chapter 6 strengthening the new nation the bank of the united states proposed by alexander hamilton the national bank opened in philadelphia in 1791 before signing the bank bill president washington sought the advice of his cabinet where he found an equal division of opinion.
the result was the first great debate on constitutional interpretation.
were the powers of congress only those explicitly stated in the constitution or were other powers implied.
the argument turned chiefly on article i section 8 which authorized congress to make all laws which shall be necessary and proper for carrying into execution the foregoing powers such language left lots of room for disagreement about what was necessary and proper and led to a savage confrontation between jefferson and hamilton.
the treasury secretary had come to view jefferson as a man of profound ambition violent passions who was guided by an unsound dangerous agrarian economic philosophy.
secretary of state jefferson who despised banks almost as much as he hated the monarchist hamilton pointed to the tenth amendment of the constitution which reserves to the states and the people powers not explicitly delegated to congress.
jefferson argued that a bank might be a convenient aid to congress in collecting taxes and regulating the currency but it was not necessary as article i section 8 specified.
in a lengthy 16 000 word report to the president hamilton countered that the power to charter corporations was an implied power of any government.
hamiltons vision of a c apitalist america 279 as he pointed out the three banks already in existence had been chartered by states none of whose constitutions specifically mentioned the authority to incorporate banks.
hamilton convinced washington to sign the bank bill.
in doing so the president had in jeffersons words opened up a boundless field of power which in coming years would lead to a further broadening of the presidents implied powers with the approval of the supreme court.
the new bank of the united states b u s.
based in philadelphia had three primary responsibilities 1 to hold the governments funds and pay its bills 2 to provide loans to the federal government and to other banks to promote economic development and 3 to manage the nations money supply by regulating the power of state chartered banks to issue paper currency called banknotes.
could issue national banknotes as needed to address the chronic shortage of gold and silver coins.
by 1800 the b u s.
had branches in four cities and four more were soon to be added.
the american financial system was on the verge of becoming the most effective in the world.
encouraging manufacturing hamiltons bold economic vision for the new republic was not yet complete.
in the last of his celebrated recommendations to congress the report on manufactures distributed in december 1791 he set in place the capstone of his design for a modern capitalist economy the active governmental promotion of new manufacturing and industrial enterprises mills mines and factories.
industrialization hamilton believed would bring diversification to an american economy dominated by agriculture and dangerously dependent on imported british goods improve productivity through greater use of machinery provide work for those not ordinarily employed outside the home such as women and children and encourage immigration of skilled industrial workers from other nations.
to foster industrial development hamilton recommended that the federal government increase tariffs on imports three quarters of which came from britain while providing financial incentives called bounties to key industries making especially needed products such as wool cotton cloth and window glass.
such government support he claimed would enable new industries to compete on equal terms with longstanding european enterprises.
finally hamilton asked congress to fund major transportation improvements including the development of roads canals and harbors for commercial traffic.
few of hamiltons pro industry ideas were enacted because of strong opposition from jefferson madison and other southerners.
they did not believe the federal government should support particular industries.
hamiltons proposals however provided an arsenal of arguments for the advocates 280 chapters on more than 1 000 campuses.
in the fall of 1964 students at the university of california at berkeley took haydens new left program to heart.
several had spent the summer working with the student nonviolent coordinating committees sncc voter registration project in mississippi where three volunteers had been killed and the free speech movement mario savio a founder of the f ree speech movement speaks at a rally at the university of california at berkeley.
1366 chapter 13 western expansion 1830 1848 almost four months since we have slept in a house once in oregon or california the emigrants set about establishing stable communities.
noted one settler friday october 27 arrived at oregon city at the falls of the willamette river.
saturday october 28 went to work pioneers in oregon found themselves initially living in a primitive state requiring backbreaking work to create self sustaining homesteads.
mirroring their duties on the overland trails women who settled in oregon did much of the same hard physical labor as men day and night.
i am a very old woman reported twenty nine year old sarah everett.
my face is thin sunken and wrinkled my hands bony withered and hard another oregon pioneer warned that a woman that cannot endure almost as much as a horse has no business here many pioneer families were devastated by the struggle of scratching out new lives in the west.
the malick family for example left illinois in 1848 and started a farm in the oregon territory.
george malick the father died soon thereafter as did three of the older children.
we are all well widow abigail malick wrote in 1855 to relatives back in illinois.
all that are left of us the settlement of california california was also a powerful magnet for settlers and adventurers.
it had first felt the influence of european culture in 1769 when spain grew concerned about russian seal traders moving south along the pacific coast from alaska.
to thwart russian intentions spain sent a naval expedition to settle the region.
the spanish discovered san francisco bay and constructed presidios military garrisons at san diego and monterey.
even more important franciscan friars led by junpero serra established a catholic mission at san diego.
over the next fifty years franciscans built twenty more missions spaced a days journey apart along the coast from san diego northward to san francisco.
the mission centered culture created by the hispanic settlers who migrated to california from mexico was quite different from those in texas and new mexico where the original missions were converted into secular communities and the property was divided among the indians.
in california however the missions were much larger more influential and longer lasting.
by the nineteenth century spanish catholic missionaries aided by spanish soldiers controlled most of the indians living along the california coast.
the friars priests enticed the indians into missions by offering gifts or impressing them with their magical religious rituals.
once inside the missions the indians were baptized as catholics taught spanish and stripped of their cultural heritage.
moving west 565 catholic missions the california catholic missions served as churches villages fortresses homes schools shops farms and outposts of spanish rule.
the missions also quickly became agricultural enterprises producing crops livestock clothing and household goods both for profit and to supply the neighboring presidios.
indians provided most of the labor.
the franciscans viewed forced indian labor as both a practical necessity and a morally enriching responsibility essential to transforming unproductive indians into industrious christians.
a missions daily routine began at dawn with the ringing of a bell which summoned the community to prayer.
work began an hour later and did not end until an hour before sunset.
most indian men worked in the fields.
some were trained in special skills such as masonry carpentry or leatherwork.
women handled domestic chores but during harvest season everyone was expected to help in the fields.
instead of wages the indians received clothing food housing and religious instruction.
the franciscans used force to control their captive laborers.
rebellious indians were whipped or imprisoned and mission indians died at an alarming rate.
one franciscan friar reported that of every four indian children born three die in their first or second year while those who survive do not reach the age of t wenty five infectious disease was the primary threat but the grueling labor regimen took a high toll as well.
the native american population along the california coast declined from 72 000 in 1769 to 18 000 by 1821 saving souls cost many lives.
with mexican independence in 1821 the spanish missions slowly disintegrated and fell into disuse.
by the time the first americans began to trickle into california they found a vast beautiful province with only a small scattered population of 6 000 mexicans ruled by a few dominant caballeros or rancheros gentlemen who owned the largest ranches in the province much like the planters who lorded over the lower south.
hispanic californians called californios took comfort that mexico city the capital was too far away to exercise effective control over them.
between 1821 when mexico gained its independence and 1841 spanish speaking californians as well as many recent american arrivals staged ten revolts against mexican governors.
among the white immigrants in california in the m id nineteenth century was john a sutter a swiss settler who had founded a colony of european emigrants.
at the junction of the sacramento and american rivers later the site of the city of sacramento sutter built an enormous fort with walls eighteen feet tall to protect the settlers and their shops.
566 chapter 13 western expansion 1830 1848 mexican borderlands and an area of rich soil lush prairie grass plentiful timber abundant wildlife and numerous creeks and rivers.
during the 1820s the united states had twice offered to buy texas but the mexican government refused to sell.
mexicans were frightened and infuriated by the idea of yankees acquiring their sacred soil but that is what happened.
the leading promoter of american settlement in the coastal plain of texas was stephen fuller austin a visionary land developer empresario who convinced the mexican government that he could recruit 300 american families to settle between the colorado and brazos rivers along the gulf coast of texas and create a buffer on the northern frontier between the feared comanche indians and the mexican settlements to the south.
americans eagerly settled in austins anglo colony in east texas.
they each received 177 free acres and had access to thousands of acres of common pasture for ranching austin received 65 000 acres for his efforts.
most of the anglos were ranchers or farmers drawn to the fertile inexpensive lands in the river valleys.
a few of the settlers were wealthy planters who brought large numbers of slaves with them at a time when mexico was prohibiting the importation of slaves.
an american reported that eastern texas was literally alive with all kinds of game.
we have only to go out a few miles into a swamp.
to find as many wild cattle as one could wish there were as many buffalo in the area as cattle.
by 1830 coastal texas had far more americans living there than hispanics tejanos or i ndians about 20 000 white settlers called anglos or texians and 1 000 enslaved blacks brought to grow and harvest cotton.
by 1835 there were 35 000 texians 3 000 african american slaves and a booming cotton economy.
so many people in the carolinas georgia alabama tennessee and missouri had migrated to texas that the phrase gone to texas or its initials gtt were often carved into the doors of cabins left behind.
the flood of americans into texas led to numerous clashes with indians as well as mexican officials who began having second thoughts about their tolerated guests a mexican congressman issued an accurate warning in 1830 mexicans.
watch closely for you know all too well the anglo saxon greed for territory.
we have generously granted land to these nordics they have made their homes with us but their hearts are with their native land.
we are continually in civil wars and revolutions we are weak and know i t and they know it also.
they may conspire with the united states to take texas from us.
from this time be on your guard the texas war for independence mexican officials were so worried about the behavior and intentions of americans living in texas that moving west 571 in april 1830 they suddenly outlawed further immigration from the united states.
but americans who viewed the mexicans their army and their fractured and incompetent government with contempt kept coming.
by 1835 the texians and their enslaved blacks outnumbered the tejanos spanish speaking texans ten to one.
in a letter to his cousin in 1835 stephen austin left no doubt about his plans it is very evident that texas should be effectually and fully americanized that is settled by a population that will harmonize with their neighbors on the east in language political principles common origin sympathy and even interest.
texas must be a slave country.
it is no longer a matter of doubt a changing political situation in mexico aggravated the growing tensions.
in 1834 general antonio lpez de santa anna the mexican president suspended the national congress and became a dictator calling himself the napoleon of the west texans feared that santa anna planned to free our slaves and to make slaves of us when santa anna imprisoned austin in 1834 texans decided that the mexican ruler had to go.
upon his release from jail eighteen months later austin called for texans to revolt war is our only resource.
there is no other remedy.
we must defend our rights ourselves and our country by force of arms he urged that texas become fully american promote slavery and join the united states.
in the fall of 1835 texans followed austins lead and rebelled against santa annas despotism an infuriated santa anna ordered all americans expelled all texans disarmed and all rebels arrested and executed as pirates as sporadic fighting erupted hundreds of armed volunteers from southern states rushed to assist the 30 000 texians and tejanos fighting for their independence against a mexican nation of 7 million people.
the sword is drawn austin proclaimed.
the alamo at san antonio the provincial capital in southern texas general santa annas 3 000 man army assaulted a group of fewer than 200 texians tejanos and members of the texas volunteer army holed up in an abandoned catholic mission called the alamo.
the outnumbered and outgunned texas rebels were led by three colorful adventurers with checkered pasts james jim bowie william barret travis and david crockett.
they symbolized the role of texas as a haven for people wanting second chances.
the sandy haired bowie born in kentucky but raised in louisiana had become a ruthless slave trader and deceitful land speculator.
however he was most famous for the bowie knife he used to wound and kill men in n umerous 572 chapter 29 a new f rontier and a great society 1960 1968 vietnam 1966 r ed china r iv er north vietnam dien bien phu hanoi haiphong.
n mek o g hai nan gulf of tonkin r south china sea vinh laos demarcation line of 1954 vientiane udon thani ho da nang tr a inh chu lai il ubon ratchathani r ive gr on ek m thailand hue ch im cambodia an khe pleiku qui nhon south vietnam nha trang cam ranh bay bien hoa phnom penh saigon tan son nhut gulf of thailand quang ngai kon tum ta khli bangkok my lai can tho south china sea major u s military bases 200 miles 200 kilometers why did the united states intervene militarily in south vietnam.
what was the ho chi minh trail.
wwn64 figure what was the tet offensive.
m29 2 first proof the tragedy of vietnam 1355 civil rights leaders and social activists felt betrayed as they saw federal funds earmarked for the war on poverty spent on vietnam.
by 1968 the united states was spending some 2 billion each month on the war about 322 000 for every vc killed anti poverty programs at home received only 53 per person.
as martin luther king jr pointed out the bombs in vietnam explode at home they destroy the hopes and possibilities for a decent america president johnson under constant assault by critics grew increasingly embittered and isolated.
the president who had accomplished so much could now do nothing right.
a nti war protesters chanted hey hey lbj how many kids in vietnam have you killed today johnson suffered from depression and paranoia as he realized how much that bitch of a war was dividing the nation gobbling up its resources and killing its young men.
clark clifford johnsons new secretary of defense reported in 1968 that a task force of experts had concluded that the united states could not win the war.
it was not what johnson wanted to hear.
robert f kennedy now a new york senator began exploring a run for the presidency to challenge johnsons vietnam policy.
senator eugene mccarthy of minnesota had already announced his own campaign as an anti war candidate.
in new hampshires democratic primary in march 1968 mccarthy won a stunning 42 percent of the vote to johnsons 48 percent.
dove bites hawk one reporter quipped.
johnson now seemed mortally wounded and the results in new hampshire convinced bobby kennedy to enter the race.
lbj hated kennedy dismissing him as a grandstanding little runt being challenged for reelection by members of his own party devastated johnson.
the growing opposition to the vietnam war was even a worse blow.
during a private meeting with military leaders the president acknowledged that the country is demoralized.
most of the press is against us.
we have no support for the war on march 31 1968 a weary johnson appeared on national television to announce a limited halt to the bombing of north vietnam to enable a negotiated cease fire agreement with the communists.
then he made an astounding announcement i shall not seek and i will not accept the nomination of my party for another term as your president as his daughter explained the agony of vietnam had engulfed her father.
johnson had become a tragic victim of his grandiose ambitions by promising far more than he could accomplish he raised false hopes stoked violent resentments and fractured society.
although u s troops would remain in vietnam for five more years the quest for military victory ended with johnsons presidency.
america tried to fight a limited war in vietnam.
the problem with the strategy was that the vietnamese communists fought an absolute war in defense of their country.
among other things the war revealed that the 1356 chapter 13 western expansion 1830 1848 henry clay hoped to dominate the mild mannered new president.
tyler dares not resist the imperious clay threatened or i will drive him before me tyler however was not willing to be dominated.
after an argument in the white house over a proposed new national bank he told clay go back down pennsylvania avenue to the capitol and perform his duties in congress.
so help me god i shall do mine at this end of it as i shall think proper john tyler the tall thin s lave owning virginian was a political maverick and the youngest president to date fifty one but he had lots of political experience having served as a state legislator governor congressman and senator.
he also fathered fifteen children the most of any president.
perhaps most important he was a man of stubborn independence and considerable charm.
a political acquaintance said tyler was approachable courteous always willing to do a kindly action or to speak a kindly word originally a democrat who had endorsed the jeffersonian commitment to states rights strict construction of the constitution and opposition to national banks tyler had broken with the party and joined the whigs over president jacksons condemnation of south carolinas attempt to nullify federal laws.
tyler believed that south carolina had a constitutional right to secede from the nation.
yet he never truly embraced the whigs.
as president tyler opposed everything associated with henry clays m uch celebrated program of economic nationalism the american system that called for high tariffs a national bank and internal improvements.
when congress met in a special session in 1841 clay introduced a series of controversial resolutions.
he called for the repeal of the independent treasury act and the creation of another bank of the united states proposed to revive the distribution program whereby the money generated by federal land sales was given to the states and urged that tariffs be raised on imported goods to hamper foreign competitors.
clay might have avoided a nasty dispute with tyler over financial issues had he been more tactful.
but for once driven by his compulsive quest to be president clay the great compromiser lost his instinct for compromise.
although tyler agreed to the repeal of the independent treasury act and signed a higher tariff bill he vetoed clays pet project the new national bank.
an incensed clay responded by calling tyler a traitor who had disgraced his party.
he claimed that the president was left solitary and alone shivering by the pitiless storm against his veto.
the dispute was so heated that scuffles and fistfights between whigs and democrats broke out in congress.
clay then convinced tylers entire cabinet to resign with the exception of secretary of state daniel webster.
a three year long war between clay and tyler had begun.
moving west 579 tyler replaced the defectors in his cabinet with a nti jackson democrats who like him had become whigs.
the whigs then expelled tyler from the party calling him his accidency and the executive ass sixty whig members of congress signed a statement denouncing tyler and declaring him no longer their representative.
some even talked of impeachment.
an exasperated tyler confided to a friend his frustration did you ever expect to see your old friend under trial for high crimes and misdemeanors by 1842 tyler had become a president without a party shunned by both whigs and democrats.
the political turmoil coincided with the ongoing economic depression that had begun in the late 1830s.
bank failures mounted businesses shut down and unemployment soared.
yet tyler refused to let either the sputtering economy or an international crisis with great britain deter him from annexing more territory into the united states.
tensions with britain in late 1841 slaves being transported from virginia to louisiana on the american ship creole revolted and took charge of the ship.
they sailed into nassau in the bahamas where british authorities set 128 of them free.
great britain had abolished slavery throughout its empire in 1834.
it was the most successful slave revolt in american history.
southerners were infuriated and the incident mushroomed into an international crisis.
secretary of state daniel webster demanded that the slaves be returned as american property but the british refused.
rather than risk a war that the united states might lose tyler and webster acquiesced to the british refusal to return the slaves.
this only made southern slaveholders more furious.
james henry hammond the south carolina planter lashed out at the tyler administration with such a stupid imbecile as tyler at the head of affairs and such an unprincipled and cowardly sec.
of state as webster we should fare badly for a time.
they are bent on peace at this point the british government decided to send alexander baring lord ashburton head of a major bank to meet with secretary of state webster who viewed good relations with britain as essential for the america economy.
the meetings concluded with the signing of the webster ashburton treaty 1842 which provided for joint naval patrols off africa to police the outlawed slave trade.
the treaty also resolved a l ong standing dispute over the northeastern u s boundary with british canada.
but it did nothing about returning the freed slaves.
the dispute was not settled until 1853 when england paid 110 000 to the owners of the freed slaves.
the extension of our empire texas from the moment he became president john tyler had his eyes fixed on annexing the 580 chapter 1 the collision of cultures that gunpowder frightens the most valiant and courageous indian and renders him slave to the white mans command the europeans enjoyed other cultural advantages.
before their arrival for example the only domesticated four legged animals in north america were dogs and llamas.
the spanish brought with them strange beasts horses pigs sheep and cattle.
horses provided greater speed in battle and gave the spanish a decided psychological advantage.
the most essential thing in new lands is horses reported one spanish soldier.
they instill the greatest fear in the enemy and make the indians respect the leaders of the army even more feared among the indians were the fighting dogs that the spanish used to guard their camps.
cortss conquest the most dramatic european conquest on the north american mainland occurred in mexico.
on february 18 1519 thirty four year old hernn corts driven by dreams of gold and glory set sail for mexico from cuba.
his fleet of eleven ships carried nearly 600 soldiers and sailors.
also on board were 200 indigenous cubans sixteen horses and cannons.
after the invaders landed on the coast of the gulf of mexico corts convinced the totomacs a society conquered by the mexica to join his assault against the dominant mexica their hated rivals.
to prevent any of his heavily armed and helmeted soldiers called conquistadores conquerors from retreating or deserting corts had the ships dismantled.
conquistadores were then widely recognized as the best soldiers in the world loyal to the monarchy and the catholic church.
they received no pay they were pitiless professional warriors willing to risk their lives for a share in the expected plunder.
one conquistador explained that he went to america to serve god and his majesty to give light to those who were in darkness and to grow rich as men desire to do with his small army cannons horses and indian allies corts brashly set out to conquer the sprawling mexica aztec empire which extended from central mexico to what is today guatemala.
the nearly 200 mile march of cortss army through the mountains to the magnificent mexica capital of tenochtitln modern mexico city took nearly three months.
along the way corts used treachery and terror to intimidate and then recruit the native peoples most of whom had been conquered earlier by the mexica.
after entering the city of cholula home to the largest pyramid in the americas as well as 40 000 people corts learned of a plot to ambush his army.
he turned the tables on his hosts by inviting the local chieftains and nobles to the citys ceremonial plaza to talk and exchange gifts.
when they the spanish empire 31 arrived however the spanish and their indian allies the tlaxcalans killed the leaders as well as thousands of other cholulans.
spanish invaders as corts and his invading army continued their march across mexico they heard fabulous accounts of the carefully planned mexica city of tenochtitln.
with some 200 000 inhabitants it was larger than most european cities.
graced by wide canals and bridges stunning gardens and formidable stone pyramids the l ake encircled city and its stone buildings seemed impregnable.
one of the spanish conquistadores described their first glimpse of the great capital city gazing on such wonderful sights we did not know what to say or whether what appeared before us was real for on the one hand there were great cities and in the lake ever so many more and the lake itself was crowded with canoes and in the causeway were many bridges at intervals and in front of us stood the great city of mexico and we we did not number even four hundred soldiers yet the vastly outnumbered spanish made the most of their assets their fighting experience superior weapons numerous indian allies and an aggressive sense of religious and racial superiority.
through a combination of threats and deceptions the invaders entered tenochtitln peacefully and captured the corts in mexico page from the lienzo de tlaxcala a historical narrative from the sixteenth century.
the scene in which corts is shown seated on a throne depicts the arrival of the spanish in tlaxcala.
32 chapter 30 rebellion and reaction 1960s and 1970s t alkative member of the silent majority who was a bundle of racial ethnic and political prejudices.
enthroned in his easy chair archie railed against blacks jews italians gays feminists hippies and liberals including his live in daughter and her hippie husband.
at one point he says i aint no bigot.
im the first guy to say it aint your fault that youse are colored the producer of the series norman lear sought to provoke viewers to question their own prejudices.
in fact however many of the 50 million people watching each saturday night identified with archies narrow minded values.
richard nixon richard nixon appealed to the working and m iddle class whites who feared that america was being corrupted by permissiveness anarchy and the tyranny of the rebellious minority.
he explicitly appealed to voters who did not break the law people who pay their taxes and go to work people who send their children to school who go to their churches people who are not haters people who love this country above all he promised to restore law and order in 1952 senator robert a taft of ohio known as mr.
republican had characterized young senator nixon as a little man in a big hurry with a mean and vindictive streak a grocers son from whittier california nixon was a humorless man of fierce ambition and extraordinary perseverance.
raised in a family that struggled with poverty he had to claw and struggle to the top and he nursed a deep resentment of people who had an easier time of it the moneyed class.
nixon was smart shrewd cunning and doggedly determined to succeed in politics.
he was also famously hard to get to know.
republican senator barry goldwater described nixon as the most complete loner ive ever known throughout his career nixon displayed violent mood swings punctuated by raging temper tantrums profanity and anti semitic outbursts.
he was driven as much by anger and resentment as by civic duty.
critics nicknamed him tricky dick because he was a good liar.
in his speech accepting the republican nomination in 1968 nixon pledged to find the truth to speak the truth and live with the truth in fact however he often did the opposite.
one of his presidential aides admitted that we did often lie mislead deceive try to use the media and to con them nixons appointments in his first term nixon selected for his cabinet and staff only white men who would blindly carry out his orders.
john mitchell the gruff attorney general who had been a senior partner in nixons nixon and the revival of conservatism 1387 new york law firm was his closest confidant.
h r bob haldeman a former advertising executive served as chief of staff.
as haldeman explained every president needs a son of a bitch and im nixons john ehrlichman a seattle attorney and college schoolmate of haldeman was chief domestic policy adviser.
john w dean iii an associate deputy in the office of the u s attorney general became the white house legal counsel.
nixon tapped as secretary of state his old friend william rogers who had served as attorney general under dwight d eisenhower.
nixon however had no intention of making rogers the nations chief diplomat.
instead the president virtually ignored rogers while forging an unlikely partnership with dr henry kissinger a brilliant german born harvard political scientist who had become the nations leading foreign policy expert.
kissingers thick accent owlish appearance and outsized ego had helped to make him an international celebrity courted by presidents of both parties.
in 1969 nixon named kissinger his national security adviser and in 1973 kissinger became secretary of state.
nixon and kissinger formed an odd but effective diplomatic team.
both were outsiders who preferred operating in secret both were insecure and even paranoid at times and both mistrusted and envied the others power and prestige.
nixon would eventually grow tired of kissingers efforts at self promotion and his frequent threats to resign if he did not get his way.
for his part kissinger lavished praise on nixon in public while in private dismissing the presidents meatball mind and criticizing his excessive drinking.
yet for all of their differences they worked well together in part because they both loved intrigue power politics and diplomatic flexibility and in part because of their shared vision of a multipolar world order beginning to replace the bipolar cold war as the united states slowly withdrew from vietnam.
the southern strategy a major reason for nixons election victories in 1968 and 1972 was his shrewd southern strategy designed to win over white southern democrats upset by the civil rights revolution.
of all the nations regions the south had long been the most conservative.
the majority of white southern voters were religious and patriotic fervently a nti c ommunist and a nti union and skeptical of s ocial welfare programs.
for a century whites in the solid south had steadfastly voted for democrats.
this trend reflected lingering resentments dating to the civil war and reconstruction against abraham lincoln and his republican successors for imposing northern ways of life on the south including racial integration.
during the late sixties and seventies however a surging economy and a spurt of population growth transformed the south.
1388 chapter 30 rebellion and reaction 1960s and 1970s off to school because of violent protests by whites against forced desegregation school buses in south boston are escorted by police in october 1974 in all the k ennedy johnson years combined.
nixons efforts to block desegregation in urban areas also failed.
the burger court ruled unanimously in swann v charlotte mecklenburg board of education 1971 that school systems must bus students out of their neighborhoods if necessary to achieve racially integrated schools.
protests over busing erupted in the north the midwest and the southwest as white families denounced the destruction of the neighborhood school angry white parents in pontiac michigan were so determined to stop mandatory busing that they firebombed empty school buses.
nixon and environmental protection during the seventies dramatic increases in the price of oil and gasoline fueled a major energy crisis in the united states.
natural resources grew l imited and increasingly precious.
nixon recognized that the public mood had shifted in favor of greater federal environmental protections especially after two widely publicized environmental events in 1969 the first was a massive oil spill off the coast of santa barbara california when an enormous slick of crude oil contaminated 200 miles of california beaches killing thousands of sea birds and marine animals.
six months later on june 22 1969 the cuyahoga river an eighty mile long stream that slices through cleveland ohio spontaneously caught fire.
fouled with oil and grease bubbling with subsurface gases and littered with debris the river burned for five days its flames leaping fifty feet into the air.
as with the santa barbara oil spill the images of the burning river helped raise environmental awareness.
a 1969 survey of college campuses by the new york times revealed that many young people were transferring their attention and idealism from the anti war m ovement to the environmental movement.
nixon and the revival of conservatism 1391 nixon knew that if he vetoed legislative efforts to improve environmental quality the democratic majorities in congress would overrule him so he chose not to stand in the way.
in late 1969 he signed the amended endangered species preservation act and the national environmental policy act.
the latter became effective on january 1 1970 the year that environmental groups established an annual earth day celebration.
in 1970 nixon by executive order created two new federal environmental agencies the environmental protec environmental awareness an earth day demonstration dramatizing the tion agency epa and the national dangers of air pollution april 1972 oceanic and atmospheric administration noaa.
the same year he signed the clean air act.
two years later he vetoed a new clean water act only to see congress override his effort.
he also undermined many of the new environmental laws by refusing to spend money appropriated by congress to fund them.
stagflation the major domestic development during the nixon administration was a floundering economy.
the accumulated expense of the vietnam war and the great society programs helped quadruple the annual inflation rate from 3 percent in 1967 to 12 percent in 1974 meanwhile unemployment at 3 3 percent when nixon took office nearly doubled to 6 percent by the end of 1970 economists coined the term stagflation to describe the simultaneous problems of stalled economic growth stagnation rising inflation and high unemployment.
consumer prices usually rose with a rapidly growing economy and rising employment.
now it was just the reverse and there were no easy ways to fight the unusual combination of recession and inflation.
stagflation had at least three d eep rooted causes.
first the johnson administration had financed both the great society social welfare programs and the vietnam war without a major tax increase thereby generating larger federal deficits a major expansion of the money supply and price inflation.
second u s companies were now facing stiff international competition from west germany japan and other emerging international industrial p owers.
the 1392 chapter 1 the collision of cultures smallpox aztec victims of the 1538 smallpox epidemic are covered in shrouds center as two others lie dying at right.
usually the first to meet the spanish and thus were the first infected.
as a consequence of losing their leaders the indigenous peoples were less capable of resisting the european invaders.
many europeans however interpreted such epidemics as diseases sent by god to punish those who resisted conversion to christianity.
the spanish in north america throughout the sixteenth century no european power other than spain held more than a brief foothold in what would become the united states.
by the time the english established jamestown in virginia in 1607 the spanish had the spanish in north america 39 already explored the smoky mountains and the great plains and established colonies in the southwest and florida.
spain had the advantage not only of having arrived first but also of having stumbled onto those regions that would produce the quickest profits.
while france and england were preoccupied with political disputes and religious conflicts spain had forged an intense national unity that enabled it to dominate europe as well as the new world.
st augustine the first spanish outpost in the continental united states emerged in response to the french.
in the 1560s spirited french protestants called huguenots established frances first american colonies one on the coast of what became south carolina and the other in florida.
they did not last long.
in 1565 the spanish founded st augustine on the atlantic coast of florida.
it became the first european town in the present day united states.
it included a fort church hospital fish market and more than 100 shops and houses all built decades before the first english settlements in america.
in september 1565 spanish soldiers from st augustine assaulted fort caroline the french huguenot colony in northeastern florida and hanged all the men over age fifteen.
the spanish commander notified his catholic king that he had killed all the french he had found in fort caroline because.
they were scattering the odious lutheran doctrine in these provinces later when survivors from a shipwrecked french fleet washed ashore on florida beaches after a hurricane the spanish commander told them they must abandon protestantism and swear their allegiance to catholicism.
when they refused he killed 245 of them.
the spanish southwest the spanish eventually established other permanent settlements in what are now new mexico texas and california.
from the outset in sharp contrast to the later english experience the spanish settlements were sparsely populated inadequately supplied and dreadfully poor.
these northernmost regions of new spain were so far from the capital in mexico city that they were regularly neglected.
the spanish colonies in america were extensions of the monarchys absolute power.
democratic ideals and notions of equal treatment were nonexistent people were expected to follow orders.
there was no freedom of speech 40 chapter 13 western expansion 1830 1848 austin texas in 1840 a view of the capital of the newly formed republic of texas the citys population at the time numbered less than a thousand.
republic of texas into the united states.
his wife julia later said that texas was the great object of his ambition to secure his place in history.
in tylers first address to congress he pledged to do so explaining that there was nothing to fear from the extension of our empire tylers efforts to recruit senators to approve an annexation treaty exhilarated texas leaders who had long been frustrated that their lone star republic had not yet been welcomed into the united states.
sam houston threatened to expand the republic of texas to the pacific.
but with little money a rising government debt and continuing tensions with mexico this was mostly talk.
the lone star republic had no i nfrastructure no banks no schools no industries.
it remained largely a frontier community.
houston decided that the rickety republic of texas had only two choices annexation to the united states or closer economic ties to great britain which extended formal diplomatic recognition to the republic and began buying cotton from texas planters.
meanwhile thousands more americans poured into texas enticed by the republics offer of 1 280 acres of land to each white family.
the population more than tripled between 1836 and 1845 from 40 000 to 150 000 and the enslaved black population grew even faster than the white population.
a tragic cruise on february 28 1844 president tyler and a group ropeller driven steam of 300 dignitaries boarded the u s s.
princeton a new p warship for an excursion on the potomac river.
as sailors fired the ships huge moving west 581 fteen foot long cannons one of them the peacemaker exploded killing fi eight people including the secretary of state the secretary of the navy and a new york state legislator.
more than a dozen others were seriously wounded.
president tyler who was below deck at the time of the accident rushed to see what had happened a more heart rending scene scarcely ever occurred he wrote.
what a loss i have sustained.
after the funerals for the accident victims tyler seized the opportunity created by the tragic accident to reorganize his entire cabinet by naming southern democrats to key positions.
he appointed john c calhoun secretary of state primarily because he wanted the prominent south carolinian to complete the annexation of texas.
on april 12 1844 calhoun signed a treaty of annexation with the republic of texas and tyler submitted it to the senate for approval.
texas would become an american territory in exchange for the united states assuming all of its debts.
tyler explained that the addition of texas would add to national greatness and wealth and would strengthen rather than weaken the union calhoun however unwittingly undermined the annexation treaty by writing the british ambassador what he thought was a confidential letter in which he declared that blacks were inferior to whites and better off enslaved than free.
slavery calhoun insisted was essential to the peace safety and prosperity of the south.
adding texas he concluded was necessary to keep the south in the union.
on june 8 1844 outraged northerners in the senate voted down calhouns annexation treaty 35 to 16 the election of 1844 thereafter leaders in both political parties hoped to keep the divisive texas issue out of the 1844 presidential campaign.
whig henry clay and democrat martin van buren the leading candidates for each partys nomination agreed that adding texas to the union would be a mistake.
for his part tyler having alienated both parties initially announced that he would run for reelection as an independent using the campaign slogan tyler and texas within a few weeks however he realized he had little support and dropped out of the race giving his endorsement to polk.
van burens southern supporters including former president andrew jackson abandoned him because he opposed the annexation of texas.
they instead nominated james knox polk former speaker of the house and former governor of tennessee.
like tyler polk was an enthusiastic expansionist who wanted to make the united states a transcontinental global power.
unlike tyler polk was a loyal democrat who hated whigs.
on the ninth ballot he became the first dark horse unexpected candidate to win a m ajor party 582 chapter 7 the early republic 1800 1815 in late 1806 burr floated down the ohio and mississippi rivers toward new orleans with 100 volunteers only to have wilkinson turn on him and alert jefferson to the scheme.
the president ordered that burr be arrested.
militiamen captured burr in february 1807 and took him to richmond virginia where in august he was tried for treason before chief justice john marshall.
jefferson declared that burr was guilty of trying to separate the western states from us of adding mexico to them and of placing himself at their head in the end however burr was acquitted because john marshall instructed the jury that a verdict of treason required an act of war against the united states confirmed by at least two witnesses.
aaron burr burr graduated from what again jefferson was disgusted with is now princeton university where marshalls ruling.
it now appears we he changed his course of study from have no law but the will of the judge theology to law.
he wrote a friend.
the president considered proposing a constitutional amendment to limit the power of the judiciary and even thought about asking congress to impeach the chief justice.
in the end however he did nothing.
with further charges pending the slippery burr deeply in debt skipped bail and took refuge first in england then in france.
he returned to america in 1812 and resumed practicing law in new york.
war in europe in the spring of 1803 soon after completing the sale of louisiana to america napolon bonaparte declared war on great britain.
the massive conflict would last eleven years and eventually involve all of europe.
most americans wanted to remain neutral and trade with both sides in the war but the british and french were determined to keep that from happening.
war in europe 321 naval harassment during 1805 the spreading war in europe reached a stalemate the french army controlled most of europe and the british navy dominated the seas.
in may 1806 britain issued a series of official declarations called orders in council which imposed a naval blockade of the entire european coast to prevent merchant ships from other nations including the united states from making port in france.
soon british warships began seizing american merchant ships bound for france.
an angry congress responded preparation for war to defend by passing the n on importation act commerce shipbuilders like those which banned the importation of brit pictured here constructing the ish goods.
in early 1807 napolon philadelphia played an important role in announced that french warships americas early wars.
would blockade the ports of great britain.
the british responded that they would no longer allow any foreign ships to trade with the french controlled islands in the caribbean.
soon thereafter british warships appeared along the american coast stopping and searching u s merchant vessels as they headed for the caribbean or europe.
the tense situation posed a terrible dilemma for american shippers.
if they agreed to british demands to stop trading with the french the french would retaliate by seizing u s vessels headed to and from great britain and if they agreed to french demands that they stop trading with the british the british would seize american ships headed to and from france.
lured by high profits many american merchants decided to risk becoming victims of the a nglo french war.
many of them paid a high price for their pursuit of overseas profits.
during 1807 hundreds of american ships and their cargoes were captured by british and french warships.
impressment for american sailors the danger on the high seas was heightened by the practice of impressment whereby british warships stopped u s vessels boarded them and kidnapped sailors they claimed were british citizens.
american merchant ships attracted british deserters because they paid seamen more than twice as much as did the royal navy fully half of all sailors on american ships about 9 000 men had been born in britain.
322 chapter 7 the early republic 1800 1815 at the same time farmers and planters in the south and west also suffered they needed to sell their surplus grain cotton and tobacco abroad.
yet jefferson stubbornly refused to admit defeat.
as a critic noted the president was determined to hug the embargo and die in its embrace congress finally rebuked the president by voting 70 0 to end the ill conceived embargo effective march 4 1809 the day that the splendid misery of jeffersons second presidential term ended.
the dejected president left the white house feeling like a freed prisoner eager to retire to my family my books and my farms in virginia.
no one he said could be more relieved on shaking off the shackles of power his fellow virginian and stern critic congressman john randolph declared that never had a president left the nation in a state so deplorable and calamitous jefferson learned a hard lesson that many of his successors would also confront a second term is rarely as successful as the first.
as he admitted no man will ever carry out of that office the presidency the reputation which carried him into it in the election of 1808 the presidency passed to another prominent virginian secretary of state james madison.
the federalists again backing charles c pinckney of south carolina and rufus king of new york won only 47 electoral votes to madisons 122 james madison and the drift to war in his inaugural address president madison confessed that he inherited a situation full of difficulties he soon made a bad situation worse.
although madison had been a talented legislator and the father of the constitution he proved to be a weak indecisive chief executive.
when members of congress questioned several of his cabinet appointments he backed down and ended up naming s econd rate men to key positions.
madisons sparkling wife dolley was the only truly excellent member of the presidents inner circle.
seventeen years younger than her husband she was a superb first lady who excelled at using the white house to entertain political leaders and foreign dignitaries.
journalists called her the queen of washington city from the beginning madisons presidency was entangled in foreign affairs and crippled by his lack of executive experience.
like jefferson madison and his advisers repeatedly overestimated the young republics diplomatic leverage and military strength in shaping foreign policy.
the result was international humiliation.
madison insisted on upholding the principle of freedom of the seas for the united states and other neutral nations but he was unwilling to create a navy the war of 1812 325 strong enough to enforce it.
he continued the policy of peaceable coercion against the european nations which was as ineffective for madison as it had been for jefferson.
in place of the failed embargo congress passed the n on intercourse act 1809 which reopened trade with all countries except france and great britain and their colonies.
it also authorized the president to reopen trade with either france or great britain if it stopped violating american rights on the high seas.
in december 1810 france issued a vague promise to restore americas neutral rights whereupon madison gave great britain three months to do the same.
the british refused and the royal navy continued to seize american vessels and their cargoes and crews.
a reluctant madison asked congress to declare war against great britain on june 1 1812 if the united states did not defend its rights as a neutral nation he explained then americans were not independent people but colonists and vassals thomas jefferson sent a letter of support to the president heaven help you through all your difficulties on june 5 the house of representatives voted for war 79 49.
two weeks later the senate followed suit 19 13.
every federalist in congress opposed what they called mr.
madisons war while 80 percent of republicans supported it.
the southern and western states wanted war the new england states opposed it.
by declaring war republicans hoped to unite the nation discredit the federalists and put an end to b ritish led indian attacks along the great lakes and in the ohio valley by conquering british canada.
to generate popular support thomas jefferson advised madison that he needed above all to stop indian barbarities.
the conquest of canada will do this jefferson presumed that the french canadians were eager to rise up against their british rulers.
with their help the republicans predicted american armies would easily conquer britains vast northern colony.
it did not work out that way.
the war of 1812 the war of 1812 marked the first time that congress had declared war.
great britain did not expect or want the war it was preoccupied with defeating napolon in europe.
in fact on june 16 1812 the british government promised to quit interfering with american shipping.
president madison and the republicans however were not satisfied only war they believed would put an end to the british practice of impressment and stop b ritish inspired indian attacks along the western frontier.
326 chapter 30 rebellion and reaction 1960s and 1970s direct connection between the watergate burglary and the committee to r e elect the president.
seventeen days later cbss walter cronkite the nations most popular news reporter announced that watergate has escalated into charges of a high level campaign of political sabotage and espionage apparently unparalleled in american history uncovering the cover up during the trial of the accused watergate burglars in january 1973 relentless questioning by federal judge john j sirica led one of the accused to tell the full story of the nixon administrations involvement.
james w mccord security chief of the committee to re elect the president creep was the first in what would become a long line of informers to reveal the systematic efforts of nixon and his aides to create an imperial presidency by the time of the watergate b reak in money to finance dirty tricks was being illegally collected through creep and controlled by the white house staff.
the trail of evidence pursued first by sirica then by a grand jury and then by a senate committee headed by democrat samuel j ervin jr of north carolina led directly to what white house legal counsel john dean called a cancer close to the presidency nixon was personally involved in the cover up using his power to discredit and block the investigation.
he ordered the cia to keep the fbi off the case and even coached his aides how to lie under oath.
most alarming as it turned out the watergate burglary was merely part of a larger pattern of corruption and criminality sanctioned by the nixon white house.
the cover up unraveled further later that year when l patrick gray acting director of the fbi resigned after confessing that he had destroyed several incriminating documents.
on april 30 1973 ehrlichman and haldeman resigned they would later serve time in prison as did attorney general richard kleindienst.
a few days later nixon nervously assured the public in a television address i am not a crook then dean whom nixon had dismissed because of his cooperation with prosecutors shocked the nation by testifying before the ervin committee that there had been a cover up approved by the president.
nixon thereafter became preoccupied with legal self defense and political survival.
he refused to provide ervins committee with documents it requested citing executive privilege to protect national security.
in another shocking disclosure a white house aide told the committee that nixon had installed a secret taping system in the white house and that many of the conversations about the watergate burglary and cover up had been recorded.
the bombshell news set off a legal battle for the nixon tapes harvard law professor archibald cox whom nixons new attorney general elliot richardson had appointed as special prosecutor to investigate the watergate case took watergate 1407 the president to court in october 1973 to obtain the tapes.
nixon refused to release the recordings and ordered cox fired.
on october 20 in what became known as the saturday night massacre richardson and deputy attorney general william ruckelshaus resigned rather than fire cox.
solicitor general robert bork finally fired him.
coxs dismissal produced a firestorm of pub john ehrlichman ehrlichman aide to president nixon addresses the senate lic indignation.
numerous newspaper watergate committee on july 24 1973 and magazine editorials as well as a growing chorus of legislators called for the president to be impeached for obstructing justice.
a gallup poll revealed that nixons approval rating had plunged to 17 percent the lowest level any president had ever received.
the new special prosecutor leon jaworski also took the president to court.
in march 1974 the watergate grand jury indicted ehrlichman haldeman and former attorney general john mitchell for obstruction of justice and named nixon an unindicted co conspirator on april 30 nixon still refusing to turn over the actual tapes released 1 254 pages of transcribed recordings that he had edited himself often substituting the phrase expletive deleted for his vulgar language and a nti semitic rants.
the transcripts revealed a president whose oval office conversations were so petty s elf serving bigoted and profane that they degraded the stature of the office and fueled growing demands for nixon to resign.
by the summer of 1974 nixon was in full retreat.
he became alternately combative melancholy and petty.
henry kissinger found him increasingly unstable and drinking heavily.
nixons efforts to orchestrate the c over up obsessed unbalanced and unhinged him.
after meeting with the president senator barry goldwater reported that nixon jabbered incessantly often incoherently he seemed to be cracking americans watched the ervin committee hearings as if they were episodes in a soap opera.
on july 24 1974 the supreme court ruled unanimously in united states v richard m nixon that the president must surrender all of the tape recordings.
a few days later the house judiciary committee voted to recommend three articles of impeachment obstruction of justice through the payment of hush money to witnesses and the withholding of evidence abuse of power through the use of federal agencies to deprive citizens of their constitutional rights and defiance of congress by withholding the tapes.
1408 chapter 30 rebellion and reaction 1960s and 1970s before the house of representatives could vote on impeachment nixon grudgingly handed over the complete set of white house tapes.
the drama continued however when investigators learned that sections of certain key recordings were missing including eighteen minutes of a conversation in june 1972 during which nixon first mentioned the watergate burglary.
the presidents loyal secretary took the blame for the erasure claiming that she had accidentally pushed the wrong button but technical experts later v for victory before boarding the concluded that the missing segments white house helicopter following his had been intentionally deleted.
the resignation nixon flashes a bright smile other recordings however provided and his trademark v for victory sign to more than enough evidence of nixons the world on august 9 1974 involvement in the cover up.
at one point he had yelled at aides who were asking what they and others should say to watergate investigators i dont give a shit what happens.
i want you all to stonewall it let them plead the fifth amendment cover up or anything else the recordings led republican leaders to urge nixon to quit rather than face an impeachment trial in the senate.
on august 9 1974 the embattled president resigned from office the only president to do so.
in 1969 he had begun his presidency hoping to heal america to bring people together now he left the white house for a s elf imposed exile at his home in san clemente california having deeply wounded the nation.
nixon was one of the strangest most complicated and most interesting political figures in american history.
he never understood why the watergate affair could have ended his presidency in his view his only mistake was getting caught.
nixon claimed that a presidents actions could not be illegal he was wrong.
the watergate affairs clearest lesson was that not even a president is above the law.
but the fact that the system worked by calling a president to justice did not prevent many americans from losing faith in the credibility of elected officials.
the new york times reported that people across the country think and feel differently from what they once did as a result of the watergate crisis.
they ask questions they reject assumptions they doubt what they are told watergate 1409 watergate and the presidency if there was a silver lining in the dark cloud of watergate it was the vigor and resilience of the institutions that had brought a rogue president to j ustice the press congress the courts and public opinion.
in the aftermath of the scandal congress passed several pieces of legislation designed to curb executive power.
nervous about possible efforts to renew military assistance to south vietnam the democratic congress passed the war powers act 1973 which requires a president to inform congress within forty eight hours if u s troops are deployed in combat abroad and to withdraw troops after sixty days unless congress specifically approves their stay.
to correct abuses in the use of campaign funds congress enacted legislation in 1974 that set new ceilings on political contributions and expenditures.
and in reaction to the nixon claim of executive privilege as a means of withholding evidence congress strengthened the 1966 freedom of information act to require prompt responses to requests for information from government files and to place on government agencies the burden of proof for classifying information as secret.
an unelected president during richard nixons last year in office the watergate crisis so dominated national politics that major domestic and foreign problems received little attention.
vice president spiro agnew had himself been forced to resign in october 1973 for accepting bribes from contractors before and during his term in office.
the vice president at the time of nixons resignation was gerald rudolph ford a s quare jawed plain speaking former house minority leader from michigan whom nixon had appointed to succeed agnew under the provisions of the twenty fifth amendment.
an honest decent man ford had played football at the university of michigan before getting a law degree at yale.
but none of his accomplishments had prepared him for his unexpected role as an accidental president called upon to restore stability to a nation reeling from one crisis after another.
on august 9 1974 ford was sworn in as the nations first politically appointed chief executive the only person in history to serve as both vice president and president without having been elected to those offices.
i am acutely aware that you have not elected me as your president by your ballots ford said in a nationally televised address.
so i ask you to confirm me as your president with your prayers he then assured the people that our long national nightmare watergate is over but it wasnt.
restoring public confidence in elected leaders was not easy.
less than a month after taking office ford reopened the wounds of watergate by issuing nixon a full free and absolute pardon for any crimes he may have committed while in office.
many americans were not in a forgiving mood and 1410 chapter 19 political s talemate and rural revolt 1865 1900 turning working men into alcoholics as had happened with nations first husband her husband is torn from her she is robbed of her sons her home her food and her virtue between 1869 and 1913 from the first term of ulysses s grant through the election of william howard taft republicans monopolized the white house except for two nonconsecutive terms of new york democrat grover cleveland.
otherwise national politics was remarkably balanced.
between 1872 and 1896 no president won a majority of the popular vote.
in each of those presidential elections sixteen states invariably voted republican and fourteen including every southern state voted democratic leaving six swing states to determine the outcome.
two of those states new york and ohio decided the election of eight presidents from 1872 to 1908 presidents during the gilded age both republican and democrat deferred to their party leaders in the senate and house of representatives.
they believed that congress not the white house should formulate major policies that the president would implement.
as senator john sherman of ohio stressed the president should merely obey and enforce the law as laid out by congress.
hayes to harrison both republicans and democrats had their share of officials willing to buy and sell government jobs or legislative votes.
yet as early as the 1870s in response to the corruption uncovered in the grant administration each party developed factions promoting honesty in government.
the struggle for clean government became one of the foremost issues of the gilded age.
hayes and civil service reform president rutherford b hayes brought to the white house in 1877 both a lingering controversy over the disputed election results critics called him his fraudulency or his accidency and an uprightness that was in sharp contrast to the barely concealed graft of the grant era.
hayes appointed a democrat as postmaster general in an effort to clean up an office infamous for trading jobs for political favors.
the son of an ohio farmer hayes was wounded four times in the civil war.
he went on to serve in congress and as governor of ohio.
honest and conservative he was said a republican journalist a third rate nonentity whose only virtue was that he was obnoxious to no one hayes had been the compromise presidential nominee of two factions fighting for control of the republican party the s o called stalwarts and hayes to harrison 869 the bosses of the senate this 1889 cartoon bitingly portrays the periods corrupt alliance between big business and legislators.
alf breeds led respectively by senators roscoe conkling of new york and h james g blaine of maine.
the stalwarts had been stalwart in their support of president grant during the furor over the misdeeds of his cabinet members.
further they had mastered the patronage system spoils system of distributing political jobs to party loyalists.
the half breeds supposedly were only half loyal to grant and half committed to reform of the spoils system.
but in the end the two factions existed primarily to advance the careers of conkling and blaine who detested each other.
to his credit president hayes tried to stay above the petty bickering.
he joined the growing public outrage over corruption admitting that his party must mend its ways by focusing on republican principles rather than fighting over the spoils of office.
he serves his party best who serves his country best hayes declared.
it was time for civil service government jobs reform he appointed a committee to consider a merit system for hiring government employees as used in some european countries.
in a dramatic gesture hayes also fired chester a arthur a stalwart republican who ran the new york customs house because arthur had abused the patronage system in ways according to hayes that promoted ignorance inefficiency and corruption hayess commitment to cleaning up politics enraged republican leaders.
in 1879 ohio congressman james garfield warned hayes that if he wishes to hold any influence with fellow republicans he must abandon some of 870 chapter 14 the gathering storm 1848 1860 let them look to a more hopeful future for almost four hours he pleaded with his colleagues not to be uncompromising pigmies but compromising statesmen.
websters evenhanded speech angered both sides.
no sooner had he finished than calhoun stood to assert that the union could indeed be broken.
great moral causes will break it at the same time northern abolitionists savaged webster for calling them fanatics.
on march 11 william seward a first year whig senator from new york gave an intentionally provocative speech in which he opposed clays compromise declaring that any compromise with slavery was radically wrong and essentially vicious there was he said a higher law than the constitution and it demanded the abolition of slavery through acts of civil disobedience.
he encouraged his fellow new yorkers to defy the federal fugitive slave law by extending a cordial welcome to escaped slaves and defending them from all efforts to return them south.
the southern supporters of slavery he concluded must give way to the inevitable progress of emancipation sewards inflammatory speech outraged southerners who repudiated his fanatical and wild notion of there being a higher law than the constitution and the implication that the godly abolitionists were somehow above the law.
clay felt compelled to dismiss sewards wild reckless and abominable theories seward however was unapologetic.
he had sought to speak for the enslaved as well as all of humankind.
compromise efforts for his part henry clay was angry at everybody the extremists had taken control of the debate and were postponing a vote on his compromise proposal.
he got little help from president taylor who continued to focus solely on the admission of california as a new state.
in a letter to his son clay reported that the administration the abolitionists the ultra southern men and the timid whigs of the north are all combined against his compromise plan.
on july 4 1850 congress took a break and celebrated independence day by gathering beneath a broiling summer sun at the base of the unfinished washington monument.
president taylor suffered a mild heatstroke while listening to three hours of patriotic speeches.
he tried to recover by gorging himself on iced milk cherries and raw vegetables.
that night he suddenly developed a violent stomach disorder.
he died five days later the second president to die in office.
taylors shocking death actually bolstered the chances of a compromise in congress for his successor vice president millard fillmore supported clays proposals.
it was a striking reversal taylor the louisiana slaveholder had slavery in the territories 609 been ready to make war on his native south to save the union fillmore whom southerners thought opposed slavery was ready to make peace.
the new president asserted his control by asking his entire cabinet to resign.
he then appointed webster as secretary of state signaling that he also joined webster in supporting compromise.
fillmore was aided by illinois senator stephen a douglas a rising young star in the democratic party who was friendly to the south.
douglas dramatically stepped up to rescue clays struggling plan.
brash and brilliant short and stocky he stood just five feet four douglas the little giant who millard fillmore fillmores support of modeled himself after andrew jack the compromise of 1850 helped sustain son cleverly suggested that the best the union through the crisis.
way to salvage clays comprehensive scheme was to break it up into separate proposals and vote on them one at a time.
fillmore endorsed the idea.
the plan worked in part because john c calhoun had died and was no longer in the senate to obstruct efforts at conciliation.
each component of clays compromise plan passed in the senate and the house several of them by the narrowest of margins.
only five senators voted for all of the items making up the compromise.
in its final version the compromise of 1850 included the following elements 1 california entered the union as a free state ending forever the old balance of free and slave states 2 the t exas new mexico act made new mexico a territory and set the texas boundary at its present location.
in return for giving up its claims texas was paid 10 million which secured payment of the states debt 3 the utah act set up the utah territory and gave the territorial legislature authority over all rightful subjects of legislation slavery 4 a fugitive slave act required the federal government and northern states to help capture and return runaway slaves and 5 as a gesture to anti slavery groups the public sale of slaves but not slavery itself was abolished in the district of columbia.
by september 20 president fillmore had signed the last of the measures into law claiming that they represented a final settlement to the sectional 610 chapter 7 the early republic 1800 1815 the war and retreat back into canada.
when the british officers came to surrender themselves and their swords macdonough said gentlemen return your swords to your scabbards you are worthy of them in florida in november an army led by andrew jackson seized spanish controlled pensacola on the gulf coast thereby preventing another british army from landing and pushing northward into the southern states.
the american victories in new york and florida convinced congress not to abandon washington d c instead the members voted to rebuild the capitol and the white house.
the aftermath of the war while the fighting raged u s diplomats including henry clay and john quincy adams son of the former president had begun meetings with british officials in ghent near brussels in present day belgium to discuss ending the war.
the negotiations were at a standstill when news arrived of the american victory at the battle of lake champlain and the failure of the british invasion of baltimore.
the news made the british more flexible but negotiations still dragged on for weeks.
finally on christmas eve 1814 the diplomats reached an agreement to stop the fighting.
the treaty of ghent the weary british decided to end the war in part because of military setbacks but also because london merchants were eager to renew the extensive trade with america.
the british government had also concluded that the war was not worth the cost.
by the treaty of ghent 1814 the two countries agreed to end the war return each sides prisoners and restore the previous boundaries.
this was a godsend for the americans since british forces at the time still controlled eastern maine northern michigan a portion of western new york and several islands off the coast of georgia.
the british also pledged to stop supporting indian attacks along the great lakes.
what had begun as an american effort to protect its honor end british impressment and conquer canada had turned into a second war of independence.
at the end of the treaty negotiations john quincy adams wrote to his wife from ghent that he had had the honor of redeeming our union although the americans lost the war for canada and saw their national capital destroyed they won the southern war to defeat the indians and take their lands.
more important the treaty of ghent saved the splintered republic from possible civil war and financial ruin.
the aftermath of the war 339 the battle of new orleans because it took six weeks for news of the treaty of ghent to reach the united states fighting continued in america at the end of 1814 on december 1 andrew jackson arrived in new orleans to prepare for a british invasion of the strategic city.
he announced that he would drive the british into the sea or perish in the effort jackson declared martial law taking control of the governance of the city which enabled him to transform new orleans into a large armed camp.
on december 12 a british fleet with some 8 000 seasoned soldiers took up positions on the coast of louisiana.
the british hoped to capture new orleans and thereby gain control of the mississippi river.
british general sir edward pakenhams painfully careful preparation for an assault against the americans gave jackson time to organize hundreds of slaves loaned by planters to dig trenches build ramparts and stack cotton bales and barrels of sugar to protect the defenders from british fire.
the americans built an almost invulnerable position but pakenham cocky and careless rashly ordered a frontal assault at dawn on sunday january 8 1815 his professional redcoats including all black units from the caribbean islands marched into a murderous hail of artillery shells and rifle fire.
line after line of advancing redcoats crumpled and fell often on top of one another.
when the smoke cleared a kentucky militiaman said that the battlefield looked first like a sea of blood.
it was not blood itself but the red coats in which the british soldiers were dressed before the devastated british withdrew some 2 100 had been wounded or killed including pakenham two other generals and more than 80 officers.
jacksons army defends new orleans andrew jacksons defeat of the british at new orleans january 1815.
340 chapter 2 englands colonies william berkeley noted that poor indebted discontented and armed virginia colonists were ripe for rebellion.
the discontent erupted when a squabble over hogs between a white planter and native americans on the potomac river led to the murder of the planters herdsman and in turn to retaliation by frontier vigilantes who killed some two dozen indians.
when five native chieftains were later murdered enraged indians took revenge on frontier settlements.
scattered attacks continued southward to the james river where nathaniel bacons overseer was killed.
in 1676 when governor berkeley refused to take action against the indian raiders bacon defied the governors authority by assuming command of a rebel group of more than 1 000 men determined to terrorize the protected and darling indians bacon said he would kill all the indians in virginia and promised to free any servants and slaves who joined him.
bacons rebellion quickly became a battle of landless servants small farmers and even some slaves against virginias wealthiest planters and political leaders.
bacons ruthless assaults against peaceful indians and his greed for power and land rather than any commitment to democratic principles sparked his conflict with the governing authorities and the planter elite.
for his part governor berkeley opposed bacons plan to destroy the indians not because he liked indians but because he didnt want warfare to disrupt the profitable deerskin trade the colonists enjoyed with the native americans.
bacon whose ragtag army had now dwindled to a few hundred issued a declaration of the people of virginia accusing berkeley of corruption and attempted to take the governor into custody.
berkeleys forces r esisted feebly and bacons men burned jamestown in frustration.
bacon however could not celebrate the victory long he fell ill and died a month later.
with bacon dead the rebellion gradually disintegrated.
governor berkeley had twenty three of the rebels hanged.
for such severity the king denounced berkeley as a fool and recalled him to england where he died within a year.
maryland in 1634 ten years after virginia became a royal colony a neighboring settlement appeared on the northern shore of chesapeake bay.
named maryland in honor of english queen henrietta maria its 12 million acres were granted to sir george calvert lord baltimore by king charles i it became the first proprietary c olony that is it was owned by an individual not by a joint stock company.
calvert had long been one of the kings favorites.
in 1619 he was appointed one of two royal secretaries of state for the nation.
forced to resign after a american colonies 69 early maryland and virginia de l r e ar aw ver i to po maryland m ac ri ve r virginia james delaware bay st marys y 1634 rive r or k atlantic ocean riv er henrico 1610 jamestown 1607 chesapeake bay roanoke island 1580s original grant to lord baltimore present day boundary of maryland 100 miles 100 kilometers why did lord baltimore create maryland.
how was maryland different from virginia.
wwn64 whatamerica were the10e main characteristics of marylands 1632 charter.
26593 02map 02 first proof squabble with the kings powerful advisers calvert used the occasion of his resignation to announce that he had converted from anglicanism to catholicism.
thereafter calvert persistently asked the new king james ii to grant him a charter for an american colony to the north of virginia.
however calvert died before the king could act on his request so the charter was awarded to his son cecilius calvert the second lord baltimore who actually founded the colony.
70 chapter 19 political s talemate and rural revolt 1865 1900 a proud tall and imposing woman with a magical voice lease began giving fiery speeches during the 1890s on behalf of struggling farmers.
the people are at bay she warned let the bloodhounds of money beware she urged angry farmers to take control with the ballot if possible but if not that way then with the bayonet like so many alliance supporters lease viewed eastern financiers as the enemy.
wall street owns the country.
it is no longer a government of the people by the people and for the people but a government of wall mary elizabeth lease a charismatic street by wall street and for wall leader in the farm protest movement.
the great common people of this country are slaves and monopoly is the master the two political parties lie to us in blaming farmers for overproduction when 10 000 little children starve to death every year in the united states she declared that the alliances wanted to abolish loan shark banks and replace them with subtreasury warehouses that would make loans to farmers backed up by their stored crops.
the election of 1892 in 1892 alliance leaders organized a convention in omaha nebraska at which they formed the peoples party populists.
the delegates approved a platform that called for unlimited coinage of silver a progressive income tax whose rates would rise with income levels and federal ownership of the railroads.
the populists also endorsed the e ight hour workday and new laws restricting immigration for fear that foreigners were taking americans jobs.
we meet in the midst of a nation brought to the verge of moral political and material ruin the populists announced.
the fruits of toil of millions are boldly stolen to build up colossal fortunes for a few.
the populist partys platform turned out to be more exciting than its presidential candidate iowas james b weaver a former union army officer who had headed the greenback party ticket twelve years earlier.
the major parties renominated the same candidates who had run in 1888 democrat grover cleveland and republican president benjamin harrison.
each major candidate received more than 5 million votes but cleveland won a majority farmers and the money problem 885 the populist party a populist gathering in callaway nebraska 1892 of the electoral college.
weaver received more than 1 million votes and carried colorado kansas nevada and idaho.
alabama was the banner populist state of the south with 37 percent of its vote going to weaver.
the depression of 1893 and the free silver crusade while farmers were funneling their discontent into politics a fundamental weakness in the economy was about to cause a major collapse and a social rebellion.
just ten days before grover cleveland was inaugurated in the winter of 1893 the philadelphia and reading railroad declared bankruptcy setting off a national financial crisis now called the panic of 1893 it grew into the worst depression the nation had ever experienced.
other overextended railroads collapsed taking many banks with them.
european investors withdrew their funds from america.
a quarter of unskilled urban workers lost their jobs many others had their wages cut and by the fall of 1893 more than 600 banks had closed and 15 000 businesses had failed.
farm foreclosures soared in the south and west and by 1900 a third of all american farmers rented their land rather than owned it.
by 1894 the nations economy had reached bottom.
but the depression lasted another four years with unemployment hovering at 20 percent.
in new york city the rate was close to 35 percent.
886 chapter 14 the gathering storm 1848 1860 sectional squabbles the violence of bleeding kansas and bloodied sumner spilled over into the tone of the 1856 presidential election one in which the major parties could no longer evade the slavery issue.
at its first national convention the republicans fastened on the eccentric john c frmont the pathfinder who had led the conquest of mexican california.
the republican platform borrowed heavily from the former whigs.
it endorsed federal funding for a transcontinental railroad and other transportation improvements.
it denounced the repeal of the missouri compromise the democratic partys policy of territorial expansion and the barbarism of slavery.
for the first time a m ajor party platform had taken a stand against slavery.
the southern dominated democrats dumped president franklin pierce who remains the only elected president to be denied renomination by his party.
instead they chose s ixty five year old james buchanan of pennsylvania a former senator and secretary of state who had long sought the nomination.
the democratic platform endorsed the k ansas nebraska act called for vigorous enforcement of the fugitive slave act and stressed that congress should not interfere with slavery in states or territories.
in the campaign of 1856 the republicans had very few southern supporters and only a handful in the border slave states of delaware maryland kentucky and missouri.
frmont swept the northernmost states with 114 electoral votes but buchanan added five free states pennsylvania new jersey illinois indiana and california to his southern majority for a total of 174 the democrats now would control the white house the congress and the supreme court.
president buchanan as franklin pierce prepared to leave the white house in march 1857 a friend asked what he was going to do.
pierce replied theres nothing left to do but get drunk james buchanan also loved to drink but he had different priorities.
the president elect had built his political career on his commitment to states rights and his aggressive promotion of territorial expansion.
saving the union he believed depended upon making concessions to the south.
republicans charged that he lacked the backbone to stand up to the southern slaveholders who dominated the democratic majorities in congress.
his choice of four slave state men and only three f ree state men for his cabinet seemed another bad sign.
although buchanan had vast experience he had limited ability and bad luck.
during his first six months in office two major events caused his undoing 1 the supreme court decision in the dred scott case and 2 new troubles in s trife torn kansas.
the emergence of the republican party 621 the election of 1856 washington terr.
nh 5 me vt 5 oregon terr.
ca minnesota wi nebraska terr.
mi territory ia utah il in oh territory kansas mo terr.
ky 12 unorg.
tn new mexico terr.
ar territory ms al ga tx la ny pa va ma 13 ri 4 ct 6 nj 7 de 3 md 8 nc sc fl electoral vote james buchanan democrat john c frmont republican millard fillmore american what was the platform of the new republican party.
why did democrats pick james buchanan.
what were the key factors that decided the election.
wwn64 figure m14 3 1st proof the financial panic of 1857 only made a bad situation worse for the new president and for the nation.
by the summer of 1857 the economy was growing too fast.
too many railroads and factories were being built and european demand for american corn and wheat was declining.
the result was a financial panic triggered by the failure of the ohio life insurance and trust company on august 24 1857 upon hearing the news worried customers began withdrawing their money from banks which forced the banks to call in loans causing many businesses 622 chapter 31 conservative revival 1977 1990 reagan inherited an economy in shambles the annual rate of inflation had reached 13 percent and unemployment hovered at 7 5 percent.
none of this fazed him however.
his philosophy was simple government is not the solution to our problem.
government is the problem at the same time the cold war was heating up again.
the soviet union had just invaded afghanistan and had placed missiles with nuclear weapons in the nations of central and eastern europe under its control which threatened all of europe.
but reagan refused to be intimidated.
he discarded the earlier policies of containment and dtente in favor of a confrontational posture against the soviet union which he summarized as we win you lose he convinced congress to support a huge increase in the military budget deployed u s missiles in europe and sought to root out communist insurgencies in central america.
reaganomics on august 1 1981 president reagan signed the economic recovery tax act erta which cut personal income taxes by 25 percent lowered the maximum rate from 70 to 50 percent for 1982 and offered a broad array of tax concessions.
the bill was the centerpiece of what reagan called his common sense economic plan.
while theorists called the philosophy behind the plan supply side economics journalists dubbed the presidents proposals reaganomics.
simply put reaganomics argued that the stagflation of the seventies had resulted from excessive corporate and personal income taxes which weakened incentives for individuals and businesses to increase productivity save money and reinvest in economic expansion.
the reaganomics solution was to slash tax rates especially on the wealthy in the belief that they would spend their tax savings on business expansion and consumer goods the supply side of the economy.
such spending advocates believed would provide trickle down benefits to the masses.
by generating economic growth reaganomics promised to produce enough new tax revenues from rising corporate profits and personal incomes to pay for the tax cuts.
in the short term however erta did not work as planned.
the federal budget deficit grew and by november 1981 the economy was officially in recession.
managing the budget to offset the loss of government tax revenues david stockman president reagans budget director proposed sharp reductions in federal spending including social security and medicare the two most expensive and most popular federal programs.
liberal democrats howled at stockmans proposal and reagan responded that he was committed to maintaining the safety net of government services for the truly the reagan revolution 1431 a miss for reaganomics a throng of more than 5 000 senior citizens staged a demonstration in downtown detroit against reagans decision to make cuts in social security and other federal programs supporting the elderly in 1982 needy according to stockman reagan was too kind gentle and sentimental to make the drastic cuts needed to balance the budget.
the reagan administration also continued huge federal subsidies to corporations and agribusinesses what critics called welfare for the rich in the end reagan never dismantled the major new deal programs that he had savagely criticized.
conservative political columnist george will explained reagans failure to make substantial cuts in federal spending by noting that americans are conservative.
what they want to conserve is the new deal within a year stockman realized that the cuts in domestic spending approved by reagan had fallen far short of what would be needed to balance the budget in four years as the president had promised.
massive increases in military spending greatly complicated the situation.
in essence reagan gave the defense department a blank check.
over the next five years the administration would spend some 1 2 trillion on military expenses.
something had to give.
in the summer of 1981 stockman warned that were heading for a crash landing on the budget.
were facing potential deficit numbers so big that they could wreck the presidents entire economic program the fast growing federal deficit which had helped trigger the worst economic recession since 1432 chapter 2 englands colonies in 1638 winthrop and the general court banished the pregnant hutchinson as a leper not fit for our society she initially resettled with her family and about sixty followers on an island south of providence rhode island.
the hard journey took its toll however.
hutchinson grew sick and her baby was stillborn leading her critics in massachusetts bay to claim that the monstrous birth was gods way of punishing her.
hutchinsons spirits never recovered.
after her husbands death in 1642 she moved near new amsterdam new york city which was then under dutch control.
the following year she and six of her children were massacred by indians.
her murder wrote a spiteful john winthrop was a special manifestation of divine justice representative government the transfer of the massachusetts bay colonys royal charter whereby an english trading company evolved into a provincial government was a unique venture in colonization.
unlike old england new england had no powerful lords or bishops kings or queens.
the massachusetts general court wherein power rested under the royal charter consisted of all the shareholders property owners who were also called freemen.
at first the freemen had no power except to choose assistants who in turn elected the governor and deputy governor.
in 1634 however the freemen turned themselves into the general court with two or three deputies to represent each town.
a final stage in the democratization of the massachusetts bay government came in 1644 when the general court organized itself like the english parliament with a house of assistants corresponding roughly to the house of lords and a house of deputies corresponding to the house of commons.
all decisions had to be ratified by a majority in each house.
the puritans who had fled religious persecution ensured that their liberties in america were spelled out and protected.
over time membership in a puritan church replaced the purchase of stock as the means of becoming a freeman or voter in massachusetts bay.
rhode island more by accident than design the massachusetts bay colony became the staging area for other new england colonies created by people dissatisfied with puritan control.
young roger williams 1603 1683 who had arrived from england in 1631 was among the first to cause problems precisely because he was the purest of puritans a separatist.
he criticized puritans for not completely cutting ties to the whorish church of england.
where john winthrop cherished strict governmental and clerical authority williams stubbornly championed individual liberty and criticized the way the indians were being shoved aside.
the combative williams posed a radical american colonies 77 question if ones salvation depends solely upon gods grace as john calvin had argued why bother to have churches at all.
why not give individuals the right to worship god in their own way.
in williamss view true puritanism required complete separation of church and state and freedom from all coercion in matters of faith.
forced worship he declared stinks in gods nostrils such dangerous opinions led governor winthrop and the general court to banish williams to england.
before authorities could ship him back the diversity of english protestantism religious quarrels among the puritans led to the founding of new colonies.
in this seventeenth century cartoon four englishmen each representing a faction in opposition to the established church of england are shown fighting over the bible.
78 chapter 20 seizing an american e mpire 1865 1913 two years later however hawaiis white population called haoles overthrew the monarchy with the help of u s marines brought in by john l stevens the u s ambassador.
within a month a committee representing the haoles came to washington d c to ask the united states to annex the islands.
president benjamin harrison sent an annexation treaty to the senate just as he was leaving the presidency.
to investigate the situation the new president grover cleveland sent a special commissioner to hawaii who reported that the americans there had acted improperly and that most native hawaiians opposed annexation.
cleveland tried to restore the queen queen liliuokalani the hawaiian to power but met resistance from queen sought to preserve her nations the haoles.
on july 4 1894 the govindependence.
ernment they controlled created the republic of hawaii which included in its constitution a provision for american annexation.
in 1897 when william mckinley became president he was looking for an excuse to annex the islands.
we need hawaii he claimed.
it is americas manifest destiny the united states annexed hawaii in the summer of 1898 over the protests of native hawaiians.
the spanish american war the war of 1898 the annexation of hawaii set in motion a series of efforts to create an american presence in asia.
ironically this imperialist push originated in cuba a spanish colony ninety miles south of florida.
even more ironically the chief motive for american intervention in cuba was outrage at spains brutal imperialism.
free cuba throughout the second half of the nineteenth century cubans had repeatedly revolted against spanish rule only to be ruthlessly suppressed.
as one of spains oldest colonies cuba was a major market for the spanish american war the war of 1898 905 spanish goods.
yet powerful american sugar and mining companies had also invested heavily in cuba.
in fact the united states traded more with cuba than spain did and american owners of sugar plantations in cuba had grown increasingly concerned about the security of their investments.
on february 24 1895 cubans began another guerrilla war against spanish troops.
during what became the cuban war for independence 1895 1898 tens of thousands of cuban peasants died of combat wounds as well as disease and starvation in spanish detention camps.
americans followed the conflict through the newspapers.
two newspapers locked in a fierce competition for readers william randolph hearsts new york journal and joseph pulitzers new york world.
both worked to outdo the other with sensational headlines about spanish atrocities in cuba real or invented.
hearst explained that the role of newspapers was to shape public opinion and legislation.
newspapers he claimed had the power to declare wars hearsts efforts to manipulate public opinion came to be called yellow journalism.
editors sent their best reporters to cuba and encouraged them to distort exaggerate or even make up stories to attract more readers.
in addition to boosting the journals circulation hearst wanted a war against spain to propel the united states to world power status.
once war was declared he took credit for it one of his headlines blared how do you like the journals war many protestant ministers and publications also campaigned for war in part because of antagonism toward catholic spain.
the political path to war at the outset of the cuban war for independence president grover cleveland tried to protect u s business interests while avoiding military involvement.
mounting public sympathy for the rebel cause prompted concern in congress however.
by concurrent resolutions on april 6 1896 the house and senate endorsed granting official recognition to the cuban rebels.
after his inauguration in march 1897 president william mckinley continued the official policy of neutrality while taking a sympathetic stance toward the rebels.
mckinley a civil war veteran did not want war.
i have been through one war he said.
i have seen the dead piled up and i do not want to see another later that year spain offered cubans autonomy self government without formal independence in return for ending the rebellion but the cubans rejected the offer.
early in 1898 events pushed spain and the united states into a war that neither wanted.
on january 25 the u s battleship maine docked in havana the cuban capital supposedly on a courtesy call.
on february 9 the new york journal released the text of a letter from dupuy de lme spanish ambassador 906 chapter 8 the emergence of a market economy 1815 1850 the growth of railroads 1850 superio lake r canada me is si ss ip lake michigan m wi pi rive tario e on lak ny ma mi e eri ke la r ia vt nh ron hu ke la minnesota territory ri ct pa il in nj oh o ri ve r unorganized territory md de atlantic hi va o mo oce an ky nc tn ar sc al ms ga railroads in 1850 tx la fl what role didwwn64 railroads play in national development.
figure m8 2a first proof 31p0 x 40p6 200 miles 200 kilometers the market revolution 363 the growth of railroads 1860 superio lake r canada si ss ip lake michigan is wi pi mi ron hu ke la minnesota territory m vt ri v e r e ri ct pa nj penn.
rr in md r b o r de va o hi o ri ve r unorganized territory oh mo atl antic ky o cean nc tn ar sc ms tx al railroads in 1860 principal east west lines ga la fl ma e rie r r eri ke il me ny tario e on entral rr lak n y c la ia nh why did the number of railroads expand rapidly from 1850 to 1860.
what were the principal e ast west lines.
wwn64 figure m8 2b first proof 31p0 x 40p6 200 miles 200 kilometers 364 chapter 26 the second world war 1933 1945 tuskegee airmen the tuskegee airmen were the first african american military pilots.
here the first graduates are reviewed at tuskegee alabama in 1941.
dirt poor sharecroppers and tenant farmers many of them african americans to leave the land for steady work in new mills and factories.
sixty of the 100 army camps created during the war were in southern states further transforming local economies.
during the war the u s rural population decreased by 20 percent.
racial tension at home the most volatile social issue ignited by the war was african american participation in the military.
although the armed forces were still racially segregated in 1941 african americans rushed to enlist after the attack on pearl harbor.
as african american joe louis the world heavyweight boxing champion put it lots of things are wrong with america but hitler aint going to fix them altogether about a million african americans men and women served in the armed forces during the war.
arsenal of democracy 1179 black soldiers and sailors assigned to racially segregated units were initially excluded from combat units.
they loaded ships drove trucks dug latrines and handled supplies and mail.
black officers could not command white soldiers or sailors.
henry l stimson the secretary of war claimed that leadership is not embedded in the negro race military bases had segregated facilities and experienced frequent racial incidents in late 1944 however the need for more troops led the government to revisit its racial policies.
under pressure from the african american community as well as eleanor roosevelt general dwight eisenhower commander of the u s forces in europe agreed to let black volunteers fight in fi fty two all black fifty man platoons commanded by white officers.
a black officer said the decision was the greatest for african americans since enactment of the constitutional amendments following the civil war the black soldiers earned the reputation of being fierce fighters.
the same was true of some 600 african american pilots trained in tuskegee alabama.
the s o called tuskegee airmen flew more than 15 000 missions and their unquestionable excellence spurred military and civilian leaders to desegregate the armed forces after the war.
at wars end however the u s army reimposed segregation.
it would be several more years before the military was truly integrated.
mexican americans as rural dwellers moved west many farm counties experienced a labor shortage.
in an ironic a bout face local and federal authorities who before the war had forced migrant laborers back across the mexican border now recruited them to harvest crops on american farms.
the mexican government would not consent to provide the laborers however until the united states promised to ensure them decent working and living conditions.
the result was the creation of the bracero program in 1942 whereby mexico agreed to provide seasonal farmworkers on y ear long contracts.
under the bracero program some 200 000 mexican farmworkers entered the western united states mostly packed in cattle cars on trains.
at least that many more crossed the border as undocumented workers.
the rising tide of mexican americans in los angeles prompted a stream of anti mexican editorials and ugly racial incidents.
even though some 300 000 mexican americans served in the war and earned a higher percentage of congressional medals of honor than any other minority group racial prejudices still prevailed.
in southern california there was constant conflict between white servicemen and mexican american gang members and teenage zoot suiters zoot suits were flamboyant clothing worn by some young mexican american men.
in 1943 several thousand o ff duty sailors and soldiers joined 1180 chapter 15 the war of the union 1861 1865 leaders arrested including baltimores mayor and chief of police.
the fragile neutrality of kentucky lasted until september 3 when confederate and union armies moved into the divided state.
kentucky voters elected a secessionist governor and a unionist majority in the state legislature as did missouri a state with many european immigrants especially germans.
when a p ro confederate militia gathered in st louis hoping to take control of the federal arsenal it was surprised and disarmed by german immigrants eager to teach the german haters a never to be forgotten lesson the german militiamen then chased the p ro confederate governor across the border to arkansas.
when news of the civil war reached missouri 4 200 men volunteered to join the union army all but 100 of them were german americans.
on the eve of the civil war the u s army had only 16 400 men about 1 000 of whom were officers.
of them about 25 percent like future confederate general robert e lee resigned to join the confederate army.
on the other hand many southerners made great sacrifices to remain loyal to the union.
some left their native region once the fighting began others remained in the south but found ways to support the union.
some 100 000 men from the southern states fought against the confederacy.
regional advantages once battle lines were finally drawn the union held twenty three states including four border slave states missouri kentucky maryland and delaware while the confederacy had eleven states.
the population count was about 22 million in the union some 400 000 of whom were enslaved african americans to 9 million in the confederacy of whom about 3 5 million were enslaved.
to help balance the odds the confederacy mobilized 80 percent of its military age white men a third of whom would die during the four year war.
an even greater advantage for the north was its superior industrial development.
as southerner rhett butler complains in the classic movie gone with the wind 1939 why all we have in the south is cotton and slaves and arrogance the hated yankees he adds have the factories the foundries the shipyards the iron and coal mines all the things we havent got the southern states produced just 7 percent of the nations manufactured goods on the eve of the war.
the union states produced 97 percent of the firearms and 96 percent of the railroad equipment.
the north also had a huge advantage in transportation particularly ships.
at the start of the war the union had ninety warships the south had no navy at all.
federal gunboats and transports played a direct role in securing the unions control of the mississippi river and its larger tributaries which provided easy invasion routes into the center of the confederacy.
early on choosing sides 643 the u s watervliet arsenal in watervliet new york the north had a huge advantage in industrial development and its foundries turned out most of the firearms used by union forces.
the union navys blockade of the major southern ports sharply reduced the amount of cotton that could be exported to britain and france as well as the flow of goods including military weapons imported from europe.
in addition the union had more wagons and horses than the confederacy and an even more impressive edge in the number of railroad locomotives.
the confederates however had major geographic and emotional advantages they could fight a war on their own territory in defense of their homeland.
in warfare it is usually easier to defend than to attack since defending troops have the opportunity to dig protective trenches and fortifications.
in the civil war 90 percent of the time armies that assaulted well defended positions were mauled.
many confederate leaders thought that if they could hold out long enough disgruntled northern voters might convince lincoln and congress to end the war.
as the two sides mobilized the confederacy had more experienced military leaders and better horsemen.
many confederates also displayed a brash sense of confidence.
after all had not the revolutionaries of 1776 defeated a much stronger british army.
britain could not conquer three million americans a louisianan declared and the world cannot conquer the south the wars early strategies the two sides initially had quite different goals.
the confederacy sought to convince the union and the world to recognize its independence.
the united 644 chapter 20 seizing an american e mpire 1865 1913 florida.
one prominent unit was the first volunteer cavalry better known as the rough riders a special regiment made up of former ivy league athletes e x convicts western cowboys texas rangers and cherokee choctaw chickasaw pawnee and creek indians.
all were young good shots and good riders the rough riders are best remembered because theodore roosevelt was second in command.
one of the rough riders said that roosevelt was nervous energetic virile manly.
he may wear out some day but he will never rust out when the 578 rough riders accompanied by a gaggle of reporters and photographers landed on june 22 1898 at the undefended southeastern tip of cuba chaos followed.
except for roosevelts horse little texas almost all of the other horses and mules had been mistakenly sent elsewhere leaving the rough riders to become the weary walkers nevertheless land and sea battles on the southern coast around santiago quickly broke spanish resistance.
on july 1 about 7 000 u s soldiers took the fortified village of el caney.
while a much larger force attacked san juan hill a smaller unit led by roosevelt on horseback and including the rough riders on foot seized nearby kettle hill.
thanks to widespread newspaper coverage much of it exaggerated roosevelt became a h ome front legend for his headlong gallop toward the spanish defenders.
the new york times reported that he had led the charge with bulldog ferociousness acting in a grand drama for the world to watch and admire roosevelt loved being in the headlines.
being a military hero was his lifelong dream.
according to the new york world the young lieutenant colonel had become more talked about than any man in the country a friend reported to roosevelts wife that her husband was reveling in victory and gore unburdened by humility roosevelt requested a congressional medal of honor for his much publicized charge in cuba.
it did not come.
president bill clinton finally awarded the medal posthumously in 2001.
while colonel roosevelt was basking in the glory of battle other u s soldiers in cuba were less enthusiastic about the terrors of modern warfare.
walter bartholomew a private from new york reported that the war in all its awfulness was so much more hideous than my wildest imagination that i have not yet recovered from the shock a soldier standing beside him had the front of his throat torn completely off by a spanish bullet.
as his unit was charging up san juan hill they became totally disorganized and thrown into utter confusion amid the intense shooting.
he discarded all he carried except for his rifle in the mad scramble to get out of the valley of death while stopping to shoot he saw the 24th regiment of colored infantry racing up the hill and he decided to follow their lead so excited that i forgot to fire my gun and i actually charged clean up to the top of the hill without shooting in as great panic as if i had been retreating the spanish american war the war of 1898 911 colonel roosevelt with one hand on his hip roosevelt rides with the rough riders in cuba.
most of his regiment was culled from arizona new mexico and texas because the southwestern climate resembled that of cuba.
spanish defeat and concessions on july 3 the spanish navy trapped at santiago made a gallant run to evade the american fleet blockading the harbor.
the spanish ships reported captain john philip commander of the u s warship texas came out as gaily as brides to the altar but they were quickly destroyed.
the casualties were as one sided as those at manila 474 spaniards were killed or wounded while only 1 american was killed and 1 wounded.
spanish officials in santiago surrendered on july 17 on july 25 an american force moved into s panish held puerto rico wealthy port in english meeting only minor resistance.
the next day july 26 the spanish government sued for peace.
a ceasefire agreement was signed on august 12 in cuba the spanish forces formally surrendered to the u s commander and then sailed for home excluded from the ceremony were the cubans for whom the war had supposedly been fought.
on december 10 1898 the united states and spain signed the treaty of paris.
under its terms cuba was to become independent and the united states was to annex puerto rico and continue to occupy manila pending a transfer of power in the philippines.
thus the spanish empire in the americas initiated by the voyages of christopher columbus some four centuries earlier came to a humiliating end.
now the united states was ready to create its own empire.
during the four month war of 1898 more than 60 000 spanish soldiers and sailors died of wounds or disease mostly malaria typhoid dysentery 912 chapter 31 conservative revival 1977 1990 harmony and trade with the west staking the soviet unions future on cooperation and trade with its cold war enemies.
early in 1989 soviet troops left afghanistan after nine years.
gorbachev then renounced the right of the soviet union to intervene in the internal affairs of other communist countries.
his foreign minister eduard shevardnadze told the soviet legislature that the nations of eastern europe had absolute freedom to choose their own form of governments.
soon thereafter the communist regimes in eastern europe fell with surprisingly little bloodshed first in poland and hungary then in czechoslovakia and bulgaria.
in romania the year of peaceful revolution ended when the people joined the army in a bloody uprising against nicolae ceauescu the countrys brutal dictator.
he and his wife were captured and tried then executed on christmas day.
although all of the new democratic governments faced immense economic and social challenges europe had at last been born anew.
the destruction of the berlin wall the most spec a hammer to the soviet empire a west german demonstrator pounds away at the berlin wall on november 11 1989 while east german border guards look on.
two days later all the crossings between east and west germany were opened.
tacular event in the collapse of the soviet empire came on november 9 1989 when tens of thousands of east germans gathered at the berlin wall and demanded that the border guards open the gates to west berlin.
sensing the fierce determination of the crowds the guards reluctantly did so and soon germans on both sides of the wall began tearing it down.
because the wall divided not only a city but a nation its destruction symbolized a revolutionary change.
what germans called the peaceful revolution had occurred with dramatic suddenness.
with the borders to west germany now fully open the communist government of east germany collapsed and germans rushed to reunify their divided nation.
on october 3 1990 the five states of east germany were united with west germany.
the presidency of george h w bush 1451 the reform impulse that gorbachev helped unleash in the eastern bloc countries sped out of control within the soviet union itself however.
gorbachev had proven unusually adept at political restructuring and building a new presidential system that gave him if anything increased powers.
his skills however could not salvage an antiquated economy that resisted change.
communist coup fails gorbachevs popularity shrank in the soviet union as it grew abroad.
communist hard liners saw in his reforms the unraveling of their bureaucratic and political empire.
on august 18 1991 a group of old guard political and military leaders accosted gorbachev at his vacation retreat in crimea and demanded that he proclaim a state of emergency and transfer his powers to them so that they could restore the supremacy of the communist party.
he replied go to hell whereupon he was placed under house arrest.
the coup however was poorly planned and clumsily implemented.
the plotters failed to arrest popular leaders such as boris yeltsin the feisty president of the russian republic.
they also neglected to close the airports or cut off telephone and television communications and they were opposed by key elements of the military and kgb the soviet secret police.
on august 20 president bush responded favorably to yeltsins request for support and persuaded other leaders to join him in refusing to recognize the new soviet government.
the next day word began to seep out that the plotters had given up and were fleeing.
several committed suicide and a newly released gorbachev ordered the others arrested.
although gorbachev reclaimed the title of president he was forced to resign as head of the communist party and admit that he had made a grave mistake in appointing the men who had turned against him.
yeltsin emerged as the most popular political figure in the country.
what had begun as a reactionary coup turned into a powerful accelerant for astonishing changes in the soviet union or the soviet disunion as one journalist termed it.
most of the fifteen republics proclaimed their independence from russia with the baltic states of latvia lithuania and estonia regaining the status of independent nations.
the communist party was dismantled prompting celebrating crowds to topple statues of lenin and other communist heroes.
panama the end of the cold war did not spell the end of international tensions however.
since the collapse of the soviet union the world has experienced numerous wars violent turbulence and fractious fundamentalisms of all sorts religious ethnic and imperial.
before the close of 1989 u s troops 1452 chapter 8 the emergence of a market economy 1815 1850 the growth of cities 1820 boston albany providence philadelphia washington new york baltimore richmond charleston new orleans population 10 000 to 34 999 35 000 to 100 000 over 100 000 500 miles 500 kilometers what were the largest cities in the united states in 1820.
those cities have the densest populations.
figure whym8 5a did new orleans grow rapidly yet eventually lag behind its northeastern first proof counterparts.
wwn64 why did 31p0 x 20p6 by the 1850s the irish made up more than half the population of boston and new york city and were almost as dominant in philadelphia.
most of them were crowded into filthy poorly ventilated tenement houses in which the low paid and p overty smitten.
crowd by the dozens irish neighborhoods were plagued by high crime rates deadly diseases prostitution and alcoholism.
the archbishop of new york described the irish as the poorest and most wretched population that can be found in the world it was the irish who often took on the nations hardest and most dangerous jobs.
a visiting irish journalist commenting on the industrial transformation in america wrote that there were several sorts of power working at the fabric of the republic water power steam power horse power and irish power.
the last works hardest of them all it was mostly irish men who built the canals and railroads and mostly irish women who worked in the textile mills of new england and cleaned the houses of thousands of upper middle class americans.
one irishman groaned that he worked like a slave for the americans immigration 381 the growth of cities 1860 lowell providence rochester buffalo milwaukee detroit chicago troy albany boston new haven brooklyn new york newark cleveland philadelphia san francisco cincinnati st louis louisville washington baltimore richmond charleston montgomery new orleans population 35 000 to 100 000 over 100 000 500 miles 500 kilometers wwn64 what is the connection between industrialization and urbanization.
figure m8 5b why did chicago pittsburgh cincinnati and st louis become major urban first proof centers in the m id nineteenth century.
31p0 x 20p6 irish immigrants were stereotyped as filthy b ad tempered and heavy drinkers.
they also encountered intense anti catholic prejudice among n ative born protestants.
many employers posted taunting signs reading no irish need apply irish americans however could be equally mean spirited toward other groups such as free african americans who competed with them for low wage mostly unskilled jobs.
in 1850 the new york tribune expressed concern that the irish having escaped from a galling degrading bondage in their homeland opposed equal rights for blacks and frequently arrived at the polls shouting down with the nagurs.
let them go back to africa where they belong irish freedom fighter daniel oconnell scolded the immigrants for their racism it was not in ireland you learned this cruelty many african americans viewed the irish with equal contempt.
in 1850 a slave expressed a common sentiment when he noted that his master was a great tyrant he treats me badly as if i were a common irishman irish immigrants often took jobs as waiters dockworkers and deliverymen that had long 382 chapter 15 the war of the union 1861 1865 as mcclellan was timid.
he is silent inscrutable strong like a god said a confederate officer.
on july 9 when lincoln visited mcclellans headquarters on the coast of virginia the general complained that the administration had failed to support him and lectured the president at length on military strategy.
such insubordination was ample reason to relieve mcclellan of his overall command.
after returning to washington lincoln called henry halleck from the west to take charge.
second bull run lincoln and halleck ordered mcclellan to move his army of the potomac back robert e lee military adviser to president jefferson davis and later to washington d c and join with commander of the army of northern general john pope commander of virginia.
the union army of virginia in a new assault on richmond.
pope declared that his goal was attack and not defense in a letter to his wife a jealous mcclellan predicted accurately that pope will be thrashed and disposed of by lees army.
he also dismissed lincoln as an idiot lee moved northward to strike popes army before mcclellans troops could arrive.
lee knew that his only chance was to drive a wedge between the two larger union armies so that he could deal with them one at a time.
violating a basic rule of military strategy lee boldly divided his forces sending stonewall jacksons foot cavalry around popes flank to attack his supply lines in the rear.
at the second battle of bull run or manassas fought on almost the same site as the earlier battle a confused pope assumed that he faced only jackson but lees main army by that time had joined in.
on august 30 1862 a crushing confederate attack drove the larger union army from the field giving the confederates a sensational victory and leading one disheartened union officer to confess from his deathbed that general pope had been outwitted.
our generals have defeated us in contrast a rebel soldier wrote home that general lee stands now above all generals in modern history.
our men will follow him to the end emancipation 659 emancipation the confederate victories in 1862 devastated morale in the north and convinced lincoln that he had to take bolder steps to win the war.
now the north had to assault slavery itself.
when fighting began in 1861 the need to keep the border slave states delaware kentucky maryland and missouri in the union dictated caution on the volatile issue of emancipation.
beyond that lincoln had to contend with a deep seated racial prejudice among most northerners who were willing to allow slavery to continue in the south as long as it was not allowed to expand into the west.
lincoln himself harbored doubts about his constitutional authority to end slavery and he did not believe that blacks if freed could coexist with whites.
slaves in the war the expanding war forced the issue.
as federal forces pushed into the confederacy fugitive slaves began to turn up in union army camps and the commanders did not know whether to declare them free.
one general designated them as being contraband of war and thereafter the slaves who sought protection and freedom with union forces were known as contrabands.
some union officers put the refugee slaves to work digging trenches building fortifications and burying the dead others simply set them free.
lincoln meanwhile began to edge toward ending slavery.
on april 16 1862 he signed an act that abolished slavery in the district of columbia on june 19 he signed another bill that excluded slavery from the western territories.
still he insisted that the war was about restoring the union and ending secession not ending slavery.
but the course of the war changed lincolns outlook.
in the summer of 1862 he decided that emancipation of slaves in the confederate states was necessary to win the war.
many of the more than 3 million enslaved laborers in the confederacy were being forced to aid the rebel war e ffort digging trenches hauling supplies or cooking meals for the armies repairing railroads and working as servants for confederate officers.
in july 1862 lincoln confided to his cabinet that decisive and extreme measures to win the war must be adopted emancipation he said had become a military necessity absolutely necessary to the preservation of the union.
we must free the slaves or be ourselves subdued secretary of state william h seward agreed but advised lincoln to delay the announcement until after a union battlefield victory to avoid being viewed as desperate.
660 chapter 3 colonial ways of life ot was required to attend midweek and sunday religious services.
the avern age new englander heard 7 000 sermons in a lifetime.
the puritans believed that god had created a covenant or contract in which people formed a congregation for common worship.
this led to the idea of people joining together to form governments but the principles of democracy were not part of puritan political thought.
puritan leaders sought to do the will of god not to follow the will of the people and the ultimate source of authority was not majority rule but the bible as interpreted by ministers and magistrates political leaders.
unlike the settlers in the southern colonies or in dutch new york few new england colonists received huge tracts of land.
township grants were usually awarded to organized groups of settlers often already gathered into a church congregation.
they would request from the general court a town what elsewhere was commonly called a township.
they then divided the land according to a rough principle of equity.
those who invested more or had larger families or greater status might receive more land while the town retained some pasture and woodland in common and held other tracts for later arrivals.
dwellings and daily life the first colonists in new england initially lived in caves tents or cabins but they soon built simple w ood frame housing in colonial new england this frame house built in the 1670s belonged to rebecca nurse one of the women hanged as a witch in salem village in 1692 society and economy in new england 119 houses.
the roofs were steeply pitched to reduce the buildup of snow and were covered with thatched grasses or reeds.
by the end of the seventeenth century most new england homes were plain but sturdy dwellings centered on a fireplace.
some had glass windows brought from england.
interior walls were often plastered and whitewashed but it was not until the eighteenth century that the exteriors of most houses were painted usually a deep indian red.
the interiors were dark illuminated by candles or oil lamps both of which were expensive out of practicality most people usually went to sleep soon after sunset.
family life revolved around the main room on the ground floor called the hall where meals were cooked in a large fireplace and where the family lived most of the time hence they came to be called living rooms.
food would be served at a table of r ough hewn planks called the board.
the father was sometimes referred to as the chair man because he sat in the only chair the origin of the term chairman of the board.
the rest of the family usually stood or sat on stools or benches and ate with their hands and wooden spoons.
forks were not introduced until the eighteenth century.
a typical meal consisted of corn boiled meat and vegetables washed down with beer cider rum or milk.
cornbread was a daily favorite as was cornmeal mush known as hasty pudding.
the new england economy early new england farmers and their families led hard lives.
clearing rocks from the g lacier scoured soil might require sixty days of hard labor per acre.
the growing season was short and no staple crops for sale in markets grew in the harsh climate.
the crops and livestock were those familiar to the english countryside wheat barley oats some cattle pigs and sheep.
many new englanders turned to the sea for their livelihood.
codfish had been a regular element of the european diet for centuries and the waters off the new england coast had the heaviest concentrations of cod in the world.
whales too abounded in new england waters.
they supplied oil for lighting and lubrication as well as ambergris a waxy substance used in the manufacture of perfumes.
new englanders exported dried fish to europe with lesser grades going to the west indies as food for slaves.
the thriving fishing industry encouraged the development of shipbuilding and the growing experience and expertise at seafaring spurred transatlantic commerce.
rising incomes and a booming trade with britain and europe soon brought a taste for luxury goods in new england that clashed with the puritan ideal of plain living and high thinking.
in 1714 a worried puritan deplored the great extravagance that people are 120 chapter 15 the war of the union 1861 1865 the year 1862 ended with a stalemate in the east and the union thrust in the west mired down.
northern morale plummeted and northern democrats victories in the fall congressional elections sharply reduced the republican majorities in the house and the senate.
many democrats were calling for a negotiated peace and republicans even lincolns own cabinet m embers grew increasingly critical of the presidents leadership.
if there is a worse place than hell lincoln sighed i am in it newspapers circulated rumors that the president was going to resign.
general burnside too was under fire with some of his own officers eager to testify publicly to his shortcomings.
one of them claimed that the general was fast losing his mind new york city draft riots lincolns proclamation freeing slaves in the confederacy created anxiety and anger among many laborers in the north who feared that freed slaves would eventually migrate north and take their jobs.
in new york city such fears erupted into violence.
in july 1863 a group of 500 wage workers led by volunteer firemen assaulted the army draft office shattering its windows then burning it down.
when the city police superintendent arrived at the scene he was beaten unconscious and the outnumbered policemen were forced to retreat.
the rioters now swollen by thousands of w orking class whites mostly irish were angry over the unfair military draft ruthlessly taking out their frustrations on blacks.
mobs rampaged through the streets of manhattan randomly assaulting african americans beating them dragging them through the streets and lynching a disabled black man while chanting hurrah for jeff davis thugs also burned down more than fifty buildings including the mayors home police stations two protestant churches and the colored orphan asylum forcing 233 children to flee.
the raging violence went on for three days killing 105 people and injuring thousands.
only the arrival of federal soldiers put an end to the rioting.
thousands of terrified blacks thereafter moved out of the city for fear of continuing racial violence.
similar riots occurred in other northern cities including boston.
black soldiers and sailors in july 1862 in an effort to strengthen the union war effort the u s congress had passed the militia act which authorized the army to use freed slaves as laborers or soldiers they were already eligible to serve in the navy.
lincoln however did not encourage the use of freed slaves as soldiers because he feared the reaction in the border states where slavery remained in place.
it was only after the formal signing of the emancipation proclamation in january 1863 that the union army recruited blacks in large numbers.
emancipation 667 campaigns in virginia and maryland 1862 confederate advance hagerstown le lee jackso n sept lan lel cc c m washington manassas junction e le ide rns bu e battle site o tom a river jackson m cclellan p second bull run pope shen and oa hr ive r frederick harpers ferry p po confederate retreat union advance union retreat e antietam sharpsburg marylan d cedar mountain n i a y pam un ke y ri ve r richmond harrisons landing mcclellan to washington i ba j e es river am ak so n g r r st gu au i pe d e riv ck no an v sa rap pah an lee ja ck che fredericksburg area of map 30 miles 30 kilometers how did the confederate army defeat general pope at the second battle of bull run.
why was general burnsides decision to attack at fredericksburg a wwn64 mistake.
figure m15 5 1st proof 668 chapter 3 colonial ways of life r ivers the hudson the delaware and the s usquehanna and their tributaries provided access to the backcountry of pennsylvania and new york which opened up a rich fur trade with native americans.
the regions bustling commerce thus rivaled that of new england.
land policies in the middle colonies followed the headright system prevalent in the chesapeake colonies.
in new york the early royal governors continued the dutch device of the patroonship granting to influential men called patroons vast estates on long island and throughout the hudson and mohawk valleys north of new york city.
the patroons controlled large domains farmed by tenants renters who paid fees to use the landlords mills warehouses smokehouses and docks.
with free land available elsewhere however new yorks population languished and the new waves of immigrants sought the promised land of pennsylvania.
an ethnic mix in the makeup of their population the middle colonies differed from both new englands puritan settlements and the biracial plantation colonies to the south.
in new york and new jersey dutch culture and language lingered.
along the delaware river near philadelphia the first settlers swedes and finns were overwhelmed by an influx of europeans.
by the mid eighteenth century the middle colonies were the fastest growing region in north america.
the germans came to america primarily pennsylvania mainly from the rhineland region of europe which had suffered from brutal religious wars that pitted protestants against catholics.
william penns recruiting brochures in german translation circulated throughout central europe and his promise of religious freedom appealed to many persecuted sects especially the mennonites german baptists whose beliefs resembled those of the quakers.
in 1683 a group of mennonites founded germantown near philadelphia.
they represented the first wave of german migrants a large proportion of whom paid their way as indentured servants or redemptioners the large numbers of penniless german immigrants during the eighteenth century alarmed many english colonists.
benjamin franklin worried that the germans will soon.
outnumber us throughout the eighteenth century the scots irish moved still farther out into the pennsylvania backcountry.
scotch irish is the more common but inaccurate name for the scots irish a mostly presbyterian population transplanted from scotland to northern ireland by the english government a century earlier to give catholic ireland a more protestant tone.
land was the great magnet attracting the poor scots irish immigrants.
they were said a recruiting agent full of expectation to have land for nothing and major immigrant groups in colonial america quebec c e q u e b ive r new hampshire lake champlain u ctic ne new york boston f o l er ke f de law susque river a p p a l a c h i a n ri ve r la ohio newport f f riv er pennsylvania j new york new jersey j w philadelphia s s baltimore delaware virginia chesapeake bay shenandoah river richmond f james river williamsburg north new bernf carolina fayetteville w charlotte f r f charleston j r ive georgia j savannah florida spanish atlantic ocean maryland potomac river sav an nah cape cod j rhode island south carolina 200 miles 200 kilometers connecticut are n han a ie n e o iver river mohawk iver m o u n t a i n s tr i nr dso hu ak r ta massachusetts n co law ren ce r augusta montreal st maine mass.
english africans scots irish german dutch highland scots french catholics j jews s swedes w welsh f french huguenots what attracted german immigrants to the middle colonies.
why did the scots irish spread across the appalachian backcountry.
where did the first jews settle in america.
how were they received.
wwn64 america 10e 26593 03map 02 first proof 126 chapter 3 colonial ways of life were unwilling to be disappointed in most cases the lands they squatted on were claimed by native americans.
in 1741 a group of delaware indians protested to pennsylvania authorities that the s cots irish intruders were taking our land without giving us anything for it if the colonial government did not stop the flow of whites the delawares threatened then they would drive them off the scots irish and the germans became the largest n on english ethnic groups in the colonies.
other ethnic minorities also enriched the population in the middle colonies huguenots french protestants whose religious freedom had been revoked in 1685 forcing many to leave france irish welsh swiss and jews.
new york had inherited from the dutch a tradition of ethnic and religious tolerance which had given the colony a diverse population before the english conquest french speaking walloons a celtic people of southern belgium french germans danes portuguese spaniards italians bohemians poles and others including some new england puritans.
the backcountry pennsylvania became the great distribution point for the different ethnic groups of european origin just as the chesapeake bay region and charleston south carolina became the distribution points for african peoples.
before the mid eighteenth century settlers in the pennsylvania backcountry had trespassed across indian lands and reached the appalachian mountain range.
rather than crossing the steep ridges the scots irish and germans filtered southward down the shenandoah valley of virginia and on into the carolina and georgia backcountry.
germans were the first white settlers in the upper shenandoah valley in southern pennsylvania western maryland and northern virginia and s cots irish filled the lower valley in western virginia and north carolina.
feisty determined and rugged the german and scots irish settlers built cabins and tended farms on indian lands built evangelical churches and established contentious isolated communities along the frontier of settlement.
r ace based slavery the institution of slavery is central to the history of the american colonies.
during the late seventeenth century slavery was legalized in all the colonies but was most prevalent in the south.
white colonists viewed race based slavery as a normal aspect of everyday life in an imperfect world few c onsidered it a moral issue.
they believed that god determined ones station in life slavery race based slavery 127 was therefore not a social evil but a personal misfortune dictated by god.
not until the late eighteenth century did large numbers of white europeans and americans begin to raise ethical questions about slavery.
initially during the seventeenth century many of the first africans in america were treated like indentured servants with a limited term of service after which they gained their freedom.
antonio an african arrived in jamestown during the early 1620s and worked as a servant for fourteen years before gaining his freedom.
he thereafter married an african woman changed his name to anthony johnson and developed a substantial farm of his own along the virginia shore.
until the mid seventeenth century no laws in the colonies specified the meaning and scope of the word slavery gradually however life long slavery for blacks became the c ustom and the l aw of the land.
by the 1660s colonial legislatures had begun to legalize the institution of r ace based slavery with detailed slave codes regulating most aspects of their lives.
the south carolina code for example defined all negroes mulattoes and indians sold into bondage as slaves for life as were the children born of enslaved mothers.
in 1667 the virginia legislature declared that slaves could not serve on juries travel without permission or gather in groups of more than two or three.
some colonies even prohibited owners from freeing their slaves manumission.
the codes allowed owners to punish slaves by whipping them slitting their noses cutting their ankle cords castrating men or killing them.
in 1713 a south carolina planter punished a slave by closing him up in a tiny coffin to die only to have his son slip in a knife so that he could kill himself rather than await suffocation.
color prejudice more than a century before the english arrived in america the portuguese and spanish had established a global trade in enslaved africans in spanish the word negro means black.
while english settlers often enslaved indian captives as had the spanish and portuguese before them the europeans did not enslave other europeans who were captured in warfare.
color was the crucial difference or at least the crucial rationalization used to justify the institution of slavery and its hellish brutalities.
the english associated the color black with darkness and evil.
to them the different appearance behavior and customs of africans and native americans represented savagery and heathenism.
colonial virginians justified slavery by convincing themselves that blacks and indians were naturally lazy treacherous and stupid among other shortcomings.
128 chapter 9 nationalism and sectionalism 1815 1828 to traders who took them to the western territories to be sold again.
any effort to restrict slavery in the western territories they believed could lead to disunion and civil war.
in addition southerners worried that the addition of missouri as a free state would tip the balance of power in the senate against the slave states.
their fears were heightened when congressman timothy fuller an anti slavery republican from massachusetts declared that it was both the right and duty of congress to stop the spread of the intolerable evil and the crying enormity of slavery after fiery debates the house with its northern majority passed the tallmadge amendment on an almost strictly sectional vote.
the senate however rejected it also along sectional lines.
at about the same time maine which had been part of massachusetts applied for statehood.
the senate decided to link maines request for statehood with missouris voting in 1820 to admit maine as a free state and missouri as a slave state thus maintaining the political balance between free and slave states.
illinois senator jesse thomas revised the so called missouri compromise by introducing an amendment to exclude slavery in the rest of the louisiana purchase north of latitude 3630 missouris southern border.
slavery thus would continue in the arkansas territory and in the new state of missouri but would be excluded from the remainder of the area west of the mississippi river.
by a narrow margin the thomas amendment passed on march 2 1820 then another issue arose.
the p ro slavery faction in missouris consti tutional convention inserted in the proposed state constitution a provision excluding free blacks and mulattoes mixed race people from residing in the state.
this violated the u s constitution.
free blacks were already citizens of many states.
the dispute over the status of blacks henry clay of kentucky clay entered the senate at t wenty eight despite the threatened to unravel the deal to admit requirement that senators be at least missouri as a state until speaker of the thirty years old.
here clay is pictured house henry clay fashioned a secon a fi fty dollar bill issued in the 1860s.
ond missouri compromise whereby nationalist diplomacy 405 missouri would be admitted as a state only if its legislature pledged never to deny free blacks their constitutional rights.
the missouri legislature approved clays suggestion but denied that it had any power to bind the state in the future.
on august 10 1821 missouri became the t wenty fourth state and the twelfth where slavery was allowed.
nationalists praised the missouri compromise for deflecting the volatile issue of slavery.
but the compromise settled little.
in fact it had the effect of hardening positions in both north and south.
sectionalism erupted even within the presidents cabinet.
president monroe insisted that any effort to restrict the spread of slavery violated the constitution.
his secretary of state the future president john quincy adams of massachusetts disliked the missouri compromise for the opposite reason because it sustained the constitutions immoral bargain between freedom and slavery the debate over the missouri compromise revealed a widening divide between north and south the north dominated by shipping commerce manufacturing and small farms the south becoming more and more dependent on cotton and slavery.
nationalist diplomacy the efforts of henry clay to promote economic nationalism and john marshall to affirm judicial nationalism were reinforced by efforts to practice diplomatic nationalism.
john quincy adams secretary of state in the monroe administration and the son of former president john adams aggressively exercised americas growing power to clarify and expand the nations boundaries.
he also wanted europeans to recognize americas dominance in the western hemisphere.
relations with britain the treaty of ghent 1814 had ended the war of 1812 but it left unsettled several disputes between the united states and great britain.
adams oversaw the negotiations of two important treaties the rush bagot treaty of 1817 named after the diplomats who arranged it and the convention of 1818 both of which eased tensions.
in the r ush bagot treaty the two nations agreed to limit the number of warships on the great lakes.
the convention of 1818 was even more impor tant.
it settled the disputed northern boundary of the louisiana purchase by extending it along the 49th parallel westward from what would become minnesota to the rocky mountains.
west of the rockies the oregon country would be jointly occupied by the british and the americans.
406 chapter 4 from colonies to states the habit of self government government within the american colonies evolved without plan during the eighteenth century as the colonial assemblies acquired powers particularly with respect to government appointments that parliament had yet to exercise itself.
the english colonies in america unlike new france and new spain benefited from elected legislative assemblies.
whether called the house of burgesses virginia delegates maryland representatives massachusetts or simply the assembly the lower houses were chosen by popular vote.
only male property owners could vote based upon the notion that only men who held a tangible stake in society could vote responsibly.
because property holding was much more widespread in america than in europe a greater proportion of the men could vote and hold office in the colonies.
members of the colonial assemblies tended to be wealthy prominent figures but there were exceptions.
one unsympathetic colonist observed in 1744 that the new jersey assembly was chiefly composed of mechanicks and ignorant wretches obstinate to the last degree the most profound political trend during the early eighteenth century was the growing power exercised by the colonial assemblies.
like parliament the assemblies controlled the budget through their vote on taxes and expenditures and they held the power to initiate legislation.
most of the colonial assemblies also exerted leverage on the royal governors by controlling their salaries.
throughout the eighteenth century the assemblies expanded their power and influence sometimes in conflict with the governors sometimes in harmony with them.
self government in america became first a habit then a right by the mid eighteenth century the american colonies had become largely s elf governing.
warfare in the colonies the glorious revolution of 1688 transformed relations among the great powers of europe.
protestants william and mary for example were passionate foes of catholic frances louis xiv.
king william organized an alliance of european nations against the french in a transatlantic war known in the american colonies as king williams war 1689 1697.
it was the first of four major wars fought in europe and the colonies over the next s eventy four years.
in each case britain and its european allies fought against catholic france or spain and their allies.
by the end of the eighteenth century the struggle between the british and the french would shift the balance of power in europe.
warfare in the colonies 157 in all four of the wars except the last the seven years war battles in the north american colonies were but a sideshow accompanying massive warfare in europe.
although the wars involved many nations including indians who fought on both sides the conflicts centered on the intense struggle for supremacy between the british and the french a struggle that ended up profoundly shifting the international balance of power among the great powers of europe.
the prolonged warfare during the eighteenth century had a devastating effect on new england especially massachusetts for it was closest to the battlefields of french canada.
the wars also reshaped britains relationship with america.
great britain emerged from the wars in 1763 as the most powerful nation in the world.
thereafter international commerce became increasingly essential to the expanding british empire thus making the american colonies even more strategically significant.
the french and indian war the most important conflict between britain and france in north america was the french and indian war 1754 1763 globally known as the seven years war.
unlike the earlier wars the french and indian war started in america and ended with a decisive victory.
it was sparked by french and british competition for the ancestral indian lands in the vast ohio valley and the stakes were high.
whoever controlled the ohio country would control the entire continent because of the ohio and mississippi rivers.
to defend their interests in the ohio country the french pushed south from canada and built forts in the region.
when virginias british governor learned of the forts he sent an ambitious t wenty two year old militia officer major george washington to warn the french to leave.
washington made his way on foot and by horseback canoe and raft more than 450 miles to fort le boeuf just south of lake erie in northwest pennsylvania in late 1753 only to be rudely rebuffed by the french.
a few months later in the spring of 1754 washington now a lieutenant colonel went back to the ohio country with 150 volunteer soldiers and indian allies.
they planned to build a fort where the allegheny monongahela and ohio rivers converged where the city of pittsburgh later developed.
the so called forks of the ohio was the key strategic gateway to the vast western territory west of the appalachian mountains and both sides were determined to control it.
after two months of difficult travel through densely forested hilly terrain washington learned that french soldiers had beaten him to the site and built fort duquesne in western pennsylvania.
washington decided to camp about 158 chapter 16 the era of r econstruction paper money were worthless personal savings had vanished.
amanda worthington a planters wife from mississippi saw her whole world destroyed.
in the fall of 1865 she assessed the damage none of us can realize that we are no longer w ealthy yet thanks to the yankees the cause of all unhappiness such is the case union soldiers who fanned out across the defeated south to impose order were cursed and spat upon.
a virginia woman expressed a spirited defiance common among her circle of confederate friends every day every hour that i live increases my hatred and detestation and loathing of that race.
they yankees disgrace our common humanity.
as a people i consider them vastly inferior to the better classes of our slaves fervent southern nationalists both men and women implanted in their children a similar hatred of yankees and a defiance of northern rule.
one mother said that she trained her children to fear god love the south and live to avenge her many of the largest southern cities richmond atlanta charleston were in ruins most southern railroads were damaged or destroyed.
cotton that had not been destroyed by invading union armies was now seized by federal troops.
emancipation had eliminated 4 billion invested in slaves and left the agricultural economy in confusion.
it would take decades before farm production regained its p re war levels.
in 1860 just before the war began the south generated 30 percent of the nations wealth in 1870 only ten years later it produced but 12 percent.
many southerners were homeless and hungry emotionally exhausted and physically disabled.
lives had been shattered literally.
countless families had lost sons and husbands and many surviving war veterans returned home with one or more limbs missing.
in 1866 the state of mississippi spent a fifth of its annual budget on artificial limbs for confederate soldiers.
confederate general braxton bragg returned to his once prosperous alabama home to find all all was lost except my debts rebuilding the former confederacy would not be easy and the issues related to reconstruction were often complicated and controversial.
for example the process of forming new state governments required first determining the official status of the states that had seceded were they now conquered territories.
if so then the constitution assigned congress authority to r e create their state governments.
but what if as abraham lincoln had argued the confederate states had never officially left the union because the act of secession was itself illegal.
in that circumstance the president would be responsible for re forming state governments.
whichever branch of government congress or the presidency directed the reconstruction of the south it would have to address the most difficult debates over political r econstruction 705 issue what would be the political social and economic status of the freed slaves.
were they citizens.
if not what was their status as americans.
what the freed slaves wanted most was to become s elf reliant as soon as possible.
that meant being able to control their labor reunite with their family members gain education for their children enjoy full participation in political life and create their own community organizations and social life.
many whites were just as determined to prevent that from happening.
debates over political r econstruction the reconstruction of former confederate states actually began during the war and went through several phases the first of which was presidential reconstruction.
in 1862 with union forces advancing into the south president lincoln had named army generals to serve as temporary military governors for conquered confederate areas.
by the end of 1863 he had formulated a plan to reestablish governments in states liberated from confederate rule.
lincolns plan in late 1863 president lincoln issued a proclamation of amnesty and reconstruction under which any confederate state could recreate a union government once a number equal to 10 percent of those who had voted in 1860 swore allegiance to the constitution.
they also received a presidential pardon acquitting them of treason.
certain groups however were denied pardons confederate government officials senior officers of the confederate army and navy judges congressmen and military officers of the united states who had left their posts to aid the rebellion and those who had abused captured african american soldiers.
congressional plans a few conservative and most moderate republicans supported lincolns program that immediately restored pro union southern governments.
however the radical republicans argued that congress not the president should supervise reconstruction.
the radical republicans favored a drastic transformation of southern society that would grant e x slaves full citizenship rights.
many radicals motivated primarily by religious values and moral ideals believed that all people regardless of race were equal in gods eyes.
they wanted no compromise with the sin of racism.
the radicals also hoped to replace the white democratic planter elite with a new generation of small farmers along with wage earning and middle class 706 chapter 4 from colonies to states which would have legislative powers.
the union would have jurisdiction over indian affairs.
the albany plan of union was too radical for the time however.
british officials and the colonial legislatures eager to maintain their powers wanted simply a military alliance against indian attacks so they rejected the albany plan.
benjamin franklin later maintained that the plan of union had it been adopted may have postponed or eliminated the eventual need for a f ull scale colonial revolution.
franklins proposal however did have a lasting significance in that it would be the model for the form of governance articles of confederation created by the new american nation in 1777 war in north america with the failure of the albany plan the british government decided to force a showdown with the presumptuous french in north america.
in june 1755 a british fleet captured the french forts protecting acadia a colony of new france along the atlantic coast of canada.
the british then expelled 11 500 acadians the catholic french residents.
hundreds of them eventually found their way to french louisiana where they became known as cajuns the name derived from acadians.
in 1755 the british government sent 1 000 soldiers to dislodge the french from the ohio country.
the arrival of unprecedented numbers of redcoat soldiers on american soil would change the dynamics of british north america.
although the colonists endorsed the use of force against the french they later would oppose the use of british soldiers to enforce colonial regulations.
braddock s defeat the british commander in chief in america general edward braddock was a stubborn overconfident officer who refused to recruit large numbers of indian allies.
braddock viewed indians with open contempt telling those willing to fight with him that he would not reward them with land for doing so no savage should inherit the land his dismissal of the indians and his ignorance of unconventional warfare in american forests would prove fatal.
neither he nor his irish troops had any experience fighting in the wilderness.
with the addition of some american militiamen including george washington as a volunteer officer braddocks force left northern virginia to confront the french hacking a 125 mile long road west through the rugged allegheny mountains toward fort duquesne.
on july 9 1755 as the british neared the fort they were ambushed by french soldiers canadian militiamen and indians.
the british troops dressed in impractical b right red wool uniforms in the summer heat suf warfare in the colonies 161 fered s hocking losses.
braddock was mortally wounded and would die three days later.
washington his coat riddled by four bullets helped lead a hasty retreat.
what came to be called the battle of monongahela was one of the worst british defeats in history.
the french and indians killed 63 of 86 british officers 914 out of 1 373 soldiers and captured the british cannons and supplies.
twelve of the wounded british soldiers left behind on the battlefield were stripped and burned alive by indians.
a devastated washington wrote his brother that the british army had been scandalously beaten by a trifling body of men the vaunted redcoats broke run as sheep pursued by hounds but the virginians he noted behaved like men and died like soldiers a world war while braddocks stunning defeat sent shock waves through the colonies indians allied with the french began attacking from la roques encyclopedie des american farms throughout western voyages an iroquois warrior in an eighteenth century french engraving.
pennsylvania maryland and virginia killing scalping or capturing hundreds of men women and children.
desperate to respond the pennsylvania provincial government offered 130 spanish dollars for each male indian scalp and 50 dollars for female scalps.
indians and colonists killed each other mercilessly throughout 1755 and 1756 during the french and indian war.
it was not until may 1756 however that protestant britain and catholic france formally declared war in europe.
the first truly world war the seven years war in europe and the french and indian war in north america would eventually be fought on four continents and three oceans around the globe.
in the end it would redraw the political map of the world.
162 chapter 21 the progressive era 1890 1920 alice paul sewing a suffrage fl ag orange and purple with s tars that she and other suffragists often waved at strikes and protests.
state legislatures target and punish politicians who failed to endorse suffrage chain themselves to public buildings incite police to arrest them and undertake hunger strikes.
in march 1913 paul organized 5 000 suffragists to protest at wilsons inauguration.
four years later having broken with the nawsa and formed the national womans party paul decided that suffragists must do something even more dramatic picket the white house.
beginning on january 11 1917 paul and her followers took turns carrying signs all day five days a week for months until the president ordered their arrest.
some sixty suffragists were jailed.
paul was sentenced to seven months in prison.
she then went on a hunger strike leading prison officials to force feed her raw eggs through a tube inserted in her nose.
she later recalled that it was shocking that a government of men could look with such extreme contempt on a movement that was woodrow wilson a progressive southerner 981 asking nothing except such a simple little thing as the right to vote under an avalanche of negative press coverage and public criticism wilson finally pardoned paul and the other activists.
progressivism renewed by 1916 wilsons determination to win reelection revived his commitment to progressive activism.
the president nominated bostonian louis d brandeis the peoples attorney to the supreme court.
brandeis was not just a famed defender of unions against big businesses he would also be the first jewish member of the supreme court.
progressives viewed the nomination as a landmark in the history of american democracy others disagreed.
f ormer president taft dismissed brandeis as a muckraker an emotionalist for his own purposes a socialist.
who is utterly unscrupulous the senate however confirmed brandeiss appointment.
justice oliver wendell holmes jr the leading figure on the court sent brandeis a o ne word telegram welcome farm legislation president wilson also urged congress to pass the first federal legislation directed at assisting farmers.
he first supported a proposal to set up rural banks to provide l ong term farm loans.
the federal farm loan act became law in 1916 under the control of the federal farm loan board twelve federal land banks offered loans to farmers for five to forty years at low interest rates.
farmers could borrow up to 50 percent of the value of their land.
at about the same time a dream long advocated by populists federal loans to farmers on the security of their crops stored in warehouses finally came to fruition when congress passed the warehouse act of 1916 these crop security loans were available to sharecroppers tenant farmers and to farmers who owned the land that they worked.
farmers also benefited from the s mith lever act of 1914 which provided federal programs to educate farmers about new machinery and new ideas related to agricultural efficiency and the s mith hughes act 1917 which funded agricultural and mechanical education in high schools.
farmers with the newfangled automobiles had more than a passing interest as well in the federal highways act of 1916 which helped finance new highways especially in rural areas.
labor legislation one of the l ong standing goals of many progressive democrats was a federal child labor law.
when congress passed the keating owen act in 1916 banning products made by child workers under 982 chapter 10 the jacksonian era 1828 1840 announced that the ship of state is sinking and the rats are flying.
the hull is too leaky to mend and the hero of two wars and a half has not the skill to keep it afloat john quincy adams told his son that the stunning cabinet purge had put all of washington in a state of confusion people stare and laugh and say what next the next act in the running political drama occurred when john eaton challenged ingham to a duel.
the ousted treasury secretary chose instead to retreat to his home in pennsylvania.
after the eatons left washington d c a gloating henry clay retrieved william shakespeares characterization of egyptian queen cleopatra to mark peggys departure age cannot wither nor time stale her infinite virginity the rats leaving a falling house during his first term jackson was beset by dissension within his administration.
here public confidence in the stability of this administration is toppling.
new cabinets by the end of august 1831 jackson had appointed a new cabinet all of whom agreed to treat peggy eaton with respect.
at the same time jackson increasingly relied upon the advice of martin van buren and others making up the presidents so called kitchen cabinet an informal group of close friends and supporters many of them democratic newspaper editors.
the kitchen cabinet soon convinced jackson to drop his pledge to serve only one term.
they explained that it would be hard for van buren the presidents chosen successor to win the 1832 democratic nomination because calhoun would do everything in his power to stop h im and calhoun might win the nomination himself.
in early 1831 the washington globe a democratic newspaper announced that jackson would seek a second term.
the conquering hero is again in the field and it must now be seen who are his friends and who are his foes the anti masonic party in 1832 for the first time in a presidential election a third political party entered the field.
the anti masonic 213003 10 422 463 r4 th indd 442 24 10 15 1 52 pm nullification 443 party grew out of popular hostility toward the masonic fraternal order a large all male social organization that originated in great britain early in the eighteenth century.
the masons often claimed to be the natural leaders of their communities the best men by 1830 more than 2 000 masonic lodges were scattered across the united states with about 100 000 members including andrew jackson and henry clay.
the new anti masonic party owed its origins to a defrocked mason william morgan a fifty two year old unemployed bricklayer in batavia new york.
morgan had been thrown out of the masons because of his joblessness.
seeking revenge he convinced a local printer to publish a widely circulated pamphlet revealing the secret rituals of the masonic order.
masons then tried to burn down the print shop where the pamphlet had been published.
they also had morgan arrested on a trumped up charge of indebtedness.
soon thereafter on september 12 1826 someone paid for his release from jail and spirited morgan away in a waiting carriage.
a year later a mans decomposed body was found in oak orchard creek near lake ontario.
morgans grieving wife confirmed that it was her husband.
governor dewitt clinton himself a mason offered a reward for anyone who would identify the kidnappers.
the morgan mystery became a major political issue.
new york launched more than twenty investigations into morgans disappearance and presumed murder and conducted a dozen trials of several masons but never gained a conviction.
each legal effort aroused more public indignation because most of the judges lawyers and jurors were masons.
people began to fear that the masons had become a self appointed aristocracy lacking the education and character necessary for self denying civic leadership.
john quincy adams said that disbanding the masonic institution was the most important issue facing us and our posterity suspicions of the masonic order as a tyrannical secret brotherhood intent on subverting democracy gave rise to the grassroots political movement known as the anti masonic party whose purpose was to protect republican values from being corrupted by self serving power hungry masonic insiders.
the anti masons claimed that they were determined to hand down to posterity unimpaired the republic we inherited from our forefathers the new party drew most of its support from new englanders and new yorkers alienated by both the democratic and national republican parties.
anti masonic adherents tended to be rural evangelical protestants many of whom also opposed slavery.
opposition to a fraternal organization was hardly the foundation upon nti masonic party had which to build a lasting political coalition but the a three important firsts to its credit in addition to being the first third party 213003 10 422 463 r4 th indd 443 24 10 15 1 52 pm 444 chapter 10 the jacksonian era 1828 1840 south carolina ordinance of nullification the 1832 ordinance repudiated two federal tariffs designed to protect northern industries.
though armed conflict was avoided the same tensions that led to nullification would later lead to south carolinas secession.
calhoun resigned as vice president so that he could openly defend his nullification theory in congress and oppose president jacksons tyrannical actions.
jackson says no to nullification president jacksons public response was moderate.
he promised to use firmness and forbearance with south carolina but stressed that nullification means insurrection and war and the other states have a right to put it down in private however jackson was furious.
he asked the secretary of war how many soldiers it would take to go to south carolina and crush the monster nullification in its cradle he also threatened to hang calhoun and other nullifiers if there were any bloodshed.
surely the president is exaggerating governor hayne of south carolina remarked to senator thomas hart benton of missouri.
benton who years before had been in a fistfight with jackson replied i have known general jackson a great many years and when he speaks of hanging it is time to look for a rope during the fall of 1832 most northern state legislatures passed resolutions condemning the nullificationists.
at the same time the s laveholder dominated southern states expressed sympathy for south carolina but none endorsed nullification.
we detest the tariff explained a mississippian but we will hold to the union south carolina was left standing alone against jackson.
on december 10 1832 the unyielding jackson issued his official response to the people of south carolina.
in his blistering proclamation he dismissed nullification as an absurdity a mad project of disunion that was incompatible with the existence of the union contradicted expressly by the letter of the constitution unauthorized by its spirit inconsistent with every principle on which it was founded and destructive of the great object for which it was formed he warned that nullification would lead to secession formal withdrawal of a state from the united states and secession meant civil war.
be 213003 10 422 463 r4 th indd 446 24 10 15 1 52 pm nullification 447 not deceived by names.
disunion by armed force is treason.
are you really ready to incur its guilt clay steps in president jackson then sent federal soldiers and a warship to charleston to protect the federal customhouse where tariffs were applied to imported products arriving on ships from europe.
governor hayne responded by mobilizing the state militia and the two sides edged toward a violent confrontation.
a south carolina unionist reported to jackson from charleston that many reckless and dangerous men were looking for civil war and scenes of bloodshed while taking forceful actions jackson still wanted peaceably to nullify the nullifiers in early 1833 the president requested from congress the authority to use the u s army to force compliance with federal law in south carolina.
calhoun exploded on the senate floor exclaiming that he and the others defending his states constitutional rights were being threatened by what they called the force bill to have our throats cut and those of our wives and children the greatest threat facing the nation he argued was not nullification but presidential despotism.
calhoun and the nullifiers however soon backed down and the south carolina legislature postponed the implementation of the nullification ordinances in hopes that congress would pass a more palatable tariff bill.
passage of a compromise bill however depended upon the support of senator henry clay himself a slaveholding planter who finally yielded to those urging him to step in and save the day for the union.
a fellow senator told clay that these south carolinians are good fellows and it would be a pity to see jackson hang them clay agreed.
on february 12 1833 he circulated a plan suggested by jackson to reduce gradually over several years the federal tariff on key imported items.
clay urged congress to treat south carolina with respect and display that great principle of compromise and concession which lies at the bottom of our institutions the tariff reductions were less than south carolina preferred but clays compromise helped the nullifiers out of the dilemma they had created.
calhoun supported the compromise he who loves the union must desire to see this agitating question the tariff brought to a termination on march 1 1833 jackson signed into law the compromise tariff and the force bill the latter being a symbolic statement of the primacy of the union.
calhoun rushed home to convince the rebels in his state to back down.
the south carolina convention then met and rescinded its nullification of the tariff acts.
in a face saving gesture the delegates nullified the force bill which jackson no longer needed.
213003 10 422 463 r4 th indd 447 24 10 15 1 52 pm 448 chapter 4 from colonies to states to the rest of the colonies.
we are now to establish our authority over the colonies north said or give it up entirely the coercive acts in 1774 lord north convinced parliament to punish rebellious boston by enacting a cluster of harsh laws called the coercive acts americans renamed them the intolerable acts.
the boston port act closed the boston harbor until the city paid for the lost tea.
a new quartering act ordered colonists to provide lodging for british soldiers.
the impartial administration of justice act said that any royal official accused of a major crime would be tried back in great britain rather than in the colony.
finally the massachusetts government act gave the royal governor the authority to appoint the colonys legislative council which until then had been elected by the people as well as judges and sheriffs.
it also ordered that no town meeting could be held without the royal governors consent.
in may lieutenant general thomas gage commander in chief of british forces in north america was named governor of massachusetts and assumed command of the british soldiers who had returned to boston.
the intolerable acts shocked colonists.
no one had expected such a severe reaction to the boston tea party.
many towns held meetings in violation of the able doctor or america swallowing the bitter draught this 1774 engraving shows lord north the boston port act in his pocket pouring tea down americas throat and america spitting it back.
the crisis grows 179 the new laws and voters elected their own unauthorized provincial legislative assembly which ordered town governments to quit paying taxes to the royal governor.
by august 1774 patriots across massachusetts had essentially taken control of local governments.
they also began stockpiling weapons and gunpowder in anticipation of an eventual clash with british troops.
elsewhere colonists rallied to help boston raising money sending supplies and boycotting as well as burning or dumping british tea.
in williamsburg when the virginia assembly met in may a member of the committee of correspondence thomas jefferson suggested that june 1 the effective date of the boston port act become an official day of fasting and prayer in virginia.
the royal governor responded by dissolving the assembly whose members then retired to the raleigh tavern where they decided to form a continental congress to represent all the colonies more effectively in the confrontation with britain.
as samuel savage a connecticut colonist wrote may 1774 the conflict had come down to a single question whether we shall or shall not be governed by a british parliament the first continental congress on september 5 1774 the fifty five delegates making up the first continental congress assembled in philadelphia.
it was the first time that all of the colonies had met to coordinate policies.
over seven weeks the congress endorsed the suffolk resolves which urged massachusetts to resist british tyranny with force.
the congress then adopted a declaration of american rights which proclaimed once again the rights of americans as british citizens and denied parliaments authority to regulate internal colonial affairs.
we demand no new rights said the congress.
we ask only for peace liberty and security finally the congress adopted the continental association of 1774 which recommended that every colony organize committees to enforce a new and complete boycott of all imported british goods a dramatic step that would be followed by a refusal to send american goods exports to britain.
if the ideal of republican virtue meant anything it meant the sacrificing of self interest for the public good.
the association was designed to show that americans could deny themselves the baubles of britain in order to demonstrate their commitment to colonial liberties and constitutional rights.
the county and city committees forming the continental association became the organizational network for the resistance movement.
seven thousand men across the colonies served on the local committees and many more women helped put the boycotts into practice.
the committees required 180 chapter 22 america and the great war 1914 1920 peace with honor woodrow wilsons neutrality policies proved popular in the 1916 campaign.
both wilson and hughes were sons of preachers both were attorneys and former professors both had been progressive governors both were known for their integrity.
hughes called for higher tariffs attacked wilson for being hostile to big business and implied that wilson was not neutral enough in responding to the war.
theodore roosevelt who was devastated that his party did not nominate him called the bearded hughes a whiskered wilson wilson however proved to be the better campaigner barely.
by midnight on election night wilson went to bed assuming that he had lost.
roosevelt was so sure hughes had won that he sent him a congratulatory telegram.
at 4 a m however the results from california were tallied.
wilson had eked out a victory in that state by only 4 000 votes and thus had become the first democrat to win a second consecutive term since andrew jackson in 1832 his pledge of peace prosperity and progressivism won him the western states ohio and the solid south.
america goes to war after his reelection wilson again urged the warring nations to negotiate a peace settlement but to no avail.
on january 31 1917 desperate german military leaders renewed unrestricted submarine warfare in the atlantic.
all an uneasy neutrality 999 vessels from the united states headed for britain france or italy would be sunk without warning.
this was practically ordering the united states off the atlantic said an angry william mcadoo wilsons secretary of the treasury.
the german decision colonel house wrote in his journal left wilson sad and depressed for the president knew it meant war.
for their part the germans greatly underestimated the american reaction.
the united states the german military newspaper proclaimed not only has no army it has no artillery no means of transportation no airplanes and lacks all other instruments of modern warfare when his advisers warned that german submarines might cause the united states to enter the war kaiser wilhelm scoffed i dont care the zimmermann telegram on february 3 president wilson informed congress that the united states had formally ended diplomatic relations with the german government.
three weeks later on february 25 wilson learned that the british had intercepted a message from a german official arthur zimmermann to the mexican government urging the mexicans to invade the united states.
in exchange germany would give mexico lost territory in texas new mexico and arizona on march 1 newspapers broke the news of the s o called zimmermann telegram.
infuriated americans called for war against the germans whose attacks on american vessels increased.
america enters the war in march 1917 german submarines torpedoed five u s ships in the north atlantic.
for wilson this was the last straw.
on april 2 he called on congress to declare war against germany.
in one of his greatest speeches wilson insisted that the world must be made safe for democracy he warned that waging war in europe would require mobilizing all the material resources of the country and he called for 500 000 men to bolster the armed forces.
the united states he asserted was entering the war to lead a great crusade not simply to defeat germany but to end wars forever.
congress greeted wilsons message with thunderous applause.
on april 4 the senate passed the war resolution by a vote of 82 to 6 the house followed 373 to 50 and wilson signed the measure on april 6 jeanette rankin of montana the first woman elected to the house was one of the few members who voted against war.
you can no more win a war than you can win an earthquake she explained.
i want to stand by my country but i cannot vote for war wilson had doubts of his own.
the president feared accurately as it turned o ut that mobilizing the nation for war and stamping out dissent would destroy the ideals and momentum of progressivism every reform we have made will be lost if we go into this war yet he saw no choice.
1000 chapter 16 the era of r econstruction transfers of white owned property to former slaves were reversed during 1865 by president andrew johnson.
in south carolina the union general responsible for evicting former slaves urged them to lay aside their bitter feelings and become reconciled to their old masters but the assembled freedmen shouted no never and cant do it they knew that ownership of land was the foundation of their freedom.
yes they had no deeds or titles for the land they now worked but it had been earned by the sweat of our brows said a group of alabama freedmen.
president johnson however insisted that the federal government had no right to take land from former confederates.
tens of thousands of former slaves were forced to return their farms to the white owners.
in addition it was virtually impossible for former slaves to get loans to buy farmland because so few banks were willing to lend to blacks.
their sense of betrayal was profound.
reconstruction of the south would not include the redistribution of southern property.
an ex slave in mississippi whose farm was returned to its white owner said the former slaves were left with nothing no land no house not so much as a place to lay our head most former slaves were farm workers.
after the war their lack of cash and land led to the system of sharecropping where the landowner provided land seed and tools to a poor farmer in exchange for a share of the c rop which essentially re enslaved the workers because as a federal army officer objected no matter how much they are abused they cannot leave without permission of the owner if they chose to leave they would forfeit any right to a portion of the crop and any workers who violated the terms of the contract could be evicted from the plantation leaving them jobless and homeless.
across the former confederacy most white plantation owners and small farmers were determined to continue to control african americans.
many freed blacks preferred sharecropping over working for wages since it freed them from day to day supervision by white landowners.
but over sharecroppers a family is shown time most sharecroppers black and outside their virginia home in this 1899 white found themselves deep in debt photograph taken by frances benjamin to the landowner with little choice but johnston one of the earliest american to remain tied to the same discouragfemale photojournalists.
ing system of dependence that over blacks under reconstruction 725 the years felt much like slavery.
as a former slave acknowledged he and others had discovered that freedom could make folks proud but it didnt make em rich tensions among southern blacks african americans in the postwar south were by no means a uniform community.
they had their own differences and disputes especially between the few who owned property and the many who did not.
in north carolina for example less than 7 percent of blacks owned land by 1870 and most of them owned only a few acres half of black property owners had fewer than twenty acres.
affluent northern blacks and the southern free black elite most of whom were city dwellers and mulattos people of mixed parentage often opposed efforts to redistribute land to the freedmen and many insisted that political equality did not mean social equality.
as an african american leader in alabama stressed we do not ask that the ignorant and degraded shall be put on a social equality with the refined and intelligent in general however unity rather than dissension prevailed and african americans focused on common concerns such as full equality under the law.
all we ask said a black member of the state constitutional convention in mississippi is justice and to be treated like human beings with little or no training or political experience many african americans served in state governments with distinction.
nonetheless the scornful label black reconstruction used by critics then and since distorts african american political influence.
such criticism also overlooks the political clout of the large number of white republicans especially in the mountain areas of the upper south who also favored the radical plan for reconstruction.
only south carolinas republican state convention had a black majority.
louisianas was evenly divided racially and in only two other state conventions were more than 20 percent of the members black florida and virginia.
the texas convention was only 10 percent black and north carolinas was 11 percent but that did not stop a white newspaper from calling it a group of baboons monkeys mules.
and other jackasses carpetbaggers and scalawags most of the offices in the new southern state governments went to white republicans who were dismissed as carpetbaggers or scalawags carpetbaggers critics argued were scheming northerners who rushed south with all their belongings in cheap suitcases made of carpeting carpetbags to grab political power.
some northerners in the postwar south were indeed corrupt opportunists.
however most were union military veterans drawn to the south by the 726 chapter 16 the era of r econstruction desire to rebuild the regions devastated economy.
new yorker george spencer for example arrived in alabama with the union army during the war and decided to pursue his chances of making a fortune in selling cotton and building railroads.
he eventually was elected to the u s senate and later found guilty of political corruption.
many other so called carpetbaggers were well educated middle class teachers social workers attorneys physicians editors and ministers motivated by a genuine desire to help the carpetbagger the cartoonists caption free blacks and poor whites improve to this critique of carpetbaggers reads the quality of their lives.
union general the bag in front of him filled with adelbert ames a native of maine who others faults he always sees.
the one behind him filled with his own faults he won the medal of honor stayed in the never sees south after the war because he felt a sense of mission with a large m to help the former slaves develop healthy communities.
he served as the military governor of mississippi before being elected a republican u s senator in 1870 from 1874 to 1876 ames was mississippis governor before resigning in the face of a resurgent white democratic party.
as ames witnessed the war still exists in a very important phase here the scalawags or white southern republicans were especially hated by southern democrats who considered them traitors.
a nashville newspaper editor called them the merest trash most scalawags had been unionists opposed to secession.
they were especially prominent in mountain counties as far south as georgia and alabama and especially in the hills of eastern tennessee.
among the scalawags were several distinguished figures including the former confederate general james longstreet who decided after appomattox that the old south must change its ways.
he became a successful cotton broker in new orleans joined the republican party and supported the radical reconstruction program.
other scalawags were former whigs attracted by the republican partys activist economic program of industrial and commercial expansion.
another unlikely scalawag was joseph e brown the confederate governor of georgia who urged southerners to support republicans because they were the only source of economic investment in the devastated region.
what the blacks under reconstruction 727 diverse scalawags had in common was a willingness to work with republicans to rebuild the southern economy.
southern resistance and white redemption most southern whites viewed secession not as a mistake but as a noble lost cause they used all means possible legal and illegal to redeem their beloved south from northern control republican rule and black assertiveness.
an alabama planter admitted that southern whites simply cant learn to treat the freedmen like human beings white southern ministers for example assured their congregations that god endorsed white supremacy.
in an attempt to reunite the protestant reconstruction 1865 1877 pa illinois wv kansas missouri kentucky indian territory texas ar la tn 1866 1869 ms nj md de ohio in nc ga al va sc fl me xi co states with reconstruction governments 1868 date of readmission to the union 1870 date of reestablishment of conservative democratic rule military districts set up by the reconstruction act of 1867 means by which slavery was abolished emancipation proclamation 1863 state action thirteenth amendment 1865 200 miles 200 kilometers how did the military reconstruction act reorganize governments in the south in the late 1860s and 1870s.
wwn64 what did the former confederate states have to do to be readmitted to the union.
figure m16 1 why did conservative white parties gradually regain control of the south from 1st proof the republicans in the 1870s.
728 chapter 4 from colonies to states all is at stake.
death and devastation are the instant consequences of delay.
every moment is infinitely precious with each passing day war fever infected more and more colonists.
oh that i were a soldier john adams wrote home to abigail from philadelphia.
i am reading military books.
everybody must and will and shall be a soldier on the very day that congress met the british fort ticonderoga on lake champlain in upstate new york near the canadian border fell to a patriot force of green mountain boys led by ethan allen of vermont and massachusetts volunteers under benedict arnold.
two days later the patriots captured a smaller british fort at crown point north of ticonderoga.
independence the revolutionary war was well underway in january 1776 when thomas paine a recently arrived t hirty nine year old english emigrant who had found work as a radical journalist in philadelphia provided the patriot cause with a stirring pamphlet titled common sense.
until it appeared colonial grievances had been mainly directed at parliament.
paine however directly attacked the british monarchy by openly appealing to the passions and feelings of mankind the common sense of the matter paine stressed was that king george iii had caused the rebellion and had ordered the savage and cruel denial of american rights.
even brutes do not devour their young he wrote nor savages make war upon their families yet britain the mother of america was doing just that.
americans paine urged should abandon the british monarchy the blood of the slain the weeping voice of nature cries tis time to part it was paine who helped convince americans that independence was not unrealistic it was inevitable.
only by declaring independence he predicted could the colonists gain the crucial support of france and spain the cause of america is in great measure the cause of all mankind the rest of the world would welcome and embrace an independent america it would be the glory of the earth paine concluded that the sun had never shined on a cause of greater worth he insisted that we have it in our power to begin the world over again within three months more than 150 000 copies of paines stirring pamphlet were circulating throughout the colonies and around the world an enormous number for the time.
common sense is working a powerful change in the minds of men george washington reported.
independence 187 breaking the bonds of empire common sense inspired the colonial population from massachusetts to georgia and helped convince british subjects still loyal to the king to embrace the radical notion of independence.
without the pen of paine remembered john adams the sword of washington would have been wielded in vain during the spring and summer of 1776 some ninety local governments towns and colonial legislatures issued declarations of independence from great britain.
momentum for independence was building in the continental congress too but success was by no means assured.
in congress john dickinson of pennsylvania urged delay.
on june 1 he warned that independence was a dangerous step since america had no national government or european allies.
but his was a lone voice of caution.
in june 1776 one by one the colonies authorized their delegates in the continental congress to take the final step.
on june 7 richard henry lee of virginia moved that these united colonies are and of right ought to be free and independent states lees resolution passed on july 2 a date that john adams predicted would be the most memorable in the history of america.
the coming revolution the continental congress votes for independence july 2 1776.
188 chapter 28 cold war america 1950 1959 mythic devotion to rugged individualism the nation during the cold war celebrated conformity.
as novelist john updike observed he and other writers felt estranged from a government that extolled business and mediocrity the most enduring novels of the postwar period emphasized the individuals struggle for survival amid the smothering forces of mass society.
the characters in books such as james joness from here to eternity 1951 ralph ellisons ellows seize invisible man 1952 saul b the day 1956 j d salingers catcher in the rye 1951 william styrons lie down in darkness 1951 and john updikes rabbit run 1961 are restralph ellison ellison is best remem less tormented souls who can find bered for his 1952 novel invisible man.
neither contentment nor respect in an uninterested world.
the upper middle class white suburbs and the culture of comfortable conformity they created were frequent literary targets.
writer john cheever located most of his short stories in suburban n eighborhoods cesspools of conformity where democratic equality created a social life that was mindless and hollow.
the typical suburban dweller one critic charged in 1956 buys the right car keeps his lawn like his neighbors eats crunchy breakfast cereal and votes republican in his vicious satire of affluent suburbia the crack in the picture window 1956 john keats charged that miles of identical boxes are spreading like gangrene across the nation producing a runaway consumerism haggard businessmen tense and anxious housewives and the gimme kids who after unwrapping the last christmas gift look up and ask whether that is all he dismissed the levittowns of america as residential developments conceived in error nurtured by greed corroding everything they touch.
they destroy established cities and trade patterns pose dangerous problems for the areas they invade and actually drive mad myriads of housewives shut up in them the beats a small but highly visible and controversial group of young writers poets painters and musicians rejected the consumer culture and the traditional expectations and responsibilities of middle class life.
they were known as the beats a term with multiple meanings to be beat was likened to cracks in the picture window 1279 being upbeat and even beatific as well as being on the beat in real cool jazz music.
but the beats also liked the name because it implied weariness being exhausted or beaten down qualities which none of them actually exhibited.
jack kerouac allen ginsberg william burroughs neal cassady gary snyder and other beats rebelled against conventional literary and artistic expression and excelled at outrageous often purposeless and even criminal behavior like stealing cars and cash or in the case of burroughs shooting an apple off his wifes head for the fun of it even though the woman was killed in the process.
intensely self absorbed to the point of ruthlessness the mostly male beats celebrated even embodied lives of breathtaking risk fueled by feverish spontaneity and raw energy.
they pursued reckless alcohol and drug induced ecstasies and sexual excesses.
many of them were gay or bisexual during an era when homosexuality was considered a form of deviance requiring psychotherapy.
the beats viewed getting high as first class trips and seducing women as s econd class accessories they were serial misogynists.
carolyn cassady said her husband neals approach to making love was rape she added that neal and the boys didnt know where they were going.
they just knew they wanted to go the beat hipsters emerged from the bohemian underground in new york citys greenwich village.
enlivened by tequila marijuana amphetamines and heroin the male beats were essentially apolitical and s elf indulgent chauvinists more interested in transforming themselves than in reforming the world.
kerouac and the other beats wanted their art and literature to change consciousness rather than address social ills.
during three feverish weeks kerouac typed nonstop dictated by the art ache the beat community fostered holy ghost the manuscript of his in its members a frenzied desire to remarkable novel on the road 1957 experience life in all of its intensity an account of a series of frenzied c ross including the cultural realm.
in this 1959 country trips he and others made photograph poet tex kleen reads in a bathtub at venice beach california between 1948 and 1950 kerouac and while artist mad mike paints trash cans.
the beats were nomadic hipsters restless 1280 chapter 16 the era of r econstruction carolina red shirts.
the last radical republican regimes collapsed however after the elections of 1876 and the return to power of the old white political elite in the south further undermined the countrys commitment to congressional reconstruction.
the contested election of 1877 president grant wanted to run for an unprecedented third term in 1876 but many republicans had lost confidence in his leadership.
in the summer of 1875 grant acknowledged the inevitable announced that he would retire and admitted that he had entered the white house with no political training and had made errors in judgment james gillespie blaine of maine former speaker of the house was the likeliest republican to succeed grant but his candidacy crumbled when it was revealed that he had promised political favors to railroad executives in exchange for shares of stock in the company.
the scandal led the republican convention to pass over blaine in favor of ohios favorite son rutherford b hayes.
elected governor of ohio three times most recently as a hard money gold advocate hayes also was a civil service reformer eager to reduce the number of federal jobs subject to political appointment.
but his chief virtue was that he offended neither radicals nor reformers.
as a journalist put it he was obnoxious to no one the democratic convention was uncharacteristically harmonious from the start.
on the second ballot the nomination went to samuel j tilden a wealthy corporate lawyer and reform governor of new york.
the 1876 campaign avoided controversial issues.
both candidates favored relaxing federal military authority in the south.
in the absence of strong ideological differences democrats highlighted the scandals embroiling the republicans.
in response republicans avoided discussion of the depression and repeatedly waved the bloody shirt linking the democrats to secession civil war and the violence committed against republicans in the south.
as robert g ingersoll the most celebrated republican public speaker of the time insisted the man that assassinated abraham lincoln was a democrat.
soldiers every scar you have on your heroic bodies was given you by a democrat despite the lack of major issues the 1876 election generated the most votes of any national election in u s history to that point.
early returns pointed to a victory for tilden.
nationwide he outpolled hayes by almost 300 000 votes by midnight following election day tilden had won 184 electoral votes just one short of the total needed for victory.
overnight however republican activists realized that the election hinged on 19 disputed electoral votes from florida louisiana and south carolina.
the grant administration 739 the election of 1876 wa terr.
or 2 1 ca nv mt terr.
nh 5 vt 5 dakota terr.
mn ne co nm terr.
ks indian terr.
tx rutherford b hayes republican wi ia mo ar la il ma 13 ny mi in me oh pa wv 5 va ky 12 nc tn 12 sc ga ms al ri 4 ct 6 nj 9 de 3 md 8 fl electoral vote popular vote 4 036 000 4 301 000 disputed assigned to hayes by the electoral commission samuel j tilden democrat why did the republicans pick rutherford hayes as their presidential candidate.
why were the electoral votes of several states disputed.
what was the compromise of 1877.
wwn64 figure m16 2 1st proof the democrats needed only one of the challenged votes to claim victory the republicans needed all nineteen.
republicans in those key states had engaged in election fraud while democrats had used physical intimidation to keep black voters at home.
but all three states were governed by a republican who appointed the election boards each of which reported narrow victories for hayes.
the democrats immediately challenged the results.
in all three states rival election boards submitted conflicting vote counts.
the nation watched and wondered as days then weeks passed with no solution.
on january 29 1877 congress set up an electoral commission to settle the dispute.
it met daily for weeks trying to verify the disputed vote counts.
740 chapter 16 the era of r econstruction the compromise of 1877 this illustration represents the compromise between republicans and southern democrats that elected rutherford b hayes and ended radical reconstruction.
finally on march 1 1877 the commission voted 8 to 7 in favor of hayes.
the next day the house of representatives declared hayes president by an electoral vote of 185 to 184 tilden decided not to protest the decision.
his campaign manager explained that they preferred four years of hayess administration to four years of civil war hayess victory hinged on the defection of key southern democrats who it turned out had made a number of secret deals with the republicans.
on february 26 1877 prominent ohio republicans and powerful southern democrats struck a private bargain the compromise of 1877 at wormleys hotel in washington d c the republicans promised that if hayes were named president he would remove the last federal troops from the south.
the end of reconstruction in 1877 newly inaugurated president hayes withdrew federal troops from louisiana and south carolina whose republican governments collapsed soon thereafter.
hayes insisted that it was not his fault the practical destruction of the republican organization in the south was accomplished before my southern policy was announced over the next thirty years the protection of black civil rights in the south crumbled.
as henry adams a former louisiana slave observed in 1877 the whole south every state in the s outh has got back into the hands of the reconstructions significance 741 very men that held us as slaves new white state governments rewrote their constitutions rid their administrations of carpetbaggers scalawags and blacks and cut spending.
the yankees helped free us so they say a former north carolina slave named thomas hall remembered but in 1877 they let us be put back in slavery again reconstructions significance congressional reconstruction gave african americans an opportunity to experience freedom but not security or equality.
as thomas hall noted in acknowledging the end of reconstruction african americans were still dependent on the southern white man for work food and clothing and most southern whites remained hostile to the notion of civil rights and social equality.
the collapse of congressional reconstruction in 1877 had tragic consequences as the south aggressively renewed traditional patterns of discrimination against african americans.
black activist w e b dubois called the effort to make slaves into citizens a splendid failure yet for all of the unfulfilled promises of congressional reconstruction it left an enduring legacy the thirteenth fourteenth and fifteenth amendments.
if reconstructions experiment in interracial democracy did not provide true social equality or substantial economic opportunities for african americans it did create the essential constitutional foundation for future advances in the quest for equality and civil rights and not just for african americans but for women and other minority groups.
until the pivotal reconstruction era the states were responsible for protecting citizens rights.
thereafter thanks to the fourteenth and fifteenth amendments blacks had gained equal rights in theory and the federal government had assumed responsibility for ensuring that states treated blacks equally.
a hundred years later the cause of civil rights would be embraced again by the federal g overnment this time permanently.
chapter 11 the south slavery and king cotton 1800 1860 what hammond failed to acknowledge was that the southern economy had grown dangerously dependent on european demand for raw cotton.
by 1860 great britain was importing more than 80 percent of its cotton from the american south.
hammond and other southern leaders did not anticipate what they could least afford a sudden collapse in world demand for southern cotton.
in 1860 the expansion of the british textile industry peaked and the price paid for southern cotton began a steady decline.
by then however the lower south was committed to l arge scale cotton production for generations to come.
whites in the old south over time the culture of cotton and slavery shaped the souths social structure and provided much of its political power.
unlike in the north and midwest southern society was dominated by an elite group of planters and merchants.
white planters although there were only a few giant plantations in each southern state their owners exercised overwhelming influence.
as a virginian observed in the m id 1830s the old slaveholding families exerted a great deal of control.
and they affected the manner and prejudices of the slaveholding part of the state the large planters behaved like an aristocracy viewing their poor white neighbors with a contempt that was readily reciprocated.
they often spent their time hunting and fishing gambling and racing horses hosting elaborate parties and importing wines and furnishings.
in short they indulged expensive habits and tastes that they often could neither afford nor control.
living the storied life of a planter was the focus of their energies their honor and often their indebtedness.
as a plantation slave recalled his master on sundays liked to gamble run horses or fight g ame cocks discuss politics and drink whisky and brandy and water all day long the richest planters and merchants were determined to retain their control over southern society in part because of self interest and in part because they assumed they were the regions natural leaders.
inequality is the fundamental law of the universe declared one planter.
james henry hammond was even more blunt declaring that the south carolina planters are essentially what the nobility are in other countries.
they stand at the head of society and politics slavery he argued does indeed create an aristocracy an aristocracy of talents of virtue of generosity and courage whites in the old south 477 in addition to its size what distinguished a plantation from a farm was the use of a large number of slaves supervised by drivers and overseers.
planters themselves rarely engaged in manual labor.
they focused on managing the overseers and handling the marketing and sale of the cotton tobacco rice or sugar.
most planters had begun their careers as land traders investors cotton merchants called factors and farmers.
over time they made enough money to acquire a plantation worked by slaves.
frederick stanton a cotton broker near natchez mississippi became a planter with 444 slaves working 15 000 acres of cotton.
success required careful monitoring of the markets for cotton land and slaves as well as careful management of the workers and production.
if as historians have agreed one had to own at least twenty slaves to be called a planter only one out of thirty whites in the south in 1860 was a planter.
eleven planters among the wealthiest people in the nation owned 500 slaves each and one planter a south carolina rice grower owned 1 000 the 10 000 most powerful planters accounting for less than 3 percent of white men in the south held more than half the slaves.
the gap between the planters and the rest of southern society was wide.
two thirds of white southern families in 1830 owned no slaves.
over time planters and their wives referred to as mistresses grew accustomed to being waited on by slaves day and night.
a virginia planter told a british visitor that a slave girl slept in the master bedroom with him and his wife.
when his british guest asked why he replied good heaven.
if i wanted a glass of water during the night what would become of me from colonial times most southern white men embraced an unwritten social code centered on a prickly sense of personal honor in which they were expected to defend their reputations with words fists knives or guns.
duels to the death called affairs of honor were the ultimate expression of manly honor.
many prominent southern leaders congressmen senators governors editors and planters engaged in duels with pistols although dueling was technically illegal in many states.
the roster of participants included president andrew jackson of tennessee and senator henry clay of kentucky.
but men of all classes were ready to fight at the first sign of disrespect.
the plantation mistress the south like the north was a ale dominated society only more so because of the slave system.
a promm inent georgian christopher memminger explained that slavery heightened the need for a hierarchical social and family structure.
white wives 478 chapter 22 america and the great war 1914 1920 virtuous by a statute or a written constitution lodges strategy was to stall approval of the treaty in hopes that public opposition would grow.
he took six weeks simply reading aloud the lengthy text to his foreign relations committee.
he then organized a parade of expert witnesses most of them opposed to the treaty to appear at the hearings on ratification.
in the senate a group of irreconcilables fourteen republicans and two democrats refused to support american membership in the league.
they were mainly western and midwestern progressives isolationists who feared that such sweeping foreign commitments would threaten domestic reforms.
lodge himself belonged to a larger group called the reservationists who insisted upon limiting american participation in the league in exchange for approving the treaty.
the only way to get senate approval was for wilson to meet with lodge and others and agree to revisions the most important of which was the requirement that congress authorize any american participation in a l eague approved war.
colonel house urged the president to meet the senate in a conciliatory spirit wilson replied that he had long ago decided that you can never get anything in this life that is worthwhile without fighting for it house courageously disagreed reminding the president that american civilization was built on compromise it was the last time the two men would speak to or see each other.
as republican senator frank b kellogg of minnesota noted the proposed changes were crafted not by enemies of the treaty but by friends who wanted to save it.
republican senator james watson of indiana told wilson that he had no choice but to accept some revisions mr.
president you are licked.
there is only one way you can take the united states into the league of nations but the self righteous president was temperamentally incapable of compromising.
he refused to negotiate declaring that if the treaty is not ratified by the senate the war will have been fought in vain let the people decide in september 1919 after a summer of fruitless debate an exhausted wilson decided to bypass his senate opponents by speaking directly to voters.
on september 2 against his doctors orders and his wifes advice he left washington for a grueling railroad tour through the midwest to the west coast intending to visit t wenty nine cities and deliver forty speeches on behalf of the treaty.
no president had ever made such a strenuous effort to win public support.
in st louis wilson said that he had returned from paris bringing one of the greatest documents of human history which was now in danger of being rejected by the senate.
he pledged to fight for a cause.
greater than the senate.
it is greater than the government.
it is as great as the cause of mankind.
wilson traveled and spoke sometimes as many as four times a day despite suffering from pounding headaches.
it did not help his morale to learn that the politics of peace 1019 his secretary of state robert lansing had said that the league of nations was entirely useless by the time wilsons train reached spokane washington the president was visibly fatigued.
but he kept going through oregon and california.
some 200 000 people greeted him in los angeles.
in all he had covered 10 000 miles in twenty two days and given thirty two major speeches.
then disaster struck.
after delivering an emotional speech on september 25 1919 in pueblo colorado wilson collapsed from headaches so severe that he had to cancel the trip.
on the train heading back as he looked out the window with tears rolling down his cheeks he told his doctor that he had suffered the greatest disappointment of his life a stricken president back in washington d c a week later the president suffered a crushing stroke cerebral hemorrhage that left him paralyzed on his left side he could barely speak or see.
only his secretary his doctor and his wife edith knew his true condition.
for five months at the end of 1919 and in early 1920 wilson lay flat on his back while his doctor issued reassuring medical bulletins.
if a document needed wilsons signature his wife guided his trembling hand.
lansing urged the presidents aides to declare him disabled and appoint vice president thomas marshall in his place they angrily refused.
soon thereafter lansing was replaced.
the stroke made wilson even more arrogant and stubborn and paralyzed his administration as well.
he became emotionally unstable at times crying uncontrollably and displaying signs of paranoia.
for the remaining seventeen months of his term his protective wife along with aides and trusted cabinet members kept him isolated from all but the most essential business.
when a group of republican senators visited the white house one of them said well mr president we have all been praying for you wilson replied which way senator the treaty under attack such presidential humor was rare however.
wilsons hardened arteries seemed to have hardened his political judgment as well.
for his part lodge pushed through the senate fourteen changes the number was not coincidental in the draft of the treaty of versailles.
the exiled colonel house became so concerned that he wrote edith wilson a letter in which he said how vital it was for some form of the treaty to be approved the presidents place in history is in the balance he pleaded for wilson to negotiate a compromise.
the first lady refused to share his concerns with her husband.
in the end wilson rejected any proposed changes to the treaty.
as a result his supporters in the senate were thrown into an unlikely alliance with the irreconcilables who opposed the treaty under any circumstances.
the final senate vote in 1920 on lodges revised treaty was 39 in favor and 55 against.
on the question of approving the original treaty without changes 1020 chapter 5 the american revolution 1776 1783 in a predominantly agricultural society like america turning farmers into soldiers hurt the national economy.
william hooper a north carolinian who signed the declaration of independence grumbled that a soldier made is a farmer lost in april 1776 the continental congress had ended britains trade regulations by opening american ports to the ships of all nations.
soon however british warships set up blockades around americas major coastal cities.
many states found a ready source of revenue in the sale of abandoned loyalist homes farms and plantations.
nevertheless congress and the states still fell short of funding the wars cost and were forced to print more and more paper money which eroded its value.
at the start of the fighting there george washington at princeton commissioned for independence were no uniforms for the soldiers and hall in philadelphia this 1779 painting sailors and weapons were as variby charles willson peale portrays ous as their costumes most weapons washington as the hero of the battle of and ammunition were acquired either princeton.
by capturing british supplies or by importing them from france a government all too glad to help the patriots fight its arch enemy.
native americans and the revolution both the british and americans recruited indians to fight with them but the british were far more successful largely because they had longstanding relationships with chieftains and they promised to protect indian lands.
the peoples making up the iroquois league split their allegiances with most mohawks onondagas cayugas and senecas led by mohawk joseph brant and seneca old smoke joining the british and most oneidas and tuscaroras supporting the patriots.
the cherokees also joined the british in hopes of driving out american settlers who had taken their lands.
most indians in new england tried to remain neutral or sided with the patriots.
the stockbridge indians in massachusetts mostly mahicans formed mobilizing for war 205 a company of minutemen who fought alongside patriot units.
they pledged that wherever your armies go there we will go you shall always find us by your side and if providence calls us to sacrifice our lives in the field of battle we will fall where you fall and lay our bones by yours yet however much the british or americans claimed native americans as allies most indians engaged in the war as a means of protecting themselves and their own interests.
disaster in canada in july 1775 the continental congress authorized an ill planned military expedition in canada against quebec in the vain hope of rallying support among the french canadians.
one patriot detachment under general richard montgomery a former british army officer headed toward quebec by way of lake champlain along the new york canadian border another under general benedict arnold struggled westward toward quebec through the dense maine woods.
the americans arrived outside quebec in september tired exhausted and hungry.
a silent killer then ambushed them smallpox.
as the deadly virus raced through the american camp general montgomery faced a brutal dilemma.
most of his soldiers had signed up for short tours of duty and many were scheduled for discharge at the end of the year.
because of the impending departure of his men montgomery could not afford to wait until spring for the smallpox to subside.
seeing little choice but to fight he ordered an attack on the british forces defending quebec during a blizzard on december 31 1775 the american assault was a disaster.
montgomery was killed early in the battle and benedict arnold was seriously wounded.
more than 400 americans were taken prisoner.
the rest of the patriot force retreated to its camp outside the walled city and appealed to the continental congress for reinforcements.
smallpox spread throughout the american army and arnold warned george washington in february 1776 that the runaway disease would soon bring the entire ruin of the army the british sensing weakness attacked the american camp and sent the ragtag patriots on a frantic retreat up the st lawrence river to the american held city of montreal and eventually back to new york and new england.
by the summer of 1776 the american revolutionaries had come to realize that their quest for independence would be neither short nor easy for the king and parliament were determined to smash the revolt and restore their empire.
george washington confessed to his brother that his efforts to form an effective american army out of the great mixture of troops were filled with difficulties and distresses most of the new england soldiers farmers sailors fishermen and a few former s laves were he said an exceeding ly 206 chapter 17 business and labor in the industrial era 1860 1900 ones to walk through.
s o called sweatshops emerged in the major cities where large numbers of mostly young women often immigrants worked long hours in cramped stifling conditions.
thomas edison no american inventor was more influential or prolific than thomas alva edison.
as a boy in michigan he could not sit still he loved to make things and do things his mother h ome schooled him and allowed him to explore the outdoors and perform chemical experiments except when he mussed things up edison later said his mother was the making of me.
she understood me she let me follow my bent his bent was toward telegraphy and electricity.
he built his own telegraph set and dreamed of being a telegraph operator sending messages in morse code.
when edison was twelve he began working for the local railroad selling newspapers food and candy to passengers.
being poor he explained i already knew that money is a valuable thing one day he was late for the train and ran after it.
a conductor reached down and lifted him into the train by his ears.
edison felt something snap in his head and soon he was deaf.
despite losing his hearing however he said that his work as a trainboy was the happiest time of my life it was in 1862 early in the civil war that the deaf solitary edison fastened on his real passion being a telegraph operator first in cincinnati then in louisville then in boston since the clicking key enabled him to listen to others and tinker with the equipment.
despite having no formal scientific education the s elf taught edison developed an insatiable curiosity and mechanical genius.
in january 1869 at the age of t wenty one he announced that he would hereafter devote his full time to bringing out his inventions he moved to new york city to be closer to the center of americas financial district.
he developed dozens of new machines including a stock market ticker that would report the t ransactions on wall street in real time.
soon job offers and real money flooded his way.
edison however had a different goal he wanted to become a full time inventor an electrical engineer devoted to creating new products.
in 1876 he moved into his science village in menlo park new jersey twenty five miles southwest of new york city.
there edison became a mass production inventor promising to produce a minor invention every ten days and a big thing every six months or so in the nations first industrial research laboratory edison and his assistants created the first phonograph in 1877 and a l ong lasting electric lightbulb in 1879 he also improved upon the telephone.
by the ripe age of thirty edison was the nations foremost inventor.
altogether he created or perfected industrial and agricultural growth 755 hundreds of new devices and processes including the storage battery dictaphone mimeograph copier electric motor and motion picture camera and projector.
edison soon became world famous.
a magazine saluted him as the wizard of menlo park and called him one of the wonders of the world president rutherford b hayes invited him to the white house and congress honored him.
george westinghouse and electric power until the 1880s buildings and streets were lit mostly by kerosene or gas lamps.
in 1882 the edison electric illuminating company later renamed general electric supplied electrical current to e ighty five customers in new york city launching the electric utility industry.
several companies that made lightbulbs merged into the edison general electric company in 1888 the use of direct electrical current however limited edisons lighting system to a radius of about two miles.
to cover greater distances required an alternating current which could be transmitted at high voltage and then stepped down by transformers.
george westinghouse inventor of the railway air brake developed the first a lternating current electric system in 1886 and set up the westinghouse electric company to manufacture the equipment.
edison resisted the new method as too risky but the westinghouse system of transmitting electricity over long distances won the battle of the currents and the edison companies had to switch over to ac alternating current from dc direct current.
after the invention in 1887 of the a lternating current motor by a croatian immigrant named nikola tesla westinghouse improved upon it and the company began selling dynamos.
the invention of dynamos or electric motors dramatically increased the power speed and efficiency of machinery.
electricity enabled factories to be located wherever the owners wished factories and mills no longer had to cluster around waterfalls and coal deposits to have a ready supply of energy.
electricity also spurred urban growth by improving lighting facilitating the development of trolley and subway systems and stimulating the creation of elevators that enabled the construction of taller buildings.
the railroad revolution more than any other industry the railroads symbolized the impact of innovative technologies on industrial development and the maturation of a truly national economy.
no other form of transportation played so large a role in the development of the interconnected national marketplace.
756 chapter 22 america and the great war 1914 1920 their first votes women of new york citys east side vote for the first time in the presidential election of 1920 economic turbulence as consumer prices rose discontented workers released from wartime controls on wages grew more willing to go out on strike.
in 1919 more than 4 million hourly wage workers 20 percent of the u s workforce participated in 3 600 strikes.
most of them wanted nothing more than higher wages and shorter workweeks but their critics linked them with the worldwide communist movement.
charges of a communist conspiracy were greatly exaggerated however.
in 1919 fewer than 70 000 americans nationwide belonged to the communist party.
the most controversial labor dispute was in boston where most of the police went on strike on september 9 1919 massachusetts governor calvin coolidge mobilized the national guard to maintain order.
after four days the striking policemen offered to return but instead coolidge ordered that they all be fired.
when labor leaders appealed for their reinstatement coolidge responded in words that made him an instant national hero there is no right to strike against the public safety by anybody anywhere any time race riots the summer of 1919 also brought a wave of deadly race riots.
as more and more african americans including many of the 367 000 who were war veterans moved out of the south to different parts of the c ountry stumbling from war to peace 1023 safe briefly escorted by a police officer an african american family moves its belongings from their home likely destroyed by white rioters and into a protected area of chicago.
eveloped successful careers and asserted their civil rights resentful whites d reacted with an almost hysterical racism.
in 1919 alone s eventy six african americans including nine military veterans were killed by southern whites.
among the victims was sergeant major joe green in birmingham alabama because he had the insolence to ask for his change on a streetcar and private william little in blakely georgia because he had walked around town wearing his army uniform.
what african american leader james weldon johnson called the red summer red signifying blood began in july when a mob of whites invaded the black neighborhood in longview texas angry over rumors of interracial dating.
they burned shops and houses and ran several african americans out of town.
a week later in washington d c exaggerated and false reports of black assaults on white women stirred up white mobs and gangs of white and black rioters waged a race war in the streets until soldiers and driving rains ended the fighting.
the worst was yet to come.
in late july 38 people were killed and 537 injured in five days of race rioting in chicago where some 50 000 blacks mostly from the rural south had moved during the war leading to tensions with local whites 1024 chapter 11 the south slavery and king cotton 1800 1860 and shot the resisting slave killing him.
none of the other slaves sidney noted said a word or turned their heads.
they kept on hoeing as if nothing had happened at times whites turned the punishment of slaves into grisly spectacles to strike fear into anyone considering rebellion or escape.
in louisiana whippings often followed a horrific procedure as a visitor reported three stakes is drove into the ground in a triangular manner about six feet apart.
the culprit slave is told to lie down.
flat on his belly.
the arms is extended out sideways and each hand tied to a stake hard and fast.
the feet is both tied to the third stake all jack 1850 daguerrotype of a slave identified only as jack on the plantation stretched tight the overseer would of b f taylor in columbia south then step back seven eight or ten feet carolina.
and with a rawhide whip about 7 feet long.
lays on with great force and address across the buttocks cutting strips of flesh 7 or 8 inches long at every stroke urban slavery slaves living in southern cities such as richmond memphis atlanta new orleans or charleston had a much different experience from those on isolated farms and plantations.
a city slave is almost a freeman claimed a maryland slave.
slaves in urban households tended to be better fed and clothed and had more privileges.
they interacted not only with their white owners but with the extended interracial c ommunity shopkeepers and police neighbors and strangers.
some were hired out to others and were often allowed to keep a portion of their wages.
generally speaking slaves in cities enjoyed greater mobility and freedom than their counterparts in rural areas.
enslaved women although enslaved men and women often performed similar chores especially on farms they did not experience slavery in the same way.
once slaveholders realized how profitable a fertile female slave could be by giving birth to babies that could later be sold they encouraged black society in the south 491 female slaves to have as many children as possible.
a south carolina planter named william johnson explained in 1815 that the interest of the owner is to obtain from his slaves labor and increase in their numbers sometimes a woman would be locked in a cabin with a male slave whose task was to impregnate her.
pregnant slaves were given less work and more food.
some plantation owners rewarded new mothers with dresses and silver dollars.
but if motherhood provided enslaved women with greater stature and benefits it also was exhausting.
within days after childbirth mothers were put back to work spinning weaving or sewing.
a few weeks thereafter they were sent back to the fields breast feeding mothers were often forced to take their babies with them strapped to their backs.
enslaved women were expected to do mans work cut trees haul logs spread fertilizer plow fields dig ditches slaughter animals hoe corn and pick cotton.
many of them in fact were more productive cotton pickers than the men.
as an escaped slave reported women who do outdoor work are used as bad as men once women passed their childbearing years their workload increased.
slaveholders put middle aged women to work f ull time in the fields or performing slave family in a georgia cotton field the invention of the cotton gin sent cotton production soaring deepening the souths dependence on slavery in the process.
492 chapter 12 religion romanticism and reform 1800 1860 often organized by churches.
such schools begun in colonial days multiplied until there were more than 6 000 of them by 1850 in 1821 the boston english high school opened as the nations first free public secondary school set up mainly for students not going on to college.
by a law of 1827 massachusetts required every town of 500 or more residents to have a high school in towns of 4 000 or more the school had to offer latin greek rhetoric and other college preparatory courses.
public high schools became well established only after the civil war.
in 1860 there were barely 300 in the whole nation.
by 1850 half of the white children between ages five and nineteen were enrolled in schools the highest percentage in the world.
but very few of those students were southerners.
public schools were scarce in the south until after the civil war.
in most states enslaved children were prohibited from learning to read and write or attend school.
a former slave recalled that his owner didnt teach em nuthin but work the south had some 500 000 illiterate whites more than half the total in the country.
in the south north carolina led the way in s tate supported the george barrell emerson school boston ca.
1850 although higher education for women initially met with some resistance in the 1820s and 1830s seminaries like this one were established to teach women mathematics physics and history as well as music art and social graces.
the reform impulse 535 e ducation enrolling more than two thirds of its white school age population by 1860 but the school year was only four months long because of the rural states need for children to do farmwork.
the prolonged disparities between north and south in the number and quality of educational opportunities help explain the growing economic and cultural differences between the two regions.
then as now undereducated people were more likely to remain economically deprived less healthy and less engaged in political life.
food and sex the widespread reform impulse in the early nineteenth century excited causes and cranks of all sorts including an array of health reformers the most popular of whom was sylvester graham a controversial preacher turned lecturer who blamed most of americans problems on their bad eating and drinking habits.
born in 1794 in west suffield connecticut graham was the youngest of seventeen children.
soon after his minister father died in 1796 his mother broke down under the strain of single parenting and young sylvester was farmed out to be raised by strangers as a young man he worked as a farmhand clerk and teacher before attending amherst college in massachusetts.
he was expelled for his aggressive eccentricities which did not prevent him from becoming a presbyterian minister.
but religion inspired graham less than nutrition did.
he soon gave up preaching the gospel of christ in order to preach the gospel of bran and fiber.
although he had no medical training graham became the nations leading health reformer after a cholera epidemic ravaged the nation in 1832 and led panicked people to embrace his odd explanations for the killer disease.
graham attributed cholera to people eating chicken pot pie and engaging in excessive lewdness thereafter on the lecture circuit in books and in grahams journal of health and longevity graham preached convincingly against the dangers of alcohol and coffee white flour meat gluttony obesity and body odor.
grahams system for a healthier america called for a diet of whole grains fresh fruits and nuts.
the graham diet banned all meats and spices including p epper and salt as well as butter cream and soups.
alcohol and tobacco were also prohibited.
the centerpiece of grahams celebrated vegetarian diet was the graham cracker made of coarsely ground wheat bathed in molasses and baked.
graham stressed that daily meals of his crackers needed to be precisely six hours apart with no snacking in between.
the graham system also prescribed fresh air daily bathing in cold water drinking only when thirsty not with meals and singing and dancing for exercise.
he discouraged excessive sexual activity meaning more than once a week for married couples because it would cause indigestion headache feebleness of circulation pulmonary 536 chapter 5 the american revolution 1776 1783 during and after the war the new american government assured its indian allies that it would respect their lands and their rights.
but many white americans used the disruptions of war to destroy and displace native americans.
once the war ended and independence was secured there was no peace for the indians.
by the end of the eighteenth century land hungry americans were again pushing into indian territories on the western frontier.
the emergence of an american culture on july 2 1776 when the second continental congress had resolved that these united colonies are and of right ought to be free and independent states john adams had written abigail that future generations would remember that date as their day of deliverance people he predicted would celebrate the occasion with pomp and parade with shows games sports guns bells bonfires and illuminations fireworks from one end of this continent to the other from this time forward forever more adams got everything right but the date.
as luck would have it july 4 the date the declaration of independence was approved became independence day rather than july 2 when independence was formally declared.
the celebration of independence day quickly became the most important public ritual in the united states.
people from all walks of life suspended their normal routine in order to devote a day to parades patriotic speeches and fireworks displays.
in the process the infant republic began to create its own myth of national identity.
what a day exclaimed the editor of the southern patriot in 1815.
what happiness what emotion what virtuous triumph must fill the bosoms of americans american nationalism embodied a stirring idea.
this new nation was not rooted in antiquity.
its people except for the native americans had not inhabited it over many centuries nor was there any notion of a common ethnic descent.
the american national consciousness one observer wrote is not a voice crying out of the depth of the dark past but is proudly a product of the enlightened present setting its face resolutely toward the future many people at least since the time of the pilgrims had thought of the new world as singled out for a special identity a special mission assigned by god.
john adams proclaimed the opening of america a grand scheme and design in providence for the illumination and the emancipation of the slavish part of mankind all over the earth this sense of providential mission provided much of the energy for americas development as a new national republic.
from the democratic rhetoric of the emergence of an american culture 241 thomas jefferson to the pragmatism of george washington to heady toasts bellowed in south carolina taverns patriots everywhere claimed a special role for american leadership in history.
the first mission was to gain independence.
now people believed god was guiding the united states to lead the world toward greater liberty and equality.
benjamin rush a philadelphia doctor and scientist issued a prophetic statement in 1787 the american war is over but this is far from being the case with the american revolution.
on the contrary but the first act of the great drama is closed chapter 29 a new f rontier and a great society 1960 1968 his special assistant on civil rights to end the freedom rides.
cant you get your goddamned friends off those buses.
stop them when kennedy suggested to several civil rights leaders that they allow things to cool off james farmer replied that blacks had been cooling off for a hundred years.
if we got any cooler wed be in the deep freeze louis martin an influential black newspaper publisher explained that negroes are getting ideas about securing equal rights they didnt have before kennedy asked where they were getting such ideas.
martin replied from you the activists finally forced the president to provide another bus which enabled them to renew the journey to new orleans.
when the new group of riders reached montgomery the capital of alabama they too were attacked.
the next night civil rights activists including martin luther king jr gathered at a montgomery church to honor the freedom riders.
but their meeting was interrupted by a rampaging mob of whites armed with rocks and firebombs.
ministers made frantic appeals to the white house.
kennedy responded by urging the alabama governor to intervene.
after midnight national guardsmen arrived to disperse the mob.
the freedom riders continued into mississippi where they were jailed.
they never made it to new orleans.
still the courage and principled resistance of the freedom riders and of federal judges whose rulings supported integration efforts prompted the interstate commerce commission icc in september 1961 to order that all interstate transportation facilities be integrated.
equally important the freedom riders kindled the growth of civil rights groups.
the experience of being assaulted and jailed galvanized the participants to become f ull time members while attracting more recruits.
the freedom rides were thus a crucial turning point in the civil rights movement.
white segregationists however remained violently opposed to racial equality.
in birmingham in september 1962 dr king was speaking at the annual meeting of the southern christian leadership conference when a white member of the american nazi party jumped to the stage and punched him in the face.
king simply dropped his hands and allowed the man to punch him again.
dont touch him king yelled.
we have to pray for him his self control and composure were as remarkable as his bravery.
king was determined as an aide said to love segregation to death his home was bombed three times and he was arrested fourteen times yet he kept telling people to use the weapon of nonviolence the breastplate of righteousness the armor of truth and just keep marching toward justice.
james meredith in the fall of 1962 james meredith an african american student and air force veteran whose grandfather had been a slave civil rights 1329 tried to enroll at the all white university of mississippi in oxford.
ross barnett the governor of mississippi described by time magazine as bitter a racist as inhabits the nation refused to allow meredith to register for classes.
the militantly stubborn barnett breathed scorching defiance he vowed to rot in jail before he will let one negro ever darken the sacred threshold of our white schools attorney general robert f kennedy then dispatched federal marshals to enforce the law.
when the marshals were assaulted with bricks bottles and steel pipes by a white mob shouting go to hell jfk president kennedy sent national guard troops.
their arrival ignited rioting that left two dead and dozens injured.
once the violence subsided however meredith was registered at the university.
only in america a reporter noted would the federal government send thousands of troops to enforce the right of an otherwise obscure citizen to attend a particular university birmingham in early 1963 in conjunction with the celebration of the hundredth anniversary of abraham lincolns emancipation proclamation martin luther king jr defied president kennedys wishes by organizing a bulls dogs eugene bull connor ordered birmingham police to unleash their dogs and clubs on civil rights demonstrators in may 1963.
1330 chapter 29 a new f rontier and a great society 1960 1968 assive series of demonstrations in birmingham.
alabama was now led by m george wallace a feisty racist governor who had vowed to protect segregation now segregation tomorrow segregation forever king knew that weeks of public demonstrations would result in thousands of arrests and would likely provoke violence but a hard won victory he felt would break the back of segregation all over the nation by revealing southern brutality openly in the light of day with the rest of the world looking on through television cameras.
the birmingham campaign began with s it ins at restaurants picket lines at segregated businesses and a march on city hall.
the police arrested and jailed hundreds of activists.
each day however more demonstrators black and white joined in the efforts.
as king and others led 2 500 demonstrators through birmingham streets on may 7 the all white police force led by bull connor used snarling dogs tear gas electric cattle prods and high pressure fire hoses on the protesters.
millions of americans were outraged when they saw the ugly confrontations on television.
the civil rights movement president kennedy observed owes bull connor as much as it owes abraham lincoln it also owed a lot to the power of television.
more than 3 000 demonstrators were arrested including dr king and several white ministers both men and women who were rushing to the cause of civil rights.
while in jail king was inspired to write a letter from birmingham jail a stirring defense of nonviolent civil disobedience that has become a classic document of the civil rights movement.
one who breaks an unjust law king stressed must do so openly lovingly and with a willingness to accept the penalty in a reference to president kennedys timid support king wrote that the most perplexing foe of equal justice was not the southern white bigot but the white moderate who is more devoted to order than to justice.
who constantly says i agree with you in the goal you seek but i cannot agree with your methods kings efforts prevailed when birmingham officials finally agreed to end their segregationist practices.
white racists did not change overnight however.
one angry alabaman sent a letter to king this isnt a threat but a promise your head will be blown off as sure as christ made green apples throughout 1963 whites in the lower south continued to defy efforts at racial integration while blacks and white liberals organized demonstrations in cities and towns across the nation.
on june 11 1963 alabama governor george wallace theatrically blocked the door at the university of alabama as african american students tried to register for classes.
wallace finally stepped aside in the face of insistent federal marshals.
civil rights 1331 that night president kennedy finally decided he needed to lead.
in a hastily arranged televised speech he announced that he would soon submit to congress a major new civil rights bill that would remove race as a consideration in american life or law he stressed that a great change is at hand and he was determined to make that change that civil rights revolution peaceful and constructive.
we are confronted primarily with a moral issue the president said.
it is as old as the scriptures and is as clear as the american constitution.
the heart of the question is whether all americans are to be afforded equal rights and equal opportunities he asked every american regardless of where he lives to stop and examine his conscience for america for all its hopes and all its boasts will not be fully free until all its citizens are free that night in mississippi a 37 year old african american civil rights activist medgar evers listened to the presidents speech in his car.
he was so excited by kennedys new commitment to civil rights that he turned the car around and went home so that he could discuss the speech with his children.
when evers arrived at his house in jackson at midnight he was shot in his driveway by a white racist lying in ambush.
he staggered to the carport and collapsed in front of his horrified wife and children.
he died before reaching a hospital.
such violence aroused the nations indignation and reinforced kennedys commitment to make civil rights americas most pressing social issue.
the killing of medgar evers led the president to host his first meeting of civil rights leaders in the white house and helped spur plans for a massive demonstration on the mall in washington d c i have a dream for weeks southern democrats in the house of representatives blocked kennedys civil rights bill.
the standoff in congress led african american leaders to take a bold step.
on august 28 some 250 000 blacks and whites many of them schoolchildren brought in on buses marched arm in arm down the mall in washington d c chanting equality now and singing we shall overcome the march on washington for jobs and freedom was the largest political demonstration in american history.
when you looked at the crowd remembered a u s park service ranger you didnt see blacks or whites.
you saw america for almost six hours prominent entertainers sang protest songs and civil rights activists gave speeches calling for racial justice.
then something remarkable happened.
standing on the steps of the lincoln memorial thirty four year old martin luther king jr came to the podium the tenth and last speaker of the day.
the crowd roared as he prepared 1332 chapter 29 a new f rontier and a great society 1960 1968 remained entrenched in the lower south as blacks continued to be excluded from the political process.
white officials kept african americans from voting by charging them expensive poll taxes forcing them to take difficult literacy tests making the application process inconvenient and intimidating them through the use of arson beatings and lynchings.
in early 1964 h arvard educated robert bob moses a black new yorker who had resigned from the sclc to head the student nonviolent coordinating committee sncc office in mississippi decided it would take an army to force the state to give voting rights to blacks.
so he set about recruiting an army of black and white volunteers who would live with rural african americans teach them in freedom schools and help them register to vote.
most of the recruits for what came to be called freedom summer were idealistic white college students many of whom were jewish.
mississippis white leaders prepared for the n igger communist invasion by doubling the state police force and stockpiling tear gas electric cattle prods and shotguns.
writer eudora welty reported from her hometown of jackson mississippi that she had heard that this summer all hell is going to break loose it did.
in m id june the volunteer activists met at an ohio college to learn about southern racial history nonviolent civil disobedience and the likely abuses they would suffer.
on the final evening of the training session moses a freedom school in jackson mississippi a volunteer from brooklyn new york instructs young black students on the arts african american history and civil rights at a freedom school as part of the mississippi summer project in august 1964 civil rights 1335 pleaded with anyone who feared heading to mississippi to go home several did.
the next day the remaining volunteers boarded buses and headed south fanning out across the state.
in all f orty one freedom schools taught thousands of children math writing and history.
they also tutored black adults about the complicated process of voter registration.
stokely carmichael an african american student from howard university wrote that black mississippians took us in fed us instructed and protected us and ultimately civilized educated and inspired the smartassed college students forty six year old fannie lou hamer was one of the local blacks who worked with the sncc volunteers during freedom summer.
the youngest in a household of twenty children she had spent most of her life working on local cotton plantations.
during the freedom summer of 1963 and after she led gatherings of volunteers in freedom songs and excelled as a lay preacher.
god is not pleased she said at all the murdering and all of the brutality and all the killings for no reason at all.
god is not pleased at the negro children in the state of mississippi suffering from malnutrition.
god is not pleased because we have to go raggedy each day.
god is not pleased because we have to go to the field and work from ten to eleven hours for three lousy dollars in response the ku klux klan local police and other white racists harassed arrested and assaulted many of the volunteers.
on june 21 1964 just two days after congress approved the civil rights act three young sncc workers james earl chaney andrew goodman and michael mickey schwerner disappeared after going to investigate the burning of an african american church.
their decomposed b ullet riddled bodies were found two months later buried in a dam at a cattle pond.
they had been abducted and murdered by klan members.
while searching for the missing men authorities found the bodies of eight black males in rivers white terror young men cruise and swamps who also had been killed.
through a riot zone in chicago in 1966 brandishing a confederate flag and the murders said one volunteer were racist signs.
the end of innocence after which 1336 chapter 24 the reactionary twenties were immigrants some of whom had a passion for socialism or a narchism as well as a willingness to use violence to achieve their political goals.
fears of an invasion of foreign radicals led congress to pass the emergency immigration act of 1921 which limited total immigration to 150 000 a year and restricted newcomers from each european country to 3 percent of the total number of that nationality represented in the 1910 census.
three years later after people complained that too many eastern and southern europeans were still being admitted congress passed the immigration act of 1924 it reduced the number of admitted europeans to 2 percent of the 1890 census so as to include fewer new immigrants from southern and eastern europe jews italians poles and russians.
the purpose of the new quotas was to shrink the total number of immigrants to favor immigrants from northern and western europe and to reduce those from southern and eastern europe.
a kansas congressman expressed the prejudices against german and italian catholics felt by many rural american protestants on the one side is beer bolshevism unassimilating settlements and perhaps many flags on the other side is constitutional government one flag stars and stripes the immigration laws targeted particular groups.
for example they banned immigrants from japan or china.
the immigration act of 1924 however allowed newcomers from countries in the western hemisphere.
an unintended result was that people of latin american descent chiefly mexicans puerto ricans and cubans became the fastest growing ethnic minority during the twenties.
the number of mexicans living in texas increased tenfold between 1900 and 1930 in response to the needs of texas farmers for stoop laborers.
cotton picking suits the mexican was the common assertion among texas growers.
because mexican migrant workers were mostly homeless nomads willing to move with the seasons farm owners came to prefer them over black and white tenants and farm laborers.
sacco and vanzetti the nativism embedded in the new immigration laws reinforced the connection between european immigrants and political radicalism.
that connection erupted in the most widely publicized criminal case of the twenties.
on may 5 1920 two italian immigrants who described themselves as revolutionary anarchists eager to topple the american government shoemaker nicola sacco and fish peddler bartolomeo vanzetti were arrested outside boston massachusetts for stealing 16 000 from a shoe factory and killing the paymaster and a guard.
both men were armed with loaded pistols when reactionary conservatism and immigration restriction 1065 sacco and vanzetti the trial and conviction of these working class italian immigrants became a public spectacle amid the growing mood of nativism.
arrested both lied to police and both were identified by eyewitnesses.
the stolen money however was never found and several people claimed that they were with sacco and vanzetti far from the scene of the crime when it occurred.
the sacco and vanzetti case occurred at the height of italian immigration to the united states and against the backdrop of numerous terror attacks by anarchists some of which sacco and vanzetti had participated in.
the charged atmosphere called the red hysteria by one journalist ensured that the mens trial would be a public spectacle.
in july 1921 sacco and vanzetti were convicted and sentenced to death.
their legal appeals lasted six years before they were electrocuted on august 23 1927 still claiming their innocence.
to millions of workers and liberals around the world sacco and vanzetti became martyrs victims of capitalist injustice.
people still debate their guilt or innocence.
the new klan the most violent of the reactionary movements during the twenties was a revived ku klux klan the infamous post civil war group 1066 chapter 29 a new f rontier and a great society 1960 1968 the effect of black power although widely covered in the media the black power movement never attracted more than a small minority of african americans.
still it forced king and other mainstream black leaders and organizations to shift their focus from the rural south to i nner city ghettos in the north and west.
legal access to restaurants schools and other public accommodations king pointed out meant little to people mired in chronic poverty.
they needed jobs and decent housing.
the time had come king declared while launching his poor peoples campaign in december 1967 for radical new measures to provide jobs and income for the poor yet as he and others stressed the war in vietnam was taking funds away from federal programs serving the poor and black soldiers were dying in disproportionate numbers in southeast asia.
the black power movement also motivated african americans to take greater pride in their racial heritage by pushing for black studies programs in schools and colleges the celebration of african cultural and artistic traditions the organizing of inner city voters to elect black mayors laws forcing landlords to treat blacks fairly and the creation of grassroots organizations and panther power black panthers issue a black power salute outside a san francisco liberation school where activists raised awareness and appreciation of african american history a topic ignored by white mainstream curriculum.
the great society 1339 community centers in black neighborhoods.
it was malcolm x who insisted that blacks call themselves african americans as a symbol of pride in their roots and as a spur to learn more about their history.
as the popular singer james brown urged say it loud im black and im proud the great society growing federal support for civil rights came from an unlikely source a drawling white southerner who succeeded john f kennedy in the white house.
a stunned lyndon baines johnson the towering texan known as lbj took the presidential oath of office on board the plane that brought kennedys body back to washington from dallas.
the fifty five year old johnson the first southern president since woodrow wilson had excelled as senate majority leader before becoming vice president.
his transition to the presidency was not easy however.
he inherited a the oath of office less than 90 minutes after kennedys death johnson took the presidential oath aboard air force one between his wife lady bird left and jacqueline kennedy right before flying out of dallas for washington d c 1340 chapter 6 strengthening the new nation federal convention to gather in philadelphias old state house now known as independence hall for the purpose of revising the articles of confederation only rhode island refused to participate.
the delegates began work on may 25 1787 meeting five hours a day six days a week.
after four months of secret deliberations t hirty nine delegates signed the new federal constitution on september 17 only three delegates refused to sign.
the durability of the constitution reflects the thoughtful men who created it.
the delegates were all white their average age was f orty two with the youngest being t wenty six.
most were members of the political and economic elite.
twenty six were college graduates two were college presidents and thirty four were lawyers.
others were planters merchants bankers and clergymen.
yet the founding fathers were also practical men of experience tested in the fires of the revolutionary war.
t wenty two had fought in the war five of whom were captured and imprisoned by the british.
seven had been state governors and eight had helped write their state constitutions.
most had been members of the continental or confederation congresses and eight had signed the declaration of independence.
nearly all were considered gentlemen and more than half of them owned slaves.
drafting the constitution george washington presides over a session of the constitutional convention in philadelphia.
creating the constitution 257 drafting the constitution the widely respected even r evered george washington served as presiding officer at the federal convention later renamed the constitutional convention.
he participated little in the debates however for fear that people would take his prestigious opinions too seriously.
the governor of pennsylvania eighty one year old benjamin franklin the oldest delegate was in such poor health that he had to be carried to the meetings in a special chair borne aloft by inmates from the philadelphia jail.
like washington franklin said little from the floor but provided a wealth of experience wit and common sense behind the scenes.
most active at the convention was james madison of virginia the ablest political theorist in the group.
a thirty six year old attorney who owned a huge tobacco plantation called montpelier not far from jeffersons monticello madison had arrived in philadelphia with trunks full of books about governments and a head full of ideas about how best to strengthen the loose confederation of independent and sovereign states madison was an unlikely giant at constitution making.
barely five feet tall and weighing only 120 pounds a colleague said he was no bigger than half a piece of soap he was too frail to serve in the revolutionary army and suffered from occasional epileptic seizures.
he speaks low his person body is little and ordinary and he was too timid in his politics remarked crusty fisher ames of massachusetts.
although painfully shy and s oft spoken madison had an agile mind a huge appetite for learning and a lifelong commitment to public service.
he was determined to create a constitution that would ensure the supremacy of national authority the logic of his arguments and his pragmatic willingness to compromise on particular points proved decisive in shaping the new constitution.
every person seems to acknowledge his greatness said a georgia delegate.
most delegates agreed with madison james madison this 1783 miniature that their young republic needed a stron shows madison at t hirty two years old ger national government weaker state just four years before he would assume a major role in drafting the constitution.
legislatures and the power to restrain the 258 chapter 17 business and labor in the industrial era 1860 1900 strike penniless and demoralized the defeated workers ended their walkout on november 20 and accepted the companys harsh wage cuts.
only a fifth of the strikers were hired back the rest were blacklisted to prevent other steel mills from hiring them.
carnegie and frick with the support of local state and national government officials had eliminated the union.
after the homestead strike none of carnegies steel plants employed unionized workers.
within a few years carnegie could confide to a friend that he was ashamed to tell you how large his profits were from the homestead plant.
with each passing year carnegie nursed regrets about how frick handled the homestead strike.
in the end an embittered frick split with carnegie after he learned that his boss had been telling lies about him and making insults about his character.
frick told carnegie that he had grown tired of your business methods your absurd newspaper interviews and personal remarks and unwarranted interference in matters you know nothing about when carnegie sought to reconcile with his former lieutenant frick told the messenger you can say to andrew carnegie that i will meet him in hell where we are both going the pullman strike the pullman strike of 1894 was even more notable as it paralyzed the economies of the twenty seven states and territories in the western half of the nation.
it involved a dispute at pullman illinois a model industrial suburb of chicago owned by the pullman palace car company which made passenger train cars called pullmans or sleeping cars.
employees were required to live in the towns 1 400 cottages which had been built to high standards with gas heat and indoor plumbing.
with 12 000 residents the town also boasted a library a theater a school parks and playgrounds and a glass roofed shopping mall owned by the company.
there were no saloons social clubs newspapers or private property not owned by the company.
no political activities were allowed.
as a company town pullman was of much higher quality than the villages in the south owned by textile mills and the death rate was less than half of that in neighboring communities.
yet over time many workers complained that they did not like living under the thumb of the companys owner george pullman.
during the depression of 1893 pullman laid off 3 000 of his 5 800 employees and cut wages 25 to 40 percent for the rest but did not lower rents for housing or the price of food in the company store.
in the spring of 1894 desperate workers joined the american railway union founded the previous year by eugene v debs.
the dreadful chill of change 793 eugene v debs founder of the american railway union and later the presidential candidate for the socialist party of america.
the charismatic debs was a child of working class immigrants who had quit school at age fourteen to work for an indiana railroad.
by the early 1890s he had become a tireless spokesman for labor radicalism and he worked to organize all railway w orkers skilled or u nskilled into the american railway union which soon became a powerful organization.
he quickly turned his attention to the pullman controversy urging the workers to obey the laws and avoid violence.
after george pullman fired three members of a workers grievance committee the workers went on strike on may 11 1894 in june after pullman refused debss plea for a negotiated settlement the railway union workers stopped handling trains containing pullman railcars.
by the end of july they had shut down most of the railroads in the midwest and cut off all traffic through chicago.
to keep the trains running railroad executives hired strikebreakers and the u s attorney general a former attorney for railroad companies swore in 3 400 special deputies to protect them.
angry workers assaulted strikebreakers and destroyed property.
finally on july 3 president grover cleveland sent 2 000 federal troops into the chicago area claiming it was his duty to ensure delivery of the mail.
meanwhile the attorney general convinced a federal judge to sign an injunction an official court decree prohibiting the labor union from interfering.
794 chapter 6 strengthening the new nation in the end several compromises ensured that the president would be powerful enough to counterbalance the congress.
in some cases the chief executives powers actually exceeded those of the british king.
the new president to be elected for four year terms could veto acts of congress subject to being overridden by a two thirds vote in each house in britain the royal veto over parliamentary legislation had long since been abandoned.
the president was to be the nations chief diplomat and commander in chief of the armed forces and was responsible for implementing the laws made by congress.
yet the powers of the president were also limited in key areas.
the chief executive could neither declare war nor make peace those powers were reserved for congress.
unlike the british monarch moreover the president could be removed from office.
the house of representatives could impeach bring to trial the chief executive and other civil officers on charges of treason bribery or other high crimes and misdemeanors an impeached president could be removed from office if t wo thirds of the senate voted for conviction.
to preserve the separation of the three branches of the new national government the president would be elected not by congress but by a group of highly qualified electors chosen by the people in local elections.
the number of electors for each state would depend upon the combined number of signing the constitution september 17 1787 thomas pritchard rossiters painting shows george washington presiding over what thomas jefferson called an assembly of demi gods in philadelphia.
creating the constitution 261 congressional representatives and u s senators.
this electoral college was a compromise between those wanting the president elected by congress and those preferring a direct vote of qualified citizens.
the judiciary the third proposed branch of government the judiciary sparked little debate.
the constitution called for a supreme national court headed by a chief justice.
the supreme courts role was not to make laws a power reserved to congress or to execute and enforce the laws reserved to the presidency but to interpret the laws and to ensure that every citizen received equal justice under the law.
the u s supreme court was given final authority in interpreting the constitution and in settling constitutional disputes between states.
furthermore article vi of the constitution declared that the federal constitution federal laws and treaties are the supreme law of the land state laws or constitutions to the contrary notwithstanding the limits of the constitution the men who drafted the new constitution claimed to be representing all americans.
to highlight that point the constitution begins with the words we the people of the united states in order to form a more perfect union.
establish this constitution for the united states of america in fact however as senator stephen douglas of illinois noted seventy years later the constitution was made by white men for the benefit of white men and their posterity descendants forever important groups of americans were left out of the constitutions protections.
native americans for example were not considered federal or state citizens unless they paid taxes which very few did.
the constitution declared that native american tribes were not part of the united states but instead were separate nations slavery of all the issues that emerged during the constitutional convention of 1787 none was more explosive than slavery.
when the patriots declared independence in 1776 slavery existed in every state.
by 1787 however massachusetts pennsylvania connecticut and rhode island had abolished the practice.
many of the framers viewed slavery as an embarrassing contradiction to the principles of liberty and equality embodied in the declaration of independence and the new constitution.
a new jersey delegate declared that slavery 262 chapter 18 the new south and the new west 1865 1900 sharecropping and tenancy 1880 1900 nh vt wa mt mn or id ny mi wi sd wy pa ia ne nv oh il ut ca me nd co in wv ks mo va ma ri ct nj de md ky nc az terr.
percentage of all farmers 1900 nm terr.
increase in percentage of tenants and sharecroppers between 1880 and 1900 over 55 percent over 10 percent 40 55 percent 7 10 percent 20 39 percent under 7 percent under 20 percent decrease tn ok terr.
ms ga al la tx fl sc ar indian terr.
500 miles 500 kilometers why was there a dramatic increase in sharecropping and tenancy in the late wwn64 nineteenth century.
figure m18 1 explain why the south had more sharecroppers than other parts of the country.
first proof texas cultivation the price paid for raw cotton fell steadily.
have you all felt the effects of the low price of cotton mary parham of amite louisiana wrote to her father in 1892.
it nearly ruined us.
i did not get my house built.
the farmers are very blue here.
but they are getting ready to plant cotton again as the price paid for cotton dropped desperate farmers planted even more cotton which only accelerated the decline in price.
in the 1870s annual production of cotton was about 2 6 billion pounds which brought an average price of 11 77 cents per pound.
in the 1880s the average annual production was 3 billion pounds at 10 44 cents per pound.
by 1896 the average price of cotton was down to 7 72 cents.
the average annual income of white southerners in 1900 was about half that of americans outside the south.
eleven percent of whites in the south were illiterate twice the national average.
the regions poorest people were the 9 million former slaves and their children.
per capita black income in 1900 was a third of that of southern whites and the black illiteracy rate in the south was nearly 50 percent almost five times higher than that of whites.
race relations during the 1890s 807 race relations during the 1890s the desperate plight of southern farmers in the 1880s and 1890s affected race relations for the worse.
during the 1890s white farmers and politicians demanded that blacks be stripped of their voting rights and other civil rights.
a violent negrophobia swept across the south and much of the nation.
in part the new wave of racism was spurred by the revival of the old idea that the a nglo saxon race was intellectually and genetically superior to blacks.
another reason was that many whites had come to resent any signs of african american financial success and political influence.
an alabama newspaper editor declared that our blood boils when the educated negro asserts himself politically disfranchising african americans by the 1890s a new generation of african americans born and educated since the end of the civil war was determined to gain true equality.
they were more assertive and less patient than their parents.
we are not the negro from whom the chains of slavery fell a quarter century ago most assuredly not a black editor announced.
a growing number of young white adults however were equally determined to keep negroes in their place mississippi took the lead in stripping blacks of their voting rights.
the so called mississippi plan a series of state constitutional amendments in 1890 set the pattern of disfranchisement that nine more states would follow.
the disfranchisement plan first instituted a residence requirement for voting two years in the state one year in a local election district.
this was aimed at african american tenant farmers who were in the habit of moving yearly in search of better economic opportunities.
second mississippi disqualified blacks from voting if they had committed certain crimes.
third in order to vote people had to have paid all of their taxes on time including a so called poll tax specifically for voting a restriction that hurt both poor blacks and poor whites.
finally all voters had to be able to read or at least understand the u s constitution.
white registrars decided who satisfied this requirement and they usually discriminated against blacks.
other states added variations on the mississippi plan.
in 1898 louisiana inserted into its state constitution the grandfather clause which allowed illiterate whites to vote if their fathers or grandfathers had been eligible to vote on january 1 1867 when african americans were still disfranchised.
by 1910 georgia north carolina virginia alabama and oklahoma had incorporated the grandfather clause.
also in the democratic solid south every southern state created a democratic primary process to select candidates and most of these primaries excluded african american voters.
808 chapter 12 religion romanticism and reform 1800 1860 c onsumption spinal diseases epilepsy and insanity.
like a cult leader graham urged his followers to avoid medicine and p hysicians if you value your life the vain and egotistical graham most of his siblings disowned him became one of the most famed and hated of the professional reformers.
butchers and bakers threatened to kill him and many people laughed at his ideas.
yet others called grahamites passionately embraced his health system.
there were grahamite hotels in new york city boston and philadelphia as well as stores boarding houses college dining halls and a newspaper promoting his diet and ideas.
one of grahams followers called him an eccentric and wayward genius utopian communities amid the pervasive climate of reform the quest for u topia communities with innovative social and economic relationships flourished.
plans for ideal communities had long been an american passion and more than 100 utopian communities sprang up between 1800 and 1900 many of them were communitarian experiments that emphasized the welfare of the entire community rather than individual freedom.
some experimented with free love socialism and special diets.
the shakers communities founded by the shakers officially the united society of believers in christs second appearing proved to be long lasting.
ann lee known as mother ann lee arrived in new york from england with eight followers in 1774 believing religious fervor to be a sign of inspiration from the holy ghost mother ann and her followers had strange fits in which they saw visions and issued prophecies predictions about the future.
these manifestations later evolved into a ritual d ance hence the name shakers shaker doctrine held god to be a dual personality.
in christ the masculine side was revealed in mother ann the feminine element.
that mother ann preached celibacy to prepare shakers for the perfection that was promised them in heaven helps explain why their membership declined over time.
mother ann died in 1784 but the group found new leaders and the movement spread from new york into new england ohio and kentucky.
by 1830 about twenty groups were flourishing.
in these shaker communities all property was held in common.
shaker farms were among the nations leading sources of garden seed and medicinal herbs and many of their products especially furniture were prized for their simple beauty.
the reform impulse 537 oneida john humphrey noyes founder of the oneida community had a very different vision of the ideal community.
the son of a vermont congressman noyes attended dartmouth college and yale divinity school.
but in 1834 he was expelled from yale and his license to preach was revoked after he announced that he was perfect and free of all sin.
in 1836 noyes gathered a group of perfectionists around his home in putney vermont.
ten years later noyes announced a new doctrine complex marriage which meant that every man in the community was married to every woman and vice versa.
in a holy community he claimed there is no more reason why sexual intercourse should be restrained by law than why eating and drinking should be authorities thought otherwise and noyes was charged with adultery for practicing his theology of free love he coined the term.
he fled to new york and in 1848 established the oneida community which had more than 200 members by 1851 and became famous for its production of fine silverware.
brook farm brook farm in massachusetts was the most celebrated utopian community because it grew out of the transcendental movement.
george ripley a unitarian minister and transcendentalist conceived of brook farm as a kind of e arly day think tank combining high philosophy and plain living and manual labor.
in 1841 he and several dozen l ike minded utopians moved to the 175 acre farm eight miles southwest of boston.
brook farm became americas first secular utopian community.
one of its members novelist nathaniel hawthorne called it our beautiful scheme of a noble and unselfish life he later would satirize the community in his novel the blithedale romance.
its residents shared the tasks of maintaining the buildings tending the fields and preparing the meals.
they also organized picnics dances lectures and discussions.
emerson thoreau and margaret fuller were among the visiting lecturers.
in 1846 however brook farms main building burned down and the community spirit died in the ashes.
in the end utopian communities had little impact on the outside world where reformers wrestled with the sins of the multitudes.
among all the targets of the reformers zeal one great evil would take precedence over the others human bondage.
transcendentalist reformer theodore parker declared that slavery was the blight of this nation the curse of the north and the curse of the south the paradox of american freedom being coupled with american slavery what novelist herman melville called the worlds fairest hope linked with mans foulest crime would inspire the climactic crusade of the age abolitionism which would ultimately sweep the nation into an epic civil war.
538 chapter 29 a new f rontier and a great society 1960 1968 the resulting voting rights act of 1965 was one of the most momentous legislative accomplishments of the twentieth century.
it ensured all citizens the right to vote.
it authorized the attorney general to send federal officials to register voters in areas that had long experienced racial discrimination.
in states or counties where fewer than half the adults had voted in 1964 the act banned the various ways like literacy tests that local officials used to keep blacks and hispanics from voting.
by the end of the year some 250 000 african americans were newly registered to vote in several southern states.
by 1968 an estimated 53 percent of blacks in alabama were registered to vote compared to 14 percent in 1960 in this respect the voting rights act was even more important than the civil rights act because it empowered black voters in the south thereby transforming the white dominated politics in the region and making possible the election of black public officials.
yet by enabling southern blacks most of whom preferred democratic candidates to vote it also helped turn the o nce solidly democratic south into a republican stronghold as many white voters switched parties.
the great society in practice lyndon b johnson sought to give americans a sense of forward movement in troubled times and show them that he could create a great society whereby people would be more concerned with the quality of their goals than the quantity of their goods franklin roosevelt passed fifteen major bills in his first hundred days johnson told an aide in 1966 whereas he had passed two hundred in the last two years a new york times columnist joked that lbj was getting everything through the congress but the abolition of the republican party and he hasnt tried that yet the scope of johnsons great society programs exceeded roosevelts new deal in part because of the nations booming prosperity during the mid 1960s.
this country johnson proclaimed is rich enough to do anything it has the guts to do and the vision to do and the will to do that proved not to be the case however.
as time magazine reported no matter how much lyndon gets he asks for more yet soon there was no more money to spend.
in 1966 johnson warned congress that if taxes were not raised the economy would suffer a ruinous spiral of inflation and brutally higher interest rates the great society and war on poverty never lived up to johnsons grandiose goals in part because the vietnam war soon took priority and siphoned away funding and in part because neither johnson nor his congressional supporters understood the stubborn complexity of chronic poverty.
in many respects the great society generated its own downfall by inspiring a conservative republican backlash that would gain political control during the eighties.
in the con the tragedy of vietnam 1349 gressional elections of 1966 only 38 of the 71 democrats elected to the house in 1964 won reelection.
the political tide was running against johnson.
the great society programs did however include several triumphs.
infant mortality has dropped college completion rates have soared malnutrition has virtually disappeared and far fewer elderly americans live below the poverty line and without access to health care.
the federal guarantee of civil rights and voting rights remains in place.
medicare and medicaid have become two of the most appreciated government programs.
consumers now have a federal agency protecting them.
head start programs providing preschool enrichment activities for poor students have produced l ong term benefits.
the federal food stamp program has improved the nutrition and health of children living in poverty.
finally scholarships for low income college students have been immensely valuable providing access to higher education.
several of johnsons most ambitious programs however were ill conceived others were vastly underfunded and many were mismanaged and even corrupt.
some of the problems they were meant to address actually worsened.
medicare for example removed incentives for hospitals to control costs so medical bills skyrocketed for everyone.
in addition food stamp fraud occurred as people took selfish advantage of a program intended to ensure healthy nutrition.
overall great society programs helped reduce the population living in poverty from 19 percent in 1964 to 10 percent in 1973 but it did so largely by providing federal welfare payments not by finding people decent jobs.
in 1966 middle class resentment over the cost and excesses of the great society programs generated a conservative backlash that fueled the republican resurgence in congress.
by then however the great society had transformed public expectations of the power and role of the federal government.
the tragedy of vietnam in foreign affairs lyndon johnson was like woodrow wilson a novice.
and again like wilson his presidency would become a victim of his crusading idealism.
as racial violence erupted in americas cities the war in vietnam reached new levels of intensity and destruction.
with weapons and supplies from china and the soviet union north vietnam provided massive support to the viet cong vc the guerrillas fighting in south vietnam to overthrow the u s backed government and unify the divided nation under communist control.
johnson inherited a l ong standing u s commitment to prevent a communist takeover in vietnam.
beginning with harry s truman u s presidents 1350 chapter 29 a new f rontier and a great society 1960 1968 had done just enough to avoid being charged with having lost vietnam.
johnson initially sought to do the same fearing that any other course of action would jeopardize his great society programs in congress.
his path however took the united states into a deeper military commitment.
in november 1963 when president kennedy was assassinated there were 16 000 u s military advisers in south vietnam.
early in his presidency johnson doubted that vietnam was worth a more extensive military involvement.
in may 1964 he told his national security adviser mcgeorge bundy that he had spent a sleepless night worrying about vietnam it looks to me like we are getting into another korea.
i dont think its worth fighting for.
and i dont think we can get out.
its just the u s air strikes sustained bombing of biggest damned mess that i ever saw vietnam left 30 to 50 foot wide craters yet johnsons fear of appearing that can still be seen today.
weak abroad outweighed his misgivings.
by the end of 1965 there were 184 000 u s troops in vietnam in 1966 there were 385 000 and by 1969 at the height of the war effort 542 000 escalation in vietnam the official justification for the military e scalation a defense department term favored in the vietnam era was the tonkin gulf resolution passed by the senate on august 7 1964 on that day president johnson unknowingly acting on false information provided by the secretary of defense reported that on august 2 and 4 north vietnamese torpedo boats had attacked two u s warships in the gulf of tonkin off the coast of north vietnam.
as it turned out the american vessels had actually fired first in support of south vietnamese attacks against two north vietnamese islands attacks planned by american advisers.
whether the american warships were actually fired upon remains in dispute.
the tonkin gulf resolution empowered the president to take all necessary measures to repel any armed attack against the forces of the united states the tragedy of vietnam 1351 and to prevent further aggression only two senators voted against the tonkin gulf resolution which johnson interpreted as equivalent to a congressional declaration of war since it allowed him to wage war as he saw fit.
in early 1965 johnson made the crucial decisions that committed america to full scale war in vietnam.
on february 5 1965 viet cong vc guerrillas attacked a u s base near pleiku in south vietnam killing and wounding more than 100 americans.
more attacks that week led johnson to approve operation rolling thunder the first sustained u s bombing of north vietnam.
thereafter there were essentially two fronts in the war one in north vietnam where u s warplanes continued a massive bombing campaign and the other in south vietnam where nearly all the ground combat occurred.
in march 1965 the u s commander general william c westmoreland greeted the first american combat troops in vietnam.
his strategy was focused not on capturing territory but on waging a war of attrition using overwhelming u s firepower to cause so many casualties that the viet cong and north vietnamese would give up their effort to undermine the south vietnamese government.
soon u s forces launched search and destroy operations against vc guerrillas throughout south vietnam reporting the body count on the evening newscasts.
but the viet cong made up of both men and women wore no uniforms and dissolved by day into the villages hiding among civilians.
their elusiveness exasperated american soldiers most of whom were not trained for such unconventional warfare in vietnams dense jungles and intense heat and humidity.
the escalating war brought rising u s casualties the number of killed wounded and missing which were announced each week on the television news.
criticism of the war grew but lbj stood firm.
we will not be defeated he told the nation.
we will not grow tired.
we will not withdraw the context for policy president johnsons decision to americanize the war flowed directly from the assumptions that had long guided u s foreign policy during the cold war.
the commitment to contain the spread of communism initiated by harry truman and continued by dwight eisenhower and john kennedy guided johnson as well.
why are we in vietnam the president asked during a speech in 1965.
we are there because we have a promise to keep.
to leave vietnam to its fate would shake the confidence of all these people in the value of american commitment what johnson did not say was that he dreaded being blamed for losing vietnam to communism as truman had been accused by republicans of losing china to communists led by mao zedong.
1352 chapter 12 religion romanticism and reform 1800 1860 sarah left and angelina right grimk after moving away from their south carolina slaveholding family the grimk sisters devoted themselves to abolitionism and feminism.
and that they should limit their activities to the domestic and social circle rather than public organizations.
angelina grimk firmly rejected such arguments.
for centuries she noted women had been raised to view themselves as inferior creatures now she insisted it is a womans right to have a voice in all laws and regulations by which she is to be governed whether in church or in state soon she and her sister began linking their efforts to free the slaves with their desire to free women from centuries of male domination.
men and women are created equal sarah grimk said.
whatever is right for man to do is right for woman the role of women the debate over the role of women in the anti slavery movement finally exploded at the american a nti slavery societys meeting in 1840 where the garrisonians convinced a majority of delegates that women should participate equally in the organization.
the tappans and their supporters walked out and formed the american and foreign a nti s lavery society.
a third faction of the american anti slavery society had grown skeptical that the nonviolent moral suasion promoted by garrison would ever lead the a nti slavery movement 543 to abolition.
they decided that political action was the most effective way to pursue their goal.
in 1840 activists formed the liberty party in an effort to elect an american president who would abolish slavery.
their nominee james gillespie birney executive secretary of the american a nti slavery society was a former alabama slaveholder turned abolitionist.
his slogan was vote as you pray and pray as you vote the platform called for an end to slavery in the western territories and the district of columbia and a ban on intrastate slave trading.
yet the liberty party found few supporters.
in the 1840 election birney polled only 7 000 votes.
in 1844 however he would win 60 000 from that time forward an anti slavery party contested every national election until the thirteenth amendment officially ended slavery in 1865 black a nti s lavery activity although many whites worked courageously to end slavery most of them unlike garrison still insisted that blacks were socially inferior to whites.
freedom for slaves in other words did not mean social equality and many white abolitionists expected free blacks to take a backseat in the movement.
william wells brown yet free african americans were active in white anti slavery societies.
former slaves such as henry bibb and william wells brown both runaways from kentucky and frederick douglass who had escaped from maryland became the most effective critics of the souths peculiar institution much of the energy and appeal of the abolitionist movement derived from the compelling testimonies provided by former slaves.
brown was just twenty years old when he escaped from his owner a steamboat pilot on the ohio river.
an ohio quaker named wells brown provided shelter to the runaway and brown adopted the mans name in the process of forging a new identity as a free man.
he settled in cleveland ohio where he was a dockworker.
he married had three children and helped runaway slaves cross the border into canada.
by 1842 he had learned to read and write begun to publish columns in abolitionist newspapers and was in great demand as a speaker at a nti slavery meetings.
in 1847 brown moved to boston where the massachusetts a nti slavery society hired him as a traveling lecturer.
that same year the organization published browns autobiography narrative of william w brown a former slave written by himself which became a best seller.
brown gave thousands of speeches in america and europe calling for an end to slavery and equality for both blacks and women.
he repeatedly 544.

new world encounters contents and learning objectives native american histories before the conquest pg.
4 imagining a new world pg.
16 what explains cultural differences among native american groups before european conquest.
how did spanish conquest of central and south america transform native american cultures.
the french claim canada pg.
20 a world transformed pg.
8 what was the character of the french empire in canada.
how did europeans and native americans interact during the period of first contact.
the english enter the competition pg.
21 west africa ancient and complex societies pg.
11 what was the character of the west african societies that european traders first encountered.
europe on the eve of conquest pg.
15 how do you explain spains central role in new world exploration and colonization.
listen to the audio file on myhistorylab why did england not participate in the early competition for new world colonies.
an unpromising beginning mystery at roanoke pg.
24 what role did the spanish play in the failure of the roanoke colony.
feature essay the columbian exchange and the global environment ecological revolution chapter 17 the west exploiting an empire canada columbia r texas de an present day state boundaries okla ohio w va r tenn ark.
st l aw r ds n j del.
va n n c s c ga ala co la.
conn ky ia n mo.
at l a gr 20 isohyet rainfall line pa io oh miss.
ri o land region boundaries lake michigan coas t pacific ocean r i ap pa la ch n mex.
ill plains i hi nte gh r la ior nd s pikes peak s colo ron.
r n h vt n y lake erie iowa in pla ariz r wis nebr.
s ain pl lo co do ra pi interior ins pla utah h hig plateau lake ontario me.
hu ie air pr at da va ne ra nev calif e r sie great basin ains unt mo western iss ip r wyo.
pacific mountains s dak.
g idaho superior ke lak e m is s ore la.
a a st c ai minn r pl n dak.
ri r sou mis hi gh la n mont.
c ky r an ges cas cad er an ge ro en ce wash atlantic ocean l fla gulf of mexico mexico 100th meridian 300 miles 300 kilometers physiographic map of the united states in the great plains and rocky mountains the topography altitudes crops and climate especially the lack of rain west of the rainfall line shown here led to changes in a mode of settlement that had been essentially uniform from the atlantic coast through kentucky ohio and missouri.
the rectangular land surveys and quarter section lots that were traditional before could not accommodate great plains conditions.
the edge of the plains and most early settlers headed directly for california and oregon.
few rivers cut through the plains those that did raged in the winter and trickled in the summer.
rainfall usually did not reach fifteen inches a year not enough to support extensive agriculture.
there was little lumber for homes and fences and the tools of eastern settlement the cast iron plow the boat and the ax were virtually useless on the tough and treeless plains soil.
east of the mississippi historian walter prescott webb noted civilization stood on three legs land water and timber west of the mississippi not one but two of these legs were withdrawn water and timber and civilization was left on one leg land hot winds seared the plains in summer and northers blizzards and hailstorms froze them in winter.
wildlife roamed in profusion.
the american bison better known as the buffalo grazed in enormous herds from mexico to canada.
in 1865 perhaps fifteen million buffalo lived on the plains so many they seemed like leaves in a forest to an early observer.
a single herd sighted in 1871 had four million head.
crushing the native americans how did white americans crush the culture of the native americans as they moved west.
when greeley urged new yorkers to move west and crowd nobody he like almost all white americans ignored the fact that large numbers of people already lived there.
at the close of the civil war native americans inhabited nearly half the united states.
by 1880 they had been driven onto smaller and smaller reservations and were no longer an independent people.
a decade later even their culture had crumbled under the impact of white domination.
in 1865 nearly a quarter million native americans lived in the western half of the country.
tribes such as the winnebago menominee cherokee and chippewa were resettled there forced out of their eastern lands by advancing white settlement.
other tribes were native to the region.
in the southwest there were the pueblo groups including the hopi zuni and rio grande pueblos.
crushing the native americans peaceful farmers and herders they had built up complex traditions around a settled way of life.
the pueblo groups were cultivators of corn.
they lived on the subdesert plateau of present day western new mexico and eastern arizona.
harassed by powerful neighboring tribes they built communal houses of adobe brick on high mesas or in cracks in the cliffs.
more nomadic were the camp dwellers the jicarilla apache and navajo who roamed eastern new mexico and western texas.
blending elements of the plains and plateau environments they lived in tepees or mud huts grew some crops to supplement their hunting and moved readily from place to place.
the navajo herded sheep and produced beautiful ornamental silver baskets and blankets.
fierce fighters apache horsemen were feared by whites and fellow indians across the southwestern plains.
farther west were the tribes that inhabited present day california.
divided into many small bands they eked out a difficult existence living on roots grubs berries acorns and small game.
in the pacific northwest where fish and forest animals made life easier the klamath chinook yurok and shasta tribes developed a rich civilization.
they built plank houses and canoes worked extensively in wood and evolved a complex social and political organization.
settled and determined they resisted the invasion of the whites.
by the 1870s most of these tribes had been destroyed or beaten into submission.
the powerful ute crushed in 1855 ceded most of their utah lands to the united states and settled on a small reservation near great salt lake.
the navajo and apache fought back fiercely but between 1865 and 1873 they too were confined to reservations.
the native americans of california succumbed to the contagious diseases carried by whites during the gold rush of 1849 miners burned their villages and by 1880 fewer than twenty thousand indians lived in california.
life of the plains indians in the mid nineteenth century nearly two thirds of the native americans lived on the great plains.
the plains tribes included the sioux of present day minnesota and the dakotas the blackfoot of idaho and montana the cheyenne crow and arapaho of the central plains the pawnee of western nebraska and the kiowa apache and comanche of present day texas and new mexico.
nomadic and warlike the plains indians depended on the buffalo and horse.
the modern horse first brought by spanish explorers in the 1500s spread north from mexico onto the plains and by the 1700s the plains indians way of life had changed.
the plains tribes gave up farming almost entirely and hunted the buffalo ranging widely over the rolling plains.
the men became superb warriors and horsemen among the best light cavalry in the world.
equipped with stout wooden bows three feet or less in length plains indians were fierce warriors.
hiding their bodies behind their racing ponies they drove deadly arrows clear through buffalo.
against white troops or settlers the skillful comanche rode three hundred yards and shot twenty arrows in the time it took a soldier to load his firearm once.
the introduction of the new colt six shooters during the 1850s gave government troops a rapid fire weapon but did not entirely offset the indians advantage.
migratory in culture the plains indians formed tribes of several thousand people but lived in smaller bands of three to five hundred.
the comanche who numbered perhaps seven thousand had thirteen bands with such names as burnt meat making bags while moving and those who move often.
each band was governed by a chief and a council of elder men and indians of the same tribe transferred freely from band to band.
bands acted independently making it difficult for the u s government to deal with the fragmented tribes.
the comanche dominated most of the plains through their exploitation of the horse their use of violence and the timely cooperation among their bands.
over the course of two centuries they crushed the feared apache harassed the spanish and mexicans and tormented american immigrants who wanted to establish trading posts in taos and santa fe.
although official maps showed spanish ownership of the southern and western plains the comanche actually controlled it their domain known as the comancheria or the comanche empire.
their last important chief quanah parker the son of a comanche brave and a captive anglo texan died in 1911 whether comanche or other tribes all native americans on the plains followed and lived off the buffalo.
buffalo provided food clothing and shelter the indians unlike later white hunters used every part of the animal.
the meat was dried or jerked in the hot plains air.
the skins made tepees blankets and robes.
buffalo bones became knives tendons were made into bowstrings horns and hooves were boiled into glue.
buffalo chips dried manure were burned as fuel.
all in all the buffalo was a galloping department store warfare among tribes usually took the form of brief raids and skirmishes.
plains indians fought few prolonged wars and rarely coveted territory.
most conflicts involved only a few warriors intent on stealing horses or counting coup touching an enemy body with the hand or a special stick.
tribes developed a fierce and trained warrior class recognized for achievements in battle.
speaking different languages native americans of various tribes were nevertheless able to communicate with one another through a highly developed sign language.
the plains tribes divided labor tasks according to gender.
men hunted traded supervised ceremonial activities and cleared ground for planting.
they usually held the positions of authority such as chief or medicine man.
women were responsible for child rearing and artistic activity.
they also performed the camp work grew vegetables prepared buffalo meat and hides and gathered berries and roots.
in most tribes women played an important role in political economic and religious activities.
among the navajo and zuni kinship descended from the mothers side and navajo women were in charge of most of the familys property.
in tribes such as the sioux there was little difference in status.
men were respected for hunting and war women for their artistic skills with quill and paint.
chapter 25 transition to modern america on november 7 federal agents seized suspected anarchists and communists and held them for deportation with no regard for due process of law.
in december 249 aliens including such well known radical leaders as emma goldman and alexander berkman were sent to russia aboard the buford dubbed the soviet ark by the press.
nearly all were innocent of the charges against them.
a month later palmer rounded up nearly four thousand suspected communists in a single evening.
federal agents broke into homes meeting halls and union offices without search warrants.
many native born americans were caught in the dragnet and spent several days in jail before being released aliens rounded up were deported without hearings or trials.
for a time it seemed that the red scare reflected the prevailing views of the american people.
instead of condemning their governments action citizens voiced their approval and even urged more drastic steps.
one patriot said his solution to the alien problem was simple s o s ship or shoot general leonard wood the former army chief of staff favored placing bolsheviks on ships of stone with sails of lead while evangelist billy sunday preferred to take these ornery wild eyed socialists and stand them up before a firing squad and save space on our ships inflamed by public statements like these a group of legionnaires in centralia washington dragged a radical from the town jail castrated him and hanged him from a railway bridge.
the coroners report blandly stated that the victim jumped off with a rope around his neck and then shot himself full of holes the very extremism of the red scare led to its rapid demise.
in early 1920 courageous government officials from the department of labor insisted on due process and full hearings before anyone else was deported.
prominent public leaders began to speak out against the acts of terror.
charles evans hughes the defeated gop candidate in 1916 offered to defend six socialists expelled from the new york legislature ohio senator warren g harding the embodiment of middle class values expressed his opinion that too much has been said about bolshevism in america finally palmer himself with evident presidential ambition went too far.
in april 1920 he warned of a vast revolution to occur on may 1 the entire new york city police force some eleven thousand strong was placed on duty to prepare for imminent disaster.
when no bombings or violence took place on may day the public began to react against palmers hysteria.
despite a violent explosion on wall street in september that killed thirty three people the red scare died out by the end of 1920 palmer passed into obscurity the tiny communist party became torn with factionalism and the american people tried hard to forget their loss of balance.
yet the red scare exerted a continuing influence on american society in the 1920s.
the foreign born lived in the uneasy realization that they were viewed with hostility and suspicion.
two italian aliens in massachusetts nicola sacco and bartolomeo vanzetti were arrested in may 1920 for a payroll robbery and murder.
they faced a prosecutor and jury who condemned them more for their ideas than for any evidence of criminal conduct and a judge who referred to them as those anarchist bastards despite a worldwide effort that became the chief liberal cause of the 1920s the courts rejected all appeals.
sacco a shoemaker and vanzetti a fish peddler died in the electric chair on august 23 1927 their fate symbolized the bigotry and intolerance that lasted through the 1920s and made that decade one of the least attractive in american history.
prohibition in december 1917 congress passed the eighteenth amendment prohibiting the manufacture and sale of alcoholic beverages and sent the amendment to the states for ratification.
a little over a year later in january 1919 nebraska was the necessary thirty sixth state to ratify and prohibition became the law of the land.
effective january 16 1920 the volstead act which implemented prohibition banned most commercial production and distribution of beverages containing more than one half of 1 percent of alcohol by volume.
exceptions were made for medicinal and religious uses of wine and spirits.
production for ones own private use was also allowed.
prohibition was the result of both a rural effort of the anti saloon league backed by methodist and baptist clergy men and the urban progressive concern over the social disease of drunkenness especially among industrial workers.
the moral issue had already led to the enactment of prohibition laws in twenty six states by 1920 the real tragedy would occur in the effort to extend this noble experiment to the growing cities where it was deeply resented by ethnic groups such as the germans and the irish and was almost totally disregarded by the well to do and the sophisticated.
prohibition did in fact lead to a decline in drinking.
americans consumed much less alcohol in the 1920s than in the prewar years.
rural areas became totally dry and in the cities the consumption of alcoholic beverages dropped sharply among the lower classes who could not afford the high prices for bootleg liquor.
among the middle class and the wealthy however drinking became fashionable.
bootleggers supplied whiskey which quickly replaced lighter spirits such as wine and beer.
the alcohol was either smuggled from abroad a 40 million a year business by 1924 or illicitly manufactured in america.
exotic products such as jackass brandy soda pop moon and yack yack bourbon were common and all could be fatal.
despite the risk of illness or death from extraordinarily high alcohol content or poorly controlled distillation americans consumed some 150 million quarts of liquor a year in the 1920s.
bootleggers took in nearly 2 billion annually about 2 percent of the gross national product.
urban resistance to prohibition finally led to its repeal in 1933 but in the intervening years it damaged american society by breeding a profound disrespect for the law.
the flamboyant excesses of bootleggers were only the more obvious evils spawned by prohibition.
in city after city police openly tolerated the traffic in liquor and judges and prosecutors agreed to let bootleggers pay merely token fines creating almost a system of licenses.
prohibition satisfied the countrysides desire for vindication yet rural and urban america alike suffered from this overzealous attempt to legislate morals.
the ku klux klan the most ominous expression of protest against the new urban culture was the rebirth of the ku klux klan.
on thanksgiving night in 1915 on stone mountain in georgia colonel william j the rural counterattack read the document court statements from sacco and vanzetti italian immigrants nicola sacco and bartolomeo vanzetti were accused of killing a paymaster and stealing about 16 000 in 1920 many believed they were convicted and executed in 1927 because of their anarchistic beliefs.
simmons and thirty four followers founded the modern klan.
only native born white gentile americans were permitted to join the invisible empire knights of the ku klux klan membership grew slowly during world war i but after 1920 fueled by postwar fears and shrewd promotional techniques the klan mushroomed.
in villages towns and small cities across the nation no longer simply in the south anglo saxon protestant men flocked into the newly formed chapter 17 the west exploiting an empire a nationwide demand for revenge.
within a few months the sioux were surrounded and beaten three thousand of them surrendering in october 1876 sitting bull and a few followers who had fled to canada gave up in 1881 the sioux war ended the major indian warfare in the west but occasional outbreaks occurred for several years thereafter.
in 1877 the nez perc tribe of oregon a people who had warmly welcomed lewis and clark in 1805 rebelled against government policy.
hoping to reach canada chief joseph led the tribe on a courageous flight lasting 75 days and covering 1 321 miles.
they defeated the pursuing army at every turn but then ran out of food horses and ammunition.
surrendering they were sent to barren lands in the indian country of oklahoma and there most of them died from disease.
in 1890 the teton sioux of south dakota bitter and starving became restless.
many of them turned to the ghost dances a this wood engraving from 1891 depicts a group of sioux dancers performing most likely one of their last set of dances and rites that grew ghost dances before the arrest of the warrior chief sitting bull.
from a vision of a paiute messiah named wovoka.
performance of the dances wovoka said would bring back native american lands to beat the indians into submission.
the kiowa and comanche and would cause the whites to disappear.
all native americans rampaged through the texas panhandle looting and killing until would reunite the earth would be covered with dust and a new the u s army including the feared buffalo soldiers african earth would come upon the old.
the vanished buffalo would american cavalrymen on the western frontier crushed them return in great herds.
in the red river war of 1874 1875 and ended warfare in the the army intervened to stop the dancing touching off viosouthwest.
see the feature essay blacks in blue the buffalo lence that killed sitting bull and a number of other warriors.
soldiers in the west pp.
frightened native americans fled southwest to join other ghost on the northern plains fighting resulted from the black dancers under the aging chief big foot.
moving quickly troops hills gold rush of 1875 as prospectors tramped across native of the seventh cavalry custers old regiment caught up with big american hunting grounds the sioux gathered to stop them.
foots band and took them to the army camp on wounded knee they were led by rain in the face the great war chief crazy creek in south dakota.
a native american it is thought fired horse and the famous medicine man sitting bull.
the army the first shot returned by the armys new machine guns.
firing a sent several columns of troops after the indians but one under shell a second they shredded tepees and people.
in the infamous flamboyant lieutenant colonel george armstrong custer wounded knee massacre about two hundred men women pushed recklessly ahead eager to claim the victory.
on the and children were killed in the snow.
morning of june 25 1876 thinking he had a small band of native americans surrounded in their village on the banks of the little bighorn river in montana custer divided his column the end of tribal life and took 265 men toward it.
instead of finding a small band the final step in indian policy came in the 1870s and 1880s.
he discovered he had stumbled on the main sioux camp with some reformers had long argued against segregating the native 2 500 warriors.
it was the largest native american army ever americans on reservations urging instead that the nation assimiassembled in the united states.
late them individually into white culture.
these assimilationists by midafternoon it was over custer and his men were wanted to use education land policy and federal law to eradicate dead.
custer was largely responsible for the loss but custers tribal society.
last stand set in blazing headlines across the country set off watch the video sioux ghost dance crushing the native americans to keep the indians land from falling into the hands of speculators the federal government read the document accounts of the wounded knee massacre held it in trust for twenty five years.
finally american citizenship was granted to native americans who accepted their land lived apart from the tribe and adopted the habits of civilized life through the dawes act 47 million acres of land were distributed to native americans and their families.
there were another 90 million acres in the reservations and these lands often the most fertile were sold to white settlers.
speculators evaded the twenty five year rule leasing rather than purchasing the land from the native americans.
many native americans knew little about farming.
their tools were rudimentary and in the culture of the plains indians men had not ordinarily participated in farming.
in 1934 the government returned to the idea of tribal land ownership but by then 138 million acres of indian land had shrunk to 48 million acres half of which was barren.
the final blow to tribal life came not in the dawes act but in the virtual extermination of the buffalo the plains indians chief resource in late 1890 troops of the seventh cavalry killed more than 200 native american men women and the basis for their unique way of life.
the and children at a reservation located along wounded knee creek in south dakota.
a number of longstanding issues on the reservation contributed to the tension prior to the massacre.
killing began in the 1860s as the transcontinental railroads pushed west and it stepped congress began to adopt the policy in 1871 when it ended the up as settlers found they could harm the indians by harming the practice of treaty making with native american tribes.
since tribes buffalo.
kill every buffalo you can an army officer said.
every were no longer separate nations they lost many of their political buffalo dead is an indian gone then in 1871 a pennsylvania and judicial functions and the power of the chiefs was weakened.
tannery discovered that buffalo hides made valuable leather.
in 1882 congress created a court of indian offenses to try native professional hunters such as william f buffalo bill cody americans who broke government rules and soon thereafter it swarmed across the plains killing millions of the beasts.
made them answerable in regular courts for certain crimes.
between 1872 and 1874 professional hunters slaughtered while congress worked to break down the tribes educators three million buffalo a year.
in a frontier form of a factory system trained young native americans to adjust to white culture.
in 1879 riflemen skinners and transport wagons pushed through the vast fifty pawnee kiowa and cheyenne youths were brought east to the herds which shrank steadily behind them.
new carlisle indian school in carlisle pennsylvania.
other native by 1883 the buffalo were almost gone.
when the government american schools soon opened including the haskell institute in set out to produce the famous buffalo nickel the designer had to kansas and numerous day schools on the western reservations.
go to the bronx zoo in new york city to find a buffalo.
the schools taught students to fix machines and farm they forced by 1900 there were only 250 000 native americans in the young indians to trim their long hair and made them speak english country.
there were 600 000 within the limits of the present day banned the wearing of tribal paint or clothes and forbade tribal united states in 1800 and more than 5 million in 1492 when ceremonies and dances.
kill the indian and save the man said columbus first set foot in the new world.
most of the indians richard h pratt the army officer who founded the carlisle school.
lived on reservations.
many lived in poverty.
alcoholism and land ownership was the final and most important link in the unemployment were growing problems and native americans new policy.
native americans who owned land it was thought no longer able to live off the buffalo became wards of the state.
would become responsible self reliant citizens.
deciding to give they lost their cultural distinctiveness.
once possessors of each native american a farm congress in 1887 passed the dawes the entire continent they had been crowded into smaller and severalty act the most important legal development in indian smaller areas overwhelmed by the demand to become settled white relations in more than three centuries.
literate and english speaking.
except for the internment of aiming to end tribal life the dawes act divided tribal lands the west coast japanese during world war ii said historian into small plots for distribution among members of the tribe.
each roger l nichols indian removal is the only example of largefamily head received 160 acres single adults 80 acres and children scale government enforced migration in american history.
once the land was distributed any surplus was sold to for the japanese the move was temporary for the indians white settlers with the profits going to native american schools.
it was not complete the assignment blacks in blue the buffalo soldiers in the west on myhistorylab feature essay blacks in blue the buffalo soldiers in the west although they were not in fact treated as well as the white soldiers in their regiments many african american cavalrymen such as those pictured here were probably drawn into service by hard sell recruitment posters such as the one shown on the facing page.
o n saturday afternoons youngsters used to sit in darkened movie theaters and cheer the victories of the u s cavalry over the indians.
typically the indians were about to capture a wagon train when army bugles suddenly sounded.
then the blue coated cavalry charged over the hill.
few in the theaters cheered for the indians fewer still noticed the absence of black faces among the charging cavalry.
but in fact more than two thousand african american cavalrymen served on the western frontier between 1867 and 1890 known as the buffalo soldiers they made up one fifth of the u s cavalry.
black troops were first used on a large scale during the civil war.
organized in segregated units with white officers they fought with distinction.
nearly 180 000 blacks served in the union army 34 000 of them died.
when the war ended in 1865 congress for the first time authorized black troops to serve in the regular peacetime army.
in addition to infantry it created two cavalry regiments the ninth and tenth which became known as the famous buffalo soldiers.
like other black regiments the ninth and tenth cavalry had white officers who took special examinations before they could serve.
the chaplains were assigned not only to preach but to teach reading writing and arithmetic.
the food was poor racism was widespread.
the army stocked the first black units with worn out horses a serious matter to men whose lives depended on the speed and stamina of their mounts.
since our first mount in 1867 this regiment has received nothing but broken down horses and repaired equipment an officer said in 1870 many white officers refused to serve with black troops.
george armstrong custer the handsome boy general turned down a position in the ninth and joined the new seventh cavalry headed for disaster at little bighorn.
the army and navy journal carried ads that told a similar story a first lieutenant of infantry white stationed at a very desirable post in the department of the south desires a transfer with an officer of the same grade on equal terms if in a white regiment but if in a colored regiment a reasonable bonus would be expected.
there was no shortage of black troops for the officers to lead.
blacks enlisted because the army offered some advancement in a closed society.
it also paid 13 a month plus room and board.
in 1867 the ninth and tenth cavalry were posted to the west where they remained for two decades.
under colonel benjamin h grierson a civil war hero the tenth went to fort riley kansas the regiment arrived in the midst of a great indian war.
the kiowa comanche cheyenne arapaho and sioux were on the warpath.
troopers of the tenth defended farms stages trains and work crews building railroad tracks to the west.
cornered by a band of cheyenne they beat back the attack and won a new name.
they had been known as the brunettes or africans but the cheyenne now called them the buffalo soldiers a name that soon applied to all african american soldiers in the west.
from 1868 to 1874 the tenth served on the kansas frontier.
the dull winter days were filled with drills and scouting parties outside the post.
in spring and summer the good weather brought forth new forays.
indian bands raided farms and ranches and stampeded cattle herds on the way north from texas.
they struck and then melted back into the reservations.
the ninth cavalry also had a difficult job.
commanded by colonel edward hatch who had served with grierson in the civil war it was stationed in west texas and along the rio grande.
the summers were so hot that men collapsed with sunstroke the winters so cold that water froze in canteens.
native americans from outside the area frequently raided it.
from the north kiowa and comanche warriors rode down the great comanche war trail kickapoo crossed the rio grande from mexico.
gangs of mexican bandits and restless civil war veterans roamed and plundered at will.
from 1874 to 1875 the ninth fought in the great red river war in which the kiowa and comanche fed up with conditions on the reservations revolted against grants peace policy.
marching fighting then marching again the soldiers harried and wore out the indians who finally surrendered in the spring of 1875 herded into a new and desolate reservation the mescalero apache of new mexico took to the warpath in 1877 and again in 1879 each time it took a year of grueling warfare to effect their surrender.
in 1886 black cavalrymen surrounded and captured the famous apache chief geronimo.
in that and other campaigns several buffalo soldiers won the congressional medal of honor.
black troops hunted big foot and his band before the slaughter at wounded knee in 1890 see p 396 and they served in many of the wests most famous indian battles.
while one third of all army recruits deserted between 1865 and 1890 the ninth and tenth cavalry had few desertions.
in 1880 the tenth had the fewest desertions of any regiment in the country.
it was ironic that in the west black men fought red men to benefit white men.
once the indian wars ended the buffalo soldiers worked to keep illegal settlers out of indian or government land much of which was later opened to settlement.
both regiments saw action in the spanish american war the ninth at san juan hill the tenth in the fighting around santiago.
unlike white veterans of the same campaigns the old buffalo soldiers were forgotten in retirement although some of them had the satisfaction of settling on the western lands they had done so much to pacify.
questions for discussion 1 why did many african american men join the military during this era.
2 why did so few of these buffalo soldiers desert at a time when so many other u s soldiers did.
chapter 17 the west exploiting an empire disappointed with the failures of reconstruction and fearful of the violence that surrounded them many southern blacks migrated to kansas in the 1870s and 1880s.
comparing their trek to the biblical story of the israelites exodus from egypt they became known as exodusters.
when it rained water seeped through the roof.
yet a sod house cost only 2 78 to build.
outside the plains environment sorely tested the men and women who moved there.
neighbors were distant the land stretched on as far as the eye could see.
always the wind blew.
as long as i live ill never see such a lonely country a woman said of the texas plains a nebraska woman said these unbounded prairies have such an air of desolation and the stillness is very oppressive in the winters savage storms swept the open grasslands.
ice caked on the cattle until their heads were too heavy to hold up.
summertime temperatures stayed near 110 degrees for weeks at a time.
fearsome rainstorms building in the summers heat beat down the young corn and wheat.
the summers also brought grasshoppers arriving without warning flying in clouds so huge they shut out the sun.
the grasshoppers ate everything in sight crops clothing mosquito netting tree bark even plow handles.
in the summer of 1874 they devastated the whole plains from texas to the dakotas eating everything but the mortgage as one farmer said.
new farming methods farmers adopted new techniques to meet conditions on the plains.
for one thing they needed cheap and effective fencing material and in 1874 joseph f glidden a farmer from de kalb illinois provided it with the invention of barbed wire.
by 1883 his factory was turning out six hundred miles of barbed wire every day and farmers were buying it faster than it could be produced.
dry farming a new technique helped compensate for the lack of rainfall.
by plowing furrows twelve to fourteen inches deep and creating a dust mulch to fill the furrow farmers loosened the soil and slowed evaporation.
wheat farmers imported european varieties of plants that could withstand the harsh plains winters.
hard kerneled varieties such as turkey red wheat from russia required new milling methods developed during the 1870s.
by 1881 minneapolis st louis and kansas city had become milling centers for the rich new process flour.
farm technology changed long before the civil war but later developments improved it.
in 1877 james oliver of indiana patented a chilled iron plow with a smooth surfaced moldboard that did not the bonanza west clog in the thick prairie soils.
the spring tooth harrow 1869 sped soil preparation the grain drill 1874 opened furrows and scientifically fed seed into the ground.
the lister 1880 dug a deep furrow planted corn at the bottom and covered the seed all in one operation.
the first baling press was built in 1866 and the hay loader was patented in 1876 the first successful harvester the cord binder 1878 cut and tied bundles of grain enabling two men and a team of horses to harvest 20 acres of wheat a day.
invented earlier threshers grew larger employing as many as nine men and ten horses one machine could thresh 300 bushels of grain a day.
in 1890 more than nine hundred corporations manufactured farm machinery.
scientific agriculture flourished under new discoveries linking soil minerals and plant growth.
samuel johnson of yale university published how crops grow 1868 and how crops feed 1870 and one of his students pioneered work on nitrogen the base of many modern fertilizers.
the hatch act passed in 1887 supported agricultural experiment stations that spread the discoveries among farmers.
four years later the stations employed more than 450 persons and distributed more than 300 published reports annually to some 350 000 readers.
in the late 1870s huge bonanza farms rose run by the new machinery and financed with outside capital.
oliver dalrymple the most famous of the bonanza farmers headed an experiment in north dakotas red river valley in 1875 then moved on to manage the grandin bonanza of 61 000 acres five times the size of manhattan island.
dalrymple hired armies of workers bought machinery by the carload and planted on a scale that dazzled the west.
the bonanza farms thanks to their size and machinery captured the countrys imagination.
using 200 pairs of harrows 155 binders and 16 threshers dalrymple produced 600 000 bushels of wheat in 1881 he and other bonanza managers profited from the economies of scale buying materials at wholesale prices and receiving rebates from the railroads.
then a period of drought began.
rainfall dropped between 1885 and 1890 and the large scale growers found it hard to compete with smaller farmers who diversified their crops and cultivated more intensively.
many of the large bonanzas slowly disintegrated and dalrymple himself went bankrupt in 1896 discontent on the farm touring the south in the 1860s oliver h kelley a clerk in the department of agriculture was struck by the drabness of rural life.
in 1867 he founded the national grange of the patrons of husbandry known simply as the grange.
the grange provided social cultural and educational activities for its members.
its constitution banned involvement in politics but grangers often ignored the rules and supported railroad regulation and other measures.
canada gr ea t l ak e s pacific ocean atlantic ocean gulf of mexico mexico 400 miles 400 kilometers predominantly cropland beef cattle corn tobacco forest with scattered cropland and pasture dairying wheat sugar cane predominantly grazing land sheep rice cotton sparsely populated or nonproductive land hogs hay fruit agricultural land use in the 1880s more land to be put to productive use.
new farming technology and new crops enabled more and wine chapter 26 franklin d roosevelt and the new deal view the map the great depression u s unemployment 1929 1942 millions new deal recovery stock market crash world war ii begins fdr inaugurated president recession 1929 1930 1931 1932 1933 1934 1935 1936 1937 1938 1939 1940 the belief they could make a killing in the market.
people bet their savings on speculative stocks.
corporations used their large cash reserves to supply money to brokers who in turn loaned it to investors on margin in 1929 for example the standard oil company of new jersey loaned out 69 million a day in this fashion.
investors could now play the market on credit buying stock listed at 100 a share with 10 down and 90 on margin the brokers loan for the balance.
if the stock advanced to 150 the investor could sell and reap a gain of 500 percent on the 10 investment.
and in the bull market climate of the 1920s everyone was sure the market would go up.
by 1929 it seemed the whole nation was engaged in speculation.
in city after city brokers opened branch offices each complete with a stock ticker and a huge board covered with the latest wall street quotations.
people crowded into the customers rooms in the offices filling the seats and greeting the latest advances of their favorite stocks with shouts of approval.
so great was the publics interest in the stock market that newspapers carried the stock averages on their front pages.
in reality though more people were spectators than speculators fewer than three million americans owned stocks in 1929 and only about a half million were active buyers and sellers.
but the bull market became a national obsession assuring everyone that the economy was healthy and preventing any serious analysis of its underlying flaws.
when the market soared to more than 80 billion in total value by mid summer the wall street journal discounted any possibility of a decline proclaiming the outlook for the fall months seems brighter than at any time and then things changed almost overnight.
on october 24 later known as black thursday the rise in stock prices faltered and when it did investors nervously began to sell.
such leading stocks as rca and westinghouse plunged losing nearly half their value in a single day.
speculators panicked as their creditors demanded new collateral and the panic caused prices to plummet still further.
within weeks the gains of the previous two years had vanished.
the great crash of the stock market soon spilled over into the larger economy.
banks and other financial institutions suffered heavy losses in the market and were forced to curtail lending for consumer purchases.
as consumers came up short factories cut back production laying off some workers and reducing hours for others.
the layoffs and cutbacks lowered purchasing power even further so fewer people bought cars and appliances.
more factory layoffs resulted and some plants closed entirely leading to u s enters world war ii the availability of even less money for the december 1941 purchase of consumer goods.
this downward economic spiral continued for four years.
by 1932 unemployment had swelled to 25 percent of the workforce.
steel production was down to 12 percent of capacity and the vast assembly lines in detroit 1941 1942 produced only a trickle of cars each day.
the gross national product fell to 67 percent of the 1929 level.
the bright promise of mass production had ended in a nightmare.
the basic explanation for the great depression lies in the fact that u s factories produced more goods than the american people could consume.
the problem was not that the market for such products was fully saturated.
in 1929 there were still millions of americans who did not own cars or radios or refrigerators but many of them could not afford the new products.
there were other contributing causes unstable economic conditions in europe the agricultural decline since 1919 corporate mismanagement and excessive speculation but it all came down to the fact that people did not have enough money to buy the consumer products coming off the assembly lines.
installment sales helped bridge the gap but by 1929 the burden of debt was just too great.
the new economic system had failed to distribute wealth more broadly.
too much money had gone into profits dividends and industrial expansion and not enough had gone into the hands of the workers who were also consumers.
factory productivity had increased 43 percent during the decade but the wages of industrial workers had gone up only 11 percent.
if the billions that went into stock market speculation had been used instead to increase wages which would then have increased consumer purchasing power production and consumption could have been brought into balance.
yet it is too much to expect that the prophets of the new era could have foreseen this flaw and corrected it.
they were pioneering a new industrial system and only out of the bitter experience of the great depression would they discover the full dynamics of the consumer goods economy.
effect of the depression it is difficult to measure the human cost of the great depression.
the material hardships were bad enough.
men and women lived in lean tos made of scrap wood and metal and families went without the great depression meat and fresh vegetables for months existing on a diet of soup and beans.
the psychological burden was even greater americans suffered through year after year of grinding poverty with no letup in sight.
the unemployed stood in line for hours waiting for relief checks veterans sold apples or pencils on street corners their manhood once prized so highly by the nation now in question.
people left the city for the countryside but found no salvation on the farm.
crops rotted in the fields because prices were too low to make harvesting worthwhile sheriffs fended off angry crowds as banks foreclosed long overdue mortgages on once prosperous farms.
few escaped the suffering.
african americans who had left the poverty of the rural south for factory jobs in the north were view the closer look among the first to be laid off.
mexican immigrants who had flowed in to replace european immigrants met with competition from angry citizens now willing to do stoop labor in the fields and work as track layers on the railroads.
immigration officials used technicalities to halt the flow across the rio grande and even to reverse it nearly a half million mexicans were deported in the 1930s including families with children born in the united states.
the poor black brown and white survived because they knew better than most americans how to exist in poverty.
they stayed in bed in cold weather both to keep warm and to avoid unnecessary burning up of calories they patched their shoes with pieces of rubber from discarded tires heated only homeless shantytown seattle 1937 urban shantytowns often called hoovervilles named after president herbert hoover were built by homeless men and women during the great depression.
these settlements were composed of shacks and tents and often constructed on empty urban land near soup kitchens.
chapter review breaking away what were some of the social problems facing britain in the 16th and 17th centuries that helped push english colonists to cross the atlantic.
the colony and ethnic rivalries shaped the politics of new york for decades.
in 1681 charles ii granted william penn a quaker a charter to establish pennsylvania.
penns guarantee to respect all christian settlers liberty of conscience drew immigrants from across northern europe.
p 44 quakers in america between 1580 and 1650 an expanding population strained englands agrarian economy.
competition for food and land threatened to disrupt law and order and drove many people to migrate from rural areas to london or across the atlantic.
p 30 te nn es s a fe roa m tuscarora no n ke ca r ia north pe ee ch carolina la pa cherokee catawba ap r r coo sa hattahoochee.
rr georgia w r ca south carolina yamasee georgeto charles town savannah how did the barbadian background of the early settlers shape the economic development of the carolinas.
about half the early settlers of carolina came from barbados a british caribbean island where the economy depended on the production of sugar by slave labor.
in the carolina colony these migrants recreated a similar slave based plantation economy that by the 1690s was based primarily on the cultivation of rice as a cash crop.
p 48 p ohio r.
claimed by virginia the founding of georgia shenandoah r s in ta un mo tuscarora n c r ia north ee ch carolina la pa cherokee catawba ap d ee r georgia how was the founding of the carolinas different from the founding of georgia.
r r ah nn va sa mu oc r e pe te nn es s carolina grant 1663 d oa br how did ethnic diversity shape the development of the middle colonies.
virginia r diversity in the middle colonies carolina grant 1663 r ah nn.
va er sa lge mu oc religious persecution drove thousands of puritans to new england.
john winthrop hoped the settlers would reform english protestantism and create a city on a hill the puritans did not welcome dissent.
they exiled roger williams and anne hutchinson to rhode island for their religious beliefs.
stable nuclear families and good health helped puritans avoid the social turmoil that plagued the chesapeake colonies.
p 37 planting the carolinas james r ns ai nt ou d oa br how did differences in religion affect the founding of the new england colonies.
m shenandoah r d ee reforming england in america pennsylvan ohio r.
claimed by virginia e pe until tobacco began to be cultivated as a profitable cash crop around 1617 the virginia colony suffered from disease hunger misgovernment and social dissension.
maryland which had been founded as a refuge for english catholics in the late 1630s and where tobacco also became the economic mainstay endured decades of political and religious conflict before a stable government was established there in the 1660s.
p 31 coo sa why did the chesapeake colonies not prosper during the earliest years of settlement.
william penn the founder of pennsylvania was a quaker a protestant sect that emphasized simplicity and the possibility of salvation for all in religious practice and belief and humility and tolerance in daily life.
he guaranteed that settlers in pennsylvania would enjoy liberty of conscience freedom from persecution no taxation without representation and due process of law.
the chesapeake dreams of wealth how did the quaker religion influence the development of pennsylvania.
south carolina immigrants from barbados began settling in the carolinas in the 1670s.
barbadian immigrants to the carolinas many of whom were wealthy planters seeking new lands for plantations brought slavery with them when they moved.
georgia was founded in 1732 as an alternative to debtors prison for impoverished englishmen and as a military outpost to guard against the spanish in florida.
p 50 after conquering the dutch colony of new netherland in 1664 the english renamed it new york.
despite the conquest the dutch remained an influential minority in key terms and definitions joint stock company business enterprise that enabled investors to pool money for commerce and funding for colonies.
p 32 house of burgesses virginia.
p 34 the elective representative assembly in colonial headright system of land distribution in which settlers were granted a 50 acre plot of land from the colonial government for each servant or dependent they transported to the new world.
it encouraged the recruitment of a large servile labor force.
p 34 mayflower compact agreement among the pilgrims aboard the mayflower in 1620 to create a civil government at plymouth colony.
p 37 puritans members of a reformed protestant sect in europe and america that insisted on removing all vestiges of catholicism from religious practice.
p 37 great migration migration of 16 000 puritans from england to the massachusetts bay colony during the 1630s.
p 39 antinomianism religious belief rejecting traditional moral law as unnecessary for christians who possess saving grace and affirming that a person could experience divine revelation and salvation without the assistance of formally trained clergy.
p 42 quakers members of a radical religious group formally known as the society of friends that rejects formal theology and stress each persons inner light a spiritual guide to righteousness.
p 46 study resources critical thinking questions 1 would the first chesapeake colonies have survived if the settlers had 3 how did william penns leadership style compare to those of john not discovered tobacco as a profitable cash crop.
2 would the historical development of new england have been winthrop and captain john smith.
4 how were the european migrants who were attracted to georgia and different if the puritans had developed a profitable cash crop like tobacco or rice.
the carolinas different from the migrants from the chesapeake and middle colonies.
myhistorylab media assignments find these resources in the media assignments folder for chapter 3 putting down roots families in an atlantic empire the witherspoon family moved from great britain to the south carolina backcountry early in the eighteenth century.
although otherwise indistinguishable from the thousands of other ordinary families that put down roots in english america the witherspoons were made historical figures by the candid account of pioneer life produced by their son robert who was only a small child at the time of their arrival.
the witherspoons initial reaction to the new world at least that of the mother and children was utter despondence.
my mother and us children were still in expectation that we were coming to an agreeable place robert confessed but when we arrived and saw nothing but a wilderness and instead of a fine timbered house nothing but a very mean dirt house our spirits quite sunk for many years the witherspoons feared they would be killed by indians become lost in the woods or be bitten by snakes.
the witherspoons managed to survive the early difficult years on the black river.
to be sure the carolina backcountry did not look very much like the world they had left behind.
the discrepancy however apparently did not greatly discourage roberts father.
he had a vision of what the black river settlement might become.
my father robert recounted gave us all the comfort he could by telling us we would get all these trees cut down and in a short time there would be plenty of inhabitants and that we could see from house to house obert witherspoons account reminds us just how much the early history of colonial america was an intimate story of families and not as some commentators would have us believe of individuals.
neither the peopling of the atlantic frontier the cutting down of the forests nor the creation of new communities where one could see from house to house was a process that involved what we would today recognize as state policy.
men and women made significant decisions about the character of their lives within families.
it was within this primary social unit that most colonists earned their livelihoods educated their children defined gender sustained religious tradition and nursed each other in sickness.
in short the family was the source of their societal and cultural identities.
early colonial families did not exist in isolation.
they were part of larger societies.
as we have already discovered the r the mason children david joanna and abigail c 1670 an early portrait of three children from a wealthy massachusetts bay colony family.
the artist lavished attention on the details of the childrens clothing and the objects they hold marks of their social status and prosperity.
character of the first english settlements in the new world varied substantially see chapter 11 slaves and masters view the map slavery in the south british north america canada grea tl a s ke boston n y mass.
r i conn missouri territory pa new york philadelphia ill n j md.
d c cincinnati at l a n t i c ocean va ky n c tenn arkansas territory s c charleston miss.
ala ga more than 50 slave 10 to 50 slave new spain la.
less than 10 slave new orleans gulf of mexico no slaves or no statistics available 500 miles 500 kilometers slave concentration 1820 in 1820 most slaves lived in the eastern seaboard states of virginia and south carolina and in louisiana on the gulf of mexico.
the internal slave trade tobacco the original plantation crop of the colonial period continued to be the principal slave cultivated commodity of the upper tier of southern states during the pre civil war era.
but markets were often depressed and profitable tobacco cultivation was hard to sustain for very long in one place because the crop rapidly depleted the soil.
during the lengthy depression of the tobacco market that lasted from the 1820s to the 1850s tobacco farmers in virginia and maryland experimented with fertilizer use crop rotation and diversified farming all of which increased the need for capital but reduced the demand for labor.
as slave prices rose because of high demand in the lower south and demand for slaves in the upper south fell the internal slave trade took off.
increasingly the most profitable business for slaveholders in virginia kentucky maryland and the carolinas was selling surplus slaves from the upper south to regions of the lower south where staple crop production was more profitable.
this interstate slave trade sent an estimated six to seven hundred thousand slaves in a southwesterly direction between 1815 and 1860 historian michael tadman estimates that the chances of a slave child in the upper south in the 1820s being sold south by 1860 were as high as 30 percent.
such sales were wrenching not only splitting families but making it especially unlikely that the slaves sold would ever see friends or family again.
some economic historians have concluded that the most important crop produced in the tobacco kingdom was not the stinking weed but human beings cultivated for the auction block.
respectable planters did not like to think of themselves as raising slaves for market but few would refuse to sell some of their people if they needed money to get out of debt or make expensive improvements.
for the region as a whole the slave trade provided a crucial source of capital in a period of transition and innovation.
nevertheless the fact that slave labor was declining in importance in the upper south meant the peculiar institution had a weaker hold on public loyalty there than in the cotton states.
diversification of agriculture was accompanied by a more rapid rate of urban and industrial development than was occurring elsewhere in the south.
as a result virginians marylanders and kentuckians were seriously divided on whether their ultimate future lay with the deep souths plantation economy or with the industrializing free labor system that was flourishing just north of their borders.
the rise of the cotton kingdom the warmer climate and good soils of the lower tier of southern states made it possible to raise crops more naturally suited than tobacco or cereals to the plantation form of agriculture and the heavy use of slave labor.
since the colonial or revolutionary slavery and the southern economy british north america canada grea minn mich nebraska terr.
milwaukee iowa chicago des moines n y mass.
r i buffalo pa cleveland fort wayne harrisburg conn pittsburgh columbus new york philadelphia ohio n j del.
atlantic ocean springfield indianapolis washington d c md.
cincinnati va richmond ill ind.
louisville st louis norfolk ky mo.
evansville new bern n c tenn unorganized terr.
boston detroit cairo new mexico terr.
n h portland toronto kansas topeka terr.
vt wis minneapolis utah terr.
montreal t l ak e s d ze ni.
r un or g te a r s c ark.
atlanta miss.
ala more than 50 slave charleston ga 10 to 50 slave jackson la.
mobile texas port arthur less than 10 slave jacksonville no slaves or no statistics available new orleans fla main routes of the underground railroad gulf of mexico 500 miles 500 kilometers slave concentration 1860 in 1860 slavery had extended throughout the southern states with the greatest concentrations of slaves in the states of the deep south.
there were also sizable slave populations in the new states of missouri arkansas texas and florida.
periods rice and a special long staple variety of fine cotton had been grown profitably on vast estates along the coast of south carolina and georgia.
in lower louisiana between new orleans and baton rouge sugar was the cash crop.
as in the west indies sugar production required a large investment and a great deal of backbreaking labor in other words large well financed plantations and small armies of slave laborers.
cultivation of rice longstaple cotton and sugar was limited by natural conditions to peripheral semitropical areas.
it was the rise of short staple cotton as the souths major crop that strengthened the hold of slavery and the plantation on the southern economy.
short staple cotton differed from the long staple variety in two important ways its bolls contained seeds that were much more difficult to extract by hand and it could be grown almost anywhere south of virginia and kentucky the main requirement was a guarantee of two hundred frost free days.
before the 1790s the seed extraction problem had prevented short staple cotton from becoming a major market crop.
the invention of the cotton gin in 1793 resolved that difficulty however and the subsequent westward expansion opened vast areas for cotton cultivation.
unlike rice and sugar cotton could be grown on small farms as well as on plantations.
but large planters enjoyed certain advantages that made them the main producers.
only relatively large operators could afford their own gins or possessed the capital to acquire the fertile bottomlands that brought the highest yields.
they also had lower transportation costs because they were able to monopolize land along rivers and streams that were the souths natural arteries of transportation.
the first major cotton producing regions were inland areas of georgia and south carolina but the center of production shifted rapidly westward during the nineteenth century.
by the 1830s alabama and mississippi had surpassed georgia and south carolina as cotton growing states.
by the 1850s arkansas northwest louisiana and east texas were the most prosperous and rapidly growing plantation regions.
the rise in total production that accompanied this geographic expansion was phenomenal.
between 1792 and 1817 the souths output of cotton rose from about 13 000 bales to 461 000 by 1840 it was 1 35 million and in 1860 production peaked at the colossal figure of 4 8 million bales.
most of the cotton went to supply the booming textile industry of great britain.
lesser proportions went to the manufacturers of continental europe and the northeastern united states.
cotton is king proclaimed a southern orator in the 1850s and he was right.
by that time three quarters of the worlds supply of cotton came from the american south and this single commodity accounted for more than half the total dollar value of american exports.
cotton growing and the network of commercial and industrial enterprises that marketed and processed the crop constituted the most important economic interest in the united states on the eve of the civil war.
since slavery and cotton seemed inextricably linked it appeared obvious to many southerners that their peculiar institution was the keystone of national wealth and economic progress.
chapter 26 franklin d roosevelt and the new deal women also were elected to office in larger numbers in the 1930s.
hattie w caraway of arkansas succeeded her husband in the senate winning a full term in 1934 that same year voters elected six women to the house of representatives.
public service however was one of the few professions open to women.
the nations leading medical and law schools discouraged women from applying and the percentage of female faculty members in colleges and universities continued to decline in the 1930s.
in sum a decade that was grim for most americans was especially hard on american women.
end of the new deal republican majority that al smith had begun in 1928 carried urban areas by impressive margins winning 3 6 million more votes than his opponents in the nations twelve largest cities.
he held on to the traditional democratic votes in the south and west and added to them by appealing strongly to the diverse religious and ethnic groups in the northern cities catholics and jews italians and poles irish and slavs.
the strong support of labor together with three quarters of the black vote indicated that the nations new alignment followed economic as well as cultural lines.
the poor and the oppressed who in the depression years included many middle class americans became attached to the democratic party leaving the gop in a minority position limited to the well to do and to rural and smalltown americans of native stock.
how and why did the new deal end.
the new deal reached its high point in 1936 when roosevelt was overwhelmingly reelected and the democratic party strengthened its hold on congress.
this political triumph was deceptive.
in the next two years roosevelt met with a series of defeats in congress.
yet despite the setbacks he remained a popular political leader who had restored american self confidence as he strove to meet the challenges of the great depression.
the election of 1936 franklin roosevelt enjoyed his finest political hour in 1936 a man who loved the give and take of politics fdr faced challenges from both the left and the right as he sought reelection.
father coughlin and gerald l k smith who inherited huey longs following after the senators assassination in 1935 organized a union party with north dakota progressive congressman william lemke heading the ticket.
at the other extreme a group of wealthy industrialists formed the liberty league to fight what they saw as the new deals assault on property rights.
the liberty league attracted prominent democrats including al smith but in 1936 it endorsed the republican presidential candidate governor alfred m landon of kansas.
a moderate colorless figure landon disappointed his backers by refusing to campaign for repeal of the popular new deal reforms.
roosevelt ignored lemke and the union party focusing attention instead on the assault from the right.
democratic spokesmen condemned the liberty league as a millionaires union and reminded the american people of how much roosevelt had done for them in fighting unemployment and providing relief.
in his speeches fdr condemned the economic royalists who were unanimous in their hatred for me i welcome their hatred he declared and promised that in his second term these forces would meet their master this frank appeal to class sympathies proved enormously successful.
roosevelt won easily receiving five million more votes than he had in 1932 and outscoring landon in the electoral college by 523 to 8 the democrats did almost as well in congress piling up margins of 331 to 89 in the house and 76 to 16 in the senate with 4 not aligned with either major party.
equally important the election marked the stunning success of a new political coalition that would dominate american politics for the next three decades.
fdr building on the inroads into the the election of 1936 candidate roosevelt landon party democratic republican popular vote 27 751 597 16 679 583 electoral vote the supreme court fight fdr proved to be far more adept at winning electoral victories than in achieving his goals in congress.
in 1937 he attempted to use his recent success to overcome the one obstacle remaining in his path the supreme court.
during his first term the court had ruled several new deal programs unconstitutional most notably the nra and the aaa.
only three of the nine justices were sympathetic to the need for emergency measures in the midst of the depression.
two others were unpredictable sometimes approving new deal measures and sometimes opposing them.
four justices were bent on using the constitution to block roosevelts proposals.
all were elderly men and one willis van devanter had planned to retire in 1932 but remained on the court because he believed roosevelt to be unfitted and unsafe for the presidency when congress convened in 1937 the president offered a startling proposal to overcome the courts threat to the new deal.
instead of seeking a constitutional amendment either to limit the courts power or to clarify the constitutional issues fdr chose an oblique attack.
declaring the court was falling behind schedule because of the age of its members he asked congress to appoint a new justice for each member of the court over the age of 70 up to a maximum of six.
although this court packing scheme as critics quickly dubbed it was perfectly legal it outraged not only conservatives but liberals as well who realized it could set a dangerous precedent for the future.
republicans wisely kept silent letting prominent democrats such as senator burton wheeler of montana lead the fight against roosevelts plan.
despite all out pressure from the white house resistance in the senate blocked early action on the proposal.
the court defended itself well.
chief justice charles evans hughes testified tellingly to the senate judiciary committee pointing out that in fact the court was up to date and not behind schedule as roosevelt charged.
the court then surprised observers with conclusion the new deal and american life a series of rulings approving such controversial new deal measures as the wagner act and social security.
in the midst of the struggle justice van devanter resigned enabling fdr to make his first appointment to the court since taking office in 1933 believing he had proved his point the president allowed his court packing plan to die in the senate.
during the next few years four more vacancies occurred and roosevelt was able to appoint such distinguished jurists as hugo black william o douglas and felix frankfurter to the supreme court.
yet the price was high.
the court fight had badly weakened the presidents relations with congress opening deep rifts with members of his own party.
many senators and representatives who had voted reluctantly for roosevelts measures during the depths of the great depression now felt free to oppose any further new deal reforms.
the new deal in decline the legislative record during roosevelts second term was meager.
aside from the minimum wage and a maximum hour law passed in 1938 congress did not extend the new deal into any new areas.
attempts to institute national health insurance met with stubborn resistance as did efforts by civil rights advocates to pass antilynching legislation.
disturbed by the growing congressional resistance roosevelt set out in the spring of 1938 to defeat a number of conservative democratic congressmen and senators primarily in the south.
his targets gleefully charged the president with interference in local politics only one of the men he sought to defeat lost in the primaries.
the failure of this attempted purge further undermined roosevelts strained relations with congress.
the worst blow came in the economic sector.
the slow but steady improvement in the economy suddenly gave way to a sharp recession in the late summer of 1937 in the following ten months industrial production fell by one third and nearly four million workers lost their jobs.
critics of the new deal quickly labeled the downturn the roosevelt recession and business executives claimed that it reflected a lack of confidence in fdrs leadership.
the criticism was overblown but not without basis.
in an effort to reduce expanding budget deficits roosevelt had cut back sharply on wpa and other government programs after the election.
federal contributions to consumer purchasing power fell from 4 1 billion in 1936 to less than 1 billion in 1937 for several months roosevelt refused to heed calls from economists to restore heavy government spending.
finally in april 1938 roosevelt asked congress for a 3 75 billion relief appropriation and the economy began to revive.
but fdrs premature attempt to balance the budget had meant two more years of hard times and had marred his reputation as the energetic foe of the depression.
the political result of the attempted purge and the recession was a strong republican upsurge in the elections of 1938 the gop won an impressive 81 seats in the house and 8 more in the senate as well as 13 governorships.
the party many thought dead suddenly had new life.
the democrats still held a sizable majority in congress but their margin in the house was particularly deceptive.
there were 262 democratic representatives to 169 republicans but 93 southern democrats held the balance of power.
more and more often after 1938 anti new deal southerners voted with republican conservatives to block social and economic reform measures.
thus not only was the new deal over by the end of 1938 but a new bipartisan conservative coalition that would prevail for a quarter century had formed in congress.
conclusion the new deal and american life the new deal lasted a brief five years and most of its measures came in two legislative bursts in the spring of 1933 and the summer of 1935 yet its impact on american life was enduring.
nearly every aspect of economic social and political development in the decades that followed bore the imprint of roosevelts leadership.
the least impressive achievement of the new deal came in the economic realm.
whatever credit roosevelt is given for relieving human suffering in the depths of the great depression must be balanced against his failure to achieve recovery in the 1930s.
the moderate nature of his programs especially the unwieldy nra led to slow and halting industrial recovery.
although much of the improvement that was made came as a result of government spending fdr never embraced the concept of planned deficits striving instead for a balanced budget.
as a result the nation had barely reached the 1929 level of production a decade later and there were still nearly ten million men and women unemployed.
equally important roosevelt refused to make any sweeping changes in the american economic system.
aside from the tva there were no broad experiments in regional planning and no attempts to alter free enterprise beyond imposing some limited forms of government regulation.
the new deal did nothing to alter the basic distribution of wealth and power in the nation.
the outcome was the preservation of the traditional capitalist system with a thin overlay of federal control.
more significant change occurred in american society.
with the adoption of social security the government acknowledged for the first time its responsibility to provide for the welfare of those unable to care for themselves in an industrial society.
the wagner act helped stimulate the growth of labor unions to balance corporate power and the minimum wage law provided a much needed floor for many workers.
yet the new deal tended to help only the more vocal and organized groups such as union members and commercial farmers.
those without effective voices or political clout african americans mexican americans women sharecroppers restaurant and laundry workers received little help from the new deal.
for all the appealing rhetoric about the forgotten man roosevelt did little more than hoover in responding to the long term needs of the dispossessed.
the most lasting impact of the roosevelt leadership came in politics.
taking advantage of the emerging power of ethnic voters and capitalizing on the frustration growing out of the depression fdr proved to be a genius at forging a new coalition.
overcoming the friction between rural and urban democrats that had prolonged republican supremacy in the 1920s he attracted new groups to the democratic party principally african americans complete the assignment eleanor roosevelt and the quest for social justice on myhistorylab feature essay eleanor roosevelt and the quest for social justice during the great depression eleanor roosevelt traveled thousands of miles each year to learn about conditions throughout the country.
she is shown here in des moines iowa in 1936 inspecting a wpa project to convert a city dump into a waterfront park.
i n august 1933 eleanor roosevelt journeyed to scotts run a poor mining community in west virginia to observe life in one of the nations poorest and most desolate areas.
the first lady toured the dilapidated homes and listened to the problems of the unemployed miners some of whom had not worked in eight years.
she also met with their wives and children and visited with local african americans.
it was an experience few would forget some of the negroes wrote a local newspaper editor to eleanors husband president franklin delano roosevelt think she is god millions of americans held her in similar esteem.
at the height of the great depression ers willingness to listen to and act on behalf of those whose voices often went unheard made her one of the nations leading symbols of hope and compassion.
eleanor roosevelt entered public life as a reformer long before she became first lady.
growing up shy and insecure in a prominent new york family she was the niece of theodore roosevelt she sought personal fulfillment through voluntary social work.
like many reformers of her day she found her sense of social justice upset by the existence of poverty and inequality.
avoiding politics which she then considered a sinister affair she limited her activities to nonpartisan reform and relief organizations such as settlement houses and the consumers league.
she curtailed her social work after her 1905 marriage to franklin roosevelt placing her responsibilities as wife and mother first as she believed a woman should.
fdr as a new york state senator and later as assistant secretary of the navy carried the political torch for the family.
however her role changed in 1921 when franklin was stricken with polio.
eleanor was determined to return him as soon as possible to political life which she believed was the best antidote to his pain and depression.
while working tirelessly to speed his recovery she also struck out on her own to keep the roosevelt name alive in new york politics making speeches writing magazine articles and chairing the womens platform committee at the democratic national convention in 1924 in the newly formed league of women voters and other activist organizations she brought her reformers impulse to politics by advocating measures such as a maximum hours law for working women.
through these efforts she also formed the nucleus of a womans network that she would employ extensively during the new deal years.
focusing on those whose needs were greatest eleanor became the administrations champion for the dispossessed.
while her husband appealed to the forgotten man she concerned herself with the forgotten woman she worked with harry hopkins to achieve equity for women on relief and to create more jobs for women under the auspices of the cwa and the wpa.
with frances perkins she helped establish camps for unemployed girls patterned after the ccc and worked with the womens trade union league to guarantee women equal pay for equal work on federal projects.
she saw to it that whenever possible women administrators were hired to supervise projects for women and in her syndicated newspaper column my day she often dealt with the problems faced by women during the great depression.
her 1933 book its up to the women urged american women to join her in a crusade for decency and fairness.
for more than a century wrote one reviewer the great white father in the white house has been instructing his people in right conduct.
but now the great white mother emerges as a personality in her own right and starts an independent course of instruction on her own account eleanor worked hard for african americans whose position at the bottom of american society deeply offended her sense of fairness and decency in the late 1930s threequarters of adult blacks in america had not finished high school and almost 90 percent lived below the federal poverty standard.
the first lady spoke out eloquently in favor of equal opportunity for blacks and sought their inclusion in new deal programs.
she worked with hopkins to employ more african americans in federal projects and lobbied within the administration for the appointment of black men and women to administer programs designed specifically for them.
publicly she endeavored to set an example by addressing black audiences throughout the country presiding over a more egalitarian white house and resigning her membership in the daughters of the american revolution over the marian anderson incident see p 629.
her struggle against racial discrimination sometimes put mrs roosevelt in conflict with her husbands efforts to keep the democratic party intact.
conservative southern democrats castigated her as a radical her more extreme critics called her a communist.
rumors of eleanor clubs said to be secret associations of black maids pledged to boycott white households circulated in every southern state.
the fbi investigated the rumors and found no factual basis for them.
hate mail emphasized the criticism.
the attacks didnt deter eleanor but they caused franklin roosevelt to temporize on bills to ban lynching and abolish the poll tax his wifes support of these measures however put the roosevelt name behind them without the same damaging political consequences.
in her efforts to advance the cause of civil rights eleanor arranged for white house meetings between fdr and african american leaders supported interracial projects and spoke out forcefully against racial discrimination.
to er such change did not help just one element of society but brought benefits to the entire country.
to deny any part of a population the opportunities for more enjoyment in life for higher aspirations she declared is a menace to the nation as a whole like other first ladies eleanor roosevelt had to strike a balance between capitalizing on her unique access to the president and intruding illegitimately into the affairs of the nations elected officials.
her position was complicated as well by her own ambivalence on certain issues.
although she advocated greater rights for women for example she did not believe in full equality between men and women.
she thought that women required protective legislation on account of their special roles as wives and mothers.
while mrs roosevelt was instrumental in the few gains made by women and african americans in the 1930s her advocacy could not overcome the sexual and racial stereotypes that continued to limit their role in the workplace and society.
thus despite her efforts the plight of these groups during the depression was only slightly relieved.
however this is not to minimize her achievements.
as the self appointed conscience of the roosevelt administration she exposed the areas where the new deal had not been realized.
her courage and vitality in the pursuit of human rights and equality made her the embodiment of reform and social justice in the new deal.
eleanor roosevelts goal was a simple one concluded one biographer a life of dignity and decency for all questions for discussion 1 why did eleanor roosevelts work with minorities upset some people.
2 what did eleanor roosevelts advocacy for more rights for women blacks and other minorities actually accomplish.
chapter 26 franklin d roosevelt and the new deal major new deal legislation and agencies year created act or agency agricultural adjustment administration aaa banking act of 1933 glasssteagall act civilian conservation corps ccc civil works administration cwa federal deposit insurance corporation fdic federal emergency relief administration fera national recovery administration nra public works administration pwa tennessee valley authority tva federal communications commission fcc federal housing administration fha securities and exchange commission sec national labor relations board nlrb established by wagner act social security act provisions attempted to regulate agricultural production through farm subsidies reworked after the supreme court ruled its key regulatory provisions unconstitutional in 1936 coordinated agricultural production during world war ii after which it was disbanded.
prohibited commercial banks from selling stock or financing corporations created fdic.
young men between the ages of 18 and 25 volunteered to be placed in camps to work on regional environmental projects mainly west of the mississippi they received 30 a month of which 25 was sent home disbanded during world war ii.
emergency work relief program put more than four million people to work during the extremely cold winter of 1933 1934 after which it was disbanded.
a federal guarantee of savings bank deposits initially of up to 2 500 raised to 5 000 in 1934 and frequently thereafter continues today with a limit of 100 000.
combined cash relief to needy families with work relief superseded in early 1935 by the extensive work relief projects of the wpa and unemployment insurance established by social security.
attempted to combat the great depression through national economic planning by establishing and administering a system of industrial codes to control production prices labor relations and trade practices among leading business interests ruled unconstitutional by the supreme court in 1935 financed more than 34 000 federal and nonfederal construction projects at a cost of more than 6 billion initiated the first federal public housing program made the federal government the nations leading producer of power and advanced conservation of the nations natural resources discontinued in 1939 due to its effectiveness at reducing unemployment and promoting private investment.
an attempt at regional planning.
included provisions for environment and recreational design architectural educational and health projects and controversial public power projects continues today to meet the tennessee valleys energy and flood control needs.
regulatory agency with wide discretionary powers established to oversee wired and wireless communication reflected growing importance of radio in everyday lives of americans during the great depression continues to regulate television as well as radio.
expanded private home ownership among moderate income families through federal guarantees of private mortgages the reduction of down payments from 30 to 10 percent and the extension of repayment from 20 to 30 years continues to function today.
continues today to regulate trading practices in stocks and bonds according to federal laws.
greatly enhanced power of american labor by overseeing collective bargaining continues to arbitrate labor management disputes today.
guaranteed retirement payments for enrolled workers beginning at age 65 set up federal state system of unemployment insurance and care for dependent mothers and children the handicapped and public health continues today.
study resources year created act or agency national youth administration nya works progress administration wpa farm security administration fsa rural electrification administration rea fair labor standards act provisions established by the wpa to reduce competition for jobs by supporting education and training of youth paid grants to more than 2 million high school and college students in return for work performed in their schools also trained another 2 6 million out of school youths as skilled labor to prepare them for later employment in the private sector disbanded during world war ii.
massive work relief program funded projects ranging from construction to acting disbanded by fdr during world war ii.
granted loans to small farmers and tenants for rehabilitation and purchase of small sized farms congress slashed its appropriations during world war ii when many poor farmers entered the armed forces or migrated to urban areas.
transformed american rural life by making electricity available at low rates to american farm families in areas that private power companies refused to service closed the cultural gap between rural and urban everyday life by making modern amenities such as radio available in rural areas.
established a minimum wage of 40 cents an hour and a maximum workweek of 40 hours for businesses engaged in interstate commerce.
and organized labor.
his political success led to a major realignment that lasted long after he left the scene.
his political achievement also reveals the true nature of roosevelts success.
he was a brilliant politician who recognized the essence of leadership in a democracy appealing directly to the people and giving them a sense of purpose.
he succeeded in infusing them with the same indomitable courage and jaunty optimism that had marked his own battle with polio.
thus despite his limitations as a reformer roosevelt proved to be the leader the american people needed in the 1930s a president who provided the psychological lift that helped them endure and survive the great depression.
study y resources take the study plan for chapter 4 chapter 27 america and the world 1921 1945 view the map world war ii in the pacific alaska u s bering sea soviet union sakhalin.
u s aleutian is attu is.
kiska i mongolia manchukuo manchuria a.
l is japan china korea tibet chungking jan br.
1944 india formosa thailand ap r manila iwo jima feb 19 mar.
16 1945 leyte gulf oct 23 26 1944 wake is.
u s guam u s v 1 no pearl harbor eniwetok marshall is.
at m su tarawa equator borneo ra ap r celebes du tch east i ndi es gilbert is.
rabaul new guinea 1000 miles 1000 kilometers g 1 au guadalcanal aug 7 1942 feb 9 1943 coral sea may 7 8 1942 australia japanese empire extent of japanese control aug 1942 allies solomon is.
java indian ocean dec 7 1941 japanese mandate caroline islands malaya hawaiian is.
u s mariana is.
south china sea equator midway is.
u s philippine is.
u s french indochina singapore br.
midway june 3 6 1942 okinawa apr.
1 june 22 1945 hong kong br.
burma ocean hiroshima aug 6 1945 nagasaki aug 9 1945 nanking pa c i f i c tokyo ellice is.
new hebrides fr br.
new caledonia fr.
neutral nations allied troop movements major battles atomic bomb explosions world war ii in the pacific the tide of battle turned in the pacific the same year as in europe.
the balance of sea power shifted back to the united states from japan after the naval victories of 1942 most important this rising income ensured postwar prosperity.
workers and farmers saved their money channeling much of it into government war bonds waiting for the day when they could buy the cars and home appliances they had done without during the long years of depression and war.
a nation on the move the war led to a vast migration of the american population.
young men left their homes for training camps and then for service overseas.
defense workers and their families some nine million people in all moved to work in the new booming shipyards munitions factories and aircraft plants.
norfolk virginia san diego california mobile alabama and other centers of defense production grew by more than 50 percent in just a year or two.
rural areas lost population while coastal regions especially along the pacific and the gulf of mexico drew millions of people.
the location of army camps in the south and west created boom conditions in the future sunbelt as did the concentration of aircraft factories and shipyards in this region.
california had the greatest gains adding nearly two million to its population in less than five years.
this movement of people caused severe social problems.
housing was in short supply.
migrating workers crowded into house trailers and boardinghouses bringing unexpected windfalls to landlords.
in one boomtown a reporter described an old victorian house that had five bedrooms on the second floor.
the home front three of them he wrote held two cots apiece the two others held three cots but the owner revealed that the third floor is where we pick up the velvet.
we rent to workers in different shifts.
three shifts a day.
seven bucks a week apiece family life suffered under these crowded living conditions.
an increase in the number of marriages as young people searched for something to hang on to in the midst of wartime turmoil was offset by a rising divorce rate.
the baby boom that would peak in the 1950s began during the war and brought its own set of problems.
only a few publicly funded day care centers were available and working mothers worried about their latchkey children schools in the boom areas were unable to cope with the influx of new students a teacher shortage intensified by the lure of higher wages in war industries compounded the education crisis.
despite these problems women found the war a time of economic opportunity.
the demand for workers led to a dramatic rise in womens employment from fourteen million working women in 1940 to nineteen million by 1945 most of the new women workers were married and many were middle aged thus broadening the composition of the female workforce which in the past had been composed primarily of young single women.
women entered industries once viewed as exclusively male by the end of the war they worked alongside men tending blast furnaces in steel mills and welding hulls in shipyards.
few challenged the traditional view of gender roles yet the wartime experience helped temporarily undermine the concept that womans only proper place was in the home.
women enjoyed the hefty weekly paychecks which rose by 50 percent from 1941 to 1943 and they took pride in their contributions to the war effort.
to hell with the life i have had commented a former fashion designer.
this war is too damn serious and it is too damn important to win it african americans shared in the wartime migration but racial prejudice limited their social and economic gains.
nearly one million served in the armed forces but relatively few saw combat.
the army placed black soldiers in segregated units usually led by white officers and used them for service and construction tasks.
the navy was even worse relegating them to menial jobs until late in the war.
african americans were denied the chance to become petty officers secretary of the navy frank knox explained because experience had shown that men of the colored race.
cannot maintain discipline among men of the white race african american civilians fared a little better.
in 1941 black labor leader a philip randolph threatened a massive march on washington to force president roosevelt to end racial discrimination in defense industries and government employment and to integrate the armed forces.
fdr compromised persuading randolph to call off the march and drop his integration demand in return for an executive order creating a fair employment practices committee fepc to ban racial discrimination in war industries.
as a result african american employment by the federal government rose from sixty thousand in 1941 to two hundred thousand by the end of the war.
the fepc proved less successful in the private sector.
weak in funding and staff the fepc was able to act on only one third of the eight thousand complaints it received.
the nationwide shortage of labor was more influential than the fepc in accounting for the rise in black employment during wartime.
african americans moved from the rural south watch the video rosie the riveter u s government publicity campaigns encouraged women to assume work in male dominated trades during world war ii to replace men who were now in the military.
perhaps the best known symbol of this industrial female worker was rosie the riveter a strong efficient and patriotic woman who also retained admirable feminine qualities.
to northern and western cities finding jobs in the automobile aircraft and shipbuilding industries.
the movement of an estimated seven hundred thousand people helped transform black white relations from a regional issue into a national concern that could no longer be ignored.
the limited housing and recreational facilities for both black and white war workers created tensions that led to urban race riots.
on a hot sunday evening in june 1943 blacks and whites began exchanging insults and then blows near belle isle recreation park in detroit.
the next day a full scale riot broke out in which twenty three blacks and nine whites died.
the fighting raged for twenty four hours until national guard troops were brought in to restore order.
later that summer only personal intervention by new york mayor fiorello laguardia quelled a harlem riot that took the lives of six blacks.
these outbursts of racial violence fueled the resentments that would grow into the postwar civil rights movement.
for most african americans despite economic gains world war ii was a reminder of the inequality of american life.
just carve on my tombstone chapter on husband and wife with the observation that even the disabilities which the wife lies under are for the most part intended for her protection and benefit.
so great a favourite is the female sex of the laws of england in practice some women especially wealthy women were able to get around some of the laws of coverture by taking advantage of loopholes in the law.
first of all women could go to courts of equity or chancery in which a chancellor rather than a jury could decide the fair or just outcome based on the facts of the individual case rather than applying rules of law.
these two court systems of law and equity are merged into one in most states today.
an equity court had the power not only to assign money damages but to require a contract to be carried out.
for example a couple might specify in a prenuptial contract made before the marriage was entered into that the wife could keep her own property from before the womens rights activist ernestine rose began petitioning for married womens property rights in new york in 1836 marriage in a separate estate it was also possible for a husband to assign some of his property to his wife after the marriage in a marriage settlement and often they arranged for the wifes separate estate to be held in trust and managed by a third party trustee usually a man.
it was the legal arrangement of coverture into which harriet douglas a rich new york heiress resisted entering.
harriet douglas had very definite ideas about what she wanted in a husband.
if she married she intended to keep control over all of her property in obedience to and conformity with the opinions and precepts of her parents and she wanted her husband to renounce his own name his home and his profession to devote himself to her and her family property.
as historian hendrik hartog observed according to the norms of early america harriet douglas effectively wanted her husband to become her wife henry cruger a young lawyer who came to new york from south carolina and who courted harriet douglas at first chafed at the restrictions she proposed for a marriage arrangement.
henry argued that the husband ought always to possess an absolute control over the wifes property but a few years later henry rethought his position writing to harriet in 1829 that he would accept her terms however derogatory to proper pride.
and self respect after extensive negotiations they finally married in 1833 henry took d for his middle initial without changing his last name and harriet was to be known as mrs.
douglas cruger harriet agreed to sign a property settlement agreement after rather than before the marriage ceremony because henry claimed that a premarital contract would become part of an embarrassing public record.
harriets and henrys marriage fell almost immediately on hard times largely over money matters.
henry repeatedly threatened to return to legal practice if harriet did not give him more freedom to control their property urging her take away this poignard of ice from between us.
i desire no interests separate from yours for i love you and we are married on several occasions harriet drew up new agency agreements giving henry more control of her estate as her agent her friends all urged her to relieve henry from a state of dependence that could only be galling to a man of honor after years of henrys haranguing and lobbying in 1841 harriet signed an order guaranteeing him one half of her income for life.
that same year their marriage fell apart completely.
it took eight more years in new york courts to work out henrys and harriets rights to her property.
henry argued that their marriage settlement was invalid because it came after rather than before the marriage.
harriet claimed the original settlement should be enforced but the 1841 gift was invalid because henry and his friends had coerced her into signing it.
in 1848 the case ended up in the new york supreme court where judge selah strong decreed that the original marriage settlement was valid giving harriet control over her own property but that the 1841 order was enforceable as well giving control over half of it to henry.
years later strong wrote she was mad and he was bad and the legal muddle they brought about between them was very deep and formidable at the end of their legal muddle henry emerged victorious with control over half of harriets separate estate.
despite her strenuous efforts to be an independent married woman she had failed.
in disgust she had her marriage bed cut in two transforming it into two slightly peculiar sofas the new york supreme court made its final decision in cruger v cruger just one year after the new york legislature passed its first married womens property act allowing women for the first time to maintain ownership and control over property they had inherited before they married.
over the course of the middle decades of the nineteenth century an increasingly vocal minority of women chafed against the laws of husband and wife that restricted the independence of women like harriet cruger.
they demanded the reform of the laws of coverture first through married womens property acts and then through earnings laws.
nowhere were they more vocal and successful than in new york.
at first womens rights reformers concentrated on changing peoples hearts and minds as had temperance reformers abolitionists and others who were part of the great wave of reform in the united states in the early nineteenth century.
in their private writings womens rights reformers were often more frank than in public discussion about how marriage kept women subjugated to their husbands.
they often compared the married woman to a slave with no right to own property sign a contract sue another or even keep her own name.
after 1840 as in so many of the reform movements sparked by the religious fervor of the second great awakening womens rights reformers began to turn to legal solutions.
the first group of advocates for womens rights took particular aim at the laws of marriage and divorce.
they also organized womens rights activity on a large scale for the first time.
on july 19 20 1848 the first womens rights convention in the world took place at seneca falls new york.
elizabeth cady stanton a womens rights activist and an organizer of the convention delivered the declaration of sentiments modeled on the declaration of independence we hold these truths to be selfevident that all men and women are created equal.
stanton declared further that the history of mankind is a history of repeated injuries and usurpations on the part of man toward woman having in direct object the establishment of an absolute tyranny over her the declaration listed a series of wrongs followed by twelve resolutions.
while winning the right to vote was part of the womens aim their chief focus was reforming the laws of marriage.
eleven resolutions passed unanimously the twelfth calling for the extension of the vote to women passed narrowly only after abolitionist and former slave frederick douglass made a rousing speech in its favor.
the declaration of sentiments quickly became famous around the world sparking womens rights reform movements in england and across europe.
new yorks first married womens property act passed in 1848 the same year as the seneca falls convention was the product of a number of factors.
the persistent petition campaigns of feminist reformers had some influence on the legislators but several other forces were at work as well.
there was a strong movement in new york to codify the common law into written codes accessible to everyone thereby minimizing the power of judges and lawyers to shape decisions as they pleased.
the leaders of that movement especially took aim at equity courts which they saw as undemocratic institutions whose individually tailored settlements benefited only the propertied elite.
for these politicians reform of the laws governing married womens property was a way to democratize property law making available to everyone the separate estates that wealthy families had been able to arrange through equity courts.
finally wealthy dutch landowners in the hudson valley saw the acts as a way to protect family property.
thus the married womens property acts in new york and elsewhere were a good example of the way that legal reform comes about as a result of reformers efforts coming together with other circumstances and constituencies.
the 1848 act pronounced that the real and personal property of any female who may hereafter marry and which she shall own at the time of the marriage and the rents issues and profits thereof shall not be subject to the disposal of her husband nor be liable for his debts and shall continue her sole and separate property as if she were a single female it also provided that gifts to married women could remain their separate property and that marriage settlements and prenuptial agreements would be enforced.
the second act in 1849 made it possible for women to sell or transfer their separate property under certain conditions and for the trustees of their separate estates to deed property to them if a judge found them capable of managing it.
despite the married womens property acts women who did not have substantial property to inherit from their families still suffered severe legal constraints most importantly because they still did not control their earnings.
new yorker ernestine rose an early activist for womens rights observed here is some provision for the favored few but for the laboring many there is none.
the mass of people commence life with no other capital than the union of heads hearts and hands.
to the benefit of this best of capital the wife has no right.
if they are unsuccessful in married life who suffers more the bitter consequences of poverty than the wife.
but if successful she can not call a dollar her own in the summer of 1854 elizabeth cady stanton rose to address the joint judiciary committee of the new york state legislature the first time a woman had ever spoken before that body.
she began the thinking minds of all nations call for change.
there is a deep lying struggle in the whole fabric of society a boundless grinding collision of the new with the old stanton asked the legislators to consider the legal disabilities under which women labor on behalf of women stanton demanded the right to vote the right to sit on juries and the reform of the law of coverture.
look at the position of woman as wife she demanded.
the wife who inherits no property holds about the same legal position that does the slave on the southern plantation.
she can own nothing sell nothing.
she has no right even to the wages she earns her person her time her services are the property of another.
but the wife who is so fortunate as to have inherited property has by the new law in this state been redeemed from her lost condition stanton told the legislators that she spoke on behalf of the daughters of the revolutionary heroes of 76 and exhorted them to be true to the goals of the revolution mocking their claims to republicanism how like feudal barons you freemen hold your women at the same time that stanton spoke before the legislature she presented more than six thousand petitions from women across the state.
six years later in 1860 new york passed the first earnings act in the nation providing that a married woman could carry on any trade or business and perform any labor or services on her sole and separate account and the earnings of any married woman from her trade business labor or services shall be her sole and separate property and may be used or invested by her in her own name by the 1870s most states had passed some version of married womens property acts and many northern states passed earning acts as well.
by and large courts interpreted earnings acts narrowly.
for example in one 1876 case the new york supreme court ruled that a wife who kept a boardinghouse and nursed a very ill man for several years could not control her earnings because work done in the home was considered to be on the family account rather than her sole and separate account and was therefore the property of the husband.
repeatedly courts held that womens labor in the household belonged to the husband so that only wages earned outside the home although a minor part of most womens earnings were covered by the act.
in the iowa case of miller v miller a husband and wife attempted to create their own marriage contract in which both spouses promised to refrain from scolding faultfinding and anger mr miller promised to provide for family necessaries as well as a sum of 16 66 per month for mrs millers individual use and she promised to keep her home and family in a comfortable and reasonably good condition when mrs miller sued her husband to enforce this contract she was turned away by the court because she had promised to do only what she was already obligated to do but he had promised far more than marriage required from a husband which was only to provide necessaries new yorks 1860 earnings act was a limited victory for reformers they won a change in the law but courts limited its reach through narrow interpretation.
had courts interpreted the act more broadly to cover all forms of womens earnings it would have gone a long way to making women independent legally and economically.
although the 1860 earnings act gained some legal rights for women it failed to resolve completely the inequities that women faced.
in the later nineteenth century womens rights advocates became convinced that political power was the way to secure civil rights and they began to focus more specifically on winning the right to vote.
achieving that goal would take another sixty years.
questions for discussion 1 what was the system of coverture.
how could couples avoid some of the legal disabilities of coverture.
could they avoid all of them.
2 what were the chief concerns of womens rights advocates in the mid nineteenth century.
how did their aims and tactics resemble those of other reform movements during this period.
3 how did the married womens property acts and earnings acts improve the legal status of married women and in what ways did they fall short of reformers aims.
why do you think these acts were passed.
chapter 19 toward an urban society 1877 1900 in the old days said a woman in 1907 a married woman was supposed to be a frump and a bore and a physical wreck.
now you are supposed to keep up intellectually to look young and well and be fresh and bright and entertaining magazines such as the ladies home journal which started in 1889 glorified motherhood and the home but its articles and ads featured women as homebound child oriented consumers.
while societys leaders spoke fondly of the value of homemaking the status of housewives declined under the factory system which emphasized money rewards and devalued household labor.
underlying all these changes was one of the modern worlds most important trends a major decline in fertility rates that lasted from 1800 to 1939 though blacks immigrants and rural dwellers continued to have more children than white native born city dwellers the trend affected all classes and races among white women the birthrate fell from seven in 1800 to just over four in 1880 to about three in 1900 people everywhere tended to marry later and have fewer children.
since contraceptive devices were not yet widely used the decline reflected abstinence and a conscious decision to postpone or limit families.
some women decided to devote greater attention to a smaller number of children others to pursue their own careers.
there was a marked increase in the number of young unmarried women working for wages or attending school an increase in the number of women delaying marriage or not marrying at all and a gradual decline in rates of illegitimacy and premarital pregnancy.
in large part the decline in fertility stemmed from peoples responses to the social and economic forces around them the rise of cities and industry.
in a host of individual decisions they decided to have fewer children and the result reshaped some of the fundamental attitudes and institutions of american society.
changing views a growing assertiveness among women in and out of the family there was growing recognition of selfsufficient working women employed in factory telephone exchange or business office who were entering the workforce in increasing numbers.
in 1880 2 6 million women were gainfully employed in 1890 4 million.
in 1882 the census bureau took the first census of working women most were single and worked out of necessity rather than choice.
many regarded this new woman as a corruption of the ideal vision of the american woman in which man worshiped a diviner self than his own innocent helpless and good.
women were to be better than the world around them.
they were brought up said ida tarbell a leading political reformer as if wrongdoing were impossible to them views changed albeit slowly.
one important change occurred in the legal codes pertaining to women particularly in the common law doctrine of femme couverte.
under that doctrine wives were chattel of their husbands they could not legally control their own earnings property or children unless they had drawn up a specific contract before marriage.
by 1890 many states had substantially revised the doctrine to allow wives control of their earnings and inherited property.
see the legal rights of married women reforming the law of coverture pp.
in cases of divorce the new laws also recognized womens rights to custody or joint custody of their children.
although divorce was still far from being socially acceptable divorce rates more than doubled during the last third of the century.
by 1905 one in twelve marriages was ending in divorce.
in the 1870s and 1880s a growing number of women were asserting their own humanness.
they fought for the vote lobbied for equal pay and sought self fulfillment.
the new interest in psychology and medicine strengthened their causes.
charlotte perkins gilman author of women and economics 1898 joined other women in questioning the ideal of womanly innocence which she argued actually meant ignorance.
in medical and popular literature menstruation sexual intercourse and childbirth were becoming viewed as natural functions instead of taboo topics.
edward bliss footes plain home talk of love marriage and parentage a best seller that went through many editions between the 1880s and 1900 challenged victorian notions that sexual intercourse was unhealthy and intended solely to produce children.
in plain facts for old and young 1881 dr john h kellogg urged parents to recognize the early awakening of sexual feelings in their children.
still such matters were avoided in many american homes.
rheta childe dorr a journalist remembered that when a girl reached the age of fourteen new rules were introduced and when you asked for an explanation you met only embarrassed silence women espoused causes with new fervor.
susan b anthony a veteran of many reform campaigns tried to vote in the 1872 presidential election and was fined 100 which she refused to pay.
in 1890 she helped form the national american woman suffrage association to work for the enfranchisement of women.
on new yorks lower east side the ladies anti beef trust association which formed to protest increases in the price of meat established a boycott of butcher shops.
when their demands were ignored the women invaded the shops poured kerosene on the meat and set fire to it.
we dont riot rebecca ablowitz told the judge.
but if all we did was to weep at home nobody would notice it so we have to do something to help ourselves educating the masses continuing a trend that stretched back a hundred years childhood was becoming an even more distinct time of life.
there was still only a vague concept of adolescence the special nature of the teenage years but the role of children was changing.
less and less were children perceived as little adults valued for the additional financial gain they might bring into the family.
now children were to grow and learn and be nurtured rather than rushed into adulthood.
as a result schooling became more important and american children came closer than ever before to universal education.
by 1900 thirty one states and territories out of fifty one had enacted laws making school attendance compulsory though most required attendance only until the age of fourteen.
in 1870 there were only 160 public high schools in 1900 there were 6 000 in the same years public school budgets rose from 63 million to 253 million illiteracy declined from 20 percent to just over 10 percent of the population.
still even as late as 1900 the average adult had only five years of schooling.
educators saw the school as the primary means to train people for life and work in an industrializing society.
hence social and cultural change 1877 1900 teachers focused on basic skills reading and mathematics and on values obedience and attentiveness to the clock.
most schools had a highly structured curriculum built around discipline and routine.
in 1892 joseph rice a pediatrician toured twelve hundred classrooms in thirty six cities.
in a typical classroom he reported the atmosphere was damp and chilly the teacher strict.
the unkindly spirit of the teacher is strikingly apparent the pupils being completely subjugated to her will are silent and motionless one teacher asked her pupils how can you learn anything with your knees and toes out of order many children dropped out of school early and not just to earn money.
helen todd a factory inspector in chicago found a group of young girls working in a hot stuffy attic.
when she asked why they were not in school tillie isakowsky who was 14 said school.
school is de fiercest ting youse kin come up against.
factories aint no cinch but schools is worst a few blocks away todd stumbled on a 13 year old boy hiding in a basement.
he cried when she said he would have to go to school blurting that they hits ye if yer dont learn and they hits ye if ye whisper and they hits ye if ye have string in yer pocket and they hits ye if yer seat squeaks and they hits ye if ye dont stan up in time and they hits ye if yer late and they hits ye if ye ferget the page curious todd asked 500 children whether they would go to school or work in a factory if their families did not need the money 412 preferred the factory.
school began early boys attended all day but girls often stayed home after lunch since it was thought they needed less in the way of learning.
on the teachers command students stood and recited from websters spellers and mcguffeys eclectic readers the periods most popular textbooks.
the work of william holmes mcguffey a professor of languages at miami university in ohio mcguffeys eclectic readers had been in use since 1836 100 million copies were sold in the last half of the nineteenth century.
nearly every child read them they taught not only reading but also ethics values and religion.
in the readers boys grew up to be heroes girls to be mothers and hard work always meant success shall birds and bees and ants be wise while i my moments waste.
o let me with the morning rise and to my duty haste.
the south lagged far behind in education.
the average family size there was about twice as large as in the north and a greater proportion of the population lived in isolated rural areas.
state and local authorities mandated fewer weeks in the average school year and many southern states refused to adopt compulsory education laws.
even more important was the effect of southern jim crow laws passed in the 1890s and after to keep african americans from voting serving on juries and participating in other aspects of southern life.
southerners used these laws to maintain separate school systems to segregate the races.
supported by the u s supreme court decision of 1896 in plessy v ferguson see plessy v ferguson the shaping of jim crow pp.
460 463 segregated schooling added a devastating financial burden to education in the south.
north carolina and alabama mandated segregated schools in 1876 south carolina and louisiana in 1877 mississippi in 1878 and virginia in 1882 a series of supreme court decisions in the 1880s and 1890s upheld the concept of segregation.
in the civil rights cases 1883 the court ruled that the fourteenth amendment barred state governments from discriminating on account of race but did not prevent private individuals or organizations from doing so.
plessy v ferguson 1896 established the doctrine of separate but equal and upheld a louisiana law requiring different railroad cars for whites and blacks.
the court applied the doctrine directly to schools in cumming v county board of education 1899 which approved the creation of separate schools for whites even if there were no comparable schools for blacks.
southern school laws often implied that the schools would be separate but equal and they were often separate but rarely equal.
black schools were usually dilapidated and black teachers were paid considerably less than white teachers.
in 1890 only 35 percent of black children attended school in the south 55 percent of white children did.
that year nearly two thirds of the countrys black population was illiterate.
educational techniques changed after the 1870s.
educators paid more attention to early elementary education a trend that placed young children in school and helped the growing number of mothers who worked outside the home.
the kindergarten movement started in st louis in 1873 spread across the country.
in kindergartens four to six year old children learned by playing not by keeping their knees and toes in order.
for older children social reformers advocated practical courses in manual training and homemaking.
we are impatient with the schools which lay all stress on reading and writing jane addams said for they fail to give the child any clew to the life about him for the first time education became a field of university study.
european theorists such as johann friedrich herbart a german educator argued that learning occurred best in an atmosphere of freedom and confidence between teachers and pupils.
teacher training became increasingly professional.
only ten normal schools or teacher training institutions existed in the united states before the civil war.
by 1900 there were 345 and one in every five elementary teachers had graduated from a professional school.
higher education nearly one hundred fifty new colleges and universities opened in the twenty years between 1880 and 1900 the morrill land grant act of 1862 gave large grants of land to the states for the establishment of colleges to teach agriculture and the mechanic arts the act fostered sixty nine land grant institutions including the great state universities of wisconsin california minnesota and illinois.
private philanthropy born of the large fortunes of the industrial age also spurred growth in higher education.
leland stanford gave 24 million to endow stanford university on his california ranch and john d rockefeller founder of the standard oil company gave 34 million to found the university of chicago.
other industrialists established cornell 1865 vanderbilt 1873 and tulane 1884.
as colleges expanded their function changed and their curriculum broadened.
no longer did they exist primarily to train young men for the ministry.
they moved away from the classical curriculum of rhetoric mathematics latin and greek toward reality and practicality as president david starr jordan of stanford university said.
the massachusetts institute of technology mit founded in 1861 focused on science and engineering.
for many americans the period generated optimism.
the population continued to grow.
indeed in 1776 approximately 2 5 million people black and white were living in great britains thirteen mainland colonies.
the striking ethnic and racial diversity of these men and women amazed european visitors who apparently rated homogeneity more highly than did the americans.
in 1775 for example a traveler corrected the impression in london that the colonists are the offspring of englishmen to be sure many families traced their roots to great britain but one also encountered french dutch germans innumerable indians africans and a multitude of felons he then asked rhetorically is it possible to tell which are the most turbulent amongst such a mixture of people the american population on the eve of independence was also extraordinarily young a fact of great importance in understanding the development of effective political resistance.
nearly 60 percent of the american people were under age 21 this is a fact of considerable significance.
at any given time most people in this society were small children and many of the young men who fought the british during the revolution either had not been born or had been infants during the stamp act crisis.
any explanation for the coming of independence therefore must take into account the continuing political mobilization of so many young people.
postwar americans also experienced a high level of prosperity.
to be sure some major port cities went through a difficult period as colonists who had been employed during the fighting were thrown out of work.
sailors and ship workers for example were especially vulnerable to layoffs of this sort.
in general however white americans did very well.
the quality of their material lives was not substantially lower than that of the english.
in 1774 the per capita wealth of the americans this figure includes blacks as well as whites was 37 4.
this sum exceeds the per capita wealth of many developing countries today.
on the eve of revolution 37 4 would have purchased about 310 bushels of wheat 1 600 pounds of rice 11 cows or 6 horses.
a typical white family of five a father mother and three dependent children not only would have been able to afford decent food clothing and housing but also would have had money left over with which to purchase consumer goods.
even the poorest colonists seem to have benefited from a rising standard of living and although they may not have done as well as their wealthier neighbors they too wanted to preserve gains they had made.
wealth however was not evenly distributed in this society.
regional variations were striking.
the southern colonies enjoyed the highest levels of personal wealth in america which can be explained in part by the ownership of slaves.
more than 90 percent of americas unfree workers lived in the south and they represented a huge capital investment.
even without including the slaves in these wealth estimates the south did quite well.
in terms of aggregate wealth the middle colonies also scored impressively.
in fact only new england lagged noticeably behind a reflection of its relative inability to produce large amounts of exports for a growing world market.
breakdown of political trust ultimate responsibility for preserving the empire fell to george iii.
when he became king of england in 1760 he was only 22 years of age.
the new monarch was determined to play an aggressive role in government.
this decision caused considerable dismay among englands political leaders.
for decades a powerful though loosely associated group of men who called themselves whigs had set policy and controlled patronage.
george ii had accepted this situation and so long as the whigs in parliament did not meddle with his beloved army the king had let them rule the nation.
in one stroke george iii destroyed this cozy relationship.
he selected as his chief minister the earl of bute a scot whose chief qualification for office appeared to be his friendship with the young king.
the whigs who dominated parliament were outraged.
bute had no ties with the members of the house of commons he owed them no favors.
it seemed to the whigs that with the appointment of bute george was trying to turn back the clock to the time before the glorious revolution in other words attempting to reestablish a personal stuart monarchy free from traditional constitutional restraints.
the whigs blamed bute for every wrong real or imagined.
george did not in fact harbor such arbitrary ambitions but his actions threw customary political practices into doubt.
by 1763 bute despairing of public life left office.
his departure however neither restored the whigs to preeminence nor dampened the kings enthusiasm for domestic politics.
everyone agreed george had the right to select whomever he desired for cabinet posts but until 1770 no one seemed able to please the monarch.
ministers came and went often for no other reason than georges personal distaste.
because of this chronic instability subministers minor bureaucrats who directed routine structure of colonial society colonial affairs did not know what was expected of them.
in the absence of clear long range policy some ministers made narrowly based decisions others did nothing.
most devoted their energies to finding a political patron capable of satisfying the fickle king.
talent played little part in the scramble for office and incompetent hacks were advanced as frequently as were men of vision.
with such turbulence surrounding him the king showed little interest in the american colonies.
the king however does not bear the sole responsibility for englands loss of empire.
the members of parliament who actually drafted the statutes that gradually drove a wedge between the colonies and britain must share the blame for they failed to provide innovative answers to the explosive constitutional issues of the day.
the problem was not stupidity or even obstinacy qualities found in equal measure among all peoples.
in part the impasse resulted from sheer ignorance.
few englishmen active in government had ever visited america.
for those who attempted to follow colonial affairs accurate information proved extremely difficult to obtain.
packet boats carrying passengers and mail sailed regularly between london and the various colonial ports but the voyage across the atlantic required at least four weeks.
furthermore all correspondence was laboriously copied in longhand by overworked clerks serving in understaffed offices.
one could not expect to receive from america an answer to a specific question in less than three months.
as a result of the lag in communication between england and america rumors sometimes passed for true accounts and misunderstanding influenced the formulation of colonial policy.
but failure of communication alone was not to blame for the widening gap between the colonies and england.
even when complete information was available the two sides were often unable to understand each others positions.
the central element in this anglo american debate was a concept known as parliamentary sovereignty.
the english ruling classes viewed the role of parliament from a historical perspective that most colonists never shared.
they insisted that parliament was the dominant element within the constitution.
indeed this elective body protected rights and property from an arbitrary monarch.
during the reign of the stuarts especially under charles i r 1625 1649 the authority of parliament had been challenged and it was not until the glorious revolution of 1688 that the english crown formally recognized parliaments supreme authority in matters such as taxation.
almost no one including george iii would have dissented from a speech made in 1766 before the house of commons in which a representative declared the parliament hath and must have from the nature and essence of the constitution has had and ever will have a sovereign supreme power and jurisdiction over every part of the dominions of the state to make laws in all cases whatsoever the logic of this argument seemed self evident to the british.
in fact parliamentary leaders could never quite understand why the colonists were so difficult to persuade.
in frustration lord hillsborough the british secretary of state admonished the colonial agent for connecticut it is essential to the constitution to preserve the supremacy of parliament inviolate and tell your friends in america.
that it is as much their interest to support the constitution and preserve the supremacy of parliament as it is ours cartoons became a popular means of criticizing government during this period.
here king george iii watches as the kilted lord bute slaughters the goose america.
a cabinet member holds a basket of golden eggs at rear.
at front left a dog relieves itself on a map of north america.
no taxation without representation the american perspective americans most emphatically did not see it in their interest to maintain the supremacy of parliament the crisis in imperial relations forced the colonists fi rst to defi ne and then to defend principles deeply rooted in their own political culture.
for more than a century their ideas about the colonies role within the british empire had remained a vague untested bundle of assumptions about personal liberties property rights and representative institutions.
by 1763 however certain fundamental american beliefs had become clear.
from massachusetts to georgia colonists aggressively defended the powers of the provincial assemblies.
they drew on a rich legislative history of their own.
over the course of the century the american assemblies had steadily expanded their authority over taxation and expenditure.
since no one in britain bothered to clip their legislative wings these provincial bodies assumed a major role in policy making and routine administration.
in other words by midcentury the assemblies looked like american copies of parliament.
it seemed unreasonable therefore for the british suddenly to insist on the supremacy of parliament for as the legislators of massachusetts observed in 1770 this house has the same inherent rights in this province as the house of commons in great britain the constitutional debate turned ultimately on the meaning of representation itself.
in 1764 a british official informed the colonists that even though they had not elected members to parliament indeed even though they had had no direct contact chapter 19 toward an urban society 1877 1900 only 15 in 1880 to 432 in 1900 doctors lawyers and others became part of a growing middle class that shaped the concerns of the progressive era of the early twentieth century.
although less than 5 percent of the college age population attended college during the 1877 1890 period the new trends had great impact.
a generation of men and women encountered new ideas that changed their views of themselves and society.
courses never before offered such as philosophy ii at harvard the ethics of social reform which students called drainage drunkenness and divorce heightened interest in social problems and the need for reform.
some graduating students burned with a desire to cure societys ills.
my life began.
at johns hopkins university frederic c howe an influential reformer recalled.
i came alive i felt a sense of responsibility to the world i wanted to change things the spread of jim crow why did jim crow laws spread across the south after the end of reconstruction.
though washington and du bois differed widely in their views both of them fought the growing restrictions on black civil rights known as jim crow laws see chapter 12 on myhistorylab the rise of evangelicalism reform turns radical view the closer look methodist camp meeting 1819 p 271 read the document speaks p 280 read the document lyman beecher six sermons on intemperance 1828 p 272 view the map p 281 watch the video drinking and the temperance movement in nineteenth century america p 273 domesticity and changes in the american family read the document catharine e beecher from a treatise on domestic economy p 274 institutional reform watch the video who was horace mann and why are so many schools named after him.
p 277 read the document william lloyd garrison first issue of the liberator 1831 p 278 david walker a black abolitionist utopian communities before the civil war complete the assignment the war against demon drink p 282 read the document 1841 p 284 ralph waldo emerson self reliance complete the assignment the legal rights of married women reforming the law of coverture p 286 indicates study plan media assignment an age of expansionism contents and learning objectives movement to the far west pg.
293 internal expansionism pg.
305 what were some of the reasons for which americans headed into the western territories and what were some of the consequences of expansion.
how did developments in transportation foster industrialization and encourage immigration.
feature essay hispanic america after 1848 a case study in majority rule manifest destiny and the mexicanamerican war pg.
298 why did the u s annex texas and the southwest.
listen to the audio file on myhistorylab chapter 13 an age of expansionism the spirit of young america in the 1840s and early 1850s politicians writers and entrepreneurs frequently proclaimed themselves champions of young america.
one of the first to use the phrase was the famous author and lecturer ralph waldo emerson who told an audience of merchants and manufacturers in 1844 that the nation was entering a new era of commercial development technological progress and territorial expansion.
emerson suggested that a progressive new generation the young americans would lead this surge of physical development.
more than a slogan and less than an organized movement young america stood for a positive attitude toward the market economy and industrial growth a more aggressive and belligerent foreign policy and a celebration of americas unique strengths and virtues.
young americans favored enlarging the national market by acquiring new territory.
they called for the annexation of texas asserted an american claim to all of oregon and urged the appropriation of vast new territories from mexico.
they also celebrated the technological advances that would knit this new empire together especially the telegraph and the railroad.
telegraphs according to one writer would flash sensation and volition.
to and from towns and provinces as if they were organs and limbs of a single organism railroads would provide a vast system of iron muscles which as it were move the limbs of the mighty organism young america was a cultural and intellectual movement as well as an economic and political one.
in 1845 a washington journal hailed the election of the 49 year old james k polk at that time the youngest man to have been elected president as a sign that youth will dare to take antiquity by the beard and tear the cloak from hoary headed hypocrisy.
too young to be corrupt.
it is young america awakened to a sense of her own intellectual greatness by her soaring spirit.
it stands in strength the voice of the majority during the polk administration young american writers and critics mostly based in new york city called for a new and distinctive national literature free of subservience to european themes or models and expressive of the democratic spirit.
their organ was the literary world founded in 1847 and its ideals influenced two of the greatest writers america has produced walt whitman and herman melville.
whitman captured much of the exuberance and expansionism of young america in his song of the open road from this hour i ordain myself loosd of limits and imaginary lines going where i list my own master total and absolute i inhale great draughts of space the east and the west are mine and the north and the south are mine.
i am larger better than i thought.
other things the dangers facing a nation that was overreaching itself by indulging its pride and exalted sense of destiny with too little concern for the moral and practical consequences.
he young american ideal the idea of a young country led by young men into new paths of prosperity and greatness appealed to many people and found support across political party lines.
but the attitude came to be identified primarily with young democrats who wanted to move their party away from its traditional fear of the expansion of commerce and industry.
unlike old line jeffersonians and jacksonians young americans had no qualms about the market economy and the speculative materialistic spirit it called forth.
before 1848 the young american impulse focused mainly on the great expanse of western lands that lay just beyond the nations borders.
after the mexican american war when territorial gains extended the nations boundaries from the atlantic to the pacific attention shifted to internal development.
new discoveries of gold in the nations western territories fostered economic growth technological advances spurred industrialization and increased immigration brought more people to populate the lands newly acquired by agreement or by force.
t movement to the far west what were some of the reasons for which americans headed into the western territories and what were some of the consequences of expansion.
in the 1830s and 1840s pioneers pursued fertile land and economic opportunity beyond the existing boundaries of the united states and thus helped set the stage for the annexations and international crises of the 1840s.
some went for material gain others went for adventure and a significant minority sought freedom from religious persecution.
walt whitman in the carpenter portrait that appeared in the first edition of his great work leaves of grass in 1855 the poets rough clothes and slouch hat signify his identification with the common people.
in moby dick herman melville produced a novel sufficiently original in form and conception to more than fulfill the demand of young americans for a new literature to fit the new man in the new age but melville was too deep a thinker not to see the perils that underlay the soaring ambition and aggressiveness of the new age.
the whaling captain ahab who brings destruction to himself and his ship by his relentless pursuit of the white whale symbolized among borderlands of the 1830s since the birth of the republic there had been a major dispute over the boundary between maine and the canadian province of new brunswick.
in 1839 fighting broke out between canadian lumberjacks and the maine militia.
in 1842 secretary of state daniel webster concluded an agreement with the british government chapter 28 the onset of the cold war the potsdam summit i am getting ready to go see stalin and churchill president truman wrote to his mother in july 1945 and it is a chore on board the cruiser augusta the new president continued to complain about the upcoming potsdam conference in his diary.
how i hate this trip he confided.
but i have to make it win lose or draw and we must win.
i am giving nothing away except to save starving people and even then i hope we can only help them to help themselves halfway around the world joseph stalin left moscow a day late because of a slight heart attack.
the russian leader hated to fly so he traveled by rail.
moreover he ordered the heavily guarded train to detour around poland for fear of an ambush further delaying his arrival.
when he made his entrance into potsdam a suburb of berlin miraculously spared the total destruction that his forces had created in the german capital he was ready to claim the spoils of war.
these two men one the veteran revolutionary who had been in power for two decades the other an untested leader in office for barely three months symbolized the enormous differences that now separated the wartime allies.
stalin was above all a realist.
brutal in securing total control at home he was more flexible in his foreign policy bent on exploiting russias victory in world war ii rather than aiming at world domination.
cunning and caution were the hallmarks of his diplomatic style.
small in stature ungainly in build he radiated a catlike quality as he waited behind his unassuming faade ready to dazzle an opponent with his brilliant terrifying tactical mastery truman in contrast personified traditional wilsonian idealism.
lacking roosevelts guile the new president placed his faith in international cooperation.
like many americans he believed implicitly in his countrys innate goodness.
self assured to the point of cockiness he came to potsdam clothed in the armor of self righteousness.
truman and stalin met for the first time on july 17 1945.
i told stalin that i am no diplomat the president recorded in his diary but usually said yes and no to questions after hearing all the argument the russian dictators reaction to truman remains a mystery but truman believed the first encounter went well.
i can deal with stalin he wrote.
he is honest but smart as hell together with winston churchill and his replacement clement attlee whose labour party had just triumphed in british elections truman and stalin clashed for the next ten days over such difficult issues as reparations the polish border and the fate of eastern europe.
truman presented the ideas and proposals formulated by his advisers he saw his task as essentially procedural and when he presided he moved the agenda along in brisk fashion.
after he churchill truman and stalin during the potsdam conference in july 1945 the conference revealed the growing divergence among the wartime allies that soon led to the onset of the cold war.
chapter 5 the american revolution from elite protest to popular revolt 1763 1783 states it is incredible that soldiers composed of men of every age even of children of fifteen of whites and blacks almost naked unpaid and rather poorly fed can march so well and withstand fire so steadfastly building a professional army during the earliest months of rebellion american soldiers especially those of new england suffered no lack of confidence.
indeed they interpreted their courageous stands at concord and bunker hill as evidence that brave yeomen farmers could lick british regulars on any battlefield.
george washington spent the first years of the war disabusing the colonists of this foolishness for as he had learned during the french and indian war military success depended on endless drill careful planning and tough discipline rigorous preparation that did not characterize the minutemens methods.
washington insisted on organizing a regular well trained field army.
some advisers urged the commander in chief to wage a guerrilla war one in which small partisan bands would sap britains will to rule americans.
but washington rejected that course.
he recognized that the continental army served not only as a fighting force but also as a symbol of the republican cause.
its very existence would sustain american hopes and so long as the army survived american agents could plausibly solicit foreign aid.
this thinking shaped washingtons wartime strategy he studiously avoided general actions in which the continental army might be destroyed.
critics complained about washingtons caution but as they soon discovered he understood better than they what independence required.
if the commander in chief was correct about the army however he failed to comprehend the political importance of the militia.
these scattered almost amateur military units seldom altered the outcome of battle but they did maintain control over large areas of the country not directly affected by the british army.
throughout the war they compelled men and women who would rather have remained neutral to actively support the american effort.
in 1777 for example the militia of farmington connecticut visited a group of suspected tories as loyalists people who sided with the king and parliament during the revolution were called and after educating these people in the fundamentals of republican ideology a militia spokesman announced they were indeed grossly ignorant of the true grounds of the present war with great britain.
but they appeared to be penitent of their former conduct and professed themselves convinced.
that there was no such thing as remaining neuters without local political coercion washingtons task would have been considerably more difficult.
for the half million african american colonists most of them slaves the fight for independence took on special poignancy.
after all they wanted to achieve personal as well as political freedom and many african americans supported those who seemed most likely to deliver them from bondage.
as one historian explained the black soldier was likely to join the side that made him the quickest and best offer in terms of those unalienable rights of which mr jefferson had spoken it is estimated that some five thousand african americans took up arms to fight against the british.
the continental army included two all black units one from massachusetts and the other from rhode island.
in 1778 the legislature of rhode island voted to free any slave who volunteered to serve since according to the lawmakers history taught that the wisest the freest and bravest nations.
liberated their slaves and enlisted them as soldiers to fight in defence of their country in the south especially in georgia and south carolina more than ten thousand african americans supported the british and after the patriots had won the war these men and women left the united states relocating to nova scotia florida and jamaica with some eventually resettling in africa.
testing the american will after the embarrassing defeats in massachusetts the king appointed general sir william howe to replace the ill fated gage.
british rulers now understood that a simple police action would not be sufficient to crush the american rebellion.
parliament authorized sending more than fifty thousand troops to the mainland colonies and after evacuating boston an untenable strategic position the british forces stormed ashore at staten island in new york harbor on july 3 1776 from this more central location howe believed he could cut the new englanders off from the rest of america.
he enjoyed the powerful support of the british navy under the command of his brother admiral lord richard howe.
when washington learned the british were planning to occupy new york city he transferred many of his inexperienced soldiers to long island where they suffered a major defeat august 27 1776.
in a series of engagements disastrous for the americans howe drove the continental army across the hudson river into new jersey.
because of his failure to take full advantage of the situation however general howe lost what seemed in retrospect an excellent opportunity to annihilate washingtons entire army.
nevertheless the americans were on the run and in the fall of 1776 contemporaries predicted the rebels would soon capitulate.
times that try mens souls swift victories in new york and new jersey persuaded general howe that few americans enthusiastically supported independence.
he issued a general pardon therefore to anyone who would swear allegiance to george iii.
the results were encouraging.
more than three thousand men and women who lived in areas occupied by the british army took the oath.
this group included one intimidated signer of the declaration of independence.
howe perceived that a lasting peace in america would require his troops to treat our enemies as if they might one day become our friends a member of lord norths cabinet grumbled that this was a sentimental manner of making war a shortsighted view considering englands experience in attempting to pacify the irish.
the pardon plan eventually failed not because howe lacked toughness but because his soldiers and officers regarded loyal americans as inferior provincials an attitude that did little to promote good relations.
in any case as soon as the redcoats left a pardoned region the rebel militia retaliated against those who had deserted the patriot cause.
in december 1776 washingtons bedraggled army retreated across the delaware river into pennsylvania.
american prospects appeared bleaker than at any other time during the war.
the continental army lacked basic supplies and many men who had signed up for short term enlistments prepared to go home.
these are the times that try mens souls paine wrote in a pamphlet titled american crisis.
the summer soldier and the sunshine patriot will in this crisis shrink from the service of their fighting for independence view the map the american revolution quebec dec 31 1775 retreat of montgomery and arnold may 7 1776 carleton three rivers june 7 1776 montgomery r io arnold oriskany aug 6 1777 gates n h bennington aug 16 1777 newburyport mass.
concord siege of boston british retreat to nova scotia july 1775 march 1776 march 17 1776 we 1 ho h 17 am rc washington s illi ma white plains retreat ir w lifax oct 28 1776 s ha is.
m ng morristown fro brooklyn heights new york lo winter quarters 1777 aug 27 1776 o we germantown admiral h oct 4 1777 aug 17 from england valley forge monmouth winter quarters court house 1777 1778 june 28 1778 penn.
brandywine n j princeton sept 11 1777 jan 3 1777 trenton dec 26 1776 md.
philadelphia washington and captured rochambeau sept 26 1777 r i conn ie m fro e how ves lin cla m at io n te et virginia pr o yorktown aug 30 oct.
19 1781 g ra ss camden aug 16 1780 wilmington co d an om n fr nto 80 cli h1 c r ma co r n wallis eutaw springs sept 8 1781 rn n wa ew ll yo i s rk gree n e e mo rg co an rn wa llis de cornwallis allis e georgia north carolina cor nw green s c ninety six abandoned by british june 1781 at l a n t i c ocean battles of the virginia capes sept 5 9 1781 americans hoped to defeat british by forcing cornwallis to divide his troops cowpens jan 17 1781 clinton town july 1776 y lafa howe guilford courthouse mar.
15 1781 kings mountain oct 7 1780 rles cha ho od and gra er e of 763 ke lexington apr.
19 1775 bunker hill june 17 1775 howe albany new york la saratoga burgoyne surrenders oct 17 1777 bemis heights oct 7 1777 ar no ld st er eg l burgoyne lake hu ron ft halifax british north america canada o n ta british launch invasions to detach new england lake arnold montreal nov 13 1775 charles town may 12 1780 savannah fell to british 1778 100 miles 100 kilometers american troop movements british troop movements french troop movements british attempt to push through carolinas and virginia the american revolution 1775 1781 american victories british victories mixed results the war for independence ranged over a huge area.
battles were fought in the colonies on the western frontier and along the gulf of mexico.
the major engagements of the first years of the war from the spontaneous rising at concord in 1775 to washingtons well coordinated attack on trenton in december 1776 were fought in the northern colonies.
in the middle theater of war burgoynes attempt in 1777 to cut off new england from the rest of the colonies failed when his army was defeated at saratoga.
action in the final years of the war from the battles at camden kings mountain cowpens and guilford courthouse to the fina l victory at yorktown occurred in the southern theater of war.
complete the assignment spains contribution to american independence on myhistorylab feature essay spains contribution to american independence s pain made a significant although much underappreciated contribution to the winning of american independence.
the decision to support american resistance against great britain came in 1779 after an american army had won a stunning victory at the battle of saratoga in 1778 spain joined its ally france in a global contest against britain that stretched from the banks of the mississippi river to the islands of the caribbean and the straits of gibraltar.
spain had little interest in advancing the revolutionary principles of life liberty and the pursuit of happiness after all as a traditional monarchy it was not enthusiastic about championing a radical cause associated with popular rights.
rather the declaration of war against britain reflected spains desire for revenge against a long standing enemy that had seized gibraltar in 1713 and florida in 1763 sensing that british military forces around the world were stretched too thin spain and france prepared for a conflict designed to regain lost possessions and restore imperial glory.
british leaders appreciated immediately the seriousness of the danger.
they knew that it was one thing to fight the insurgent armies of george washington quite another to take on two major european powers.
confronting the new threat lord george germain the british secretary of state assured the british people that his government would pursue the war in north america with the utmost vigor he faced a very difficult challenge.
war with france and spain forced britain to reallocate key military resources in ways that took pressure off the struggling american army.
germain ordered half of the 16 000 troops then occupying philadelphia diverted to other vulnerable regions.
approximately 5 000 were transferred to the west indies where they guarded against the possibility of french and spanish attacks against britains lucrative sugar trade.
another 3 000 were posted in florida spains former colony.
in fact worried that french and spanish warships might attack vital supply lines british leaders finally abandoned philadelphia altogether a move that allowed washington to retake the city without having to fire a shot.
anxious to recapture florida the spanish launched a bold campaign against british forts located along the coast of the gulf of mexico.
their success owed a lot to the energy and courage of bernardo de glvez the spanish governor of louisiana.
before taking this post he had compiled an impressive military record having fought against spains enemies in africa and the borderlands of northern mexico.
in fact he received the governorship of louisiana as a reward for his extraordinary service.
glvez was determined to restore spains honor in north america.
as he announced the king of spain has determined that the principal object of his arms in america during the present war will be to drive the british from the mexican gulf and the neighborhood of louisiana even before spain had officially entered the war glvez began sending vital military supplies from st louis then governed by spain to american forces operating in the west.
these materials helped george rogers clark win a string of strategic victories against british forces in the illinois territory in 1778 if clark had failed the united states could not have creditably claimed all the land east of the mississippi river during the peace negotiations with great britain that ended the revolution.
in 1779 glvez moved decisively to drive the british from the region north of new orleans and in quick succession he captured manchac natchez and baton rouge.
glvez then turned his attention to regaining florida.
the first obstacle was mobile.
in march 1780 after a two week siege the british garrison surrendered to glvezs troops.
pensacola presented a much greater military challenge.
it served as britains administrative and commercial center for west florida.
moreover it was well defended.
glvezs courage and amazing luck allowed the spanish to carry the day.
a spanish fleet sailing out of cuba joined ships transporting glvezs soldiers in the waters off pensacola.
the admiral of the cuban fleet was reluctant to enter the port.
he feared that his vessels might run aground on sandbars.
glvez would have none of it.
he sailed his own ship boldly into the harbor and inspired by his example the captains of the other ships followed his lead.
in march 1781 they landed over 7 000 soldiers.
the battle of pensacola was hard fought.
the spanish siege lasted for over two months and just as their ammunition was running out a lucky shot hit the british powder magazine setting off a huge explosion that destroyed much of the fort.
the british force an army made up of british regulars native americans and american loyalists surrendered on may 10 glvezs successful campaign had a major impact on the final year of the american revolution.
the growing military presence of spain and france in the west indies compelled the british to station troops in the area that could have been employed against the continental army in yorktown and new york.
moreover the fall of west florida made it harder for the british to supply their soldiers and indian allies operating in the southern mainland colonies.
although spain was unable to retake gibraltar glvez realized his goal of reclaiming florida.
he had overcome the humiliation of spains previous defeats.
in 1783 the spanish crown invited him to serve on the committee that would draw up the peace of paris ending the american revolution.
even at this moment of triumph though spain refused to recognize the sovereignty of the united states.
it was not long before spain had second thoughts about its victory over great britain.
an aggressive new enemy appeared.
every year brought a flood of american settlers into florida and the mississippi valley.
they showed not the slightest respect for spanish authority.
in 1787 the spanish governor of florida reported that the american backwoodsmen were distinguished from savages only in their color language and the superiority of their depraved cunning and untrustworthiness he believed the frontiersmen migrated to florida to escape all legal authority another spanish official warned a new and independent power has arisen on our continent he was correct.
in 1819 spain was forced to transfer florida to the united states.
questions for discussion 1 why did spain decide to enter the revolutionary war.
2 why did the spanish government have misgivings about american independence.
chapter 13 an age of expansionism a much more astute political strategy than the overtly prosouthern expansionism advocated by tyler and calhoun.
the whig nominee henry clay was basically antiexpansionist but his sense of the growing popularity of texas annexation among southern whigs caused him to waffle on the issue during the campaign.
this vacillation in turn cost clay the support of a small but crucial group of northern antislavery whigs who defected to the abolitionist liberty party.
polk won the fall election by a relatively narrow popular margin.
his triumph in the electoral college 170 votes to 105 was secured by victories in new york and michigan where the liberty party candidate james g birney had taken away enough votes from clay to affect the outcome.
the closeness of the election meant the democrats had something less than a clear mandate to implement their expansionist policies but this did not prevent them from claiming that the people backed border expansion.
after the election congress reconvened to consider the annexation of texas.
the mood had changed as a result of polks victory and some leading senators from both parties who had initially opposed tylers scheme for annexation by joint resolution of congress now changed their position.
as a result annexation was approved a few days before polk took office.
read the document john osullivan was editor of the united states magazine and democratic review.
he advocated the view that the united states was destined to expand.
in the process he coined the phrase manifest destiny his vision caught the imagination of the immigrant nation searching for its identity and meaning as well as a definition of success.
the election of 1844 candidate polk clay birney john osullivan the great nation of futurity 1845 party popular vote electoral vote democratic 1 338 464 whig 1 300 097 liberty 62 300 the doctrine of manifest destiny the expansionist mood that accompanied polks election and the annexation of texas was given a name and a rationale in the summer of 1845 john l osullivan a proponent of the young america movement and editor of the influential united states magazine and democratic review charged that foreign governments were conspiring to block the annexation of texas in an effort to thwart the fulfillment of our manifest destiny to overspread the continent allotted by providence for the free development of our yearly multiplying millions besides coining the phrase manifest destiny osullivan pointed to the three main ideas that lay behind it.
one was that god was on the side of american expansionism.
this notion came naturally out of the tradition going back to the new england puritans that identified the growth of america with the divinely ordained success of a chosen people.
a second idea implied in the phrase free development was that the spread of american rule meant what other propagandists for expansion described as extending the area of freedom democratic institutions and local self government would follow the flag if areas claimed by autocratic foreign governments were annexed to the united states.
osullivans third premise was that population growth required the outlet that territorial acquisitions would provide.
behind this notion lurked a fear that growing numbers would lead to diminished opportunity and a european type polarization of social classes if the restless and the ambitious were not given new lands to settle and exploit.
in its most extreme form the doctrine of manifest destiny meant that the united states would someday occupy the entire north american continent.
make way i say for the young american buffalo bellowed a democratic orator in 1844 he has not yet got land enough.
i tell you we will give him oregon for his summer shade and the region of texas as his winter pasture.
applause like all of his race he wants salt too.
well he shall have the use of two oceans the mighty pacific and the turbulent atlantic.
he shall not stop his career until he slakes his thirst in the frozen ocean.
cheers polk and the oregon question in 1845 and 1846 the united states came closer to armed conflict with great britain than at any time since the war of 1812 the willingness of some americans to go to war over manifest destiny and the mexican american war alaska russ.
treaty of 1825 544 0 nt co ine a nt ld ivi de north r ve ou nc va 49 oregon treaty of i latitu de treaty of 1818 anglo american convention country puget sound pa c i f i c ocean british north america canada joint u s british occupation of disputed territory 1818 1846 columbia r united states willamette valley main area of u s settlement 42 300 miles 300 kilometers adams ons tre aty of 1819 mexico northwest boundary dispute president polks policy of bluff and bluster nearly involved the united states in a war with great britain over the disputed boundary in oregon.
oregon was expressed in the rallying cry fifty four forty or fight referring to the latitude of the northern boundary of the desired territory.
this slogan was actually coined by whigs seeking to ridicule democratic expansionists but democrats later took it over as a vivid expression of their demand for what is now british columbia.
polk fed this expansionist fever by laying claim in his inaugural address to all of the oregon country then jointly occupied by britain and the united states.
privately he was willing to accept the 49th parallel as a dividing line.
what made the situation so tense was that polk was dedicated to an aggressive diplomacy of bluff and bluster convinced that his foreign adversaries would only respond to a hard line approach.
in july 1845 polk authorized secretary of state james buchanan to reply to the latest british request for terms by offering a boundary along the 49th parallel.
when the british ambassador rejected this proposal polk angrily withdrew it and refused to renew it when the british sought to reopen negotiations.
in april 1846 congress terminated the agreement for joint occupation of the pacific northwest at polks request the british government then took the initiative submitting a new treaty proposal and dispatching warships at the same time.
when the draft treaty was received in june polk refused either to endorse or reject it and took the unusual step of submitting it directly to the senate for advice which recommended its acceptance almost without change.
it was ratified on june 15 polk was prompted to settle the oregon question because he now had a war with mexico on his hands.
american policy makers got what they wanted from the oregon treaty namely puget sound a splendid natural harbor and the first u s deepwater port on the pacific.
polks initial demand for all of oregon was made partly for domestic political consumption and partly to bluff the british into making more concessions.
it was a dangerous game on both fronts.
when polk finally agreed to the solution he alienated expansionist advocates in the old northwest who had supported his call for all of oregon for many northerners the promise of new acquisitions in the pacific northwest was the only thing that made annexation of texas palatable.
they hoped new free states could be created to counterbalance the admission of slaveholding texas to the union.
as this prospect receded the charge of antislavery advocates that texas annexation was a southern plot became more believable to northerners polk began to look more and more like a president concerned mainly with furthering the interests of his native region.
war with mexico while the united states was avoiding a war with great britain it was getting into one with mexico.
although the mexicans had recognized texas independence in 1845 they rejected the lone star republics dubious claim to the unsettled territory between the nueces river and the rio grande.
when the united states annexed texas and assumed its claim to the disputed area mexico broke off diplomatic relations and prepared for armed conflict.
this 1846 cartoon titled this is the house that polk built shows president polk sitting forlornly in a house of cards which represents the delicately balanced issues facing him.
chapter 28 the onset of the cold war had banged through three items one day he commented i am not going to stay around this terrible place all summer just to listen to speeches.
ill go home to the senate for that in an indirect roundabout way he informed stalin of the existence of the atomic bomb tested successfully in the new mexico desert just before the conference began.
truman offered no details and the impassive stalin asked for none commenting only that he hoped the united states would make good use of it against the japanese reparations proved to be the crucial issue at potsdam.
the russians wanted to rebuild their war ravaged economy with german industry the united states feared it would be saddled with the entire cost of caring for the defeated germans.
a compromise was finally reached.
each side would take reparations primarily from its own occupation zone a solution that foreshadowed the future division of germany.
because they could not agree on how to govern europe wrote historian daniel yergin truman and stalin began to divide it the other issues were referred to the newly created council of foreign ministers which would meet in the fall in london.
he potsdam conference thus ended on an apparent note of harmony beneath the surface however the bitter antagonism of the cold war was festering.
a dozen years later truman reminisced to an old associate about potsdam.
what a show that was describing himself as an innocent idealist surrounded by wolves he claimed that all the agreements reached there were broken as soon as the unconscionable russian dictator returned to moscow he added ruefully and i liked the little son of a bitch potsdam marked the end of the wartime alliance.
america and russia each distrustful of the other began to engage in a long and bitter confrontation.
for the next decade the two superpowers would vie for control of postwar europe and later clash over the spread of communism to asia.
by the time trumans and stalins successors met for the next summit conference at geneva in 1955 the cold war was at its height.
t the cold war begins how did the cold war begin.
the conflict between the united states and the soviet union began gradually.
for two years the nations tried to adjust their differences over the division of europe postwar economic aid and the atomic bomb through discussion and negotiation.
the council of foreign ministers provided the forum.
beginning in london during the fall of 1945 and meeting with their russian counterparts in paris new york and moscow american diplomats searched for a way to live in peace with a suspicious soviet union.
the division of europe the fundamental disagreement was over who would control postwar europe.
in the east the red army had swept over poland and the balkans laying the basis for soviet domination there.
american and british forces had liberated western europe from scandinavia to italy.
the russians mindful of past invasions from the west across the plains of poland were intent on imposing communist governments loyal to moscow in the soviet sphere.
the united states on the other hand upheld the principle of national self determination insisting the people in each country should freely choose their postwar rulers.
the soviets saw the demand for free elections as subversive since they knew that popularly chosen regimes would be unfriendly to russia.
suspecting american duplicity stalin brought down an iron curtain churchills phrase from the baltic to the adriatic as he created a series of satellite governments.
germany was the key.
the temporary zones of occupation gradually hardened into permanent lines of division.
ignoring the potsdam conference agreement that the country be treated as an economic unit the united states and great britain were by 1946 refusing to permit the russians to take reparations from the industrial western zones.
the initial harsh occupation policy gave way to more humane treatment of the german people and a slow but steady economic recovery.
the united states and england merged their zones and championed the idea of the unification of all germany.
russia fearing a resurgence of german military power responded by intensifying the communization of its zone which included the jointly occupied city of berlin.
by 1947 england france and the united states were laying plans to transfer their authority to an independent west germany.
the soviet union consolidated its grip on eastern europe in 1946 and 1947 one by one communist regimes replaced coalition governments in poland hungary romania and bulgaria.
moving cautiously to avoid provoking the west stalin used communism as a means to dominate half of europe both to protect the security of the soviet state and to advance its international power.
the climax came in march 1948 when a coup in czechoslovakia overthrew a democratic government and gave the soviets a strategic foothold in central europe.
the division of europe was an inevitable aftereffect of world war ii.
both sides were intent on imposing their values in the areas liberated by their troops.
the russians were no more likely to withdraw from eastern europe than the united states and britain were from germany france and italy.
a frank recognition of competing spheres of influence might have avoided further escalation of tension.
but the western nations remembering hitlers aggression in the 1930s began to see stalin as an equally dangerous threat to their well being.
instead of accepting him as a cautious leader bent on protecting russian security they perceived him as an aggressive dictator leading a communist drive for world domination.
withholding economic aid world war ii had inflicted enormous damage on russia.
the brutal fighting had taken between fifteen and twenty million russian lives destroyed more than thirty thousand factories and torn up forty thousand miles of railroad track.
the industrialization the cold war begins read the document churchills iron curtain speech march 5 1946 iceland hamburg western bloc communist bloc soviet zone hanover berlin nonaligned nations british zone finland iron curtain norway sweden 500 miles soviet zone 500 kilometers north sea ireland den.
soviet union united kingdom french zone frankfurt american zone neth.
poland belg.
atlantic ocean germany czech.
france switz.
romania 100 miles berlin airlift 1948 1949 100 kilometers bulg.
italy spain a ck se bla yugoslavia portugal hun.
french alb.
morocco greece british berlin soviet american morocco fr.
algeria fr.
tunisia fr.
medi cyprus terranea n sea europe after world war ii the heavy red line splitting germany shows in graphic form the division of europe between the western and soviet spheres of influence.
from stettin in the baltic to trieste in the adriatic said winston churchill in a speech at fulton missouri in 1946 an iron curtain has descended across the continent that stalin had achieved at such great sacrifice in the 1930s had been badly set back even agricultural production had fallen by half during the war.
outside aid and assistance were vital for the reconstruction of the soviet union.
american leaders knew of russias plight and hoped to use it to good advantage.
wartime ambassador averell harriman wrote in 1944 that economic aid was one of the most effective weapons at our disposal in dealing with russia.
president truman was convinced that economically we held all the cards and the russians had to come to us there were two possible forms of postwar assistance loans and lend lease.
in january 1945 the soviets requested a 6 billion loan to finance postwar reconstruction.
despite initial american encouragement president roosevelt deferred action on this request as relations with russia cooled the chances for action dimmed.
our experience commented harriman in april 1945 had incontrovertibly proved it was not possible to bank goodwill in moscow by the wars end the loan request though never formally turned down was dead.
lend lease proved no more successful.
in the spring of 1945 congress instructed the administration not to use lend lease for postwar reconstruction.
president truman went further however by signing an order on may 11 1945 terminating all shipments to russia including those already at sea.
the state department saw the action as applying leverage against the soviet union stalin termed it brutal heeding russian protests truman resumed lend lease shipments but only until the war was over in august.
after that all lend lease ended.
deprived of american assistance the russians were forced to rebuild their economy through reparations.
american and british resistance prevented them from taking reparations in western germany but the soviets systematically removed factories and plants from other areas they controlled including their zone of germany eastern europe and manchuria.
slowly the russian economy recovered from the war but the bitterness over the american refusal to extend aid convinced stalin of western hostility and thus deepened the growing antagonism between the soviet union and the united states.
chapter 28 the onset of the cold war view the closer look berlin airlift the berlin airlift june 1948 may 1949 was organized by the truman administration and the western allies to overcome the rail roadways and canals blockade of west berlin instituted by the soviet union.
over two hundred thousand american and british air force flights over west berlin delivered approximately nearly five thousand tons of food and other necessities to west berliners in order to break successfully the soviet blockade.
acheson presented the committees favorable report to the president in january 1950 truman took only seven minutes to decide to go ahead with the awesome new weapon.
at the same time acheson ordered the policy planning staff headed by paul nitze after kennan resigned in protest to draw up a new statement of national defense policy.
nsc 68 as the document eventually became known was based on the premise that the soviet union sought to impose its absolute authority over the rest of the world and thus mortally challenged the united states.
rejecting such options as appeasement or a return to isolation nitze advocated a massive expansion of american military power so the united states could halt and overcome the soviet threat.
contending the nation could afford to spend upward of 50 percent of its gross national product for security nsc 68 proposed increasing defense spending from 13 to 45 billion annually.
approved in principle by the national security council in april 1950 nsc 68 stood as a symbol of the truman administrations determination to win the cold war regardless of cost.
the cold war in asia the soviet american conflict developed more slowly in asia.
at yalta the two superpowers had agreed to a far eastern balance of power with the russians dominating northeast asia and the americans in control of the pacific including both japan and its former island empire.
the united states moved quickly to consolidate its sphere of influence.
general douglas macarthur in charge of japanese occupation denied the soviet union any role in the reconstruction of japan.
instead he supervised the transition of the japanese government into a constitutional democracy shaped along western lines in which communists were barred from all government posts.
the japanese willingly renounced war in their new constitution relying instead the cold war expands on american forces to protect their security.
american policy was equally nationalistic in the pacific.
a trusteeship arrangement with the united nations merely disguised the fact that the united states held full control over the marshall mariana and caroline islands.
american scientists conducted atomic bomb tests at bikini atoll in 1946 and by 1949 macarthur was declaring that the entire pacific had become an anglo saxon lake and our line of defense runs through the chain of islands fringing the coast of asia as defined at yalta china lay between the soviet and american spheres.
when world war ii ended the country was torn between chiang kai sheks nationalists in the south and mao tse tungs communists in the north.
chiang had many advantages including american political and economic backing and official soviet recognition.
but corruption was widespread among the nationalist leaders and a raging inflation that soon reached 100 percent a year devastated the chinese middle classes and thus eroded chiangs base of power.
mao used tight discipline and patriotic appeals to strengthen his hold on the peasantry and extend his influence.
when the soviets abruptly vacated manchuria in 1946 after stripping it of virtually all the industrial machinery japan had installed mao inherited control of this rich northern province.
ignoring american advice chiang rushed north to occupy manchurian cities overextending his supply lines and exposing his forces to communist counterattack.
american policy sought to prevent a chinese civil war.
before he became secretary of state george marshall undertook the difficult task of forming a coalition government between chiang and mao.
for a few months in early 1946 marshall appeared to have succeeded but chiangs attempts to gain control of manchuria doomed the agreement.
in reality there was no basis for compromise.
chiang insisted he was going to liquidate communists while mao was trying to play the united states against russia in his bid for power.
by 1947 as china plunged into full scale civil war the truman administration had given up any meaningful effort to influence the outcome.
political mediation had failed military intervention was out of the question so soon after world war ii and a policy of continued american economic aid served only to appease domestic supporters of chiang kai shek 80 percent of the military supplies ended up in communist hands.
the chinese conflict climaxed at the end of the decade.
maos forces drove the nationalists out of manchuria in late 1948 and advanced across the yangtze by mid 1949.
acheson released a lengthy report justifying american policy in china on the grounds that the civil war there was beyond the control of the government of the united states an american military adviser concurred telling congress that the nationalist defeat was due to the worlds worst leadership and a complete loss of will to fight republican senators however disagreed blaming american diplomats for sabotaging the nationalists and terming achesons report a 1054 page white wash of a wishful do nothing policy while the domestic debate raged over responsibility for the loss of china chiangs forces fled the mainland for sanctuary on formosa taiwan in december 1949 two months later mao and stalin signed a sino soviet treaty of mutual assistance that clearly placed china in the russian orbit.
the american response to the communist triumph in china was twofold.
first the state department refused to recognize the legitimacy of the new regime in beijing maintaining instead formal diplomatic relations with the nationalists on formosa.
citing the sino soviet alliance assistant secretary of state dean rusk called the beijing regime a colonial russian government and declared it is not the government of china.
it does not pass the first test.
it is not chinese then to compensate for the loss of china the united states focused on japan as its main ally in asia.
the state department encouraged the buildup of japanese industry and the pentagon expanded american bases on the japanese home islands and okinawa.
a japanese american security pact led to the end of american occupation by 1952 the cold war had now split east asia in two.
the korean war the showdown between the united states and the soviet union in asia came in korea.
traditionally the cockpit of international rivalry in northeast asia korea had been divided at the view the map the korean war 1950 1953 soviet union china lu ya farthest un advance nov 1950 r sea of japan north korea pyongyang truce line panmunjom 38th parallel seoul inchon landing sept 15 1950 pusan perimeter farthest north korean advance sept 1950 south korea pusan yellow sea 150 miles 150 kilometers international boundaries 1950 un offensive sept nov.
1950 north korean invasion june sept.
1950 communist chinese offensive nov 1950 jan.
1951 the korean war 1950 1953 after a year of rapid movement up and down the korean peninsula the fighting stalled just north of the 38th parallel.
the resulting truce line has divided north and south korea since the july 1953 armistice.
chapter 5 chapter review 1770 parliament repeals all townshend duties except one on tea march british troops massacre boston civilians march samuel adams forms committee of correspondence lord norths government passes tea act may bostonians hold tea party december parliament punishes boston with coercive acts march june first continental congress convenes september patriots take stand at lexington and concord april second continental congress gathers may americans hold their own at bunker hill june 1776 congress votes for independence declaration of independence is signed british defeat washington at long island august americans score victory at trenton december general burgoyne surrenders at saratoga october french treaties recognize independence of the united states february british take charles town may washington forces cornwallis to surrender at yorktown october peace treaty signed september british evacuate new york city november chapter 13 an age of expansionism immigration to the united states 1820 1860 thousands 427 833 371 603 369 980 total immigration for indicated year 200 877 153 640 114 371 84 066 8 385 23 322 famine to a population that subsisted on this single crop.
escape to america was made possible by the low fares then prevailing on sailing ships bound from england to north america.
ships involved in the timber trade carried their bulky cargoes from boston or halifax to liverpool as an alternative to returning to america partly in ballast they packed irish immigrants into their holds.
the squalor and misery in these steerage accommodations were almost beyond belief.
because of the ports involved in the lumber trade boston halifax saint johns and saint andrews the irish usually arrived in canada or the northeastern states.
immobilized by poverty and a lack of the skills required for pioneering in the west most of them remained in northeastern cities.
forced to subsist on low paid menial labor and crowded into festering urban slums they were looked down on by most native born americans.
their devotion to catholicism aroused protestant resentment and mob violence.
some race conscious people even doubted that the irish were white like other northern europeans.
see chapter 29 the reaction to sputnik pp.
fearful that the russians were several years ahead of the united states in the development of intercontinental ballistic missiles icbms democrats criticized eisenhower for not spending enough on defense and warned that a dangerous missile gap would open up by the early 1960s a time when the russians might have such a commanding lead in icbms that they could launch a first strike and destroy america.
despite the presidents belief that the american missile program was in good shape he allowed increased defense spending to speed up the building of american icbms and the new polaris submarine launched intermediate range missile irbm.
conclusion the continuing cold war nikita khrushchev took full advantage of the furor over sputnik to put the united states on the defensive.
we will bury you he boasted telling americans your grandchildren will live under communism the most serious threat of all came in november 1958 when the russian leader declared that within six months he would sign a separate peace treaty with east germany calling for an end to american british and french occupation rights in berlin.
eisenhower met the second berlin crisis as firmly as truman had the first.
he refused to abandon the city but also tried to avoid a military showdown.
prudent diplomacy forced khrushchev to extend his deadline indefinitely.
after a trip to the united states culminating in a personal meeting with eisenhower at camp david the russian leader agreed to attend a summit conference in paris in may 1960 this much heralded meeting never took place.
on may 1 two weeks before the leaders were to convene in paris the soviets shot down an american u 2 plane piloted by francis gary powers.
the united states had been flying over russia since 1956 in the high altitude spy planes gaining vital information about the soviet missile program that showed there was little basis for the publics fear that the russians had opened up a dangerous missile gap.
after initially denying any knowledge eisenhower took full responsibility for powerss overflight and khrushchev responded with a scathing personal denunciation and a refusal to meet with the american president.
conclusion the continuing cold war the breakup of the paris summit marked the end of eisenhowers attempts to moderate the cold war.
the disillusioned leader told an aide that he saw nothing worthwhile left for him to do now until the end of his presidency but eisenhower did make a final effort for peace by delivering a somber warning about the danger of massive military spending in his farewell address to the american people.
in the councils of government we must guard against the acquisition of unwarranted influence whether sought or unsought by the military industrial complex he declared.
the potential for the disastrous rise of misplaced power exists and will persist rarely has an american president been more prophetic.
in the next few years the level of defense spending would skyrocket as the cold war escalated.
the military industrial complex reached its acme of power in the 1960s when the united states realized the full implications of trumans doctrine of containment.
eisenhower had succeeded in keeping the peace for eight years but he had failed to halt the momentum of the cold war he had inherited from harry truman.
ikes efforts to ease tension with the soviet union were dashed by his own distrust of communism and by khrushchevs belligerent rhetoric and behavior.
still he had begun to relax tensions a process that would survive the troubled 1960s and after several false starts would finally begin to erode the cold war by the end of the 1980s.
russians view the wreckage of the u 2 reconnaissance plane piloted by francis powers that was shot down over soviet territory on may 1 1960 although eisenhower originally disavowed any knowledge of powerss mission khrushchev produced photographs of soviet military and industrial sites which he said had been taken by the u 2 pilot.
powers was held in a soviet prison for two years before he was released in exchange for a russian spy.
chapter 6 the republican experiment a new political morality in 1788 lewis hallam and john henry petitioned the general assembly of pennsylvania to open a theater.
although a 1786 state law banned the performance of stage plays and other disorderly sports many philadelphia leaders favored the request to hold representations in their city.
a committee appointed to study the issue concluded that a theater would contribute to the general refinement of manners and the polish of society some supporters even argued that the sooner the united states had a professional theater the sooner the young republic would escape the foreign yoke of british culture.
the quakers of philadelphia dismissed such claims as out of hand.
they warned that such seminaries of lewdness and irreligion would quickly undermine the virtue of the people they pointed out that no sooner is a playhouse opened than it becomes surrounded with.
brothels since pennsylvania was already suffering from a stagnation of commerce and a scarcity of money unmistakable signs of gods displeasure it seemed unwise to risk divine punishment by encouraging new hot beds of vice such rhetoric did not sit well with other citizens who interpreted the revolutionary experience from an entirely different perspective.
at issue they insisted was not popular morality but state censorship.
if the government silenced the stage then the same authority.
may with equal justice dictate the shape and texture of our dress or the modes and ceremonies of our worship depriving those who wanted to see plays of an opportunity to do so they argued will abridge the natural right of every freeman to dispose of his time and money according to his own tastes and dispositions throughout post revolutionary america everyday matters such as the opening of a new playhouse provoked passionate public debate.
these divisions were symptomatic of a new uncertain political culture struggling to find the proper balance between public morality and private freedom.
during the long fight against although the words slave and slavery do not appear in the u s constitution debate over slavery and the slave trade resulted in a compromise in which both institutions persisted in the new republic.
not everyone was pleased with the compromise.
the library company of philadelphia commissioned this painting liberty displaying the arts and sciences 1792 by samuel jennings.
the broken chain at the feet of the goddess liberty is meant to demonstrate her opposition to slavery.
source the library company of philadelphia.
great britain americans had defended individual rights.
the problem was that the same people also believed that a republic that compromised its virtue could not long preserve liberty and independence.
in 1776 thomas paine had reminded ordinary men and women that the sun never shined on a cause of greater worth.
tis not the concern of a day a year or an age posterity are virtually involved in the contest and will be more or less affected even to the end of time by the proceedings now during the 1780s americans understood their responsibility not only to each other but also to history.
they worried however that they might not successfully meet the challenge.
the dangers were clear.
individual states seemed intent on looking out for local interests rather than the national welfare.
revolutionary leaders such as george washington and james madison concluded that the united states needed a strong central government to protect rights and property.
their creative quest for solutions brought forth a new and enduring constitution.
defining republican culture what were the limits of equality in the republican society of the new united states.
today the term republican no longer possesses the evocative power it did for most eighteenth century americans.
for them it defined not a political party but rather an entire political culture.
after all they had done something that no other people had achieved for a very long time.
they founded a national government without a monarch or aristocracy in other words a genuine republic.
making the new system work was a daunting task.
those americans who read deeply in ancient and renaissance history knew that most republics had failed often within a few years only to be replaced by tyrants who cared not at all what ordinary people thought about the public good.
to preserve their republic from such a fate victorious revolutionaries such as samuel adams chapter 6 the republican experiment flush of independence.
these early constitutions were provisional but they nevertheless provided the framers of the federal constitution of 1787 with invaluable insights into the strengths and weaknesses of government based on the will of the people.
blueprints for state government despite disagreements over details americans who wrote the various state constitutions shared certain political assumptions.
first they insisted on preparing written documents.
for many of them of course this seemed a natural step.
as colonists they had lived under royal charters documents that described the workings of local government in detail.
the massachusetts bay charter of 1629 for example see chapter 20 political realignments in the 1890s put them out hanna stood on a chair screaming go.
go william jennings bryan who was there as a special correspondent for a nebraska newspaper climbed on a desk to get a better view.
the democrats and silver silver meanwhile had captured large segments of the democratic party in the south and west.
despite president clevelands opposition more than twenty democratic state platforms came out for free silver in 1894 power in the party shifted to the south where it remained for decades.
the partys base narrowed its outlook increasingly reflected southern views on silver race and other issues.
in effect the democrats became a sectional no longer a national party.
read the document william jennings bryan cross of gold speech 1896 the anti cleveland democrats had their issue but they lacked a leader.
out in nebraska bryan saw the opportunity to take on that role.
he was barely thirty six years old and had relatively little political experience.
but he had spent months wooing support and he was a captivating public speaker tall slender and handsome with a resounding voice that in an era without microphones projected easily into every corner of an auditorium.
from the outset of the 1896 democratic convention the silver democrats were in charge and they put together a platform that stunned the cleveland wing of the party.
it demanded the free coinage of silver attacked clevelands actions in the pullman strike and censured his sales of gold bonds.
on july 9 as delegates debated the platform bryans moment came.
striding to the stage he stood for an instant a hand raised for silence waiting for the applause to die down.
he would not contend with the previous speakers he began for this is not a contest between persons.
the humblest citizen in all the land when clad in the armor of a righteous cause is stronger than all the hosts of error.
i come to speak to you in defense of a cause as holy as the cause of liberty the cause of humanity the delegates were captivated.
like a trained choir they rose cheered each point and sat back to listen for more.
easterners bryan said liked to praise businessmen but forgot that plain people laborers miners and farmers were businessmen too.
shouts rang through the hall and delegates pounded on chairs.
savoring each cheer bryan defended silver.
then came the famous closing having behind us the producing masses of this nation and the world.
we will answer their demand for a gold standard by saying to them you shall not press down upon the brow of labor this crown of thorns you shall not crucify mankind upon a cross of gold bryan moved his fingers down his temples suggesting blood trickling from his wounds.
he ended with his arms outstretched as on a cross.
letting the silence hang he dropped his arms stepped back then started to his seat.
suddenly there was pandemonium.
delegates shouted and cheered.
when the tumult subsided they adopted the anti cleveland platform and the next day bryan won the presidential nomination.
campaign and election william jennings bryan was well known for his dramatic speeches.
during the democratic convention of 1896 bryan delivered his best known speech which attacked the gold standard.
his stirring rhetoric captivated his audience and won him the democratic presidential nomination for the election of 1896 the democratic convention presented the populists with a dilemma.
the peoples party had staked everything on the assumption that neither major party would endorse silver.
now it faced a painful choice nominate an independent ticket and risk splitting the silverite forces or nominate bryan and give up its separate identity as a party.
the choice was unpleasant and it shattered the peoples party.
meeting late in july the partys national convention nominated bryan but rather than accept the democratic candidate for vice president it named tom watson instead.
the populists endorsement probably hurt bryan as much as it helped.
it won him relatively few votes since many populists would have voted for him anyway.
it also identified him as a populist which he was not allowing the republicans to accuse him of heading a ragtag army of malcontents.
the squabble over watson seemed the mckinley administration the northeast and midwest and carried four border states.
in the cities mckinley crushed bryan.
the election struck down the populists whose totals sagged nearly everywhere.
many populist proposals were later adopted under different leadership.
the graduated income tax crop loans to farmers the secret ballot and direct election of u s senators all were early populist ideas.
but the peoples party never could win over a majority of the voters and failing that it vanished after 1896 election of 1896 electoral vote by state popular vote republican william mckinley 7 104 779 democratic 176 william j bryan 6 502 925 265 155 minor parties 13 872 859 ariz new 1 terr.
mexico terr.
indian terr.
24 15 6 12 to prove that the democratic populist alliance could never stay together long enough to govern.
in august 1896 bryan set off on a campaign that became an american legend.
much of the conservative democratic eastern press had deserted him and he took his campaign directly to the voters the first presidential candidate in history to do so in a systematic way.
by his own count bryan traveled 18 009 miles visited 27 states and spoke 600 times to a total of some 3 million people.
he built skillfully on a new merchandising style of campaign in which he worked to educate and persuade voters.
bryan summoned voters to an older america a land where farms were as important as factories where the virtues of rural and religious life outweighed the doubtful lure of the city where common people still ruled and opportunity existed for all.
he drew on the jeffersonian tradition of rural virtue distrust of central authority and abiding faith in the powers of human reason.
urged to take the stump against bryan mckinley replied i might just as well put up a trapeze on my front lawn and compete with some professional athlete as go out speaking against bryan the republican candidate let voters come to him.
railroads brought them by the thousands into mckinleys hometown of canton ohio and he spoke to them from his front porch.
through use of the press he reached fully as many people as bryans more strenuous effort.
appealing to labor immigrants well to do farmers businessmen and the middle class mckinley defended economic nationalism and the advancing urbanindustrial society.
on election day voter turnout was extraordinarily high a measure of the intense interest.
by nightfall the outcome was clear mckinley won 50 percent of the vote to bryans 46 percent.
he won the mckinley administration what did mckinley accomplish that placed the results of the 1896 election on a solid basis.
the election of 1896 cemented the voter realignment of 1894 and initiated a generation of republican rule.
for more than three decades after 1896 with only a brief democratic resurgence under woodrow wilson the republicans remained the countrys majority party.
mckinley took office in 1897 under favorable circumstances.
to everyones relief the economy had begun to revive.
the stock market rose factories once again churned out goods and farmers prospered.
farm prices climbed sharply during 1897 on bumper crops of wheat cotton and corn.
discoveries of gold in australia and alaska together with the development of a new cyanide process for extracting gold from ore enlarged the worlds gold supply decreased its price and inflated the currency as the silverites had hoped.
for the first time since 1890 the 1897 treasury statements showed a comfortable gold reserve.
mckinley and the republicans basked in the glow.
they became the party of progress and prosperity an image that helped them win victories until another depression hit in the 1930s.
mckinleys popularity soared.
open and accessible in contrast to clevelands isolation he rode the washington streetcars walked the streets and enjoyed looking in department store windows.
mckinley became the first president to ride in an automobile reaching the speed of 18 miles an hour.
an activist president he set the policies of the administration.
conscious of the limits of power he maintained close ties with congress and worked hard to educate the public on national choices and priorities.
mckinley struck new relations with the press and traveled far more than previous presidents.
in some ways he began the modern presidency.
shortly after taking office he summoned congress into special session to revise the tariff.
in july 1897 the dingley tariff passed the house and senate.
it raised average tariff duties to a record level and as the final burst of nineteenth century protectionism it caused trouble for the republican party.
by the end of the 1890s consumers critics and the republicans themselves were wondering if the tariff had outlived its usefulness in the maturing american economy.
from the 1860s to the 1890s the republicans had built their party on a pledge to promote economic growth through the use of state and national power.
by 1900 with the industrial system chapter 13 on myhistorylab movement to the far west read the document 1852 p 305 view the map united states territorial expansion in the 1850s p 294 view the map texas revolution 1836 p 296 manifest destiny and the mexican american war watch the video the annexation of texas p 299 read the document john osullivan the great nation of futurity 1845 p 300 read the document thomas corwin against the mexican war 1847 p 303 internal expansionism view the map p 304 mexican american war 1846 1848 senate report on the railroads watch the video mastering time and space how the railroads changed america p 306 complete the assignment hispanic america after a case study in majority rule p 308 read the document samuel morse foreign immigration 1835 p 311 indicates study plan media assignment the sectional crisis contents and learning objectives the compromise of 1850 pg.
315 feature essay the enigma of john brown how did territorial expansion intensify the conflict over slavery.
law and society the case of dred and harriet scott blurring the borders of politics and justice political upheaval 1852 1856 pg.
319 how did the two party system change during this period.
the house divided 1857 1860 pg.
324 how did the institution of slavery go bey ond political and economic debates.
listen to the audio file on myhistorylab chapter 6 maine st l part of mass.
northwest territory ceded by virginia 1784 ron hu ke la lake m ich iga vermont n n ca u ceded by massachusetts ke la ceded by connecticut p massachusetts rhode island connecticut pennsylvania 17 82 new jersey y ork r delaware d c maryland ew io oh new hampshire new york ntario e eri ceded by new york r a r ke o p e la ceded by conn 1800 missouri ad ce virginia by n d territory of virginia de cumberland until 1792 gap kentucky sis sip pi mis ceded by spain to france 1800 r louisiana ceded by south carolina to georgia ceded by north carolina tennessee atlantic ocean north carolina state of franklin south carolina ceded by georgia georgia ceded by spain 31 north latitude spanish fl boundary of territory ceded by new york o r id gulf of mexico 200 miles 200 kilometers boundary of territory ceded by virginia in 1784 a original thirteen states after their land cession western land claims ceded by the states after winning the war the major issue facing the continental congress under the articles of confederation was mediating conflicting states claims to rich western land.
by 1802 the states had ceded all rights to the federal government.
the initial attempt to deal with this explosive problem came in 1784 jefferson then serving as a member of congress drafted an ordinance that became the basis for later more enduring legislation.
jefferson recommended carving ten new states out of the western lands located north of the ohio river and recently ceded to the united states by virginia.
he specified that each new state establish a republican form of government.
when the population of a territory equaled that of the smallest state already in the confederation the region could apply for full statehood.
in the meantime free white males could participate in local government a democratic guarantee that frightened some of jeffersons more conservative colleagues.
the impoverished congress was eager to sell off the western territory as quickly as possible.
after all the frontier represented a source of income that did not depend on the unreliable generosity of the states.
a second ordinance passed in 1785 and called the land ordinance established an orderly process for laying out new townships and marketing public lands.
public response disappointed congress.
surveying the lands took far longer than anticipated and few persons possessed enough hard currency to make even the minimum purchase.
finally a solution to the problem came from manasseh cutler a new england minister turned land speculator and congressional lobbyist and his associates who included several former officers of the continental army.
cutler and his associates representing the ohio and scioto companies offered to purchase more than six million strengthening federal authority land ordinance of 1785 grid pattern of a township 36 sections of 640 acres 1 square mile each income of one section reserved for the support of public education 6 miles a half section a 320 acres b quarter section 160 acres c half quarter section 80 acres d quarter quarter section 40 acres c b 6 miles unsurveyed acres of land located in present day southeastern ohio by persuading congress to accept at full face value government loan certificates that had been issued to soldiers during the revolution.
on the open market the ohio company could pick up the certificates for as little as 10 percent of their face value thus the company stood to make a fortune.
like so many other get rich quick schemes however this one failed to produce the anticipated millions.
unfortunately for cutler and his friends small homesteaders settled wherever they pleased refusing to pay either government or speculators for the land.
congress worried about the excess liberty on the frontier.
in the 1780s the west seemed to be filling up with people who by eastern standards were uncultured.
timothy pickering a new englander declared that the emigrants to the frontier lands are the least worthy subjects in the united states.
they are little less savage than the indians and when possessed of the most fertile spots for want of industry live miserably the charge was as old as the frontier itself.
indeed seventeenth century englishmen had said the same things of the earliest virginians.
the lawless image stuck however and even a sober observer such as washington insisted that the west crawled with banditti the ordinance of 1784 placed the government of the territories in the hands of people about whom congressmen and speculators had second thoughts.
these various currents shaped the ordinance of 1787 one of the final acts passed under the confederation.
the bill also called the northwest ordinance provided a new structure for government of the northwest territory.
the plan authorized the creation of between three and five territories each to be ruled by a governor a secretary and three judges appointed by congress.
when the population reached five thousand voters who owned property could elect an assembly but its decisions were subject to the governors absolute veto.
once sixty thousand persons resided in a territory they could write a constitution and petition for full statehood.
while these procedures represented a retreat from jeffersons original proposal the ordinance of 1787 contained d d 1 mile several significant features.
a bill of rights guaranteed the settlers the right to trial by jury freedom of religion and due process of law.
in addition the act outlawed slavery a prohibition that freed the future states of ohio indiana illinois michigan and wisconsin from the curse of human bondage.
by contrast settlement south of the ohio river received far less attention from congress.
long before the end of the war thousands of americans streamed through the cumberland gap into a part of virginia known as kentucky.
the most famous of these settlers was daniel boone.
in 1775 the population of kentucky was approximately one hundred by 1784 it had jumped to thirty thousand.
speculators purchased large tracts from the indians planning to resell this acreage to settlers at handsome profits.
in 1776 one land company asked congress to reorganize the companys holdings into a new state called transylvania.
while nothing came of this selfserving request another even more aggressive group of speculators in 1784 carved the state of franklin out of a section of present day tennessee then claimed by north carolina.
rival speculators prevented formal recognition of franklins government.
by 1790 the entire region south of the ohio river had been transformed into a crazy quilt of claims and counterclaims that generated lawsuits for many years to come.
strengthening federal authority what did the nationalists call for and how did they aim to achieve their initiatives.
despite its success in bringing order to the northwest territory the confederation increasingly came under heavy fire from critics who wanted a stronger central government.
complaints varied from region to region from person to person but most disappointment reflected economic frustration.
americans had assumed that peace would restore economic growth but recovery following the revolution was slow.
chapter 29 affluence and anxiety levittown the flight to the suburbs on may 7 1947 william levitt announced plans to build two thousand rental houses in a former potato field on long island thirty miles from midtown manhattan.
using mass production techniques he had learned while erecting navy housing during the war levitt quickly built four thousand homes and rented them to young veterans eager to leave crowded city apartments or their parents homes to begin raising families.
a change in government financing regulations led him to begin offering his houses for sale in 1948 for a small amount down and a low monthly payment.
young couples many of them the original renters quickly bought the first four thousand by the time levittown as he called the new community was completed in 1951 it contained more than seventeen thousand homes.
so many babies were born in levittown that it soon became known as fertility valley and the rabbit hutch levitt eventually built two more levittowns one in pennsylvania and one in new jersey each contained the same curving streets neighborhood parks and playgrounds and community swimming pools characteristic of the first development.
the secret of levittowns appeal was the basic house a 720 square foot cape cod design built on a concrete slab.
it had a kitchen two bedrooms and bath a living room complete with a fireplace and 16 foot picture window and an expansion attic with room for two more bedrooms.
levitt built only one interior but there were four different facades to break the monotony.
the original house sold for 6 990 in 1948 even the improved model a ranch style house sold for less than 10 000 in 1951 levitts houses were ideal for young people just starting out in life.
they were cheap comfortable and efficient and each home came with a refrigerator cooking range and washing machine.
despite the conformity of the houses the three levittowns were surprisingly diverse communities residents had a wide variety of religious ethnic and occupational backgrounds.
african americans however were rigidly excluded.
in time as the more successful families moved on to larger homes in more expensive neighborhoods the levittowns became enclaves for lower middle class families.
evittown symbolized the most significant social trend of the postwar era in the united states the flight to the suburbs.
the residential areas surrounding cities such as new york and chicago nearly doubled in the 1950s.
while central cities remained relatively stagnant during the decade suburbs grew by 46 percent by 1960 some sixty million people one third of the nation lived in suburban rings around the cities.
this massive shift in population from the central city was accompanied by a baby boom that started during world war ii.
young married couples began to have three four or even five children compared with only one or two children in american families during the 1930s.
these larger families led to a 19 percent growth in the nations population between 1950 and 1960 the highest growth rate since 1910 l the houses of levittown spread over twelve hundred acres of former potato fields on long island new york.
the economy boomed as residential construction soared.
by 1960 one fourth of all existing homes were less than ten years old and factories were turning out large quantities of appliances and television sets for the new households.
a multitude of new consumer products ranging from frozen foods to filter cigarettes from high fidelity phonographs to cars equipped with automatic transmissions and tubeless tires appeared in stores and showrooms.
in the suburbs the corner grocery gave way to the supermarket carrying a vast array of items that enabled homemakers to provide their families with a more varied diet.
a new affluence replaced the poverty and hunger of the great depression for most americans but many had haunting memories chapter 4.
like the extreme republicans who drafted the first state constitutions the antifederalists were deeply suspicious of political power.
during the debates over ratification they warned that public officials however selected would be constantly scheming to expand their authority.
the preservation of individual liberty required constant vigilance.
it seemed obvious that the larger the republic the greater the opportunity for political corruption.
local voters could not possibly know what their representatives in a distant national capital were doing.
the government outlined in the constitution invited precisely the kinds of problems that montesquieu had described in his famous essay the spirit of the laws.
in so extensive a republic one antifederalist declared the great officers of government would soon become above the control of the people and abuse their power antifederalists demanded direct personal contact with their representatives.
they argued that elected officials should reflect the character of their constituents as closely as possible.
it seemed unlikely that in large congressional districts the people would be able to preserve such close ties with their representatives.
according to the antifederalists the constitution favored persons wealthy enough to have forged a reputation that extended beyond a single community.
samuel chase told the members of the maryland whose constitution.
struggle for ratification read the document federalist paper no.
51 feb 6 1788 new hampshire 9th british north america canada lake superior june 21 1788 maine part of mass.
h ke la massachusetts lake michigan n uro new york r io e onta lak feb 16 1788 11th rhode island july 26 1788 ee l ak 13th may 29 1790 r ie connecticut pennsylvania 5th 2nd jan 9 1788 dec 12 1787 new jersey 3rd atlantic ocean dec 18 1787 delaware i oh 1st virginia.
or dec 8 1787 10th june 25 1788 maryland north carolina apr.
26 1788 7th spanish louisiana r 12th iss ipp i nov 21 1789 mi ss south carolina 300 miles 300 kilometers 8th may 23 1788 georgia majority for ratification 4th majority against ratification jan 2 1788 disputed with spain divided spani no returns sh f lor 1st ida order in which the states ratified ratification of the constitution advocates of the new constitution called themselves federalists and those who opposed its ratification were known as antifederalists.
ratifying convention that under the new system the distance between the people and their representatives will be so great that there is no probability of a farmer or planter being chosen.
only the gentry the rich and the well born will be elected federalist speakers mocked their opponents localist perspective.
the constitution deserved general support precisely because it ensured that future americans would be represented by natural aristocrats individuals possessing greater insights skills and training than did the ordinary citizen.
these talented leaders the federalists insisted could discern the interests of the entire population.
historians have generally accepted the federalist critique.
it would be a mistake however to see the antifederalists as losers or as persons who could not comprehend social and economic change.
although their rhetoric echoed an older moral view of political culture they accepted more easily than did many federalists a liberal marketplace in which ordinary citizens competed as equals with the rich and well born.
they believed the public good was best served by allowing individuals like themselves to pursue their own private interests.
that is what they had been doing on the local level during the 1780s and they resented the imposition of elite controls over their affairs.
although the antifederalists lost the battle over ratification their ideas about political economy later found many champions in the age of andrew jackson.
the constitution drew support from many different types of people.
in fact historians have been unable to discover sharp correlations between wealth and occupation on the one hand and attitudes toward the proposed system of central government on the other.
in general federalists lived in more commercialized areas than did their opponents.
in the cities artisans as well as chapter violated a city ordinance by refusing to give up her seat to a white person on a local chapter 21 toward empire greenland denmark iceland denmark sweden denmark the netherlands great german britain empire belgium austriafrance hungary alaska u s canada atlantic ocean italy greece morocco egypt puerto rico u s cuba french west africa liberia belgian congo c n e r f angola h ecuador brazil peru bolivia paraguay german southwest africa japan burma siam french indochina philippine islands ethiopia pacific islands german 1899 british east africa german east africa du tch east in dies indian ocean madagascar australia union of south africa uruguay chile korea pacific ocean india angloegyptian sudan eq ua to ria colombia china afghanistan persia arabia mo za mb ique mexico venezuela equator ottoman empire tripoli l africa pacific ocean spain ma nc hu ri a portugal united states russian empire argentina new zealand world colonial empires 1900 belgium german empire italy portugal united states france great britain the netherlands spain other independent states world colonial empires 1900 events of the nineteenth century increased european hegemony over the world.
by 1900 most independent african nations had disappeared and the major european nations had divided the continent among themselves.
in the east the european powers and japan took advantage of chinas internal weakness to gain both trading ports and economic concessions.
taft encouraged filipino participation in government.
during the following decades other measures broadened filipino rights.
independence finally came on july 4 1946 nearly fifty years after aguinaldo proclaimed it.
governing the empire ruling the colonies raised new and perplexing questions.
how could and how should the distant dependencies be governed.
did their inhabitants have the rights of american citizens.
some people contended that acquisition did not automatically incorporate the new possessions into the united states and endow them with constitutional privileges.
others argued that the constitution followed the flag meaning that acquisition made the possessions part of the nation and thus entitled them to all constitutional guarantees.
a third group suggested that only fundamental constitutional guarantees citizenship the right to vote and the right to trial by jury not formal privileges the right to use american currency the right to be taxed and the right to run for the presidency were applicable to the new empire.
in a series of cases between 1901 and 1904 de lima v bidwell dooley v u s and downes v bidwell the supreme court asserted the principle that the constitution did not automatically and immediately apply to the people of an annexed territory and did not confer upon them all the privileges of u s citizenship.
instead congress could specifically extend such constitutional provisions as it saw fit.
ye es the secretary of war said of the courts ambiguous rulings as near as i can make out the constitution follows the flag but doesnt quite catch up with it four dependencies hawaii alaska guam and puerto rico were organized quickly.
in 1900 congress granted territorial status to hawaii gave american citizenship to all citizens of the hawaiian republic authorized an elective legislature and provided for a governor appointed from washington.
a similar measure made alaska a territory in 1912 guam and american samoa were simply placed under the control of naval officers.
unlike the filipinos puerto ricans readily accepted the wars outcome and mckinley early withdrew troops from the island.
the foraker act of 1900 established civil government in puerto rico.
it organized the island as a territory made its residents citizens of puerto rico u s citizenship was extended to them in 1917 and empowered the president to appoint a governor general and a council to serve as the upper house of the legislature.
a lower house of delegates was to be elected.
acquisition of empire view the image emilio aguinaldo cubans themselves.
it repaired the damage of the civil war built roads and schools and established order in rural areas.
a public health campaign headed by dr walter reed an army surgeon wiped out yellow fever.
most troops withdrew at the end of 1899 but a small american occupation force remained until may 1902 when it sailed for home the cubans at last had a form of independence but they were still under the clear domination of their neighbor to the north.
the open door emilio aguinaldo in the philippines 1896 aguinaldos forces helped the americans drive spain out of the philippines expecting that the united states would recognize filipino independence.
when the united states failed to do so aguinaldo led his forces in warfare against the americans.
cuba proved a trickier matter.
mckinley asserted the authority of the united states over conquered territory and promised to govern the island until the cubans had established a firm and stable government of their own.
i want you to go down there to get the people ready for a republican form of government he instructed general leonard wood commander of the army in cuba until 1902.
i leave the details of procedure to you.
give them a good school system try to straighten out their ports and put them on their feet as best you can.
we want to do all we can for them and to get out of the island as soon as we safely can wood moved quickly to implement the instructions.
early in 1900 he completed a census of the cuban population conducted municipal elections and arranged the election of delegates to a constitutional convention.
the convention adopted a constitution modeled on the u s constitution and at woods prodding included provisions for future relations with the united states.
known as the platt amendment to the new cuban constitution the provisions stipulated that cuba should make no treaties with other powers that might impair its independence acquire no debts it could not pay and lease naval bases such as guantnamo bay to the united states.
most important the amendment empowered the united states to intervene in cuba to maintain orderly government.
between 1898 and 1902 the american military government worked hard for the economic and political revival of the island though it often demonstrated a paternalistic attitude toward the poised in the philippines the united states had become an asian power on the doorstep of china.
weakened by years of warfare china in 1898 and 1899 was unable to resist foreign influence.
japan england france germany and russia eyed it covetously dividing parts of the country into spheres of influence they forced china to grant concessions that allowed them exclusive rights to develop particular areas and threatened american hopes for extensive trade with the country.
mckinley first outlined a new china policy in september 1898 when he said that americans sought more trade but we seek no advantages in the orient which are not common to all.
asking only the open door for ourselves we are ready to accord the open door to others in september 1899 secretary of state john hay addressed identical diplomatic notes to england germany and russia and later to france japan and italy asking them to join the united states in establishing the open door policy.
this policy urged three agreements nations possessing a sphere of influence would respect the rights and privileges of other nations in that sphere the chinese government would continue to collect tariff duties in all spheres and nations would not discriminate against other nations in levying port dues and railroad rates within their respective spheres of influence.
under the open door policy the united states would retain many commercial advantages it might lose if china was partitioned into spheres of influence.
mckinley and hay also attempted to preserve for the chinese some semblance of national authority.
great britain most nearly accepted the principle of the open door.
russia declined to approve it and the other powers sending evasive replies stated they would agree only if all the other nations did.
hay turned the situation to american advantage by boldly announcing in march 1900 that all the powers had accepted the open door policy.
see the feature essay the 400 million customers of china pp.
508 510 for more on u s trade in china.
the policys first test came just three months later with the outbreak of the boxer rebellion in peking now beijing.
in june 1900 a secret intensely nationalistic chinese society called the boxers tried to oust all foreigners from their country.
overrunning peking they drove foreigners into their legations and penned them up for nearly two months.
in the end the united states joined britain germany and other powers in sending troops to lift the siege.
fearing that the rebellion gave some nations especially germany and russia an excuse to expand their spheres of influence hay took quick action to emphasize american policy.
in july he sent off another round of open door notes affirming complete the assignment the 400 million customers of china on myhistorylab feature essay the 400 million customers of china dukes cameo cigarettes card depicting the ruler flag and coat of arms of china.
the w duke sons company merged with other tobacco manufacturers in 1890 to form the american tobacco company which began selling cigarettes in china that same year.
t he issue of american trade with china so much in the news today has been a concern of the united states for more than two centuries.
many of the things americans now buy and wear carry the label made in china the united states had long hoped that the chinese would be buying goods made in the u s a but it has not worked out entirely that way.
for a time it seemed it would.
when the united states won independence from great britain it opened up markets the british had monopolized such as china whose huge population of 400 million people fascinated american business leaders throughout the nineteenth century.
let me say to the businessmen of america a member of congress exclaimed in 1898 look to the land of the setting sun look to the pacific.
there are teeming millions there who will ere long want to be fed and clothed the same as we are step by step americans in the 1800s moved closer to those teeming millions by actions including secretary of state william h sewards 1867 purchase of alaska and the later decisions to acquire hawaii and construct a canal across the isthmus of panama.
president william mckinley offered several reasons for retaining the philippine islands after the spanish american war but one of them was their nearness to china.
adding a sense of urgency business and political leaders during the 1880s and 1890s became increasingly concerned that the avalanche of goods pouring out of the nations farms and factories outpaced the purchasing power of customers at home.
presidents from mckinley to woodrow wilson pointed out that businesses must find new markets abroad or face collapse.
o ur industries have expanded to such a point wilson argued in 1912 that they will burst their jackets if they cannot find a free outlet to the markets of the world but doing that was not easy in china whose great distances different language and restrictive laws stymied even some of americas most legendary business leaders.
both j p morgan the famed financier who bought up railroads everywhere and created the gigantic u s steel company and e h harriman a railroad magnate who dreamed of china as part of a transportation system that circled the globe tried and failed.
others who took account of chinese customs and conditions succeeded.
bring me the atlas james b duke head of the american tobacco company said to an aide soon after he founded the company.
turning the pages he quickly scanned population figures until he came to one he liked pop.
430 000 000 that he said is where we are going to sell cigarettes and that place of course was china.
american tobacco shipped its first cigarettes to china in 1890 and watched sales rise dramatically from 1 25 billion cigarettes in 1902 to 9 75 billion in 1912 and 12 billion in 1916 it built large plants in two chinese cities established key distribution centers and advertised widely.
the company employed some native chinese to market its cigarettes but also hired teams of westerners usually bachelors under the age of 25 who could accept the risks of living and working in china.
urging them to learn colloquial chinese the company held language exams every six months and awarded a 500 bonus to anyone who passed.
before long american tobacco produced nearly two thirds of the cigarettes consumed in china.
other businesses adopted similar strategies among them john d rockefellers standard oil company which by 1910 marketed more than half the kerosene sold in china.
standards famous red kerosene tin flattened to make roofs and walls of houses around the world became a symbol of americas economic reach.
significantly americans in the progressive period exported not only oil and tobacco but also major social reforms reflecting a certainty so common in our history that the chinese could not do it for themselves.
the pigtails the old pinched shoes the parasols and banners a leading reform magazine said in 1915 must give way to parks and sewers and filtered water and war on rats and mosquitoes american agencies and universities eagerly took up the far eastern question as lillian wald a prominent female reformer put it.
the rockefeller foundation worked to encourage cultivation of arable land the suffragist magazine campaigned to give chinese women the vote americans in china tried to improve the postal service and introduce the wireless radio the american red cross employed engineers to eliminate floods on chinese rivers and open up new farmland.
before long the young mens christian association extended its mission to china aiming to improve schools form settlement houses in major cities and reform the sanitation of chinas prisons parks and businesses.
drawing on its staff of young dedicated college graduates it held literacy campaigns worked for better public health paid for social surveys and tried to provide recreation and residences for some of chinas poor.
students from princeton university established a settlement house soon known as princeton in peking.
in 1906 yale university students founded the yale in china medical college at changsha to function as one of the founders said as a center for the uplifting of leading chinese young men toward civilization heady ideas they were typical of the united states in the progressive period a conviction that changing the environment would change people a desire to expand business growth and progressive reform and export both to other countries.
business leaders eager to acquire more and more of the vast china market were among those who urged the mckinley administration to establish the famed open door.
the great depression and world war ii diverted american attention from the china market but once the war ended business leaders again flocked there only to find that the victory in 1949 of mao tse tung and his communist peoples liberation army had closed the door to trade.
china emptied of americans.
the last american diplomats left in the spring of 1950 followed soon after by business figures and missionaries.
it took two decades to begin a thaw even longer to begin the serious business of trading once again.
president richard m nixon visited china in 1972 in a historic trip that signaled a new direction in relations between the two countries.
six years later president jimmy carter restored diplomatic relations.
sounding very much like his nineteenth century predecessors president bill clinton noted in 2000 that china with more than a billion people is home to the largest potential market in the world backed by the united states china entered the world trade organization in 2001 with much of american business still hopeful of capturing the china trade in favor.
and the chinese did buy american goods as those businesses hoped 35 billion worth in the year 2000 making china americas fifth largest market in the world.
american tobacco companies continue to sell millions of cigarettes in china companies dealing in aircraft engines power plant equipment soybeans cotton and fruit also do well.
but the old dream proves elusive still.
americans buy from china far more than the chinese buy from the united states about six times more in fact.
by the end of 2005 the u s deficit with china reached 202 billion the largest trade deficit in the history of the world the u s trade representative said in a recent speech in beijing.
that deficit continues to grow.
with many american name brands now made in china the chinese have begun to wonder what a made in the u s a label really means.
questions for discussion 1 why did american business in the late nineteenth century want to tap the china market.
2 what social reforms did americans in the progressive era want to export to china.
chapter 22 the progressive era and oriented toward results and efficiency.
they both believed in private property and the importance of economic progress.
in fact in working for reform the progressives often drew on the managerial methods of a business world they sought to regulate.
managing the machines mass production changed the direction of american industry.
size system organization and marketing became increasingly important.
management focused on speed and product not on workers.
assembly line technology changed tasks and to some extent values.
the goal was no longer to make a unique product that would be better than the one before.
the way to make automobiles ford said as early as 1903 is to make one automobile like another automobile to make them all alike to make them come through the factory just alike read the document frederick winslow taylor scientific management 1911 in 1911 frederick winslow taylor published his book the principles of scientific management.
in this work taylor proposed two major reforms.
first management must take responsibility for job related knowledge and classify it into rules.
second management should control the workplace through standardization of methods.
in a development that rivaled assembly lines in importance businesses established industrial research laboratories where scientists and engineers developed new products.
general electric founded the first one in 1900 housed in a barn.
it soon attracted experts who designed improvements in light bulbs invented the cathode ray tube worked on early radio and even tinkered with atomic theory.
du pont opened its labs in 1911 eastman kodak in 1912 and standard oil in 1919 as the source of new ideas and technology the labs altered life in the twentieth century.
through all this business became large scale mechanized and managed.
while many shops still employed fewer than a dozen workers the proportion of such shops shrank.
by 1920 close to one half of all industrial workers toiled in factories employing more than 250 people.
more than one third worked in factories that were part of multiplant companies.
industries that processed materials iron and steel paper cement and chemicals were increasingly automated and operated continuously.
in the glass industry machines ended the domination of highly skilled and well paid craftspeople.
in 1908 irving w colburn invented a machine to manufacture plate glass the libbey owens ford company bought the patent and ford soon had a glassmaking machine from which emerged every day for two years a 3 mile ribbon of automobile window glass.
eventually the plant produced almost two thousand miles of glass.
workers tending such ribbons could not fall behind.
foremen still managed the laborers on the factory floor but more and more the rules came down from a central office where trained professional managers supervised production flow.
systematic record keeping cost accounting and inventory and production controls became widespread.
workers lost control of the work pace.
if you need to turn out a little more a manager at swift and company said you speed up the conveyor a little and the men speed up to keep pace it worked.
for that and other reasons in the automobile industry output per worker hour multiplied an extraordinary four times between 1909 and 1919 folkways of the workplace workers passing job related knowledge to each other performing their tasks with little supervision setting their own pace and in effect running the shop began to give way to scientific labor management.
more than anyone else frederick winslow taylor an inventive mechanical engineer strove to extract maximum efficiency from each worker.
in the past he believed the man has been first in the future the system must be first in his book the principles of scientific management 1911 taylor proposed two major reforms.
first management must take responsibility for job related knowledge and classify it into rules laws and formulae second management should control the workplace through enforced standardization of methods enforced adoption of the best implements and working conditions and enforced cooperation although few factories wholly adopted taylors principles he had great influence and the doctrines of scientific management spread through american industry.
workers caught up in the changing industrial system experienced the benefits of efficiency and productivity in some industries they earned more.
but they suffered important losses as well.
societys masses performing repetitive tasks they seemed part of the machinery moving to the pace and needs of their mechanical pacesetters.
bored they might easily lose pride of workmanship though many workers it is clear did not.
efficiency engineers experimented with tools and methods a process many workers found unsettling.
yet the goal was to establish routine to work out as someone said of a garment worker one single precise motion each second 3 600 in one hour and all exactly the same praising that worker the manager said she is a sure machine jobs became not only monotonous but dangerous.
as machines and assembly lines sped up boredom or miscalculation could bring disaster.
meat cutters sliced fingers and hands.
illinois steel mills a magazine said were making steel and killing men one mill had forty six deaths in 1906 alone.
injuries were part of many jobs.
the machines go like mad all day a garment worker said because the faster you work the more money you get.
sometimes in my haste i get my finger caught and the needle goes right through it.
i bind the finger up with a piece of cotton and go on working watch the video rural free delivery mail societys masses how did mass production affect women children immigrants and african americans.
spreading consumer goods through society mass production not only improved peoples lives but sometimes cost lives too.
tending the machines took hard painful labor often under dangerous conditions.
as businesses expanded they required more and more people and the labor force increased tremendously to keep up with the demand for workers in the factories mines and forests.
women african americans asian americans and mexican americans played larger and larger roles.
immigration soared.
between 1901 and 1910 nearly 8 8 million immigrants entered the united states between 1911 and 1920 another 5 7 million came.
for many of these people life was harsh spent in crowded slums and long hours on the job.
fortunately the massive unemployment of the 1890s was over and in many skilled trades such as cigar making there was plenty of work to go around.
though the economic recovery helped nearly everyone the less skilled continued to be the less fortunate.
migrant workers lumberjacks ore shovelers and others struggled to find jobs that paid decently.
under such circumstances many people fought to make a living and many too fought to improve their lot.
their efforts along with the efforts of the reform minded people who came to their aid became another important hallmark of the progressive era.
better times on the farm while people continued to flee the farms by 1920 fewer than one third of all americans lived on farms and fewer than one half lived in rural areas farmers themselves prospered the beneficiaries of greater production and expanding urban markets.
rural free delivery begun in 1896 helped diminish the farmers sense of isolation and changed farm life.
the delivery the west virginia experiment with rural free delivery was launched in relative obscurity and in an atmosphere of hostility.
critics of the plan claimed it was impractical and too expensive to have a postal carrier trudge over rutted roads and through forests trying to deliver mail in all kinds of weather.
of mail to the farm door opened that door to a wider world it exposed farmers to urban thinking national advertising and political events.
in 1911 more than one billion newspapers and magazines were delivered over rfd routes.
parcel post 1913 permitted the sending of packages through the u s mail.
mail order houses flourished rural merchants suffered.
packages went both ways president woodrow wilsons first parcel post delivery held 8 pounds of new jersey apples and within a year 300 million packages were being mailed annually.
while telephones and electricity did not reach most rural areas for decades better roads mail order catalogs and other innovations knit farmers into the larger society.
early in the new century mary e lease who in her populist days had urged kansas farmers to raise less corn and more hell moved to brooklyn.
farmers still had problems.
land prices rose with crop prices and farm tenancy increased especially in the south.
tenancy grew from one quarter of all farms in 1880 to more than one third in 1910 in south carolina georgia alabama and mississippi nearly two thirds of the farms were run by tenant farmers.
many southern tenant farmers were african americans and they suffered from farm bred diseases.
in one of the reforms of the progressive era in 1909 the rockefeller sanitary commission acting on recent scientific discoveries began a sanitation campaign that eventually wiped out the hookworm disease and in 1912 the u s public health service began work on rural malaria.
in the arid west irrigation transformed the land as the federal government and private landholders joined to import water from mountain watersheds.
the dry lands bloomed and so did a rural chapter 30 the turbulent sixties military escalation designed to compel hanoi to accept a diplomatic solution.
in late july the president permitted a gradual increase in the bombing of north vietnam and allowed american ground commanders to conduct offensive operations in the south.
most ominously he approved the immediate dispatch of fifty thousand troops to vietnam and the future commitment of fifty thousand more.
these july decisions formed an open ended commitment to employ american military forces as the situation demanded wrote historian george herring and they were the closest thing to a formal decision for war in vietnam convinced that withdrawal would destroy american credibility before the world and that an invasion of the north would lead to world war iii johnson opted for large scale but limited military intervention.
moreover lbj feared the domestic consequences of either extreme.
a pullout could cause a massive political backlash at home as conservatives condemned him for betraying south vietnam to communism.
all out war however would mean the end of his social programs.
once congress focused on the conflict he explained to biographer doris kearns that bitch of a war would destroy the woman i really loved the great society so he settled for a limited war committing a half million american troops to battle in southeast asia all the while pretending it was a minor engagement and refusing to ask the american people for the support and sacrifice required for victory.
lyndon johnson was not solely responsible for the vietnam war.
he inherited both a policy that assumed vietnam was a vital national interest and a deteriorating situation in saigon that demanded a more active american role.
truman eisenhower and kennedy had taken the united states deep into the vietnam maze it was johnsons fate to have to find a way out.
but lbj bears full responsibility for the way he tried to resolve his dilemma.
the failure to confront the people with the stark choices the nation faced in vietnam the insistence on secrecy and deceit and the refusal to acknowledge that he had committed the united states to a dangerous military involvement were johnsons sins in vietnam.
his lack of self confidence in foreign policy and fear of domestic reaction led directly to his undoing.
stalemate for the next three years americans waged an intensive war in vietnam and succeeded only in preventing a communist victory.
american bombing of the north proved ineffective.
the rural undeveloped nature of the north vietnamese economy meant there were few industrial targets a political refusal to bomb the main port of haiphong allowed soviet and chinese arms to flow freely into the country.
nor were the efforts to destroy supply lines any more successful.
american planes pounded the ho chi minh trail that ran down through laos and cambodia but the north vietnamese used the jungle canopy effectively to hide their shipments and their massive efforts to repair damaged roads and bridges.
in fact the american air attacks with their inadvertent civilian casualties gave north vietnam a powerful propaganda weapon which it used to sway world opinion against the united states.
the war in the south went no better.
despite the steady increase in american ground forces from 184 000 in late 1965 to more than 500 000 by early 1968 the vietcong still controlled much of the countryside.
the search and destroy tactics employed by the american commander general william westmoreland proved ill suited to the situation.
the vietcong aided by north vietnamese regulars were waging a war of insurgency avoiding fixed positions and striking from ambush.
in a vain effort to destroy the enemy westmoreland used superior american firepower wantonly devastating the countryside causing many civilian casualties and driving the peasantry into the arms of the guerrillas.
inevitably these tactics led to the slaughter of innocent civilians most notably at the hamlet of my lai.
in march 1968 an american company led by lieutenant william calley jr killed more than two hundred unarmed villagers.
the main premise of westmorelands strategy was to wage a war of attrition that would finally reach a crossover point when communist losses each month would be greater than the number of new troops they could recruit.
he hoped to lure the vietcong and the north vietnamese regulars into pitched battles in which american firepower would inflict heavy casualties.
but soon it was the communists who were deciding where and when the fighting would take place provoking american attacks in remote areas of south vietnam that favored the defenders and made westmoreland pay heavily in american lives for the communist losses.
by the end of 1967 the nearly half million american troops johnson had sent to vietnam had failed to defeat the enemy.
at best lbj had only achieved a bloody stalemate that gradually turned the american people against a war they had once eagerly embraced.
years of turmoil why were there protests during the 1960s.
the vietnam war became the focal point for a growing movement of youthful protest that made the 1960s the most turbulent decade of the twentieth century.
disenchantment with conventional middle class values a rapid increase in college enrollments as a result of the post world war ii baby boom a reaction against the crass materialism of the affluent society with its endless suburbs and shopping malls all led american youth to embrace an alternative lifestyle based on the belief that people are sensitive searching poetic and capable of love they were ready to create a counterculture.
the agitation of the 1960s was at its height between 1965 and 1968 the years that marked the escalation of the vietnam war.
disturbances on college campuses reflected growing discontent in other parts of society from the urban ghettos to the lettuce fields of the southwest.
all who felt disadvantaged and dissatisfied students african americans hispanics native americans women hippies took to the streets to give vent to their feelings.
the student revolt the first sign of student rebellion came in the fall of 1964 at the prestigious university of california at berkeley.
a small group of radical students resisted university efforts to deny them a place to solicit volunteers and funds for off campus causes.
forming the free speech movement they struck back by occupying years of turmoil administration buildings and blocking the arrest of a nonstudent class.
but like the flappers of the 1920s the protesters set the tone for protester.
for the next two months the campus was in turmoil.
an entire era and left a lasting impression on american society.
in the end the protesters won the rights of free speech and association that they championed.
their hero was mario savio a protesting the vietnam war student who had eloquently summed up the cause by likening the university to a great machine and telling others youve got to put the most dramatic aspect of the youthful rebellion came in your bodies upon the gears and upon the wheels upon the levers opposing the vietnam war.
the first student teach ins began upon all the apparatus and youve got to make it stop at the university of michigan in march 1965 soon they spread the free speech movement at berkeley offered many insights into the causes of campus unrest.
it was fueled in part by student suspicion of an watch the video protests against the vietnam war older depression born generation that viewed affluence as the answer to all problems.
unable to exert much influence on the power structure that directed the consumer society the students turned on the university.
they viewed higher education as the faithful servant of a corporate culture the university trained hordes of technicians harbored research laboratories that perfected dreadful weapons and used ibm punch cards to regiment students.
the feeling of powerlessness that underlay the berkeley riots was best revealed by a protester carrying a sign that read i am a uc student.
please dont bend fold spindle or mutilate me student protest found its full expression in the explosive growth of the students for a democratic society sds.
founded in port huron michigan in 1962 this radical organization wanted to rid american society of poverty racism and violence.
although the sds embraced many traditional liberal reforms such as expanded public housing and comprehensive health insurance its founders advocated a new approach called participatory democracy.
in contrast to both liberalism and oldstyle socialism the sds sought salvation through the individual rather than the group.
personal control of ones life and destiny not the creation of new bureaucracies was the hallmark of the new left.
in the next few years the sds grew phenomenally.
spurred on by the vietnam war and massive campus unrest the sds could count more than a hundred thousand followers and was responsible for disruptions at nearly a thousand colleges in 1968 yet its very emphasis on the individual and its fear of bureaucracy left it leaderless and subject to division and disunity.
by 1970 a split between factions some of which were given to violence led to its complete demise.
the meteoric career of the sds symbolized the turbulence of the 1960s.
for a brief time it seemed as though the nations youth had gone berserk indulging in a wave of experimentation with drugs sex and rock music.
older americans believed that all the nations traditional values from the puritan work ethic to the antiwar demonstrators protest in central park new york city on april 15 1967 family were under attack.
not all american youth four hundred thousand peace demonstrators with martin luther king jr leading the joined in the cultural insurgency the rebellion was procession marched from central park to the united nations to demand a halt to the american bombing of north vietnam.
generally limited to children of the upper middle chapter review study y resources take the study plan for chapter 31 the rise of a new conservatism 1969 1988 by the time reagan left the governors office in 1974 many signs pointed to a growing conservative mood across the nation.
in a popular rebellion against escalating property taxes in 1978 californias voters passed proposition 13 which slashed property taxes in half and resulted in a gradual reduction in social services.
religious leaders were especially outraged over the 1962 supreme court ruling in engel v vitale outlawing school prayer on the grounds that it was no part of the business of government to compose official prayers in the south where daily prayers were the customary way of beginning the school day the reaction was intense.
one alabama congressman denounced the supreme court justices proclaiming they put the negroes in the schools and now theyre driving god out concern over school prayer along with rising abortion and divorce rates impelled religious groups to engage in political activity to defend what they viewed as traditional family values.
jerry falwell a successful virginia radio and television evangelist founded the moral majority a fundamentalist group dedicated to preserving the american way of life see the feature essay the christian right pp.
the population shift of the 1970s especially the rapid growth of the sunbelt region in the south and west see p 774 added momentum to the conservative upsurge.
those moving to the sunbelt tended to be white middleand upper class suburbanites mainly skilled workers young professionals and business executives who were attracted both by economic opportunity and by a political climate emphasizing low taxes less government regulation and more reliance on the marketplace.
the political impact of population shifts from east to west and north to south during the 1970s was reflected in the congressional gains seventeen seats by sunbelt and far western states after the 1980 census.
conservatives also succeeded for the first time since world war ii in making their cause intellectually respectable.
scholars and academics on the right flourished in new think tanks writer william buckley and economist milton friedman proved to be effective advocates of conservative causes in print and on television.
neoconservatism led by norman podhoretzs magazine commentary became fashionable among many intellectuals who were former liberal stalwarts.
they denounced liberals for being too soft on the communist threat abroad and too willing to compromise high standards at home in the face of demands for equality from african americans women and the disadvantaged.
neoconservatives called for a reaffirmation of capitalism and a new emphasis on what was right about america rather than an obsessive concern with social ills.
y the end of the 1970s a decade marked by military defeat in vietnam political scandal that destroyed the administration of richard nixon economic ills that vexed the country under gerald ford and jimmy carter and unprecedented social strains on families and traditional institutions millions of americans had come to believe that cold war liberalism had run its course.
ronald reagan as the acknowledged leader of the conservative resurgence was ideally placed to capitalize on this discontent.
his personal charm softened the hard edges of his right wing call to arms and his conviction that america could regain its traditional self confidence by reaffirming basic ideals had a broad appeal to a nation facing new challenges at home and abroad.
in 1976 reagan had barely lost to president ford at the republican convention four years later he overcame an early upset by george bush in iowa to win the gop presidential nomination handily.
in his acceptance speech at the republican convention in detroit reagan set forth the themes that endeared him to conservatives less government a balanced budget family values and peace through greater military spending.
unlike barry goldwater who frightened people with his rigid ideology reagan offered reassurance and hope for the future.
he spoke of restoring to the federal government the capacity to do the peoples work without dominating their lives as historian robert dallek pointed out reagan assured his listeners that he was no radical idealist courting defeat but a sensible thoroughly likable american with a surefire formula for success that would please everyone in ronald reagan the republicans had found the perfect figure to lead americans into a new conservative era.
b the tempting of richard nixon what were the major accomplishments and failures of the nixon presidency.
following the divisive campaign of 1968 richard nixons presidency proved to be one of the most controversial in american history.
nixons domestic policies had limited success and though his diplomacy broke new ground in relations with china and the soviet union and ended american fighting in vietnam he was forced to resign the presidency under the dark cloud of the watergate scandal.
pragmatic liberalism nixon began his first term on a hopeful note promising the nation peace and respite from the chaos of the 1960s.
rejecting the divisions that had driven americans apart he pledged in his inaugural address to bring the country together.
we cannot learn from one another he said until we stop shouting at one another until we speak quietly enough so that our words can be heard as well as our voices the tempting of richard nixon nixons moderate language appeared to herald a return to the politics of accommodation that had characterized the eisenhower era.
faced with a democratic congress nixon like ike reconciled himself to the broad outlines of the welfare state.
instead of trying to overthrow the great society he focused on making the federal bureaucracy function more efficiently.
in some areas he actually expanded federal programs and responsibilities.
on civil rights for example nixon was the first president to adopt affirmative action as an explicit policy.
his labor secretary george shultz applied the philadelphia plan which had evolved to ensure the hiring of minority contractors in pennsylvanias largest city to other cities and eventually to all federal contracts worth more than 50 000.
nixon also expanded affirmative action to include women vastly increasing the scope of the policy.
the goal a nixon executive order explained was for the federal government to achieve the prompt and full utilization of minorities and women at all levels in all segments of its work force nixon broke new ground in other areas associated with liberalism.
he approved the creation of the occupational safety and health administration which assumed responsibility for reducing workplace injuries.
he oversaw the establishment of the environmental protection agency epa the federal watchdog on environmental affairs.
he signed the clean air act which provided the basis for tackling smog and other air pollutants.
he supported automatic cost of living increases to social security ensuring that the elderly not lose ground to the inflation that increasingly vexed the american economy.
many liberals suspected nixons motives and not without reason.
nixons liberalism was pragmatic even opportunistic rather than principled.
in private conversations he could be demeaning of african americans jews and other minorities.
but planning big changes in american foreign policy he chose not to pick fights with congressional democrats or buck the liberal tide that was still flowing from the 1960s.
he did try to shape that tide.
under the label of the new federalism he shifted responsibility for many social programs from washington to state and local authorities.
he developed the concept of revenue sharing by which federal funds were dispersed to state county and city agencies to meet local needs.
in 1972 he signed a law that shared 30 billion with local governments over a five year period.
an accompanying ceiling of 2 5 billion a year on federal welfare payments meant that much of the revenue sharing payments had to be allocated by cities and states to programs previously paid for by the federal government.
nixons civil rights policy was similarly calculating.
action by congress and the johnson administration had ensured that massive desegregation of southern schools delayed for more than a decade by legal action would begin just as nixon took office.
nixon and his attorney general john mitchell decided to shift the responsibility for this process to the courts.
in the summer of 1969 the justice department asked a federal judge to delay the integration of thirty three school districts in mississippi.
the supreme court quickly ruled against the justice department declaring that the obligation of every school district is to terminate dual school systems at once thus in the minds of southern white voters it was the hated supreme court not richard nixon who had forced them to integrate their schools.
the upshot of nixons domestic policies was to extend the welfare state in some areas reshape it in others and leave liberals and conservatives alike wondering just where nixon stood.
dtente nixon didnt really care because foreign policy not domestic policy was his pride and joy.
nixon had thought long about the state of the world and he was determined to improve it.
to assist him in this endeavor he appointed henry kissinger to be national security adviser.
a refugee from nazi germany kissinger had become a professor of government at harvard the author of several influential books and an acknowledged authority on international affairs.
nixon and kissinger approached foreign policy from a practical realistic perspective.
instead of viewing the cold war as an ideological struggle for survival with communism they saw it as a traditional great power rivalry one to be managed and controlled rather than to be won.
nixon and kissinger had a grand design.
realizing that recent events especially the vietnam war and the rapid soviet arms buildup of the 1960s had eroded americas position of primacy in the world they planned a strategic retreat.
russia had great military strength but its economy was weak and it had a dangerous rival in china.
nixon planned to use american trade notably grain and high technology to induce soviet cooperation while at the same time improving u s relations with china.
nixon and kissinger shrewdly played the china card as their first step toward achieving dtente a relaxation of tension with the soviet union.
in february 1972 accompanied by a planeload of reporters and television camera crews nixon visited china meeting with the communist leaders and ending more than two decades of sino american hostility.
nixon agreed to establish an american liaison mission in beijing as a first step toward diplomatic recognition.
the soviets who viewed china as a dangerous adversary responded by agreeing to an arms control pact with the united states.
the strategic arms limitation talks salt had been under way since 1969 during a visit to moscow in may 1972 nixon signed two vital documents with soviet leader leonid brezhnev.
the first limited the two superpowers to two hundred antiballistic missiles abms apiece the second froze the number of offensive ballistic missiles for a five year period.
the salt i agreements recognized the existing soviet lead in missiles but the american deployment of multiple independently targeted reentry vehicles mirvs ensured a continuing strategic advantage for the united states.
the salt i agreements were most important as a symbolic first step toward control of the nuclear arms race.
they signified that the united states and the soviet union were trying to achieve a settlement of their differences by peaceful means.
ending the vietnam war vietnam remained the one foreign policy challenge that nixon could not overcome.
he had a three part plan to end the conflict gradual withdrawal of american troops accompanied by training of south vietnamese forces to take over the chapter 16 the agony of reconstruction control of white conservatives bent on depriving blacks of political power.
organized mob violence defeated him in 1878 but he bounced back to win by decision of congress a contested congressional election in 1880 he did not leave the house of representatives for good until 1886 when he lost another contested election that had to be decided by congress.
it revealed the changing mood of the country that his white challenger was seated despite evidence of violence and intimidation against black voters.
in their efforts to defeat him smalls white opponents frequently charged that he had a hand in the corruption that was allegedly rampant in south carolina during reconstruction.
but careful historical investigation shows that he was by the standards of the time an honest and responsible public servant.
in the south carolina convention of 1868 and later in the state legislature he was a conspicuous champion of free and compulsory public education.
in congress he fought for the enactment and enforcement of federal civil rights laws.
not especially radical on social questions he sometimes bent over backward to accommodate what he regarded as the legitimate interests and sensibilities of south carolina whites.
like other middle class black political leaders in reconstructionera south carolina he can perhaps be faulted in hindsight for not doing more to help poor blacks gain access to land of their own.
but in 1875 he sponsored congressional legislation that opened for purchase at low prices the land in his own district that had been confiscated by the federal government during the war.
as a result blacks were able to buy most of it and they soon owned three fourths of the land in beaufort and its vicinity.
robert smalls spent the later years of his life as u s collector of customs for the port of beaufort a beneficiary of the patronage that the republican party continued to provide for a few loyal southern blacks.
but the loss of real political clout for smalls and men like him was one of the tragic consequences of the fall of reconstruction.
or a brief period of years black politicians such as robert smalls exercised more power in the south than they would for another century.
a series of political developments on the national and regional stage made reconstruction an unfinished revolution promising but not delivering true equality for newly freed african americans.
national party politics shifting priorities among northern republicans white southerners commitment to white supremacy backed by legal restrictions as well as massive extralegal violence against blacks all combined to stifle the promise of reconstruction.
f yet the reconstruction era also saw major transformations in american society in the wake of the civil war new ways of organizing labor and family life new institutions within and outside of the government and new ideologies regarding the role of institutions and government in social and economic life.
many of the changes begun during reconstruction laid the groundwork for later revolutions in american life.
the president vs congress what conflicts arose among lincoln johnson and congress during reconstruction.
the problem of how to reconstruct the union in the wake of the souths military defeat was one of the most difficult and perplexing challenges ever faced by american policy makers.
the constitution provided no firm guidelines for the framers had not anticipated a division of the country into warring sections.
after emancipation became a northern war aim the problem was compounded by a new issue how far should the federal government go to secure freedom and civil rights for four million former slaves.
the debate that evolved led to a major political crisis.
advocates of a minimal reconstruction policy favored quick restoration of the union with no protection for the freed slaves beyond the prohibition of slavery.
proponents of a more radical policy wanted readmission of the southern states to be dependent on guarantees that loyal men would displace the confederate elite in positions of power and that blacks would acquire basic rights of american citizenship.
the white house favored the minimal approach whereas congress came to endorse the more radical and thoroughgoing form of reconstruction.
the resulting struggle between congress and the chief executive was the most serious clash between two branches of government in the nations history.
wartime reconstruction tension between the president and congress over how to reconstruct the union began during the war.
occupied mainly with achieving victory lincoln never set forth a final and comprehensive plan for bringing rebellious states back into the fold.
but he did take initiatives that indicated he favored a lenient and conciliatory policy toward southerners who would give up the struggle and repudiate slavery.
in december 1863 he issued a proclamation of amnesty and reconstruction which offered a full pardon to all southerners with the exception of certain classes of confederate leaders who would take an oath of allegiance to the union and acknowledge the legality of emancipation.
this ten percent plan provided that once 10 percent or more of the voting population of any occupied state had taken the oath they were authorized to set up a loyal government.
by 1864 louisiana and arkansas states that were wholly or partially occupied by union troops had established unionist governments.
lincolns policy was meant to shorten the war.
first he hoped to weaken the southern cause by making it easy for disillusioned or lukewarm confederates to switch sides.
second he hoped to further his emancipation policy by insisting that the new governments abolish slavery.
the president vs congress congress was unhappy with the presidents reconstruction experquarrel with congress would have worsened or been resolved.
given iments and in 1864 refused to seat the unionists elected to the house lincolns past record of political flexibility the best bet is that he and senate from louisiana and arkansas.
a minority of congressiowould have come to terms with the majority of his party.
nal republicans the strongly antislavery radical republicans favored protection for black rights especially black male suffrage as a andrew johnson at the helm precondition for the readmission of southern states.
but a larger group of congressional moderates opposed lincolns plan not on the basis of andrew johnson the man suddenly made president by an assasblack rights but because they did not trust the repentant confederates sins bullet attempted to put the union back together on his own who would play a major role in the new governments.
they feared authority in 1865 but his policies eventually set him at odds with that the old ruling class would return to power and cheat the north of congress and the republican party and provoked the most serithe full fruits of its impending victory.
ous crisis in the history of relations between the executive and congress also believed the president was exceeding his authorlegislative branches of the federal government.
ity by using executive powers to restore the union.
lincoln operjohnsons background shaped his approach to reconstruction.
ated on the theory that secession being illegal did not place the born in dire poverty in north carolina he migrated as a young confederate states outside the union in a constitutional sense.
since individuals and not states had defied federal authority the president could use his pardoning power to read the document thirteenth fourteenth and certify a loyal electorate which could then function as the fifteenth amendments 1865 1868 1870 legitimate state government.
the dominant view in congress however was that the southern states had forfeited their place in the union and that it was up to congress to decide when and how they would be readmitted.
the most popular justification for congressional responsibility was based on the clause of the constitution providing that the united states shall guarantee to every state in this union a republican form of government by seceding radicals argued the confederate states had ceased to be republican and congress had to set the conditions to be met before they could be readmitted.
after refusing to recognize lincolns 10 percent governments congress passed a reconstruction bill of its own in july 1864 known as the wade davis bill this legislation required that 50 percent of the voters take an oath of future loyalty before the restoration process could begin.
once this had occurred those who could swear they had never willingly supported the confederacy could vote in an election for delegates to a constitutional convention.
the bill in its final form did not require black suffrage but it did give federal courts the power to enforce emancipation.
faced with this attempt to nullify his own program lincoln exercised a pocket veto by refusing to sign the bill before congress adjourned.
he justified his action by announcing that he did not want to be committed to any single reconstruction plan.
the sponsors of the bill responded with an angry manifesto and lincolns relations with congress reached their low.
congress and the president remained stalemated on the reconstruction issue for the rest of the war.
during his last months in office however lincoln showed some willingness to compromise.
he persisted in his efforts to obtain full recognition for the governments he had nurtured in louisiana and arkansas but seemed receptive to the setting of other conditions perhaps including black suffrage for readmis in this cartoon president andrew johnson left and thaddeus stevens the radical sion of those states where wartime conditions had prevented republican congressman from pennsylvania are depicted as train engineers in a execution of his plan.
however he died without clarifying deadlock on the tracks.
indeed neither johnson nor stevens would give way on his his intentions leaving historians to speculate whether his plans for reconstruction.
chapter 23 from roosevelt to wilson in the age of progressivism conditions child labor and other matters.
between 1910 and 1913 the u s commissioner of labor issued a massive nineteen volume report on conditions of women and children wage earners in the united states.
social justice reformers banding together to work for change formed the national conference of charities and corrections which in 1915 became the national conference of social work.
controlled by social workers the conference reflected the growing professionalization of reform.
through it social workers discovered each others efforts shared methodology and tried to establish themselves as a separate field within the social sciences.
once content with informal training sessions in a settlement house living room they now founded complete professional schools at chicago harvard and other universities.
after 1909 they had their own professional magazine the survey and instead of piecemeal reforms they aimed at a comprehensive program of minimum wages maximum hours workers compensation and widows pensions.
than at any other time until the 1960s.
some working class women pushed for higher wages and better working conditions.
collegeeducated women five thousand a year graduated after 1900 took up careers in the professions from which some of them supported reform.
from 1890 to 1910 the work of a number of national womens organizations including the national council of jewish women the national congress of mothers and the womens trade union league furthered the aims of the progressive movement.
excluded from most of these organizations african american women formed their own groups.
the national association of read the document report of the vice commission 1915 the purity crusade working in city neighborhoods social justice reformers were often struck by the degree to which alcohol affected the lives of the people they were trying to help.
workers drank away their wages some men spent more time at the saloon than at home.
drunkenness caused violence and it angered employers who did not want intoxicated workers on the job.
in countless ways alcohol wasted human resources the reformers believed and along with business leaders ministers and others they launched a crusade to remove the evils of drink from american life.
at the head of the crusade was the womens christian temperance union wctu which had continued to grow since it was founded in the 1870s.
by 1911 the wctu had nearly a quarter of a million members it was the largest organization of women in american history to that time.
in 1893 it was joined by the anti saloon league and together the groups pressed to abolish alcohol and the places where it was consumed.
by 1916 they had succeeded in nineteen states but as drinking continued elsewhere they pushed for a nationwide law.
in the midst of the moral fervor of world war i they succeeded and the eighteenth amendment to the constitution prohibiting the manufacture sale and transportation of intoxicating liquors took effect in january 1920 the amendment encountered troubles later in the 1920s as the social atmosphere changed but at the time it passed progressives thought prohibition was a major step toward eliminating social instability and moral wrong.
in a similar fashion some progressive reformers also worked to get rid of prostitution convinced that poverty and ignorance drove women to the trade.
by 1915 nearly every state had banned brothels and in 1910 congress passed the mann act which prohibited the interstate transportation of women for immoral purposes.
like the campaign against liquor the campaign against prostitution reflected the eras desire to purify and elevate often through the instrument of government action.
woman suffrage womens rights women played a large role in the social justice movement.
feminists were particularly active especially in the political sphere between 1890 and 1914 feminists were more active then in fact during the first two decades of the twentieth century progressive reformers set out to improve society.
one strategy they employed was eradicating vice.
termed vice crusaders these reformers attempted to stamp out prostitution especially in large cities as well as homosexuality.
the pinnacle of the anti vice movement was the passage of the mann act of 1910 which made it illegal to transport women across state lines for immoral purposes the spirit of progressivism view the map changing lives of american women 1880 1930 canada 1916 helena mt.
jeanette rankin is elected the first woman to the u s house of representatives.
washington 1910 columbia r montana 1914 north dakota ke superior la minnesota 1908 salem or.
miller v state of oregon u s supreme court upholds oregons 10 hour work day for women.
do r kansas ka ansas 1912 1 1912 arkan sa c indiana o missouri delaware west virginia.
maryland virginia pacific ocean red r arkansas 1892 memphis tn.
journalist ida b wells launches an anti lynching campaign.
mississippi alabama bra south carolina sr.
400 mi 400 km 1839 jackson ms first married womens property act passed granting married women ownership over limited property.
rio an gr 4 24 de number of children per woman florida louisiana fertility rate by race atlantic ocean georgia zo texas north carolina tennessee siss mis rio grand e oklahoma 1918 ippi new mexico r kentucky 1932 little rock ar.
hattie wyatt caraway is the first woman elected to the u s senate.
arizona 1912 non white mexico gulf of mexico 3 56 3 87 3 56 3 42 2 73 3 22 2 62 2 51 2 18 white 1916 brooklyn ny.
margaret sanger opens first u s birth control clinic.
ohio r hio s r california 1911 nj pennsylvania 1889 889 ch chicago il.
jane addams establishes establi ablishe hull house.
colorado 1893 ra o ol property act passed granting married women legal right to own property in their own name.
iowa io 1894 denver co first u s women omen me elected to state house of representatives.
esentatives.
entatives utah 1870 r ri r lake michiga mis sou nebraska vermont new new hampshire york o mich ontari 1917.
l 1918 massachusetts conn ri 1848 albany ny.
model married womens uron i ipp nevada 1914 south dakota 1918 wyoming 1869 great salt lake mi ss eh ak idaho 1896 r snake n l wisconsin iss oregon 1912 maine 1848 seneca falls ny.
women gather for convention to organize womens rights.
percentage of total women working by race or nativity 1890 nonwhite 52 37 white 21 5 foreign born 26 1880 1890 1900 1910 1920 1930 1940 percentage of women working 1900 single 89 married 11 percentage of women in the workforce 1900 less than 10 10 20 20 30 more than 40 1918 date womens suffrage legislation was passed states which never ratified the 19th amendment in 1920 wyoming was the first of several western states to grant women the right to vote however in most eastern states women s suffrage came only with the passage of the nineteenth amendment in 1920 the number of women in the workforce grew steadily to 18 percent by 1900 a figure that reflects an emphasis on industrial workers and ignores workers more informally employed in agricultural and domestic occupations.
colored women was founded in 1895 fourteen years before the better known male oriented national association for the advancement of colored people naacp.
aimed at social welfare the womens organization was the first african american social service agency in the country.
at the local level african american womens clubs established kindergartens day nurseries playgrounds and retirement homes.
from two hundred thousand members in 1900 the general federation of womens clubs grew to more than one million by 1912 the clubs met as they had before for coffee and literary conversation but they also began to look closely at conditions around them.
forming an industrial section and a committee on legislation for women and children the federation supported reforms to safeguard child and women workers improve schools ensure pure food and beautify the community.
reluctant at first the federation finally lent support in 1914 to woman suffrage a cause that dated back to the first womens rights convention in seneca falls new york in 1848 divided over tactics since the civil war the suffrage movement suffered from disunity male opposition indecision over whether to seek action at the state or at the national level resistance from the catholic church and opposition from liquor interests who linked the cause to prohibition.
women in the social justice movement needed to influence elected officials most of them men whom they could not reach chapter 23 from roosevelt to wilson in the age of progressivism reform in the cities and states what methods did progressive reformers use to attack problems in the cities and states.
progressive reformers realized government could be a crucial agent in accomplishing their goals.
they wanted to curb the influence of special interests and through such measures of political reform as the direct primary and the direct election of senators make government follow the public will.
once it did they welcomed government action at whatever level was appropriate.
as a result of this thinking the use of federal power increased as did the power and prestige of the presidency.
progressives not only lobbied for government sponsored reform but also worked actively in their home neighborhoods cities and states much of the significant change occurred in local settings outside the national limelight.
most important the progressives believed in the ability of experts to solve problems.
at every level local state and federal thousands of commissions and agencies took form.
staffed by trained experts they oversaw a multitude of matters ranging from railroad rates to public health.
voter participation in presidential elections 1876 1920 percentage 81 8 79 4 79 3 79 3 73 2 77 5 74 7 65 4 61 6 65 2 58 8 49 2 interest groups and the decline of popular politics placing government in the hands of experts was one way to get it out of the hands of politicians and political parties.
the direct primary which allowed voters rather than parties to choose candidates for office was another way.
these initiatives and others like them were part of a fundamental change in the way americans viewed their political system.
as one sign of the change fewer and fewer people were going to the polls.
voter turnout dropped dramatically after 1900 when the intense partisanship of the decades after the civil war gave way to media oriented political campaigns based largely on the personalities of the candidates.
from 1876 to 1900 the average turnout in presidential elections was 77 percent.
from 1900 to 1916 it was 65 percent and in the 1920s it dropped to 52 percent close to the average today.
turnout was lowest among young people immigrants the poor and ironically the newly enfranchised women.
it was particularly low in the south where conservative whites used restrictive election laws to keep blacks and others from the polls.
turnout in the south fell sharply from an average of 64 percent in the presidential elections of the 1880s to just 20 percent in 1920 and 1924 although the decline in the north was less sharp the reasons for it were more complex.
by the 1920s as many as onequarter of all eligible northern voters never cast a ballot.
there were numerous causes for the falloff but among the most important was the fact that people had found another way to achieve some of the objectives they had once assigned to political parties.
they had found the interest group a means of action that assumed importance in this era and became a major feature of politics ever after.
professional societies trade associations labor organizations farm lobbies and scores of other interest groups worked outside the party system to pressure government for things their members wanted.
social workers womens clubs reform groups and others learned to apply pressure in similar ways and the result was much of the significant legislation of the progressive era.
1876 1880 1884 1888 1892 1896 1900 1904 1908 1912 1916 1920 reform in the cities during the early years of the twentieth century urban reform movements many of them born in the depression of the 1890s spread across the nation.
in 1894 the national municipal league was organized and it became the forum for debate over civic reform changes in the tax laws and municipal ownership of public utilities.
within a few years nearly every city had a variety of clubs and organizations directed at improving the quality of city life.
in the 1880s reformers would call an evening conference pass resolutions and then go home after 1900 they formed associations adopted long range policies and hired a staff to achieve them.
in the mid 1890s only chicago had an urban reform league with a full time paid executive within a decade there were such leagues in every major city.
in city after city reformers reordered municipal government.
tightening controls on corporate activities they broadened the scope of utility regulation and restricted city franchises.
they updated tax assessments often skewed in favor of corporations and tried to clean up the electoral machinery.
devoted to efficiency they developed a trained civil service to oversee planning and operations.
the generation of the 1880s also had believed in civil service but the goal then was mostly negative to get spoilsmen out and good people in.
now the goal was efficiency and above all results.
in constructing their model governments urban reformers often turned to recent advances in business management and organization.
they emphasized continuity and expertise a system in which professional experts staffed a government overseen by elected officials.
at the top the elected leader surveyed the breadth of city reform in the cities and states state or national affairs and defined directions.
below a corps of experts trained in the various disciplines of the new society funneled the definition into specific scientifically based policies.
reformers created a growing number of regulatory commissions and municipal departments.
they hired engineers to oversee utility and water systems physicians and nurses to improve municipal health and city planners to oversee park and highway development.
they created specialized academies to train police and firefighters.
imitated by the state and federal governments the proliferation of experts and commissions widened the gap between voters and decision makers but dramatically improved the efficiency of government.
as cities exploded in size they freed themselves from the tight controls of state legislatures and began to experiment with their own governments.
struggling to recover from a devastating hurricane in 1900 galveston texas pioneered the commission form of government a form of municipal government in which commissions of appointed experts rather than elected officials ran the city.
wanting nonpartisan expertise staunton virginia was the first to hire a city manager.
other cities followed and by 1910 more than one hundred cities were using either the commission or manager type of government.
in the race for reform a number of city mayors won national reputations among them seth low in new york city and hazen s pingree in detroit working to modernize taxes clean up politics lower utility rates and control the awarding of valuable city franchises.
in toledo ohio mayor samuel m golden rule jones a wealthy manufacturer took billy clubs away from the police established free kindergartens playgrounds and night schools and improved wages for city workers.
in cleveland ohio tom l johnson demonstrated an innovative approach to city government.
a millionaire who had made his fortune manipulating city franchises johnson one day read henry georges progress and poverty and turned to reform.
elected mayor of cleveland he served from 1901 to 1909 and collected a group of aggressive and talented young advisers.
frederic c howe newton d baker and edward bemis all of whom later won national reputations shaped johnsons ideas on taxes prison reform utility regulation and other issues facing the city.
johnson combined shrewdness and showmanship.
believing in an informed citizenry he held outdoor meetings in huge tents.
he used colorful charts to give cleveland residents a course in utilities and taxation.
he cut down on corruption cut off special privilege updated taxes and gave cleveland a reputation as the countrys best governed city.
finding it difficult to regulate powerful city utilities and keep their costs down johnson and mayors in other cities turned more and more to public ownership of gas electricity water and transportation.
the idea of gas and water socialism in which cities owned their own gas electricity water and other utilities spread swiftly.
in 1896 fewer than half of american cities owned their own waterworks by 1915 almost two thirds did.
action in the states reformers soon discovered however that many problems lay beyond a citys boundaries and they turned for action to the state governments.
from the 1890s to 1920 reformers worked to stiffen state laws regulating the labor of women and children to create and strengthen commissions to regulate railroads and utilities to impose corporate and inheritance taxes to improve mental and penal institutions and to allocate more funds for state universities which were viewed as the training ground for the experts and educated citizenry needed for the new society.
maryland passed the first workers compensation law in 1902 soon most industrial states had such legislation.
after 1900 many states adopted factory inspection laws and by 1916 almost two thirds of the states mandated insurance for the victims of factory accidents.
by 1914 twenty five states had enacted employers liability laws.
to regulate business virtually every state created regulatory commissions empowered to examine corporate books and hold public hearings.
building on earlier experience state commissions after 1900 were given new power to initiate actions rather than await complaints and in some cases to set maximum prices and rates.
dictating company practices they pioneered regulatory methods later adopted in federal legislation of 1906 and 1910 some business leaders supported the federal laws in order to get rid of the intolerable supervision of dozens of separate state commissions.
historians have long praised the regulation movement but the commissions did not always act wisely or even in the public interest.
elective commissions often produced commissioners who had little knowledge of corporate affairs.
in addition to win an election some promised specific rates or reforms obligations that might bias the commissions investigative functions.
appointive commissions sometimes fared better but they too had to oversee extraordinarily complex businesses such as the railroads.
shaping everything from wages to train schedules the regulatory commissions affected railroad profits and growth negatively and in the end damaged the railroad industry.
to the progressives commissions offered a way to end the corrupt alliance between business and politics.
there was another way too and that was to democratize government by reducing the power of politicians and increasing the influence of the electorate.
to do that progressives backed three measures to make office holders responsive to popular will the initiative which allowed voters to propose new laws the referendum which allowed them to accept or reject a law at the ballot box and the recall which gave them a way to remove an elected official from office.
oregon adopted the initiative and referendum in 1902 by 1912 twelve states had them.
that year congress added the seventeenth amendment to the constitution to provide for the direct election of u s senators.
by 1916 all but three states had direct primaries which allowed the people rather than nominating conventions to choose candidates for office.
as attention shifted from the cities to the states reform governors throughout the country earned greater visibility.
joseph folk steffenss hero in st louis became the governor of missouri in 1904 hiram johnson won fame in california for his shrewd and forceful campaign against the southern pacific railroad.
in the east the cause of reform was upheld by charles evans hughes in new york and woodrow wilson the former president of princeton university in new jersey.
robert m la follette became the most famous reform governor.
a graduate of the university of wisconsin la follette served three terms in congress during the late 1880s.
a staunch republican he supported the tariff and other republican doctrines but the democratic landslide of 1890 turned him out of office.
moving to state politics he became interested in reform chapter 16 the agony of reconstruction the new governments were more economical than those of reconstruction mainly because they cut back drastically on appropriations for schools and other needed public services.
but they were scarcely more honest embezzlement of funds and bribery of officials continued to occur to an alarming extent.
louisiana for example suffered for decades from the flagrant corruption associated with a state chartered lottery.
the redeemer regimes of the late 1870s and 1880s badly neglected the interests of small white farmers.
whites and blacks were suffering from the notorious crop lien system that gave local merchants who advanced credit at high rates of interest during the growing season the right to take possession of the harvested crop on terms that buried farmers deeper and deeper in debt.
as a result increasing numbers of whites lost title to their homesteads and were reduced to tenancy.
when a depression of world cotton prices added to the burden of a ruinous credit system agrarian protesters began to challenge the ruling elite first through the southern farmers alliance of the late 1880s and then by supporting its political descendant the populist party of the 1890s see chapter 31 the rise of a new conservatism 1969 1988 on myhistorylab time line 1969 stonewall riots in new yorks greenwich village spark gay rights movement june american astronauts land on the moon july u s forces invade cambodia april ohio national guardsmen kill four students at kent state university may states ratify twenty sixth amendment to the constitution giving 18 year olds the right to vote july president nixon freezes wages and prices for ninety days august richard nixon visits china february u s and ussr sign salt i accords in moscow may white house plumbers unit breaks into democratic headquarters in watergate complex june nixon wins reelection in landslide victory over george mcgovern november united states and north vietnam sign truce january arab oil embargo creates energy crisis in the united states october supreme court orders nixon to surrender white house tapes june nixon resigns presidency august last evacuation helicopter leaves roof of u s embassy in saigon south vietnam april nation celebrates bicentennial with fireworks patriotic music and parade of sailing ships july jimmy carter defeats gerald ford in presidential election november 1977 carter signs panama canal treaties restoring sovereignty to panama september carter orchestrates camp david accords between israel and egypt september 1979 iranian militants seize american hostages tehran november soviet invasion of afghanistan leads to u s withdrawal from 1980 moscow olympics december 1980 ronald reagan wins presidency over carter 1981 american hostages in iran released after 444 days in captivity january sandra day oconnor becomes first woman u s supreme court justice september 1982 equal rights amendment fails state ratification june unemployment reaches postwar record high of 10 4 percent october 1984 russia boycotts summer olympics in los angeles july reagan reelected president november 1985 mikhail gorbachev becomes leader of the soviet union march 1986 iran contra affair made public november 1987 reagan and gorbachev sign inf treaty at washington summit 1988 george h w bush defeats michael dukakis decisively in presidential election chapter 9 nation building and nationalism a thriving settlement existed around natchez in the mississippi territory.
elsewhere in the trans appalachian west white settlement was sparse and much land remained in indian hands.
u s citizens eager to expand into lands held by indian nations as well as spain used diplomacy military action force and fraud to open lands for u s settlement and westward migration.
general andrew jackson provided such an opening.
in 1816 u s troops first crossed into east florida in pursuit of hostile seminole indians.
this raid touched off a wider conflict and after taking command in late 1817 jackson went beyond his official orders and occupied east florida in april and may of 1818 this operation became known as the first seminole war.
except for adams all the members of monroes cabinet privately condemned this aggressive action so did a report of the house of representatives.
but no disciplinary action was taken mainly because public opinion rallied behind the hero of new orleans.
in november 1818 secretary adams informed the spanish government that the united states had acted in self defense and that further conflict would be avoided only if east florida were ceded to the united states.
the madrid government weakened by latin american revolutions and the breaking up of its empire was in no position to resist american bullying.
as part of the adams ons treaty signed on february 22 1819 spain relinquished florida to the united states.
in return the united states assumed 5 million of the financial claims of american citizens against spain.
extending the boundaries postwar expansionists turned their attention first to spanish holdings which included florida and much of the present day american west.
their first goal was to obtain florida from spain.
between 1810 and 1812 the united states had annexed part of what is now alabama claiming that it was part of the louisiana purchase.
the remainder known as east florida became a prime object of territorial ambition for president james monroe and his energetic secretary of state john quincy adams.
adams was looking for opportunities to confront spain for control of the region and put into effect his grand design for continental expansion.
north america 1819 treaties with britain following the war of 1812 setting the border between the united states and canada british north america made this border the longest unfortified boundary line in the world.
greenland russian america danish settlements oregon country joint u s british occupation british north america con ven tion a tre dam aty s o lin ns e 1 of 1 st pierre and miquelon fr.
united states s new pa c i f i c ocean at l a n t i c ocean n pai gulf of mexico santo domingo cuba belize jamaica puerto rico sp.
guadeloupe fr.
haiti indep.
1804 martinique fr.
united states british possessions spanish possessions russian possessions 1000 miles 1000 kilometers gran colombia brazil port.
expansion and migration a strong believer that the united states had a continental destiny adams also used the confrontation over florida to make spain give up its claim to the pacific coast north of california thus opening a path for future american expansion.
taking advantage of spains desire to keep its title to texas a portion of which the united states had previously claimed as part of the louisiana purchase adams induced the spanish minister luis de ons to agree to the creation of a new boundary between american and spanish territory that ran north of texas but extended all the way to the pacific.
great britain and russia still had competing claims to the pacific northwest but the united states was now in a better position to acquire frontage on a second ocean.
interest in exploitation of the far west continued to grow during the second and third decades of the nineteenth century.
in 1811 a new york merchant john jacob astor founded the fur trading post of astoria at the mouth of the columbia river in the oregon country.
astors american fur company operated out of st louis in the 1820s and 1830s with fur traders working their way up the missouri to the northern rockies and beyond.
first they limited themselves to trading for furs with the indians but later businesses such as the rocky mountain fur company founded in 1822 relied on trappers or mountain men who went after game on their own and sold the furs to agents of the company at an annual meeting or rendezvous these colorful characters who included such legendary figures as jedediah smith jim bridger kit carson and jim beckwourth one of the many african americans who contributed to the opening of the west as fur traders scouts or settlers accomplished prodigious feats of survival under harsh natural conditions.
following indian trails they explored many parts of the rockies and the great basin.
many of them married indian women and assimilated much of the culture and technology of the native americans.
the mountain men were portrayed in american literature and popular mythology as exemplars of a romantic ideal of lonely self reliance in harmony with unspoiled nature.
the far west however remained beyond american dreams of agrarian expansion.
the real focus of attention between 1815 and the 1840s was the nearer west the rich agricultural lands between the appalachians and the mississippi that were inhabited by numerous indian tribes.
native american societies under pressure five indian nations with a combined population of nearly sixty thousand occupied much of what later became mississippi alabama georgia and florida.
these nations the cherokee chickasaw choctaw creek and seminole became known as the five civilized tribes because by 1815 they had adopted many of the features of the surrounding white southern society an agricultural economy a republican form of government and the institution of slavery.
though these southeastern indians consciously strategized to respond to jeffersonian exhortations toward civilization and the promise of citizenship that came with it between 1815 and 1833 it became increasingly clear that most white americans were not interested in incorporating them into u s society whether as nations or as individuals.
the five nations varied in their responses to white encroachment on their lands.
so called mixed blood leaders such as john ross convinced the cherokee to adopt a strategy of accommodation to increase their chances of survival the creek and seminole by contrast took up arms in resistance.
the cherokee were the largest of the five nations.
traditional cherokee society had combined hunting by men and subsistence farming by women.
in the early nineteenth century the shift to a more agrarian market based economy led to an erosion of the traditional matrilineal kinship system in which a person belonged to his mothers clan.
the new order replaced matrilineal inheritance with the u s system of patriarchy in which fathers headed the household and property passed from father to son.
an emphasis on the nuclear family with the husband as producer and the wife as domestic caretaker diminished the role of the clan.
the shift toward agriculture also helped introduce americanstyle slavery to cherokee society.
as the cherokee adopted plantation style agriculture they also began to adopt white attitudes toward blacks.
by the time of indian removal a few cherokeeowned plantations with hundreds of slaves and there were more than fifteen hundred slaves in the cherokee nation.
discrimination against africans in all five nations grew under pressure of contact with whites.
beginning in the 1820s the cherokee council adopted rules regulating slaves.
whereas a few africans in the eighteenth century had been adopted into the tribe and become citizens under the new laws slaves could not intermarry with cherokee citizens engage in trade or barter or hold property.
in an effort to head off encroachments by southern states the cherokee attempted to centralize power in a republican government in the 1820s as well.
cherokee historian william mcloughlin has described a series of eleven laws passed between 1820 and 1823.
constituted a political revolution in the structure of cherokee government.
under these laws the national council created a bicameral legislature a district and superior court system an elective system of representation by geographical district rather than by town and a salaried government bureaucracy this process culminated in the 1827 adoption of a formal written constitution modeled on the u s constitution.
at the same time a renaissance of cherokee culture was spurred by sequoyahs invention of a written cherokee language in 1821 1822.
while the alphabet was complicated and lacked punctuation sequoyan provided the cherokee a new means of selfexpression and a reinvigorated sense of cherokee identity.
the first american indian newspaper the cherokee phoenix was published in sequoyan in 1828 by the time of indian removal cherokee leaders like john ross and elias boudinot could point with pride to high levels of cherokee acculturation education and economic success at american style civilization the seminole nation the smallest of the five nations presents perhaps the starkest cultural contrast to the cherokee both because the seminole reacted to pressure from white settlers with armed resistance rather than accommodation and because their multicultural history gave them a very different relationship to slavery.
the seminole nation in florida formed after the european conquest of america from the disparate groups of creek indians migrating from georgia and alabama in the wake of war and disease who mingled with the remnants of native floridians to form the new chapter 9 nation building and nationalism as late as 1820 about two thirds of the clothing worn by americans was made entirely in households by female family members wives and daughters.
a growing proportion however was produced for market rather than direct home consumption.
under the putting out system of manufacturing merchant capitalists provided raw material to people in their own homes picked up finished or semifinished products paid the workers and took charge of distribution.
home manufacturing of this type was centered in the northeast and often involved farm families making profitable use of their slack seasons.
the making of articles that required greater skill such as high quality shoes and boots carriages or wagons mill wheels and barrels or kegs was mostly carried on by artisans working in small shops in towns.
but in the decades after 1815 shops expanded in size masters tended to become entrepreneurs rather than working artisans and journeymen often became wage earners rather than aspiring masters.
at the same time the growing market for low priced goods led to an emphasis on speed quantity and standardization in the methods of production.
a fully developed factory system emerged first in textile manufacturing.
the establishment of the first cotton mills utilizing the power loom as well as spinning machinery thus making it possible to turn fiber into cloth in a single factory resulted from the efforts of a trio of boston merchants francis cabot lowell nathan appleton and patrick tracy jackson.
on a visit to england in 1810 1811 lowell succeeded in memorizing the closely guarded industrial secret of how a power loom was constructed.
returning to boston he joined with appleton and jackson to acquire a water site at nearby waltham and to obtain a corporate charter for textile manufacturing on a new and expanded scale.
under the name of the boston manufacturing company the associates began their waltham operation in 1813 its phenomenal success led to the erection of a larger and even more profitable mill at lowell massachusetts in 1822 and another at chicopee in 1823 lowell became the great showplace for early american industrialization.
its large workforce of unmarried young women residing in supervised dormitories its unprecedented scale of operation its successful mechanization of almost every stage of the production process all captured the american middle class imagination in the 1820s and 1830s.
but in the late 1830s and 1840s conditions in the mills changed for the worse as the owners began to require more work for lower pay and some of the mill girls became militant labor activists.
one of these was sarah bagley who helped found the lowell female labor reform association in 1844 she subsequently led a series of protests against long hours and changes in the work routine that required more work from each operative.
other mills using similar labor systems sprang up throughout new england and the region became the first important manufacturing area in the united states.
the shift in textile manufacture from domestic to factory production shifted the locus of womens economic activity.
as the new england textile industry grew the putting out system rapidly declined.
between 1824 and 1832 household production of textiles dropped from 90 to 50 percent in most parts of new england.
the shift to factory production changed the course of capitalist activity in the region.
before the 1820s new england merchants concentrated mainly on international trade and boston mercantile houses read the document the harbinger female workers at lowell 1836 read the document a week in the mill lowell offering vol.
v 1845 lowell massachusetts became americas model industrial town in the first half of the nineteenth century.
in this painting of the town in 1814 when it was still called east chelmsford a multistory brick mill is prominent on the river.
textile mills sprang up throughout lowell in the 1820s and 1830s employing thousands of workers mostly women.
the second photograph from c 1848 shows a lowell mill worker operating a loom.
the politics of nation building after the war of 1812 made great profits.
a major source of capital was the lucrative china trade carried on by fast well built new england vessels.
when the success of waltham and lowell became clear many merchants shifted their capital away from oceanic trade and into manufacturing.
this change had important political consequences as leading politicians such as daniel webster no longer advocated a low tariff that favored importers over exporters.
they now became leading proponents of a high duty designed to protect manufacturers from foreign competition.
although most manufacturing was centered in the northeast the west also experienced modest industrial progress.
increasing rapidly in number and size were facilities for processing farm products such as gristmills slaughterhouses and tanneries.
distilleries in kentucky and ohio began during the 1820s to produce vast quantities of corn whiskey for a seemingly insatiable public.
one should not assume however that america had already experienced an industrial revolution by 1840 in that year 63 4 percent of the nations labor force was still employed in agriculture.
only 8 8 percent of workers were directly involved in factory production others were employed in trade transportation and the professions.
although this represented a significant shift since 1810 when the figures were 83 7 and 3 2 percent respectively the numbers would have to change a good deal more before it could be said that industrialization had really arrived.
the revolution that did occur during these years was essentially one of distribution rather than production.
the growth of a market economy of national scope still based mainly on agriculture but involving a rapid flow of capital commodities and services from region to region was the major economic development of this period.
and it was one that had vast repercussions for all aspects of american life.
for those who benefited from it most directly the market economy provided firm evidence of progress and improvement.
but many of those who suffered from its periodic panics and depressions regretted the loss of the individual independence and security that had existed in a localized economy of small producers.
these victims of boom and bust were receptive to politicians and reformers who attacked corporations and the money power the growth of cities in 1800 the united states was a rural nation.
only 6 percent of its five million people lived in towns of twenty five hundred or more and just two cities philadelphia and new york had populations above fifty thousand.
by 1850 one sixth of the twenty three million americans lived in towns of twenty five hundred or more.
this was hardly a complete urbanization of american life but it did reflect the rise of significant urban centers throughout the northeast and as far west as chicago and st louis as a result of the transportation revolution and the growing market economy.
the expansion of commerce banking and industry in the northeast drew people to towns like lowell massachusetts and albany new york which grew to more than twenty five thousand people and the growing web of canals and railroads made inland cities like cincinnati st louis and chicago viable and thriving.
new york city alone had grown to more than half a million people by 1850 these young cities were magnets for new immigrants from europe.
canals and railroads also led to the growth of great cities on the western frontier.
from a small town in the 1830s chicago grew into the nations fourth largest city by 1860 it was the hub of a thriving market economy funneling grain and other farm products from all over the northwest to cities and towns in the east.
the politics of nation building after the war of 1812 what decisions did the federal government face as the country expanded.
geographic expansion economic growth and the changes in american life that accompanied them were bound to generate political controversy.
farmers merchants manufacturers and laborers were affected by the changes in different ways.
so were northerners southerners and westerners.
federal and state policies that were meant to encourage or control growth and expansion did not benefit all these groups or sections equally and unavoidable conflicts of interest and ideology occurred.
but for a time these conflicts were not prominently reflected in the national political arena.
during the period following the war of 1812 a single party dominated politics.
without a party system in place politicians did not have to band together to offer the voters a choice of programs and ideologies.
a myth of national harmony prevailed culminating in the era of good feelings during james monroes two terms as president.
behind this facade individuals and groups fought for advantage as always but without the public accountability and need for broad popular approval that a party system would have required.
as a result popular interest in national politics fell.
the absence of party discipline and programs did not completely immobilize the federal government.
congress did manage to legislate on some matters of national concern.
although the president had little control over congressional action he could still take important initiatives in foreign policy.
the third branch of government the supreme court was in a position to make farreaching decisions affecting the relationship between the federal government and the states.
the common theme of the public policies that emerged between the war of 1812 and the age of andrew jackson which began in the late 1820s was an awakening nationalism a sense of american pride and purpose that reflected the expansionism and material progress of the period.
the republicans in power by the end of the war of 1812 the federalist party was no longer capable of winning a national election.
the party of jefferson now known simply as the republicans was so completely dominant that it no longer had to distinguish itself from its opponents.
retreating from their original philosophy of states rights and limited government party leaders now openly embraced some of the programs of their former federalist rivals policies that seemed dictated by postwar conditions.
in december 1815 president madison proposed to congress that it consider such measures as the chapter 16 the agony of reconstruction watch the video the schools that the civil war and reconstruction created a freedmens school one of the more successful endeavors supported by the freedmens bureau.
the bureau working with teachers from northern abolitionist and missionary societies founded thousands of schools for freed slaves and poor whites.
immediately after the war freed people flocked to create institutions that had been denied to them under slavery churches fraternal and benevolent associations political organizations and schools.
many joined all black denominations such as the african methodist episcopal church which provided freedom from white dominance and a more congenial style of worship.
black women formed all black chapter 24 the nation at war new and reconstituted nations finland norway sweden north sea estonia latvia denmark danzig free city great britain lithuania soviet union ger.
germany belg.
france poland cz ec ho s lux.
lovaki a austria switz.
hungary romania yugoslavia spain corsica fr.
mallorca sp.
italy bulgaria albania sardinia it.
greece mediterranean sea algeria fr.
tunisia fr.
sicily crete europe after the treaty of versailles 1919 the treaty changed the map of europe creating a number of new and reconstituted nations.
note the boundary changes from the map on p.
the draft treaty in hand wilson returned home in february 1919 to discuss it with congress and the people.
most americans the polls showed favored the league thirty three governors endorsed it.
but over dinner with the senate and house foreign relations committees wilson learned of the strength of congressional opposition to it.
on march 3 senator lodge produced a round robin signed by thirty seven senators declaring they would not vote for the treaty without amendment.
should the numbers hold lodge had enough votes to defeat it.
returning to paris wilson attacked his critics while he worked privately for changes to improve the chances of senate approval.
in return for major concessions the allies amended the league draft treaty agreeing that domestic affairs remained outside league jurisdiction exempting the monroe doctrine and allowing nations to withdraw after two years notice.
on june 28 1919 they signed the treaty in the hall of mirrors at versailles and wilson started home for his most difficult fight.
rejection in the senate there were ninety six senators in 1919 forty nine of them republicans.
fourteen republicans led by william e borah of idaho were the irreconcilables who opposed the league on any grounds.
if the savior of man borah said would revisit the earth and declare for a league of nations i would be opposed to it frank b kellogg of minnesota led a group of twelve mild reservationists who accepted the treaty but wanted to insert several reservations that would not greatly weaken it.
finally there were the lodge led strong reservationists twenty three of them in all who wanted major changes that the allies would have to approve.
with only four democratic senators opposed to the treaty the democrats and republicans willing to compromise had enough votes to ratify it once a few reservations were inserted.
bidding for time to allow public opposition to grow lodge scheduled lengthy hearings and spent two weeks reading the 268 page treaty aloud.
democratic leaders urged wilson to appeal to the republican mild reservationists but he refused anyone who opposes me in that ill crush fed up with lodges tactics wilson set out in early september to take the case directly to the people.
crossing the midwest his speeches aroused little emotion but on the pacific coast he won ovations which heartened him.
on his way back to washington he stopped in pueblo colorado where he delivered one of the most eloquent speeches of his career.
people wept as he talked of americans who died in battle and the hope that they would never fight again in foreign lands.
that night wilson felt ill returned to washington and on october 2 mrs wilson found him lying unconscious on the floor of the white house the victim of a stroke that paralyzed his left side.
after the stroke wilson could not work more than an hour or two at a time.
no one was allowed to see him except family members his secretary and his physician.
for more than seven months he did not meet with the cabinet.
secretary of state lansing convened cabinet meetings but when wilson learned of them he ordered lansing to stop and then cruelly forced lansing to resign.
focusing his remaining energy on the fight over the treaty wilson lost touch with other issues and critics charged that his wife edith bolling wilson ran the government.
on november 6 1919 while wilson convalesced lodge finally reported the treaty out of committee along with fourteen reservations one for each of wilsons points.
the most important reservation stipulated that implementation of article x wilsons key article required the action of congress before any american intervention abroad.
the next day the presidents floor leader in the senate told him that the democrats could not pass the treaty without reservations.
is it possible wilson asked sadly.
it might be wise to compromise the senator said.
let lodge compromise wilson replied.
when mrs wilson urged her husband to accept the lodge reservations he said better a thousand times to go down fighting than to dip your colors to dishonorable compromise on november 19 the treaty with the lodge reservations failed 39 to 55 following wilsons instructions the democrats voted against it.
a motion to approve without the reservations lost 38 to 53 with only one republican voting in favor.
the defeat brought pleas for compromise but neither wilson nor lodge would back down.
when the treaty with reservations again came up for vote on march 19 1920 wilson ordered the democrats to hold firm against it.
although twenty one of them defied him enough obeyed his orders to defeat it 49 to 35 seven votes short of the necessary two thirds majority.
study resources to wilson walking now with the help of a cane one chance remained the presidential election of 1920 for a time he thought of running for a third term himself but his party shunted him aside.
the democrats nominated governor james m cox of ohio along with the young and popular franklin d roosevelt assistant secretary of the navy for vice president.
wilson called for a great and solemn referendum on the treaty.
the democratic platform endorsed the treaty but agreed to accept reservations that clarified the american role in the league.
the election of 1920 candidate harding cox debs party republican democrat socialist popular vote 16 152 200 9 147 353 917 799 electoral vote on the republican side senator warren g harding of ohio who had nominated taft in 1912 won the presidential nomination.
harding waffled on the treaty but that issue made little difference.
voters wanted a change.
harding won in a landslide taking 61 percent of the vote and beating cox by seven million votes.
without a peace treaty the united states remained technically at war and it was not until july 1921 almost three years after the last shot was fired that congress passed a joint resolution ending the war.
conclusion postwar disillusionment after 1919 there was disillusionment.
world war i was feared before it started popular while it lasted and hated when it ended.
to a whole generation that followed it appeared futile killing without cause sacrificing without benefit.
books plays and movies hemingways a farewell to arms 1929 john dos passoss three soldiers 1921 laurence stallings and maxwell andersons what price glory.
1924 among others showed it as waste horror and death.
the war and its aftermath damaged the humanitarian progressive spirit of the early years of the century.
it killed something precious and perhaps irretrievable in the hearts of thinking men and women progressivism survived well into the 1920s and the new deal but it no longer had the old conviction and broad popular support.
bruising fights over the war and the league drained peoples energy and enthusiasm.
confined to bed woodrow wilson died in washington in 1924 three years after harding the new president promised not heroics but healing not nostrums but normalcy not revolution but restoration nonetheless the war to end all wars and the spirit of woodrow wilson left an indelible imprint on the country.
study y resources take the study plan for chapter 16.

chapter 22.
the apa arose in part because protestants found their dominance challenged.
millions of americans especially in the industrial working class were now catholics or jews.
overall in 1916 protestants still constituted about 60 percent of americans affiliated with a religious body.
but they faced formidable rivals the number of practicing catholics in 1916 15 7 million was greater than the number of baptists methodists and presbyterians combined.
some protestants responded to the urban immigrant challenge by evangelizing among the unchurched.
they provided reading rooms day nurseries vocational classes and other services.
the goal of renewing religious faith through dedication to justice and social welfare became known as the social gospel.
its goals were epitomized by charles sheldons novel in his steps 1896 which told the story of a congregation identify causes who resolved to live by christs precepts for one year.
if church members were all doing as jesus would do sheldon asked could it remain true that armies of men would walk the streets for jobs and hundreds of them curse the church and thousands of them find in the saloon their best friend the salvation army which arrived from great britain in 1879 also spread a gospel message among the urban poor offering assistance that ranged from soup kitchens to shelters for former prostitutes.
when the salvation army on the streets this theater poster for the popular play on the bowery 1894 written by theater agent robert neilson stephens shows how many americans perceived the salvation army.
here salvation army workers in new york city offer the organizations newspaper war cry to a man who brushes them off rudely.
the man is steve brodie a celebrity who was recruited to portray himself onstage.
a former east river lifesaving champion who became a saloon owner in new yorks bowery district brodie had won fame in 1886 by claiming to have jumped from the brooklyn bridge and survived.
it was later claimed that he faked the stunt but doing a brodie became popular slang for taking a big risk.
while many americans admired the salvation army others particularly men of working class origins like brodie rejected its appeals.
library of congress.
america c o m pa r e d christianity in the united states and japan during the 1893 chicago worlds columbian exhibition a parliament of religions brought together representatives of prominent faiths for discussion.
english speaking protestants dominated the program but several asian representatives included kinzo hirai a lay buddhist from japan.
in his speech hirai reviewed japans experiences with the united states since commodore matthew c perry opened the country in 1853 i do not understand why the christian lands have ignored the rights and advantages of forty million souls of japan for forty years.
one of the excuses offered by foreign nations is that our country is not yet civilized.
is it the principle of civilized law that the rights and profits of the so called uncivilized or the weaker should be sacrificed.
as i understand it the spirit and necessity of law is to protect the rights and profits of the weaker against the aggression of the stronger.
from the religious source the claim is made that the japanese are idolaters and heathen.
a dmitting for the sake of argument that we are idolaters and heathen is it christian morality to trample upon the rights and advantages of a non christian nation coloring all their natural happiness with the dark stain of injustice.
you send your missionaries to japan and they advise us to be moral and believe christianity.
we like to be moral we know that christianity is good and we are very thankful for this kindness.
but at the same time our people are rather perplexed.
for when we think that the treaty stipulated in the time of feudalism when we were yet in our youth is still clung to by the powerful nations of christendom when we find that every year a good many western vessels of seal fishery are smuggled into our seas when legal cases are always decided by the foreign authorities in japan unfavorably to us when some years ago a japanese was not allowed to enter a university on the pacific coast of america because of his being of a different race when a few months ago the school board in san francisco enacted a regulation that no japanese should be allowed to enter the public school there when all else failed down and outers knew they could count on the salvation army whose bell ringers became a familiar sight on city streets.
the group borrowed upto date marketing techniques and used the latest business slang in urging its christian soldiers to hustle the salvation army succeeded in part because it managed to bridge an emerging divide between social gospel reformers and protestants who were taking a last year the japanese were driven out in wholesale from one of the territories of the united states when our business men in san francisco were compelled by some union not to employ japanese assistants and laborers but the americans when there are some in the same city who speak on the platform against those of us who are already here when there are many who go in procession hoisting lanterns marked japs must go when the japanese in the hawaiian islands were deprived of their suffrage when we see some western people in japan who erect before the entrance to their houses a special post upon which is the notice no japanese is allowed to enter here just like a board upon which is written no dogs allowed when we are in such a situation notwithstanding the kindness of the western nations from one point of view who send their missionaries to us that we unintelligent heathens are embarrassed and hesitate to swallow the sweet and warm liquid of the heaven of christianity will not be unreasonable.
source the worlds parliament of religions ed.
john henry barrows chicago parliament publishing co 1893 444 450.
analyzing the evidence 1 what is hirais attitude toward american christians.
2 of what events is hirai aware that are taking place in the united states.
how does this shape his view of christian missions in japan.
3 how might american delegates to the parliament especially protestant missionaries have responded to hirai.
different theological path.
disturbed by what they saw as rising secularism conservative ministers and their allies held a series of bible conferences at niagara falls between 1876 and 1897 the resulting niagara creed reaffirmed the literal truth of the bible and the certain damnation of those not born again in christ.
by the 1910s a network of churches and bible institutes had emerged from these conferences.
they called their part 6 industrializing america upheavals and experiments 1877 1917 billy sunday with his bible one of the most popular protestant preachers of the early twentieth century billy sunday 1862 1935 was a former professional baseball player with an imposing physique and dynamic preaching style.
more willing than most of his predecessors to make direct political arguments sunday championed antiradicalism and prohibition stances that foreshadowed the protestant political crusades of the 1920s.
sundays most famous sermon was his antiliquor exhortation get on the water wagon library of congress.
movement fundamentalism based on their belief in the fundamental truth of the bible.
fundamentalists and their allies made particularly effective use of revival meetings.
unlike social gospel advocates revivalists said little about poverty or earthly justice focusing not on the matters of the world but on heavenly redemption.
the pioneer modern evangelist was dwight l moody a former chicago shoe salesman and ymca official who won fame in the 1870s.
eternal life could be had for the asking moody promised.
his listeners needed only to come forward and take take moodys successor billy sunday helped bring evangelism into the modern era.
more often than his predecessors sunday took political stances based on his protestant beliefs.
condemning the booze traffic was his greatest cause.
sunday also denounced unrestricted immigration and labor radicalism.
if i had my way with these ornery wild eyed socialists he once threatened i would stand them up before a firing squad sunday supported some progressive reform causes he opposed child labor for example and advocated voting rights for women.
but in other ways his views anticipated the nativism and antiradicalism that would dominate american politics after world war i billy sunday like other noted men of his era broke free of victorian practices and asserted his leadership in a masculinized american culture.
not only was he a commanding presence on the stage but before his conversion he had been a hard drinking outfielder for the chicago white stockings.
to advertise his revivals sunday often organized local men into baseball teams then put on his own uniform and played for both sides.
through such feats and the fiery sermons that followed sunday offered a model of spiritual inspiration manly strength and political engagement.
his revivals were thoroughly modern marketed shrewdly they provided mass entertainment and the chance to meet a pro baseball player.
like other cultural developments of the industrializing era billy sundays popularity showed how americans often adjusted to modernity they adapted older beliefs and values enabling them to endure in new forms.
summary industrialization and new consumer practices created foundations for modern american culture.
while middle class families sought to preserve the victorian domestic ideal a variety of factors transformed family life.
families had fewer children and a substantial majority of young people achieved more education than their parents had obtained.
across class and gender lines americans enjoyed athletics and the outdoors fostering the rise of environmentalism.
among an array of womens reform movements the womans christian temperance union sought chapter 1 colliding worlds 1450 1600 the kincaid site located on the north bank of the ohio river 140 miles from cahokia the kincaid site was a mississippian town from c a d.
1050 to 1450 it contains at least nineteen mounds topped by large buildings thought to have been temples or council houses.
now a state historic site in illinois it has been studied by anthropologists and archaeologists since the 1930s.
artist herb roe depicts the town as it may have looked at its peak.
herb roe chromesun productions.
dominated the chesapeake bay region embraced more than thirty subordinate chiefdoms and some 20 000 people by the time englishmen established the colony of virginia in powhatan territory.
powhatan himself according to the english colonist john smith was attended by a guard of 40 or 50 of the tallest men his country affords elsewhere especially in the mid atlantic region the power of chiefs was strictly local.
along the delaware and hudson rivers lenni lenape or delaware and munsee indians lived in small independent communities without overarching political organizations.
early european maps of this region show a landscape dotted with a bewildering profusion of indian names.
european colonization would soon drive many of these groups into oblivion and force survivors to coalesce into larger groups.
some native american groups were not chiefdoms at all but instead granted political authority to councils of sachems or leaders.
this was the case with the iroquois confederacy.
sometime shortly before the arrival of europeans probably around 1500 five nations occupying the region between the hudson river and lake erie the mohawks oneidas onondagas cayugas and senecas banded together to form the iroquois.
these groups had been fighting among themselves for years caught in a destructive cycle of wars of retribution.
then according to iroquois legend a mohawk man named hiawatha lost his family in one of these america c o m pa r e d altered landscapes in the eastern woodlands native americans set fires once or twice a year to clear underbrush and open up landscapes that would otherwise have been densely wooded.
the burnings made it easier to plant corn beans and squash and drew big game animals into the clearings where hunters could fell them.
as european colonization displaced indian populations this practice ended.
some scholars have even suggested that the decline in burning caused a drop of carbon in the atmosphere large enough to account for the little ice age an episode of global cooling that lasted from about 1550 to 1850 though the claim is controversial.
thomas morton of the custome in burning the country and the reason thereof 1637 the savages are accustomed to set fire of the country in all places where they come and to burne it twize a yeare viz at the spring and the fall of the leafe.
the reason that mooves them to doe so is because it would other wise be so overgrowne with underweedes that it would be all a coppice wood and the people would not be able in any wise to passe through the country out of a beaten path.
the meanes that they do it with is with certaine minerall stones that they carry about them in baggs made for that purpose of the skinnes of little beastes which they convert into good lether carrying in the same a peece of touch wood very excellent for that purpose of their owne making.
these minerall stones they have from the piquenteenes which is to the southward of all the plantations in new england by trade and trafficke with those people.
the burning of the grasse destroyes the underwoods and so scorcheth the elder trees that it shrinkes them and hinders their grouth very much so that hee that will looke to finde large trees and good tymber must not depend upon the help of a woodden prospect to finde them on the uplandground but must seeke for them as i and others have done in the lower grounds where the grounds are wett when the country is fired by reason of the snow water that remaines there for a time untill the sunne by continuance of that hath exhaled the vapoures of the earth and dried up those places where the fire by reason of the moisture can have no power to doe them any hurt and if he would endevoure to finde out any goodly cedars hee must not seeke for them on the higher grounds but make his inquest for them in the vallies for the savages by this custome of theirs have spoiled all the rest for this custome hath bin continued from the beginninge.
and least their firing of the country in this manner should be an occasion of damnifying us and indaingering our habitations wee our selves have used carefully about the same times to observe the winds and fire the grounds about our owne habitations to prevent the dammage that might happen by any neglect thereof if the fire should come neere those howses in our absence.
for when the fire is once kindled it dilates and spreads it selfe as well against as with the winde burning continually night and day untill a shower of raine falls to quench it.
and this custome of firing the country is the meanes to make it passable and by that meanes the trees growe here and there as in our parks and makes the country very beautifull and commodious.
source thomas morton the new english canaan boston john wilson and son 1883 orig.
1637 172 173.
questions for analysis 1 what benefits and dangers does morton attribute to the practice of indian burning.
how did he and his fellow colonists respond to the practice.
2 since europeans did not practice widespread burning in the indian manner they achieved deforestation only slowly through many years of backbreaking labor.
thinking comparatively about european and native american approaches to landscape management how would you assess the benefits and challenges of each approach.
chapter 1 wars.
stricken by grief he met a spirit who taught him a series of condolence rituals.
he returned to his people preaching a new gospel of peace and power and the condolence rituals he taught became the foundation for the iroquois confederacy.
once bound by these rituals the five nations began acting together as a political confederacy.
they avoided violence among themselves and became one of the most powerful native american groups in the northeast.
the iroquois did not recognize chiefs instead councils of sachems made decisions.
these were matriarchal societies with power inherited through female lines of authority.
women were influential in local councils though men served as sachems made war and conducted diplomacy.
along the southern coast of the region that would soon be called new england a dense network of powerful chiefdoms including the narragansetts wampanoags mohegans pequots and others competed for resources and dominance.
when the dutch and english arrived they were able to exploit these rivalries and play indian groups against one another.
farther north in northern new england and much of present day canada the short growing season and thin rocky soil were inhospitable to maize agriculture.
here the native peoples were hunters and gatherers and therefore had smaller and more mobile communities though they were no less complex than their agriculturally oriented cousins.
the great lakes to the west algonquian speaking peoples dominated the great lakes.
the tribal groups recognized by europeans in this region included the ottawas ojibwas and potawatomis.
but collectively they thought of themselves as a single people the anishinaabe.
clan identities beaver otter sturgeon deer and others crosscut tribal affiliations and were in some ways more fundamental.
the result was a social landscape that could be bewildering to outsiders.
here lived one french official remarked an infinity of undiscovered nations the extensive network of lakes and rivers and the use of birchbark canoes made great lakes peoples especially mobile.
they seem to have as many abodes as the year has seasons wrote one observer.
they traveled long distances to hunt and fish to trade or to join in important ceremonies or military alliances.
groups negotiated access to resources and travel routes.
instead of a map with clearly delineated tribal territories it is best to imagine the great lakes as a porous region where political power and social identity took on multiple forms as one scholar has written.
colliding worlds 1450 1600 the great plains and rockies farther west lies the vast arid steppe region known as the great plains which was dominated by the hunting and gathering activities of small dispersed groups.
the geopolitics of the plains indians was transformed by a european import the horse long before europeans themselves arrived.
livestock was introduced in the spanish colony of new mexico in the late sixteenth century and from there horses gradually dispersed across the plains.
bison hunters who had previously relied on stealth became much more successful on horseback.
indians on horseback were also more formidable opponents than their counterparts on foot and some plains peoples leveraged their control of horses to gain power over their neighbors.
the comanches were a explain small shoshonean band on the consequences northern plains that migrated how did landscape south in pursuit of horses.
they climate and resources became expert raiders captur influence the developing people and horses alike and ment of native american trading them for weapons food societies.
clothing and other necessities.
eventually they controlled a vast territory.
from their humble origins their skill in making war on horseback made the comanches one of the regions most formidable peoples.
similarly horses allowed the sioux a confederation of seven distinct peoples who originated in present day minnesota to move west and dominate a vast territory ranging from the mississippi river to the black hills.
the crow indians moved from the missouri river to the eastern slope of the rocky mountains where they became nomadic bison hunters.
beginning in the mideighteenth century they became horse breeders and traders as well.
in some places farming communities were embedded within the much wider geographical range of hunter gatherers.
thus the hidatsa and mandan indians maintained settled agricultural villages along the missouri river while the more mobile sioux dominated the region around them.
similarly the caddo indians who lived on the edge of the southern plains inhabited agricultural communities that were like islands in a sea of more mobile peoples.
three broad swaths of numic speaking peoples occupied the great basin that separated the rockies from the sierra mountains bannocks and northern paiutes in the north shoshones in the central basin and utes and southern paiutes in the south.
resources were varied and spread thin on the land.
kin based bands traveled great distances to hunt bison along the part 1 transformations of north america 1450 1700 yellowstone river where they shared territory with the crows and bighorn sheep in high altitudes to fish for salmon and to gather pine nuts when they were in season.
throughout the great basin some groups adopted horses and became relatively powerful while others remained foot borne and impoverished in comparison with their more mobile neighbors.
the arid southwest in the part of north america that appears to be most hostile to agriculture the canyon laced country of the arid southwest surprisingly large farming settlements developed.
anasazi peoples were growing maize by the first century a d earlier than anywhere else north of mexico and pueblo cultures emerged around a d 600 by a d 1000 the hohokams mogollons and anasazis all pueblo peoples had developed irrigation systems to manage scarce water enabling them to build sizable villages and towns of adobe and rock that were often molded to sheer canyon walls.
chaco canyon in modern new mexico supported a dozen large anasazi towns while beyond the canyon a network of roads tied these settlements together with hundreds of small anasazi villages.
extended droughts and soil exhaustion caused the abandonment of chaco canyon and other large settlements in the southwest after 1150 but smaller communities still dotted the landscape when the first europeans arrived.
it was the spanish who called these groups pueblo indians pueblo means town in spanish and the name refers to their distinctive building style.
when europeans arrived pueblo peoples including the acomas zuis tewas and hopis were found throughout much of modern new mexico arizona and western texas.
the pacific coast hunter gatherers inhabited the pacific coast.
before the arrival of the spanish california was home to more than 300 000 people subdivided into dozens of small localized groups and speaking at least a hundred distinct languages.
this diversity of languages and cultures discouraged intermarriage and kept these societies independent.
despite these differences many groups did share common characteristics including clearly defined social hierarchies separating elites from commoners.
they gathered acorns and other nuts and seeds caught fish and shellfish and hunted game.
the pacific northwest also supported a dense population that was divided into many distinct groups who controlled small territories and spoke different languages.
their stratified societies were ruled by wealthy families.
to maintain control of their territories the more powerful nations including the chinooks coast salishes haidas and tlingits nurtured strong warrior traditions.
they developed sophisticated fishing technologies and crafted oceangoing dugout canoes made from enormous cedar trees that ranged up to 60 feet in length.
their distinctive material culture included large longhouses that were home to dozens of people and totem poles representing clan lineages or local legends.
patterns of trade expansive trade networks tied together regions and carried valuable goods hundreds and even thousands of miles.
trade goods included food and raw materials tools ritual artifacts and decorative goods.
trade enriched diets enhanced economies and allowed the powerful to set themselves apart with luxury items.
anasazi ladle crafted between a d.
1300 and 1600 and found in a site in central arizona this anasazi dipper was coiled and molded by hand and painted with a geometric motif.
anasazi pottery is abundant in archaeological sites thanks in part to the southwests dry climate.
clay vessels and ladles helped anasazi peoples handle water one of their most precious resources with care.
national museum of the american indian smithsonian institution.
chapter 1 colliding worlds 1450 1600 chilkat tlingit bowl this bowl in the form of a brown bear which dates to the mid nineteenth century is made of alder wood and inlaid with snail shells.
the brown bear is a tlingit clan totem.
animal form bowls like this one which express an affinity with nonhuman creatures are a common feature of tlingit culture.
national museum of the american indian smithsonian institution.
in areas where indians specialized in a particular economic activity regional trade networks allowed them to share resources.
thus nomadic hunters of the southern plains including the navajos and apaches conducted annual trade fairs with pueblo farmers exchanging hides and meat for maize pottery and cotton blankets.
similar patterns of exchange occurred throughout the great plains wherever hunters and farmers coexisted.
in some parts of north america a regional trade in war captives who were offered as slaves helped to sustain friendly relations among neighboring groups.
one such network developed in the upper mississippi river basin where plains indian captives were traded or given as diplomatic gifts to ottawas and other great lakes and eastern woodlands peoples.
across longer distances rare and valuable objects traveled through networks that spanned much of the continent.
great lakes copper rocky mountain mica jasper from pennsylvania obsidian from new mexico and wyoming and pipestone from the midwest have all been found in archaeological sites hundreds of miles from their points of origin.
seashells often shaped and polished into beads and other artifacts traveled hundreds of miles inland.
grizzly bear claws and eagle feathers were prized high status objects.
after european contact indian hunters often traveled long distances to european trading posts to trade for cloth iron tools and weapons.
within native american groups powerful leaders controlled a disproportionate share of wealth and redistributed it to prove their generosity and strengthen their authority.
in small kin based bands the strongest hunters possessed the most food and sharing it was essential.
in chiefdoms rulers filled the same role often collecting the wealth of a community and then redistributing it to their followers.
powhatan the powerful chesapeake bay chief reportedly collected nine tenths of the produce of the communities he oversaw skins beads copper pearls deer turkeys wild beasts and corn but then gave much of it back to his subordinates.
his generosity was considered a mark of good leadership.
in the pacific northwest the chinook word potlatch refers to periodic festivals in which wealthy residents gave away belongings to friends family and followers.
sacred power most native north americans were animists who believed that the natural world was suffused with spiritual power.
they sought to understand the world by interpreting dreams and visions and their rituals appeased guardian spirits that could ensure successful hunts and other forms of good fortune.
although their views were subject to countless local variations certain patterns were widespread.
women and men interacted differently with these spiritual forces.
in agricultural communities women grew crops and maintained hearth home and village.
native american conceptions of female power linked their bodies generative functions with the earths fertility and rituals like the green corn ceremony a summer ritual of purification and renewal helped to sustain the life giving properties of the world around them.
for men spiritual power was invoked in hunting and war.
to ensure success in hunting men took care part 1 transformations of north america 1450 1700 not to offend the spirits of the animals they killed.
they performed rituals before during and after a how did native americans hunt to acknowledge the power of conceptions of the spiritual those guardian spirits and they world influence their daily believed that when an animal had lives.
been killed properly its spirit would rise from the earth unharmed.
success in hunting and prowess in war were both interpreted as signs of sacred protection and power.
ideas about war varied widely.
war could be fought for geopolitical reasons to gain ground against an enemy but for many groups warfare was a crucial rite of passage for young men and raids were conducted to allow warriors to prove themselves in battle.
motives for war could be highly personal war was often more like a blood feud between families than a contest between nations.
if a community lost warriors in battle it often retaliated by capturing or killing a like number of warriors in response a so called mourning war.
some captives were adopted into new communities while others were enslaved or tortured.
understand points of view western europe the edge of the old world in 1450 western europe lay at the far fringe of the eurasian and african continents.
it had neither the powerful centralized empires nor the hunter gatherer bands and semisedentary societies of the americas it was instead a patchwork of roughly equivalent kingdoms duchies and republics vying with one another and struggling to reach out effectively to the rest of the world.
no one would have predicted that europeans would soon become overlords of the western hemisphere.
a thousand years after the fall of the roman empire europes populations still relied on subsistence agriculture and were never far from the specter of famine.
moreover around 1350 a deadly plague introduced from central asia the black death had killed one third of europes population.
the lives of ordinary people were afflicted by poverty disease and uncertainty and the future looked as difficult and dark as the past.
hierarchy and authority in traditional hierarchical societies american or european authority came from above.
in europe kings and princes owned vast tracts of land forcibly conscripted men for military service and lived off the peasantrys labor.
yet monarchs were far from supreme local nobles also owned large estates and controlled hundreds of peasant families.
collectively these nobles challenged royal authority with both their military power and their legislative institutions such as the french parlements and the english house of lords.
just as kings and nobles ruled society men governed families.
these were patriarchies in which property and social identity descended in male family lines.
rich or poor the man was the head of the house his power justified by the teachings of the christian church.
as one english clergyman put it the woman is a weak creature not embued with like strength and constancy of mind law and custom subjected her to the power of man once married an englishwoman assumed her husbands surname submitted to his orders and surrendered the right to her property.
when he died she received a dower usually the use during her lifetime of one third of the familys land and goods.
men also controlled the lives of their children who usually worked for their father into their middle or late twenties.
then landowning peasants would give land to their sons and dowries to their daughters and choose marriage partners of appropriate wealth and status.
in many regions fathers bestowed all their land on their eldest son a practice known as primogeniture forcing many younger children to join the ranks of the roaming poor.
few men and even fewer women had much personal freedom.
hierarchy and authority prevailed in traditional european society because of the power held by established institutions nobility church and village and because in a violent and unpredictable world they offered ordinary people a measure of security.
carried by migrants to america these security conscious institutions would shape the character of family and society well into the eighteenth century.
peasant society in 1450 most europeans were peasants farmworkers who lived in small villages surrounded by fields farmed cooperatively by different families.
on manorial lands farming rights were given in exchange for labor on the lords estate an arrangement that turned peasants into serfs.
gradually obligatory manorial services gave way to paying rent or as in france landownership.
once freed from the obligation to labor for their farming rights european farmers began to produce surpluses and created local market economies.
chapter 1 as with native americans the rhythm of life followed the seasons.
in march villagers began the exhausting work of plowing and then planting wheat rye and oats.
during the spring the men sheared wool which the women washed and spun into yarn.
in june peasants cut hay and stored it as winter fodder for their livestock.
during the summer life was more relaxed and families repaired their houses and barns.
fall brought the harvest followed by solemn feasts of thanksgiving and riotous bouts of merrymaking.
as winter approached peasants slaughtered excess livestock and salted or smoked the meat.
during the cold months they threshed grain and wove textiles visited friends and relatives and celebrated the winter solstice or the birth of christ.
just before the cycle began again in the spring they held carnivals celebrating with drink and dance the end of the long winter figure 1 1.
for most peasants survival meant constant labor and poverty corroded family relationships.
malnourished mothers fed their babies sparingly calling them greedy and gluttonous and many newborn girls were helped to die so that their brothers would have enough to eat.
half of all peasant children died before the age of twenty one victims of malnourishment and disease.
many peasants drew on strong religious beliefs counting blessings and accepting their harsh existence.
others hoped for a better life.
it was the peasants of spain germany and britain who would supply the majority of white migrants to the western hemisphere.
colliding worlds 1450 1600 expanding trade networks in the millennium before contact with the americas western europe was the barbarian fringe of the civilized world.
in the mediterranean basin arab scholars carried on the legacy of byzantine civilization which had preserved compare and the achievements of the greeks contrast and romans in medicine philos in what ways were ophy mathematics astronomy the lives of europeans and geography while merchants similar to and different controlled trade in the mediter from those of native ranean africa and the near east.
this control gave them access to spices from india and silks magnetic compasses water powered mills and mechanical clocks from china.
in the twelfth century merchants from the italian city states of genoa florence pisa and especially venice began to push their way into the arabdominated trade routes of the mediterranean.
trading in alexandria beirut and other eastern mediterranean ports they carried the luxuries of asia into european markets.
at its peak venice had a merchant fleet of more than three thousand ships.
this enormously profitable commerce created wealthy merchants bankers and textile manufacturers who expanded trade lent vast sums of money and spurred technological innovation in silk and wool production.
italian moneyed elites ruled their city states as republics states that had no prince or king but instead figure 1 1 the yearly rhythm of rural life and death the annual cycle of nature profoundly affected life in the traditional agricultural world.
the death rate soared by 20 percent in february from viruses and september from fly borne dysentery.
summer was the healthiest season with the fewest deaths and the most successful conceptions as measured by births nine months later.
a value of 100 indicates an equal number of deaths and conceptions.
conceptions winter.
deaths spring summer.
dec jan feb mar.
may june july aug sept oct nov part 1 transformations of north america 1450 1700 procession in st marks square in venice 1496 venice was one of the worlds great trading centers in the fifteenth century.
its merchant houses connected europe to asia and the middle east while its complex republican government aroused both admiration and mistrust.
here venetian painter gentile bellini c 1429 1507 depicts a diplomatic procession celebrating the league of venice a union of european states opposed to french expansion into italy.
galleria dell accademia venice italy giraudon the bridgeman art library.
were governed by merchant coalitions.
they celebrated civic humanism an ideology that praised public virtue and service to the state and in time profoundly influenced european and american conceptions of government.
they sponsored great artists michelangelo leonardo da vinci and others who produced an unprecedented flowering of genius.
historians have labeled the arts and learning associated with this cultural transformation from 1300 to 1450 the renaissance.
the economic revolution that began in italy spread slowly to northern and western europe.
englands principal export was woolen cloth which was prized in the colder parts of the continent but had less appeal in southern trace change europe and beyond.
northern over time europe had its own trade system how did the growth of controlled by an alliance of mercommerce shift the strucchant communities called the ture of power in european societies.
hanseatic league centered on the baltic and north seas which dealt in timber furs wheat and rye honey wax and amber.
as trade picked up in europe merchants and artisans came to dominate its growing cities and towns.
while the italian city states ruled themselves without having a powerful monarch to contend with in much of europe the power of merchants stood in tension with that of kings and nobles.
in general the rise of commerce favored the power of kings at the expense of the landed nobility.
the kings of western europe established royal law courts that gradually eclipsed the manorial courts controlled by nobles they also built bureaucracies that helped them centralize power while they forged alliances with merchants and urban artisans.
monarchs allowed merchants to trade throughout their realms granted privileges to guilds or artisan organizations that regulated trades and safeguarded commercial transactions thereby encouraging domestic manufacturing and foreign trade.
in return they extracted taxes from towns and loans from merchants to support their armies and officials.
myths religions and holy warriors the oldest european religious beliefs drew on a form of animism similar to that of native americans which held that the natural world the sun wind stones animals was animated by spiritual forces.
as in north america such beliefs led ancient european peoples to develop localized cults of knowledge and spiritual practice.
wise men and women developed rituals to protect their communities ensure abundant harvests heal illnesses and bring misfortunes to their enemies.
chapter 18 timeline chapter.
jane addams twenty years at hull house 1910.
an inspiring must read by a great american reformer.
george chauncey gay new york 1994.
a groundbreaking study of the rise of urban gay subcultures.
kathy peiss cheap amusements 1986.
explores urban working class dating and the world of young working class women.
harold platt the electric city 1991.
a study of how electricity shaped the urban industrial society and economy.
ruth rosen the lost sisterhood 1982.
a poignant account of progressive era antiprostitution campaigns and their tragic impact on sex workers.
david von drehle triangle the fire that changed america 2003.
the most recent account of the fire and its consequences.
chapter 25.
chapter 20 whose government.
politics populists and progressives 1880 1917 and military service.
these principles based on african american pride and an uncompromising demand for full equality guided the civil rights movement throughout the twentieth century.
in 1908 a bloody race riot broke out in springfield illinois.
appalled by the white mobs violence in the hometown of abraham lincoln new york settlement worker mary white ovington called together a group of sympathetic progressives to formulate a response.
their meeting led in 1909 to creation of the national association for the advancement of colored people naacp.
most leaders of the niagara movement soon joined w e b du bois became editor of the naacp journal the crisis.
the fledgling group found allies in many african american womens clubs and churches.
it also cooperated with the national urban league 1911 a union of agencies that assisted black migrants in the north.
over the coming decades these groups grew into a powerful force for racial justice.
w e b du bois w e b du bois was born in western massachusetts in 1868 the son of a barber and a domestic worker.
he received an excellent local education and went on to earn his ba and phd at harvard as well as to study with cutting edge social scientists in germany.
by 1900 du bois had become a national civil rights leader and americas leading black intellectual.
famous for his sociological and historical studies including the souls of black folk 1903 du bois helped found the national association for the advancement of colored people naacp and edited the organizations journal the crisis.
between 1900 and 1945 he helped organize pan african conferences in locations around the world.
toward the end of his life du bois pursued this pan african ideal by moving to ghana the first modern african nation formed after the end of european colonialism.
he died there in 1963 special collections and archives w e b du bois library university of massachusetts amherst.
for a talented tenth of educated blacks to develop new strategies.
the policy of compromise has failed declared william monroe trotter pugnacious editor of the boston guardian.
the policy of resistance and aggression deserves a trial in 1905 du bois and trotter called a meeting at niagara falls on the canadian side because no hotel on the u s side would admit blacks.
the resulting niagara principles called for full voting rights an end to segregation equal treatment in the justice system and equal opportunity in education jobs health care the problem of labor leaders of the nations dominant union the american federation of labor were slow to ally with progressives.
they had long believed workers should improve their situation through strikes and direct negotiation with employers not through politics.
but by the 1910s as progressive reformers came forward with solutions labor leaders in state after state began to join the cause.
the nation also confronted a daring wave of radical labor militancy.
in 1905 the western federation of miners wfm led by fiery leaders such as william big bill haywood helped create a new movement the industrial workers of the world iww.
the wobblies as they were called fervently supported the marxist class struggle.
as syndicalists they believed that by resisting in the workplace and ultimately launching a general strike workers could overthrow capitalism.
a new society would emerge run directly by workers.
at its height around 1916 the iww had about 100 000 members.
though divided by internal conflicts the group helped spark a number of local protests during the 1910s including strikes of rail car builders in pennsylvania textile operatives in massachusetts rubber workers in compare and ohio and miners in minnesota.
contrast meanwhile after midnight on october 1 1910 an explo how did various grassroots sion ripped through the los reformers define progressivism and how did their angeles times headquarters killviews differ from theoing twenty employees and wreckdore roosevelts version ing the building.
it turned out that of progressivism.
john j mcnamara a high official part 6 industrializing america upheavals and experiments 1877 1917 the ludlow massacre 1914 like his drawings of triangle shirtwaist fire victims in new york this cover illustration for the popular socialist magazine the masses demonstrates john sloans outrage at social injustice in progressive america.
the drawing memorializes a tragic episode during a coal miners strike at ludlow colorado the asphyxiation of women and children when vigilantes torched the tent city of evicted miners and the aftermath an armed revolt by enraged miners.
the masses june 1914 of the american federation of labors bridge and structural iron workers union had planned the bombing against the fiercely antiunion times.
mcnamaras brother and another union member had carried out the attack.
the bombing created a sensation as did the terrible triangle shirtwaist fire chapter 3 the british atlantic world 1660 1750 the greenwood lee family 1747 born in massachusetts and apprenticed as an engraver john greenwood 1727 1792 painted dozens of commissioned works there before moving to surinam in 1752 he painted this scene of his own family at the age of twenty.
group portraits with so many people were rare in the colonies and it is a technically impressive composition.
greenwood himself is at the right rear wigless he wears a velvet cap to keep his head warm and holding a palette and brushes.
the table displays a basket of needlework and a volume of the spectator the popular london periodical published by joseph addison and richard steele.
photograph 2014 museum of fine arts boston.
bequest of henry lee shattuck in memory of the late morris gray 1983 34 household budgets left no margin for sickness or unemployment depressed trade meant hunger dependence on public charity and for the most desperate petty thievery or prostitution.
the sugar and slave based south atlantic system and cycles of imperial warfare brought economic uncertainty as well as opportunity to the people of the northern colonies.
the new politics of empire 1713 1750 the south atlantic system also changed the politics of empire.
british ministers pleased with the wealth produced by the trade in slaves sugar rice and tobacco ruled the colonies with a gentle hand.
the colonists took advantage of that leniency to strengthen their political institutions and eventually to challenge the rules of the mercantilist system.
the rise of colonial assemblies after the glorious revolution representative assemblies in america copied the english whigs and limited the powers of crown officials.
in massachusetts during the 1720s the assembly repeatedly ignored the kings instructions to provide the royal governor with a permanent salary and legislatures in north carolina new jersey and pennsylvania did the same.
using such tactics the legislatures gradually took control of taxation and appointments angering imperial bureaucrats and absentee proprietors.
the people in power in america complained william penn during a struggle with the pennsylvania assembly think nothing taller than themselves but the trees leading the increasingly powerful assemblies were mem identify causes bers of the colonial elite.
although what explains the increasing political autonomy of most property owning white men the colonies in the eighhad the right to vote only men teenth century.
of wealth and status stood for election.
in new jersey in 1750 90 percent of assemblymen came from influential political families figure 3 3.
in virginia seven members of the wealthy lee family sat in the house of burgesses and along with other powerful families dominated its major committees.
in new england affluent descendants of the original puritans formed a core of political leaders.
go into every village in new england john adams wrote in 1765 and you will find that the office of justice of the peace and even the place of representative have generally descended from generation to generation in three or four families at most however neither elitist assemblies nor wealthy property owners could impose unpopular edicts on the people.
purposeful crowd actions were a fact of colonial life.
an uprising of ordinary citizens overthrew the part 2 british north america and the atlantic world 1660 1763 number of relatives per assemblyman 7 3 6 1 2 none 100 1770 1776 figure 3 3 family connections and political power new jersey 1700 1776 as early as 1700 more than 50 percent of the members of the new jersey assembly came from families with a history of political leadership.
by 1750 the percentage whose fathers or other relatives had served in the assembly reached 90 percent indeed some members had seven relatives who were or had been political leaders clear testimony of the emergence of powerful political families and an experienced governing elite.
however as the conflict with britain increased after 1765 voters in new jersey and elsewhere ousted lukewarm patriots and new families entered the political ranks.
dominion of new england in 1689 in new york mobs closed houses of prostitution in salem massachusetts they ran people with infectious diseases out of town and in new jersey in the 1730s and 1740s mobs of farmers battled with proprietors who were forcing tenants off disputed lands.
when officials in boston restricted the sale of farm produce to a single public market a crowd destroyed the building and its members defied the authorities to arrest them.
if you touch one you shall touch all an anonymous letter warned the sheriff and we will show you a hundred men where you can show one these expressions of popular discontent combined with the growing authority of the assemblies created a political system that was broadly responsive to popular pressure and increasingly resistant to british control.
salutary neglect british colonial policy during the reigns of george i r 1714 1727 and george ii r 1727 1760 allowed for this rise of american self government as royal bureaucrats pleased by growing trade and import duties relaxed their supervision of internal colonial affairs.
in 1775 british political philosopher edmund burke would praise this strategy as salutary neglect.
salutary neglect was a by product of the political system developed by sir robert walpole the whig leader in the house of commons from 1720 to 1742 by providing supporters with appointments and pensions walpole won parliamentary approval for his policies.
however his patronage appointments filled the british government including the board of trade and the colonial bureaucracy with do nothing political hacks.
when governor gabriel johnson arrived in north carolina in the 1730s he vowed to curb the powers of the assembly and make a mighty change in the face of affairs receiving little support from the board of trade johnson renounced reform and decided to do nothing which can be reasonably blamed and leave the rest to time and a new set of inhabitants walpoles tactics also weakened the empire by undermining the legitimacy of the political system.
radical whigs protested that walpole had betrayed the glorious revolution by using patronage the practice of giving offices and salaries to political allies and bribery to create a strong court or kingly party.
the country party whose members were landed gentlemen likewise warned that walpoles policies of high taxes and a bloated royal bureaucracy threatened british liberties.
heeding these arguments colonial legislators complained that royal governors abused their patronage powers.
to preserve american liberty the colonists strengthened the powers of the representative assemblies unintentionally laying the foundation for the american independence movement american voices p 108.
protecting the mercantile system in 1732 walpole provided a parliamentary subsidy for the new colony of georgia.
while georgias reformminded trustees envisioned the colony as a refuge for britains poor walpole had little interest in social reform he subsidized georgia to protect the valuable rice growing colony of south carolina.
the subsidy however did exactly the opposite.
britains expansion into georgia outraged spanish officials who were chapter 22 nineteenth amendment to the constitution womens suffrage 1920 chapter 4 in philadelphia including anglicans baptists quakers swedish and german lutherans mennonites scotsirish presbyterians and roman catholics.
migrants preserved their cultural identity by marrying within their ethnic groups.
a major exception was the huguenots calvinists who had been expelled from catholic france in the 1680s and resettled in holland england and the british colonies.
huguenots in american port cities such as boston new york and charleston quickly lost their french identities by intermarrying with other protestants.
more typical were the welsh quakers in chester county pennsylvania 70 percent of the children of the original welsh migrants married other welsh quakers as did 60 percent of the third generation.
in pennsylvania and western new jersey quakers shaped the culture because of their numbers wealth and social cohesion.
most quakers came from english counties with few landlords and brought with them growth diversity and conflict 1720 1763 traditions of local village governance popular participation in politics and social equality.
but after 1720 the growth of german and scots irish populations challenged their dominance.
the german influx the quaker vision of a peaceable kingdom attracted 100 000 german migrants who had fled their homelands because of military conscription religious persecution and high taxes.
first to arrive in 1683 were the mennonites religious dissenters drawn by the promise of freedom of worship.
in the 1720s a larger wave of german migrants arrived from the overcrowded villages of southwestern germany and switzerland.
wages were far better in pennsylvania heinrich schneebeli reported to his friends in zurich and one also enjoyed there a free unhindered exercise of religion a third wave of germans and swiss nearly 40 000 strong landed in philadelphia between 1749 and 1756 to help pay a quaker meeting for worship quakers dressed plainly and met for worship in unadorned buildings sitting in silence until inspired by an inner light women spoke during meetings on terms of near equality to men a tradition that prepared quaker women to take a leading part in the nineteenth century womens rights movement.
in this english work titled quaker meeting an elder his hat on a peg above his head conveys his thoughts to the congregation.
museum of fine arts boston.
m and m karolik collection.
part 2 british north america and the atlantic world 1660 1763 the demory house c 1780 the demory house lies near the shenandoah valley in northwestern virginia and was probably built by a migrant from pennsylvania according to a german design used by both german and scots irish settlers.
the house is small but sturdy.
it measures 20 feet by 14 feet deep and has one and a half stories.
the two first floor rooms a kitchen and a parlor are separated by an 18 18 inch square chimney set in the center of the house as well as the stairs leading up to the sleeping chamber.
clay and small stones fill the gaps in the exterior walls which consist of timber planking about 12 inches tall and 6 to 8 inches wide.
2003 copyright and all rights reserved by christopher c fennell.
the costs of the expensive trip from the rhine valley german immigrants pioneered the redemptioner system a flexible form of indentured servitude that allowed families to negotiate their own terms upon arrival.
families often indentured one or more children while their parents set up a household of their own.
germans soon dominated many districts in eastern pennsylvania and thousands more moved down the fertile shenandoah valley into the western backcountry of maryland virginia and the carolinas map 4 2.
many migrants preserved their cultural identity by settling in identify causes german speaking lutheran and what attracted german reformed communities that and scots irish migrants to pennsylvania in such large endured well beyond 1800 a numbers.
minister in north carolina admonished young people not to contract any marriages with the english or irish arguing that we owe it to our native country to do our part that german blood and the german language be preserved in america these settlers were willing colonial subjects of britains german born and german speaking protestant monarchs george i r 1714 1727 and george ii r 1727 1760.
they generally avoided politics except to protect their cultural practices for example they insisted that married women have the legal right to hold property and write wills as they did in germany.
scots irish settlers migrants from ireland who numbered about 115 000 were the most numerous of the incoming europeans.
some were irish and catholic but most were scots and presbyterian the descendants of the calvinist protestants sent to ireland during the seventeenth century to solidify english rule there.
once in ireland the scots faced hostility from both irish catholics and english officials and landlords.
the irish test act of 1704 restricted voting and office holding to members of the church of england english mercantilist regulations placed heavy import duties on linens made by scots irish weavers and farmers paid heavy taxes.
this persecution made america seem desirable.
read this letter rev.
baptist boyd a migrant to new york wrote back to his minister and tell all the poor folk of ye place that god has opened a door for their deliverance.
all that a man works for is his own there are no revenue hounds to take it from us here lured by such reports thousands of scots irish families sailed for the colonies.
by 1720 most migrated to philadelphia attracted by the religious tolerance there.
seeking cheap land they moved to central pennsylvania and to the fertile shenandoah valley to the south.
governor william gooch of virginia welcomed the scots irish presence to secure the country against the indians an anglican planter however thought them as dangerous as the goths and vandals of old had been to the roman empire.
like the germans the scots irish retained their culture living in ethnic communities and holding firm to the presbyterian church.
religion and politics in western europe the leaders of church and state condemned religious diversity.
to tolerate all religions without controul is the way to have none at all declared an anglican clergyman.
orthodox church chapter 4 growth diversity and conflict 1720 1763 figure 4 3 church growth by denomination 1700 1780 in 1700 and again in 1740 the congregationalist and anglican churches had the most members.
by 1780 however largely because of their enthusiastic evangelical message presbyterian and baptist congregations outnumbered those of the anglicans.
the growth of immigrant denominations such as the german reformed and lutheran was equally impressive.
anglican congregations half the pulpits were empty.
in this circumstance itinerant preachers who stressed the power of heart religion and downplayed the importance of formal ministerial training found a ready audience.
the great awakening challenged the authority of all ministers whose status rested on respect for their education and knowledge of the bible.
in an influential pamphlet the dangers of an unconverted ministry 1740 gilbert tennent asserted that ministers authority should come not from theological knowledge but from the conversion experience.
reaffirming martin luthers belief in the priesthood of all christians tennent suggested that anyone who had felt gods redeeming grace could speak with ministerial authority.
sarah harrah osborn a new light exhorter in rhode island refused to shut up my mouth.
and creep into obscurity when silenced by her minister.
as religious enthusiasm spread churches founded new colleges to educate their young men and to train ministers.
new light presbyterians established the college of new jersey princeton in 1746 and new york anglicans founded kings college columbia in 1754 baptists set up the college of rhode island brown in 1764 two years later the dutch reformed church subsidized queens college rutgers in new jersey.
however the main intellectual legacy of the great awakening was not education for the privileged few but a new sense of authority among the many.
a european visitor to philadelphia remarked in surprise the poorest day laborer.
holds it his right to advance his opinion in religious as well as political matters with as much freedom as the gentleman social and religious conflict in the south in the southern colonies where the church of england was legally established religious enthusiasm triggered social conflict.
anglican ministers generally ignored the spiritual needs of african americans and landless whites who numbered 40 percent and 20 percent of the population respectively.
middling white freeholders 35 percent of the residents formed the core of most church of england congregations.
but prominent planters just 5 percent held the real power using their control of parish finances to discipline ministers.
one clergyman complained that dismissal awaited any minister who had the courage to preach against any vices taken into favor by the leading men of his parish the presbyterian revival soon a democratization of religion challenged the dominance of both the anglican church and the planter elite.
in 1743 bricklayer samuel morris inspired by reading george whitefields sermons led a group of virginia anglicans out of their congregation.
seeking a deeper religious experience morris invited new light presbyterian samuel davies to lead their prayer meetings.
daviess sermons filled with erotic devotional imagery and urging christians to feel ardent passion sparked presbyterian revivals across the tidewater region part 2 british north america and the atlantic world 1660 1763 threatening the social authority of the virginia gentry.
traditionally planters and their well dressed families arrived at anglican services in fancy carriages drawn by well bred horses and flaunted their power by sitting in the front pews.
such ritual displays of the gentrys superiority were meaningless if freeholders attended other churches.
moreover religious pluralism threatened the tax supported status of the anglican church.
to halt the spread of new light ideas virginia governor william gooch denounced them as false teachings and anglican justices of the peace closed presbyterian churches.
this harassment kept most white yeomen and poor tenant families in the church of england.
the baptist insurgency during the 1760s the vigorous preaching and democratic message of new light baptist ministers converted thousands of white farm families.
the baptists were radical protestants whose central ritual was adult rather than infant baptism.
once men and women had experienced the infusion of grace had been born again they were baptized in an emotional public ceremony often involving complete immersion in water.
slaves were welcome at baptist revivals.
during the 1740s george whitefield had urged carolina planters to bring their slaves into the christian fold but white opposition and the africans commitment to their ancestral religions kept the number of converts low.
however in the 1760s native born african americans in virginia welcomed the baptists message that all people were equal in gods eyes.
sensing a threat to the system of racial slavery the house of burgesses imposed heavy fines on baptists who preached to slaves without their owners permission.
baptists threatened gentry authority because they repudiated social distinctions and urged followers to call one another brother and sister they also condemned the planters decadent lifestyle.
as planter landon carter complained the baptists were destroying pleasure in the country for they encourage ardent prayer.
an intire banishment of gaming dancing sabbath day diversions the gentry responded with violence.
in caroline county an anglican posse attacked brother john waller at a prayer meeting.
waller was violently jerked off the stage they caught him by the back part of his neck beat his head against the ground and a gentleman gave him twenty lashes with his horsewhip despite these attacks baptist congregations multiplied.
by 1775 about 15 percent of virginias whites and hundreds of enslaved blacks had joined baptist baptism in the schuylkill river the baptist movement which made adult baptism central to its religious practice gained enormous influence during the great awakening.
baptists presented a challenge to the social order in new england where isaac backus and other leaders vigorously opposed the power of established congregationalist churches.
they presented an even graver threat to established authority in virginia where they ministered to african american slaves and ridiculed the pretensions of the gentry.
this woodcut from an eighteenth century history of the baptist movement shows a congregation gathered on the banks of the schuylkill river in pennsylvania to witness the baptism of a new convert.
historical society of pennsylvania.
chapter review ask yourself why this chapters 21 22 and 24 part 7 domestic and global challenges 1890 1945 domestic and global challenges 1890 1945 creation of the welfare state in comparison with their progressive predecessors chapter 24 thematic understanding this timeline arranges some of the important events of this period into themes.
consider the entries under america in the world politics and power identity and ideas beliefs and culture what connections do you see between events on the world stage and developments within the united states.
what impact did world war i the great depression and world war ii appear to have on american politics society and culture.
america in the world congress funds construction of modern battleships u s backed planters overthrow hawaiis queen 1892 u s wins war of 1898 against spain claims hawaii puerto rico guam and philippines republicans sweep congressional elections as americans respond to severe depression 1894 republican william mckinley elected president 1896 american exceptionalism and rise of imperialism william mckinley assassinated theodore roosevelt becomes president 1901 california washington and hawaii limit rights for asian immigrants wilson intervenes in mexico 1914 woodrow wilson elected president 1912 new ku klux klan founded 1915 panama canal opened 1914 red scare 1919 post wwi race riots woodrow wilson issues fourteen points 1919 wartime pressure for 100 loyalty dissent suppressed war ends wilson seeks to influence peace treaty negotiations 1918 heyday of dollar diplomacy u s occupation of haiti and other caribbean and central american nations u s senate rejects treaty of versailles 1919 1920 ideas beliefs and culture depression of 1890s increases pressure for u s to secure foreign markets rise of modernism root takahira agreement affirms free oceanic commerce 1908 moviemaking industry moves to southern california great migration brings african americans to northern cities mexicans north to united states birth of a nation glorifies the reconstruction era klan 1915 nineteenth amendment grants womens suffrage 1920 national origins act limits immigration 1924 rise of hollywood harlem renaissance prohibition 1920 1933 popularity of jazz music teapot dome scandal 1923 scopes monkey trial 1925 rise of european fascist powers franklin roosevelt elected president 1932 japan invades china 1937 first new deal 1933 second new deal 1935 roosevelt attempts to reform supreme court 1937 assembly line production begins radio corporation of america created 1919 bonus army 1932 indian reorganization act 1934 labor gains rolled back era of welfare capitalism documentary impulse in arts great depression 1929 1941 wpa assists artists rise of cio and organized labor social security created 1935 federal writers project film industry aids war effort united states enters wwii 1941 roosevelt elected to fourth term 1944 internment of japanese americans atomic bombing of japan and end of wwii 1945 roosevelt dies 1945 segregation in armed services until 1948 harry truman becomes president 1945 economic prosperity 1922 1929 rise of automobile loans and consumer credit republican associated state probusiness policies 1920 1932 work exchange and technology remember the maine campaign fuels surge in nationalism alfred mahan the influence of sea power upon history 1890 insular cases establish noncitizenship status for new territories 1901 united states enters wwi 1917 identity william mckinley reelected on proimperialist platform 1900 u s war against philippine revolutionaries roosevelt corollary to monroe doctrine 1904 politics and power united nations founded 1945 part 1 war spending ends depression rationing curbs consumer spending married women take war jobs part 7 thematic timeline 1890 1945 transformations of north america 1450 1700 an emerging world power 1890 1918 c h a p t e r from expansion to imperialism foundations of empire the war of 1898 spoils of war a power among powers the open door in asia the united states and latin america the united states in world war i from neutrality to war over there war on the home front catastrophe at versailles the fate of wilsons ideas congress rejects the treaty a ccepting the democratic presidenidentify the big idea tial nomination in 1900 william as the united states became a major jennings bryan delivered a famous power on the world stage what speech denouncing u s military occuideas and interests did policymakpations overseas.
god himself bryan ers seek to promote in international declared placed in every human heart affairs.
the love of liberty.
he never made a race of people so low in the scale of civilization or intelligence that it would welcome a foreign master at the time republican president william mckinley was leading an ambitious and popular plan of overseas expansion.
the united states had asserted control over the caribbean claimed hawaii and sought to annex the philippines.
bryan failed to convince a majority of voters that imperialism the exercise of military political and economic power overseas was the wrong direction.
he lost the election by a landslide.
by the 1910s however american enthusiasm for overseas involvement cooled.
despite efforts to stay neutral the united states got caught up in the global catastrophe of world war i which killed 8 million combatants including over 50 000 u s soldiers.
by the wars end european powers grip on their colonial empires was weakening.
the united states also ceased acquiring overseas territories and pursued a different path.
it did so in part because the war brought dramatic changes at home leaving americans a postwar legacy of economic upheaval and political disillusionment.
president woodrow wilson who in 1913 appointed bryan as his secretary of state tried to steer a middle course between revolutionary socialism and european style imperialism.
in wilsons phrase america would make the world safe for democracy while unapologetically working to advance u s economic interests.
the u s senate however rejected the 1919 treaty of versailles and with it wilsons vision leaving the nations foreign policy in doubt.
should the united states try to promote democracy abroad.
to what degree should the federal government seek to promote american business interests.
under what conditions was overseas military action justified.
when on the contrary did it impinge on others sovereignty endanger u s soldiers and invite disaster.
todays debates over foreign policy still center to a large degree on questions that americans debated in the era of mckinley bryan and wilson when the nation first asserted itself as a major world power.
american soldiers on a french battlefield 1918 as the united states asserted its power on the world stage american soldiers found themselves fighting on foreign battlefields.
this 1918 photograph shows a few of the 1 million u s soldiers who joined french and british troops fighting on the brutal western front to defeat germany in the great war.
over 26 000 american soldiers lost their lives on the battlefield during world war i and 95 000 were wounded.
library of congress.
part 7 domestic and global challenges 1890 1945 from expansion to imperialism historians used to describe turn of the twentiethcentury u s imperialism as something new and unprecedented.
now they stress continuities between foreign policy in this era and the nations earlier relentless expansion across north america.
wars against native peoples had occurred almost continuously since the countrys founding in the 1840s the united states had annexed a third of mexico.
the united states never administered a large colonial empire as did european powers like spain england and germany partly because it had a plentiful supply of natural resources in the american west.
but policymakers undertook a determined quest for global markets.
events in the 1890s opened opportunities to pursue this goal in new ways.
foundations of empire american empire builders around 1900 fulfilled a vision laid out earlier by william seward secretary of state under presidents abraham lincoln and andrew johnson who saw access to global markets as the key to power chapter.
fred anderson the war that made america 2005.
a compelling narrative of the seven years war in america.
also see the war that made america pbs video and its web site thewarthatmadeamerica org.
colin g calloway white people indians and highlanders 2008.
makes suggestive comparisons between britains encounters in scotland and america.
aaron spencer fogleman hopeful journeys 1996.
covers german migrations to america.
patrick griffin the people with no name 2001.
treats the experience of the scots irish in ireland and america.
susan e klepp and billy g smith eds the infortunate 1992.
a compelling narrative of one indentured servant immigrants experience in the middle colonies.
laurel thatcher ulrich a midwifes tale 1990.
a vivid account of one womans experiences on the maine frontier.
see also a midwifes tale pbs video and two related web sites pbs org wgbh amex midwife and dohistory org.
chapter 4 timeline chapter text also describes the anti imperialist movement.
what does senator pattersons cross examination of general macarthur reveal about the anti imperialists beliefs.
3 does the clash of ideas in these excerpts remain relevant to our own time.
how does it compare to what you might read or hear about in a news source today.
part 7 domestic and global challenges 1890 1945 roosevelt reviewed americas weak position in the pacific and declined.
he conceded that japan had a paramount interest in what surrounds the yellow sea in 1908 the united states and japan signed the roottakahira agreement confirming principles of free oceanic commerce and recognizing japans authority over manchuria.
william howard taft entered the white house in 1909 convinced that the united states had been shortchanged in asia.
he pressed for a larger role for american investors especially in chinese railroad construction.
eager to promote u s business interests abroad he hoped that infusions of american capital would offset japanese power.
when the chinese revolution of 1911 toppled the manchu dynasty taft supported the victorious nationalists who wanted to modernize their country and liberate it from japanese domination.
the united states had entangled itself in china and entered a long term rivalry with japan for power in the pacific a competition that would culminate thirty years later in world war ii.
the united states and latin america roosevelt famously argued that the united states should speak softly and carry a big stick by big stick he meant naval power and rapid access to two oceans required a canal.
european powers conceded the united statess paramount interest in the caribbean.
freed by britains surrender of canal building rights in the hay pauncefote treaty 1901 roosevelt persuaded congress to authorize 10 million plus future payments of 250 000 per year to purchase from colombia a six mile strip of land across panama a colombian province.
furious when colombia rejected this proposal roosevelt contemplated outright seizure of panama but settled on a more roundabout solution.
panamanians long separated from colombia by remote jungle chafed under colombian rule.
the united states lent covert assistance to an independence movement triggering a bloodless revolution.
on november 6 1903 the united states recognized the new nation of panama two weeks later it obtained a perpetually renewable lease on a canal zone.
roosevelt never regretted the venture though in 1922 the united states paid colombia 25 million as a kind of conscience money.
to build the canal the u s army corps of engineers hired 60 000 laborers who came from many countries to clear vast swamps excavate 240 million cubic yards of earth and construct a series of immense locks.
the project a major engineering feat took eight years and cost thousands of lives among the workers who built it.
opened in 1914 the panama canal gave panama canal workers 1910 the 51 mile long panama canal includes seven sets of locks that can raise and lower fifty large ships in a twenty four hour period.
building the canal took eight years and required over 50 000 workers including immigrants from spain and italy and many west indians such as these men who accomplished some of the worst paid most dangerous labor.
workers endured the horrors of rockslides explosions and a yellow fever epidemic that almost halted the project.
but american observers hailed the canal as a triumph of modern science and engineering especially in medical efforts to eradicate the yellow fever and malaria that had stymied earlier canal building efforts.
theodore roosevelt insisted on making a personal visit in november 1906.
he made the men that were building there feel like they were special people recalled the descendant of one canal worker.
give them pride of what they were doing for the united states library of congress.
chapter review ask yourself why this chapter 21 an emerging world power 1890 1918 collective military action.
wilson hoped the league would end all wars but his ideals had marked limits and in negotiations he confronted harsh realities.
the fate of wilsons ideas peace and future cannon fodder this scathing cartoon published in 1920 was drawn by australian born artist will dyson and published in a british magazine.
it shows the big four power brokers at versailles from left to right vittorio orlando of italy david lloyd george of britain georges clemenceau of france and woodrow wilson of the united states.
clemenceau who was nicknamed the tiger turns his head and comments on the crying child.
even at the time astute observers such as dyson argued that the treaty might have horrific consequences particularly in the brutal conditions it imposed on germany.
dyson sketched 1940 class over the head of the child.
the young children of 1920 grew up to inherit the consequences of the versailles treaty which contributed to the rise of fascism nazism and world war ii.
british daily herald may 13 1919 peace that he had presented a year earlier in a speech to congress.
wilsons points embodied an important strand in progressivism.
they called for open diplomacy absolute freedom of navigation upon the seas arms reduction removal of trade barriers and national selfdetermination for peoples in the austro hungarian russian and german empires.
essential to wilsons vision was the creation of an international regulatory body eventually called the league of nations that would guarantee each countrys independence and territorial integrity the league would mediate disputes supervise arms reduction and according to its crucial article x curb aggressor nations through the peace conference included ten thousand representatives from around the globe but leaders of france britain and the united states dominated the proceedings.
when the japanese delegation proposed a declaration for equal treatment of all races the allies rejected it.
similarly the allies ignored a global pan african congress organized by w e b du bois and other black leaders they snubbed arab representatives who had been military allies during the war.
even italys prime minister included among the influential big four because in 1915 italy had switched to the allied side withdrew from the conference aggrieved at the way british and french leaders marginalized him.
the allies excluded two key players russia because they distrusted its communist leaders and germany because they planned to dictate terms to their defeated foe.
for wilsons peace among equals it was a terrible start.
prime minister david lloyd george of britain and premier georges clemenceau of france imposed harsh punishments on germany.
unbeknownst to others at the time they had already made secret agreements to divide up germanys african colonies and take them as spoils of war.
at versailles they also forced the defeated nation to pay 33 billion in reparations and surrender coal supplies merchant ships valuable patents and even territory along the french border.
these terms caused keen resentment and economic hardship in germany and over the following two decades they helped lead to world war ii.
given these conditions it is remarkable that wilson influenced the treaty of versailles as much as he did.
he intervened repeatedly to soften conditions imposed on germany.
in accordance with the fourteen points he worked with the other allies to fashion nine new nations stretching from the baltic to the mediterranean map 21 4.
these were intended as a buffer to protect western europe from communist russia the plan also embodied wilsons principle of self determination for european states.
elsewhere in the world the allies dismantled their enemies empires but did not create independent nations keeping colonized people subordinate to european power.
france for example refused to give up its long standing occupation of indochina clemenceaus snub of future vietnamese leader ho chi minh who sought representation at versailles had part 7 domestic and global challenges 1890 1945 the versailles treaty thus created conditions for horrific future bloodshed and it must be judged one of historys great catastrophes.
balfour astutely described clemenceau lloyd george and wilson as all powerful all ignorant men sitting there and carving up continents wilson however remained optimistic as he returned home even though his health was beginning to fail.
the president hoped the new league of nations authorized by the treaty would moderate the settlement and secure peaceful resolutions of other disputes.
for this to occur u s participation was crucial.
grave long term consequences for both france and the united states.
the establishment of a british in what ways did the mandate in palestine now israel treaty of versailles also proved crucial.
during the embody or fail to war brit ish foreign secretary sir embody wilsons balfour had stated that his arthur fourteen points.
country would work to establish there a national home for the jewish people with the condition that nothing shall be done which may prejudice the civil and religious rights of existing nonjewish communities in palestine under the british mandate thousands of jews moved to palestine and purchased land in some cases evicting palestinian tenants.
as early as 1920 riots erupted between jews and palestinians a situation that even before world war ii escalated beyond british control.
explain consequences 500 kilometers atlantic ocean n w e ea north sea denmark ireland netherlands united danzig kingdom free city germany belg.
rhineland cz saar luxembourg e in r a ce r l o ls a a switz.
s new and reconstituted nations demilitarized or allied occupation british mandates estonia cs the outlook for u s ratification was not promising.
though major opinion makers and religious denominations supported the treaty openly hostile republicans finland lti 500 miles s w ed en no rw ay congress rejects the treaty ba.
french mandates latvia lithuania east prussia ger.
soviet union poland ec vol ga r h ca france al tug por black sea y al ad yugoslavia ria tic bulg.
sardinia it.
greece a f r i c a persian gulf syria mediterranean sea tunisia fr.
n o r t h persia turkey sicily algeria fr.
a it corsica fr.
i se romania spain sp an aust.
crete iraq dodecanese is.
italy palestine egypt independent 1922 transjordan kuwait gr.
saudi arabia map 21 4 europe and the middle east after world war i world war i and its aftermath dramatically altered the landscape of europe and the middle east.
in central europe the collapse of the german russian and austro hungarian empires brought the reconstitution of poland and the creation of a string of new states based on the principle of national ethnic self determination.
the demise of the ottoman empire resulted in the appearance of the quasi independent territories or mandates of iraq syria lebanon and palestine.
the league of nations stipulated that their affairs would be supervised by one of the allied powers.
chapter 21 making connections recognize the larger developments and continuities within and across chapter 5 that imperial reform would undermine political liberty.
the mobs also included apprentices day laborers and unemployed sailors young men with their own notions of liberty who especially if they had been drinking were quick to resort to violence.
nearly everywhere popular resistance nullified the stamp act.
fearing an assault on fort george new york lieutenant governor cadwallader colden called on general gage to use his small military force to protect the stamps.
gage refused.
fire from the fort might disperse the mob but it would not quell them he told colden and the result would be an insurrection the commencement of civil war the tax was collected in barbados and jamaica but frightened collectors resigned their offices in all thirteen colonies that would eventually join in the declaration of independence.
this popular insurrection gave a democratic cast to the emerging patriot movement.
nothing is wanting but your own resolution declared a new york rioter for great is the authority and power of the people the ideological roots of resistance some americans couched their resistance in constitutional terms.
many were lawyers or well educated merchants and planters.
composing pamphlets of remarkable political sophistication they gave the resistance movement its rationale its political agenda and its leaders.
patriot writers drew on three intellectual traditions.
the first was english common law the centuries old body of legal rules and procedures that protected the lives and property of the monarchs subjects.
in the famous writs of assistance case of 1761 boston lawyer james otis invoked english legal precedents to challenge open ended search warrants.
in demanding a jury trial for john hancock in the late 1760s john adams appealed to the magna carta 1215 the ancient document that said adams has for many centuries been esteemed by englishmen as one of the.
firmest bulwarks of their liberties other lawyers protested that new strictures violated specific liberties and privileges granted in colonial charters or embodied in britains ancient constitution enlightenment rationalism provided patriots with a second important intellectual resource.
virginia planter thomas jefferson and other patriots drew on the writings of john locke who had argued that all individuals possessed certain natural rights life liberty and property that governments must protect see chapters by answering these questions.
across time and place read again the documents from representing indians in chapter 29.
horrified at the suffering caused by world war i some women joined a growing international peace movement.
while diplomats conducted negotiations at versailles women peace advocates from around the part 7 domestic and global challenges 1890 1945 such women faced serious opposition.
the wilpf came under fierce attack during the red scare because it included socialist women in its ranks.
and though women proved to be effective lobbyists they had difficulty gaining access to positions inside the republican and democratic parties.
finding that women did not vote as a bloc politicians in both parties began to take their votes for granted.
new reforms failed to gain support and others were rolled back.
many congressmen for example had supported the sheppard towner act because they feared the voting power of women but congress ended the program in the late 1920s.
republicans and business the league of women voters the league of women voters was the brainchild of carrie chapman catt president of the national american woman suffrage association.
formed in 1920 as the nineteenth amendment was about to give women the vote the league undertook to educate americans in responsible citizenship and to win enactment of legislation favorable to women.
the league helped secure passage of the sheppard towner act of 1921 which provided federal aid for maternal and child care programs.
in the 1930s members campaigned for the enactment of social security and other social welfare legislation.
the library of virginia world convened in zurich and called on all nations to use their resources to end hunger and promote human welfare.
treaty negotiators ignored them but the women organized for sustained activism.
in 1919 they created the womens international league for peace and freedom wilpf whose leading american members included jane addams.
members of the league denounced imperialism stressed the human suffering caused by militarism and proposed social justice measures.
with president wilson ailing in 1920 democrats nominated ohio governor james m cox for president on a platform calling for u s participation in the league of nations and continuation of wilsons progressivism.
republicans led by their probusiness wing tapped genial ohio senator warren g harding.
in a dig at wilsons idealism harding promised not nostrums but normalcy on election day he won in a landslide beginning an era of republican dominance that lasted until 1932 hardings most energetic appointee was secretary of commerce herbert hoover well known as head of the wartime food administration.
under hoovers direction the commerce department helped create two thousand trade associations representing companies in almost every major industry.
government officials worked closely with the associations providing statistical research suggesting industry wide standards and promoting stable prices and wages.
hoover hoped that through voluntary business cooperation with government an associated state he could achieve what progressives had sought through governmental regulation.
this meant of course giving corporate leaders greater policymaking power.
more sinister links between government and corporate interests were soon revealed.
when president harding died suddenly of a heart attack in august 1923 evidence was just emerging that parts of his administration were riddled with corruption.
the worst scandal concerned secret leasing of government oil reserves in teapot dome wyoming and elk hills california to private companies.
secretary of the interior albert fall was eventually convicted of taking 300 000 in bribes and became the first cabinet officer in u s history to serve a prison sentence.
vice president calvin coolidge became president upon hardings death.
he maintained republican chapter 22 dominance while offering with his austere yankee morality a contrast to his predecessors cronyism.
campaigning for election in his own right in 1924 coolidge called for limited government and tax cuts for business.
rural and urban democrats deeply divided over such issues as prohibition and immigration restriction deadlocked at their national convention after 102 ballots delegates finally nominated john w davis a wall street lawyer.
coolidge easily defeated davis and staved off a challenge from senator robert m la follette of wisconsin who tried to resuscitate the progressive party.
the 1924 progressive platform called for stronger government regulation at home and international efforts to reduce weapons production and prevent war.
free men of every generation it declared must combat the renewed efforts of organized force and greed in the end coolidge received 15 7 million votes to daviss 8 4 million and la follettes 4 9 million.
to see a longer excerpt of the progressive party platform along with other primary sources from this period see sources for americas history.
for the most part republicans dropped progressive initiatives of the prewar years.
the federal trade commission failed to enforce antitrust laws.
the supreme court now headed by former republican president william howard taft refused to break up the mammoth u s steel corporation despite evidence of its near monopoly status.
with the agricultural sector facing hardship congress sought to aid farmers with the mcnary haugen bills of 1927 and 1928 which proposed a system of federal price supports for major crops.
but president coolidge opposed the bills as special interest legislation and vetoed them both.
while some state and municipal leaders continued to pursue ambitious agendas they were shut out of federal power.
dollar diplomacy political campaigns emphasized domestic issues in the 1920s but while the united states refused to join the league of nations the federal government remained deeply engaged in foreign affairs.
republican presidents worked to advance u s business interests especially by encouraging private banks to make foreign loans part of the broader government business alliance in republicans associated state.
policymakers hoped loans would stimulate growth and increase demand for u s products in developing markets.
bankers though wanted cultural conflict bubble and bust 1919 1932 government guarantees of repaycompare and ment in countries they perceived contrast as weak or unstable.
what choices did ameriofficials provided such assur cans face in the elections ance.
in 1922 for example when of 1920 and 1924 and american banks offered an what directions did they immense loan to bolivia at a choose.
hefty profit state department officials pressured the south american nation to accept it.
diplomats also forced bolivia to agree to financial oversight by a commission under the banks control.
a similar arrangement was reached with el salvadors government in 1923 in other cases the united states intervened militarily often to force repayment of debt.
to implement such policies the u s marines occupied nicaragua almost continuously from 1912 to 1933 the dominican republic from 1916 to 1924 and haiti from 1915 to 1934 in these lengthy military deployments americans came to think of the occupied countries as essentially u s possessions much like puerto rico and the philippines.
sensational memoirs by marines who had served in haiti popularized the island as the american africa white americans became fascinated by vodou voodoo and other haitian religious customs reinforcing their view of haitians as dangerous savages or childlike people who needed u s guidance and supervision.
one commander testified that his troops saw themselves as trustees of a huge estate that belonged to minors.
the haitians were our wards at home critics denounced loan guarantees and military interventions as dollar diplomacy.
the term was coined in 1924 by samuel guy inman a disciples of christ missionary who toured u s occupied haiti and the dominican republic.
the united states inman declared cannot go on destroying with impunity the sovereignty of other peoples however weak african american leaders also denounced the haitian occupation.
on behalf of the womens international league for peace and freedom and the international council of women of the darker races a delegation conducted a fact finding tour of haiti in 1926 their report exposed among other things the sexual exploitation of haitian women by u s soldiers.
by the late 1920s dollar diplomacy was on the defensive in keeping with a broader disgust over international affairs.
at the same time political leaders became frus place events in context trated with their poor results.
what were the economic dollar diplomacy usually mangoals of u s foreign aged to get loans repaid securing policymakers in the 1920s.
bankers profits.
but the loans part 7 domestic and global challenges 1890 1945 often ended up in the pockets of local elites u s policies failed to build broad based prosperity overseas.
military intervention had even worse results.
in haiti for example the marines crushed peasant protests and helped the haitian elite consolidate power.
u s occupation thus helped create the conditions for harsh dictatorships that haitians endured through the rest of the twentieth century.
culture wars by 1929 ninety three u s cities had populations of more than 100 000 new york citys population exceeded 7 million los angeless had exploded to 1 2 million.
the lives and beliefs of urban americans often differed dramatically from those in small towns and farming areas.
native born rural protestants faced with a dire perceived threat rallied in the 1920s to protect what they saw as american values.
prohibition rural and native born protestants started the decade with the achievement of a longtime goal national prohibition of liquor chapter 4 pre sented a turbulent era marked by social and cultural conflict and imperial warfare during which the regions of british north america were disparate and without unity.
yet by 1776 only thirteen years after the treaty of paris ending the great war for empire thirteen of britains mainland colonies were prepared to unite in a declaration of independence.
what happened in that intervening time to strengthen and deepen colonists sense of common cause.
as they drew together to resist imperial authority what political and cultural resources did they have in common.
more to explore 3 what compromises were proposed in the colonies visual evidence return to the paul revere engraving of the boston massacre on page 167 this image was an instrument of political propaganda.
what features of the image are most important to its political purpose.
consider his depiction of both the soldiers and the townspeople.
look too at the buildings surrounding the crowd especially the custom house on the right.
list the ways in which revere invokes the idea of tyranny in this image.
start here to learn more about the events discussed in this chapter 22 many poor and affluent families shared one thing in common they stretched their incomes small or large through new forms of borrowing such as auto loans and installment plans.
buy now pay later said the ads and millions did.
anyone no matter how rich could get into debt but consumer credit was particularly perilous for those living on the economic margins.
in chicago one lithuanian man described his neighbors situation she aint got no money.
sure she buys on credit clothes for the children and everything such borrowing turned out to be a factor in the bust of 1929 the automobile no possession proved more popular than the automobile a showpiece of modern consumer capitalism that revolutionized american life.
car sales played a major role in the decades economic boom in one year 1929 americans spent 2 58 billion on automobiles.
by the end of the decade they owned 23 million cars about 80 percent of the worlds automobiles or an average of one for every six people.
the auto industrys exuberant expansion rippled through the economy with both positive and negative results.
it stimulated steel petroleum chemical rubber and glass production and directly or indirectly created 3 7 million jobs.
highway construction became cultural conflict bubble and bust 1919 1932 a billion dollar a year enterprise place events financed by federal subsidies and in context state gasoline taxes.
car owner how did the radio autoship spurred urban sprawl and in mobile and hollywood 1924 the first suburban shopping movies exemplify the center country club plaza out opportunities and the side kansas city missouri.
but risks of 1920s consumer cars were expensive and most culture.
americans bought them on credit.
this created risks not only for buyers but for the whole economy.
borrowers who could not pay off car loans lost their entire investment in the vehicle if they defaulted banks were left holding unpaid loans.
amid the boom of the 1920s however few worried about this result.
cars changed the way americans spent their leisure time as proud drivers took their machines on the road.
an infrastructure of gas stations motels and drive in restaurants soon catered to drivers.
railroad travel faltered.
the american automobile association founded in 1902 estimated that by 1929 almost a third of the population took vacations by car.
as early as 1923 colorado had 247 autocamps.
i had a few days after i got my wheat cut reported one kansas farmer so i just loaded my family.
and lit out an elite californian complained that automobile travel was no automobiles at jacksonville beach florida 1923 the automobile transformed americans leisure pursuits.
as proud car owners took to the road in ever larger numbers the vacation became a summer staple.
auto travel created a booming business in gas stations roadside motels campgrounds and sightseeing destinations.
a florida vacation once reserved for wealthy northeasterners who had traveled to miamis exclusive hotels by first class rail car became an attainable luxury for middle class and even some working class families.
curt teich postcard archives lake county museum.
part 7 domestic and global challenges 1890 1945 charlie chaplin and jackie coogan charlie chaplin left and jackie coogan starred together in the kid 1921 a silent comedy that also included sentimental and dramatic moments promising viewers a smile.
and perhaps a tear chaplin born in london in 1889 moved to the united states in 1912 and over the next two decades reigned as one of hollywoods most famous silent film stars.
in 1919 he joined with d w griffith mary pickford and other american directors and stars to create the independent studio united artists.
the kid made the los angeles born coogan discovered by chaplin on the vaudeville stage into americas first child star.
library of congress.
longer aristocratic the clerks and their wives and sweethearts observed a reporter driving through the wisconsin lake country camping at niagara scattering tin cans and pop bottles over the rockies made those places taboo for bankers hollywood movies formed a second centerpiece of consumer culture.
in the 1910s the moviemaking industry had begun moving to southern california to take advantage of cheap land sunshine and varied scenery within easy reach.
the large studios united artists paramount and metro goldwyn mayer were run mainly by eastern european jewish immigrants like adolph zukor who arrived from hungary in the 1880s.
starting with fur sales zukor and a partner then set up five cent theaters in manhattan.
i spent a good deal of time watching the faces of the audience zukor recalled.
with a little experience i could see hear and feel the reaction to each melodrama and comedy founding paramount pictures zukor signed emerging stars and produced successful feature length films.
by 1920 hollywood reigned as the worlds movie capital producing nearly 90 percent of all films.
large ornate movie palaces attracted both middle class and working class audiences.
idols such as rudolph valentino mary pickford and douglas fairbanks set national trends in style.
thousands of young women followed the lead of actress clara bow hollywoods famous flapper who flaunted her boyish figure.
decked out in knee length skirts flappers shocked the older generation by smoking and wearing makeup.
flappers represented only a tiny minority of women but thanks to the movies and advertising they became influential symbols of womens sexual and social emancipation.
in cities young immigrant women eagerly bought makeup and the latest flapper fashions and went dancing to jazz.
jazz stars helped popularize the style among working class african americans.
mexican american teenagers joined the trend though they usually found themselves under the watchful eyes of la duea the chaperone.
politicians quickly grasped the publicity value of american radio and film to foreign relations.
in 1919 with government support general electric spearheaded the creation of radio corporation of america rca to expand u s presence in foreign radio markets.
rca which had a federal appointee on its board of directors emerged as a major provider of radio transmission in latin america and east asia.
meanwhile by 1925 american films made up 95 percent of the movies screened in britain 80 percent in latin america and 70 percent in france america compared p 727.
the united states was experimenting with what historians call soft power the exercise of popular cultural influence as radio and film exports celebrated the american dream.
the coming of the great depression by 1927 strains on the economy began to show.
consumer lending had become the tenth largest business in the country topping 7 billion that year.
increasing numbers of americans bought into the stock market often with unrealistic expectations.
one yale professor proclaimed that stocks had reached a permanently high plateau corporate profits were so high that some companies fully invested in their own operations plowed excess earnings into the stock america c o m pa r e d hollywood in europe european film studios struggled after world war i to reach audiences who had fallen in love with american movies.
working class europeans in particular preferred hollywoods offerings to the films produced in europe.
in this 1928 article from a cinematography journal german expressionist filmmaker erich pommer suggested new strategies for expanding an audience for european films.
expressionists influenced by romanticism and modernism explored dark themes such as spiritual crisis and insanity.
a famous example of expressionist painting is edvard munchs the scream.
pommer worked for american studios and later fled to the united states after the rise of hitler.
the towering importance of the american motion picture on the worlds markets cannot be safely explained by the unlimited financial resources at the disposal of the american producers.
its main reason is the mentality of the american picture which notwithstanding all attacks and claims to the contrary apparently comes nearest to the taste of international cinema audiences.
the specific and unique element of the american film is the fact of its being absolutely uncomplicated.
being what is called nave it knows no problems.
universal appeal.
it is really preferable to have a picture too light rather than too heavy because in the latter case there is a danger that the public will not understand the story.
this is the worst thing that can happen with a picture.
spectacular appeal.
the international appeal of a picture has its foundation in a story.
it is totally independent of the capital invested and of the splendor and luxury used in its production.
the fact that in most cases the supers and monumental pictures have proved to be such international successes does not disprove this claim.
other market players compounded risk by purchasing on margin.
an investor might for example spend 20 of his own money and borrow 80 to buy a 100 share of stock expecting to pay back the loan as the stock rose quickly in value.
this worked as long as the economy grew and the stock market climbed.
but those conditions did not last.
yet when the stock market fell in a series of plunges between october 25 and november 13 1929 few onlookers understood the magnitude of the crisis.
cyclical downturns had been a familiar part of the industrializing economy since the panic of the 1830s they tended to follow periods of rapid growth and speculation.
a sharp recent recession in 1921 had not such productions always have a simple story of universal appeal because it is simply impossible to use spiritual thoughts and impressions of the soul in a picture deluxe.
the splendour in such production is not merely created for decoration it is its outstanding purpose.
but splendour means show and a show is always and everywhere easy to understand.
source excerpt from the international picture a lesson on simplicity by erich pommer from film europe and film america cinema commerce and cultural exchange 1920 1939 edited by andrew higson and richard maltby 1999 isbn 978 0 85989 546 0 used by permission of exeter university press.
questions for analysis 1 how does pommer characterize the attraction of popular american films for european audiences.
what does he mean when he calls those films nave.
2 how does pommer propose to produce german films that will compete with hollywood.
what constraints and challenges did he face.
triggered disaster.
the market identify causes rose again in late 1929 and early what domestic and global 1930 and while a great deal factors helped cause the of money had been lost most great depression.
americans hoped the aftermath of the crash would be brief.
in fact the nation had entered the great depression.
over the next four years industrial production fell 37 percent.
construction plunged 78 percent.
prices for crops and other raw materials already low fell by half.
by 1932 unemployment had reached a staggering 24 percent figure 22 1.
a precipitous drop in consumer spending deepened the crisis.
facing hard times and unemployment americans cut back dramatically creating a part 7 domestic and global challenges 1890 1945 24 9 23 6 21 7 20 1 19 0 16 9 percent unemployed 17 2 15 9 14 3 14 6 11 7 9 9 8 7 8 5 6 7 5 1 5 2 4 6 5 0 2 4 1 4 1 4 4 7 4 2 3 3 3 2 3 2 1 9 1 8 1 2 1 9 figure 22 1 unemployment 1915 1945 during the 1920s business prosperity and low rates of immigration resulted in historically low unemployment levels.
the great depression threw millions of people out of work by 1933 one in four american workers was unemployed and the rate remained high until 1941 when the nation mobilized for world war ii.
vicious cycle of falling demand and forfeited loans.
in late 1930 several major banks went under victims of overextended credit and reckless management.
the following year as industrial production slowed a much larger wave of bank failures occurred causing an even greater shock.
since the government did not insure bank deposits accounts in failed banks simply vanished.
some people who had had steady jobs and comfortable savings found themselves broke and out of work.
not all americans were devastated by the depression the middle class did not disappear and the rich lived in accustomed luxury.
but incomes plummeted even among workers who kept their jobs.
salt lake city went bankrupt in 1931 barter systems developed as barbers traded haircuts for onions and potatoes and laborers worked for payment in eggs or pork.
we do not dare to use even a little soap reported one jobless oregonian when it will pay for an extra egg a few more carrots for our children i would be only too glad to dig ditches to keep my family from going hungry wrote a north carolina man.
where did desperate people turn for aid.
their first hope lay in private charity especially churches and synagogues.
but by the winter of 1931 these institutions were overwhelmed unable to keep pace with the extraordinary need.
only eight states provided even minimal unemployment insurance.
there was no public support for the elderly statistically among the poorest citizens.
few americans had any retirement savings and many who had saved watched their accounts erased by failing banks.
even those who were not wiped out had to adapt to depression conditions.
couples delayed marriage and reduced the number of children they conceived.
as a result the marriage rate fell to a historical low and by 1933 the birthrate dropped from 97 births per 1 000 women to 75 often the responsibility for birth control fell to women.
it was one of the worst problems of women whose husbands were out of work a californian told a reporter.
campaigns against hiring married women were common on the theory that available jobs should go to male breadwinners.
three quarters of the nations school districts banned married women chapter 22 3 what factors contributed to the economic boom of the 1920s and the crash that followed.
thematic understanding between 1917 and 1945 the roaring twenties were the only years when the united states did not face a major economic or international crisis.
review the categories making connections of america in the world politics and power and identity on the thematic timeline on page 671 in what ways do they suggest that the prosperous 1920s were a politically distinctive era.
what continuities do you see in politics and foreign policy.
recognize the larger developments and continuities within and across chapter.
lynn dumenil the modern temper 1995.
a readable overview of events in the 1920s.
david levering lewis when harlem was in vogue 1979.
a wonderful account of politics arts and culture in the vibrant negro capital of the world daniel okrent last call the rise and fall of prohibition 2010.
a lively recent history of the movement to ban liquor.
martha l olney buy now pay later 1991.
explores the rise and impact of consumer credit.
mary a renda taking haiti 2001.
a compelling exploration of u s occupation of haiti and its impact on haiti and especially the united states.
the pbs series american experience has produced an excellent documentary on the scopes trial information and documents are available at pbs org wgbh amex monkeytrial.
for a broad view of the 1929 crash and its impact see pbs org wgbh amex crash.
part 7 chapter 22 chapter 20.
compared with previous chief executives and in contrast to his popular image as a do nothing president hoover had responded to the national emergency with unprecedented government action.
but the nations needs part 7 domestic and global challenges 1890 1945 hooverville the depression cast hundreds of thousands of americans out of their homes.
most found shelter with relatives but those with little choice had to make do as they could.
encampments such as this one south of downtown seattle washington places where the homeless crafted makeshift lodging out of whatever materials were at hand became known as hoovervilles.
the name reflected americans attitudes toward president hoover whose popularity plummeted as the depression deepened.
university of washington libraries special collections uw2129.
were even more unprecedented and hoovers programs failed to meet them map 23 1.
rising discontent as the depression deepened the american vocabulary now included the terms hoovervilles shantytowns where people lived in packing crates and hoover blankets newspapers.
bankrupt farmers banded together to resist the bank agents and sheriffs who tried to evict them from their land.
to protest low prices for their goods in the spring of 1932 thousands of midwestern farmers joined the farmers holiday association which cut off supplies to urban areas by barricading roads and dumping milk vegetables and other foodstuffs onto the roadways.
agricultural prices were so low that the farmers holiday association favored a government supported farm program.
in the industrial sector layoffs and wage cuts led to violent strikes.
when coal miners in harlan county kentucky went on strike over a 10 percent wage cut in 1931 the mine owners called in the states national guard which crushed the union.
a 1932 confrontation between workers and security forces at the ford motor companys giant river rouge factory outside detroit left five workers dead and fifty with serious injuries.
a photographer had his camera shot from his hands and fifteen policemen were clubbed or stoned.
whether on farms or in factories those who produced the nations food and goods had begun to push for a more aggressive response to the nations economic troubles.
veterans staged the most publicized and most tragic protest.
in the summer of 1932 the bonus army a determined group of 15 000 unemployed world war i veterans hitchhiked to washington to demand chapter and from your knowledge of the period write an essay in which you analyze americans attitudes toward new deal public works projects.
if they were positive or optimistic what was the basis of their optimism.
if they were critical what was the basis of their criticism.
from these sources can you identify a governing spirit of new deal reform.
sources 1 harold l ickes the new democracy new york w w norton company inc 1934 60 61 3 federal writers project life histories library of congress lcweb2 loc gov ammem wpaintro wpahome html 5 david e lilienthal tva democracy on the march new york harper row publishers 1944 xxii 3 part 7 domestic and global challenges 1890 1945 representing the other major group of unions favored organizing workers on a craft by craft basis.
both federations dramatically increased their membership in the second half of the 1930s.
labors new vitality translated into political action and a long lasting alliance with the democratic party.
the cio helped fund democratic campaigns in 1936 and its political action committee became a major democratic contributor during the 1940s.
these successes were real but limited.
the labor movement did not become the dominant force in the united states that it was in europe and unions never enrolled a majority of american wageworkers.
antiunion employer groups such as the national association of manufacturers and the chamber of commerce remained powerful forces in american business life.
after a decade of gains organized labor remained an important but secondary force in american industry.
women and the new deal because policymakers saw the depression primarily as a crisis of male breadwinners the new deal did not directly challenge gender inequities.
new deal measures generally enhanced womens welfare but few addressed their specific needs and concerns.
however the roosevelt administration did welcome women into the higher ranks of government.
frances perkins the first woman named to a cabinet post served as secretary of labor throughout roosevelts presidency.
while relatively few female appointees often worked to open up other opportunities in government for talented women.
the most prominent woman in american politics was the presidents wife eleanor roosevelt.
in the 1920s she had worked to expand positions for women in political parties labor unions and education.
a tireless advocate for womens rights during her years in the white house mrs roosevelt emerged as an independent public figure and the most influential first lady in the nations history.
descending into coal mines to view working conditions meeting with african americans seeking antilynching laws and talking to people on breadlines she became the conscience of the new deal pushing her husband to do more for the disadvantaged.
i sometimes acted as a spur mrs roosevelt later reflected even though the spurring was not always wanted compare and or welcome contrast without the intervention of what aspects of the new eleanor roosevelt frances deal inspired ordinary perkins and other prominent americans.
what stymied women new deal policymakers their ambitions.
would have largely ignored the roosevelts visit camp tara franklin roosevelt was a wealthy patrician but one of his great political skills was the ability to connect with ordinary americans.
his wife eleanor shared a similar gift perhaps to an even greater degree.
in an era when staged photographs had become an important part of a politicians image making roosevelt made certain to appear frequently in settings in which he mingled with the public.
here he and eleanor visit a vocational training camp for jobless women in 1934 fdr is seated on the far left while eleanor greets two women standing beside the car.
ap wide world photos.
needs of women.
a fourth of the national recovery acts employment rules set a lower minimum wage for women than for men performing the same jobs and only 7 percent of the workers hired by the civil works administration were female.
the civilian conservation corps excluded women entirely.
women fared better under the works progress administration at its peak 405 000 women were on the payroll.
most americans agreed with such policies.
when gallup pollsters in 1936 asked people whether wives should work outside the home when their husbands had jobs 82 percent said no.
such sentiment reflected a persistent belief in womens secondary status in american economic life.
african americans under the new deal across the nation but especially in the south african americans held the lowest paying jobs and faced harsh social and political discrimination.
though fdr did not fundamentally change this fact he was the most popular president among african americans since abraham lincoln.
african americans held 18 percent of wpa jobs although they constituted 10 percent of the population.
the resettlement administration established in 1935 to help small farmers and tenants buy land actively protected the rights of black tenant chapter 23 managing the great depression forging the new deal 1929 1939 indian new deal commissioner of indian affairs john collier poses with chiefs of the blackfoot indian tribe in 1934 collier helped reform the way the u s federal government treated native americans.
as part of what many called the indian new deal collier lobbied congress to pass the indian reorganization act.
the act gave indian tribes greater control over their own affairs and ended many of the most atrocious federal practices such as forcing indian children into white run boarding schools and dividing up and selling reservation land.
the legislations long term results were mixed but it signaled the beginning of greater autonomy for indian tribes across the country.
bettmann corbis.
representative and they made no linguistic distinctions among law rule charter and constitution.
in another case the nations largest tribe the navajos rejected the bias new policy largely because the government was simultaneously reducing navajo livestock to protect the boulder dam project.
in theory the new policy gave indians a much greater degree of self determination.
in practice however although some tribes did benefit the bia and congress continued to interfere in internal indian affairs and retained financial control over reservation governments.
struggles in the west by the 1920s agriculture in california had become a big business intensive diversified and export oriented.
large scale corporateowned farms produced specialty crops lettuce tomatoes peaches grapes and cotton whose staggered harvests allowed the use of transient laborers.
thousands of workers immigrants from mexico and asia and white migrants from the midwestern states trooped from farm to farm and from crop to crop during the long picking season.
some migrants settled in the rapidly growing cities along the west coast especially the sprawling metropolis of los angeles.
under both hoover and fdr the federal government promoted the repatriation of mexican citizens their deportation to mexico.
between 1929 and 1937 approximately half a million people of mexican descent were deported.
but historians estimate that more than 60 percent of these were legal u s citizens making the governments actions constitutionally questionable.
despite the deportations many mexican americans benefitted from the new deal and generally held roosevelt and the democratic party in high regard.
people of mexican descent like other americans took jobs with the wpa and the ccc or received relief in the worst years of the depression.
the national youth administration nya which employed young people from families on relief and sponsored a variety of school programs was especially important in part 7 domestic and global challenges 1890 1945 mexican american farm workers among the most hard pressed workers during the great depression were those who labored in the nations agricultural field orchards and processing plants.
agriculture was a big time corporate business by the 1930s and in california and other parts of the southwest it employed hundreds of thousands of poor mexican americans and mexican immigrants.
seizing on the spirit of social protest sweeping the country in the early 1930s many of these workers went on strike for better wages and working conditions.
here women from mexican american communities are heading to the cotton fields near corcoran california to urge workers to join a major strike of cotton pickers.
though the workers in corcoran won some wage improvements in this 1933 strike the fierce battle between employers and workers in american agriculture was far from over and continues to this day.
library of congress.
southwestern cities.
in california the mexican american movement mam a youth focused organization received assistance from liberal new dealers.
new deal programs did not fundamentally improve the migrant farm labor system under which so many people of mexican descent labored but mexicans joined the new deal coalition in large numbers because of the democrats commitment to ordinary americans.
franklin d roosevelts name was the spark that started thousands of spanish speaking persons to the polls noted one los angeles activist.
men and women of asian descent mostly from china japan and the philippines formed a small minority of the american population but were a significant presence in some western cities.
immigrants from japan and china had long faced discrimination.
a 1913 california law prohibited them from owning land.
japanese farmers who specialized in fruit and vegetable crops circumvented this restriction by putting land titles in the names of their american born children.
as the depression cut farm prices and racial discrimination excluded young japanese americans from nonfarm jobs about 20 percent of the immigrants returned to japan.
chinese americans were less prosperous than their japanese counterparts.
only 3 percent of chinese americans worked in professional and technical positions and discrimination barred them from most industrial jobs.
in san francisco the majority of chinese worked in small businesses restaurants laundries and firms that imported textiles and ceramics.
during the depression they turned for assistance to chinese social organizations such as huiguan district associations and to the city government in 1931 about one sixth of san franciscos chinese population was receiving public aid.
but few chinese benefitted from the new deal.
until the repeal of the exclusion act in 1943 chinese immigrants were classified as aliens ineligible for citizenship and therefore were excluded from most federal programs.
because filipino immigrants came from a u s territory they were not affected by the ban on asian chapter 7 british canada gros ventre me.
pe l su rior colum bia r crow fox m is santee sioux r kickapoo iowa louisiana purchase taos santa fe a i u s nationals per sq.
mile 18 to 45 over 45 explorers routes ar kan s as el paso r n j md.
n w n c s s c ga a tlanti c ocean creek gulf of mexico del.
e s pa n i s h coahuila lewis and clark 1804 1806 pike 1805 1806 pike 1806 1807 missions forts pa i ee ch ok yu er ch new orleans san antonio timucua fl o r id a seminole 500 miles 500 kilometers cuba map 7 4 u s population density in 1803 and the louisiana purchase when the united states purchased louisiana from france in 1803 much of the land to its east the vast territory between the appalachian mountains and the mississippi river remained in indian hands.
the equally vast lands beyond the mississippi were virtually unknown to anglo americans even after the epic explorations of meriwether lewis and william clark.
still president jefferson predicted quite accurately that the huge mississippi river valley from its fertility.
will ere long yield half of our whole produce and contain half of our whole population had served the nation well.
but john beckley a loyal republican worried that madison would be too timid and indecisive as a statesman and events proved him right.
acknowledging the embargos failure madison replaced it with new economic restrictions which also failed to protect american commerce.
western war hawks republican congressmen from the west were certain that britain was the primary offender.
they pointed to its trade with indians in the ohio river valley in violation of the treaty of paris and jays treaty.
bolstered by british guns and supplies the shawnee war chief tecumseh revived the western confederacy in 1809 his brother the prophet tenskwatawa provided the confederacy with a powerful nativist ideology.
he urged indian peoples to shun mass.
r i conn choctaw natchez nacogdoches chihuahua tenn mississippi territory texas rio g ra n h n y va chickasaw wichita e nd under 2 2 to 18 kiowa n population density 1800 osage red r p san diego lo co io ohio st louis.
or ohi sh ky aw ne e r s santa barbara los angeles w san luis obispo do ra illinois kansa ie er l ntar erie.
e alta california indiana territory mis sissi ppi r n san francisco pacific o ce a n missouri arapaho l o potawatomi mi am i cheyenne r winnebago l michigan sauk uri so snake vt l ron hu oregon claimed by britain spain and the united states hammering out a federal republic 1787 1820 americans the children of the evil spirit.
who have taken away your lands renounce alcohol and return to traditional ways.
the shawnee leaders found their greatest support among kickapoo potawatomi winnebago ottawa and chippewa warriors indians of the western great lakes who had so far been largely shielded from the direct effects of u s westward expansion.
they flocked to tenskwatawas holy village prophetstown in the indiana territory.
as tecumseh mobilized the western indian peoples for war william henry harrison the governor of the indiana territory decided on a preemptive strike.
in november 1811 when tecumseh went south to seek support from the chickasaws choctaws and creeks harrison took advantage of his absence and attacked prophetstown.
the governors 1 000 troops part 3 revolution and republican culture 1763 1820 tenskwatawa the prophet 1830 tenskwatawa added a spiritual dimension to native american resistance by urging a holy war against the invading whites and calling for a return to sacred ancestral ways.
his dress reflects his teachings note the animal skin shirt and the heavily ornamented ears.
however some of tenskwatawas religious rituals reflected the influence of french jesuits he urged his followers to finger a sacred string of beads such as those in his left hand that were similar to the catholic rosary thereby shaking hands with the prophet whatever its origins tenskwatawas message transcended the cultural differences among indian peoples and helped his brother tecumseh create a formidable political and military alliance.
smithsonian american art museum washington d c art resource.
and militiamen traded heavy casualties with the confederacys warriors at the battle of tippecanoe and then destroyed the holy village.
with britain assisting indians in the western territories and seizing american ships in the atlantic henry clay of kentucky the new speaker of the house of representatives and john c calhoun a rising young congressman from south carolina pushed madison toward war.
like other republican war hawks from the west and south they wanted to seize territory in british canada and spanish florida.
with national elections approaching madison issued an ultimatum to britain.
when britain failed to respond quickly the president asked congress for a declaration of war.
in june 1812 a sharply divided senate voted 19 to 13 for war and the house of representatives concurred 79 to 49 the causes of the war of 1812 have been much debated.
officially the united states went to war because britain had violated its commercial rights as a neutral nation.
but the federalists in congress who represented the new england and middle atlantic merchants voted against the war and in the election of 1812 those regions cast their 89 electoral votes for the federalist presidential candidate de witt clinton of new york.
madison amassed most of his 128 electoral votes in the south and west where voters and congressmen strongly supported the war.
many historians therefore argue that the conflict was actually a western war with eastern labels american voices p 238.
the war of 1812 the war of 1812 was a near disaster for the united states.
an invasion of british canada in 1812 quickly ended in a retreat to detroit.
nonetheless the united states stayed on the offensive in the west.
in 1813 american raiders burned the canadian capital of york present day toronto commodore oliver hazard perry defeated a small british flotilla on lake erie and chapter review ask yourself why this chapter 29.
new urban communities folk singer pete seeger performs at the opening of the washington d c labor canteen in 1944 sponsored by the congress of industrial organizations cio.
wartime migration brought people from across the country to centers of industry and military operations.
migration opened new possibilities for urban communities.
african american neighborhoods grew dramatically urban populations grew younger and more mobile and gay and lesbian communities began to flourish and become more visible.
the granger collection new york.
chapter 24 the military tried to screen out homosexuals but had limited success.
once in the services homosexuals found opportunities to participate in a gay culture often more extensive than that in civilian life.
in the last twenty years historians have documented thriving communities of gay and lesbian soldiers in the world war ii military.
some came out under fire as one historian put it but most kept their sexuality hidden from authorities because army officers doctors and psychiatrists treated homosexuality as a psychological disorder that was grounds for dishonorable discharge.
japanese removal unlike world war i which evoked widespread harassment of german americans world war ii produced relatively little condemnation of european americans.
federal officials held about 5 000 potentially dangerous german and italian aliens during the war.
despite the presence of small but vocal groups of nazi sympathizers and mussolini supporters german american and italian american communities were largely left in peace during the war.
the relocation and temporary imprisonment of japanese immigrants and japanese american citizens was a glaring exception to this otherwise tolerant policy.
immediately after the attack on pearl harbor the west coast remained calm.
then as residents began to fear spies sabotage and further attacks californias long history of racial animosity toward asian immigrants surfaced.
local politicians and newspapers whipped up hysteria against japanese americans who numbered only about 112 000 had no political power and lived primarily in small enclaves in the pacific coast states.
the world at war 1937 1945 early in 1942 president identify causes roosevelt responded to anti why were japanese amerijapanese fears by issuing execu cans treated differently tive order 9066 which authothan german and italian rized the war department to americans during the war.
force japanese americans from their west coast homes and hold them in relocation camps for the rest of the war.
although there was no disloyal or seditious activity among the evacuees few public leaders opposed the plan.
a japs a jap snapped general john dewitt the officer charged with defense of the west coast.
it makes no difference whether he is an american citizen or not the relocation plan shocked japanese americans more than two thirds of whom were nisei that is their parents were immigrants but they were native born american citizens.
army officials gave families only a few days to dispose of their property.
businesses that had taken a lifetime to build were liquidated overnight.
the war relocation authority moved the prisoners to hastily built camps in desolate areas in california arizona utah colorado wyoming idaho and arkansas map 24 1.
ironically the japanese americans who made up one third of the population of hawaii and presumably posed a greater threat because of their numbers and proximity to japan were not imprisoned.
they provided much of the unskilled labor in the island territory and the hawaiian economy could not have functioned without them.
cracks soon appeared in the relocation policy.
an agricultural labor shortage led the government to furlough seasonal farmworkers from the camps as early as 1942 about 4 300 students were allowed to attend colleges outside the west coast military zone.
other map 24 1 japanese relocation camps in 1942 the government ordered 112 000 japanese americans living on the west coast into internment camps in the nations interior because of their supposed threat to public safety.
some of the camps were as far away as arkansas.
the federal government rescinded the mass evacuation order in december 1944 but 44 000 people still remained in the camps when the war ended in august 1945 wash alaska mont.
ore tule lake hawaii idaho nev minidoka mountain utah ariz n dak.
colo granada amache iowa kansas okla texas japanese relocation camps states and territories with more than 1 000 japanese residents military exclusion zone wis s dak.
topaz manzanar calif heart n mex.
poston gila river ill mo.
rohwer jerome la.
part 7 domestic and global challenges 1890 1945 behind barbed wire as part of the forced relocation of 112 000 japanese americans los angeles photographer toyo miyatake and his family were sent to manzanar a camp in the california desert east of the sierra nevada.
miyatake secretly began shooting photographs of the camp with a handmade camera.
eventually miyatake received permission from the authorities to document life in the camp its births weddings deaths and high school graduations.
to communicate the injustice of internment he also took staged photographs such as this image of three young boys behind barbed wire with a watchtower in the distance.
for miyatake the image gave new meaning to the phrase prisoners of war toyo miyatake.
internees were permitted to join the armed services.
the 442nd regimental combat team a unit composed almost entirely of nisei volunteers served with distinction in europe.
gordon hirabayashi was among the nisei who actively resisted incarceration.
a student at the university of washington hirabayashi was a religious pacifist who had registered with his draft board as a conscientious objector.
he refused to report for evacuation and turned himself in to the fbi.
i wanted to uphold the principles of the constitution hirabayashi later stated and the curfew and evacuation orders which singled out a group on the basis of ethnicity violated them tried and convicted in 1942 he appealed his case to the supreme court in hirabayashi v united states 1943.
in that case and in korematsu v united states 1944 the court allowed the removal of japanese americans from the west coast on the basis of military necessity but avoided ruling on the constitutionality of the incarceration program.
the courts decision underscored the fragility of civil liberties in wartime.
congress issued a public apology in 1988 and awarded 20 000 to each of the eighty thousand surviving japanese americans who had once been internees.
fighting and winning the war world war ii was a war for control of the world.
had the axis powers triumphed germany would have dominated either directly or indirectly all of europe and much of africa and the middle east japan would have controlled most of east and southeast asia.
to prevent this outcome which would have crippled democracy in europe and restricted american power to the western hemisphere the roosevelt administration took the united states to war.
the combination of american intervention the perseverance of britain and the profound civilian and military sacrifices of the soviet union decided the outcome of the conflict and shaped the character of the postwar world.
wartime aims and tensions great britain the united states and the soviet union were the key actors in the allied coalition.
china france and other nations played crucial but smaller roles.
the leaders who became known as the big three president franklin roosevelt prime minister winston churchill of great britain and premier joseph stalin of the soviet union set military strategy.
however stalin was not a party to the atlantic charter which churchill and roosevelt had signed in august 1941 and disagreed fundamentally with some of its precepts such as a capitalist run international trading system.
the allies also disagreed about military strategy and timing.
the big three made defeating germany rather than japan the top military priority but they differed over how best to do it.
in 1941 a massive german force had invaded the soviet union and reached the outskirts of leningrad moscow and stalingrad before being halted in early 1942 by chapter review advances by the soviet army in europe and the american navy in the pacific and by the end of 1944 allied victory was all but certain.
germany finally surrendered in may 1945 and japan surrendered in august after the atomic bombing of the japanese cities hiroshima and nagasaki.
the united states emerged from the war with an undamaged homeland sole possession of the atomic bomb and a set of unresolved diplomatic disputes with the soviet union that would soon lead to the four decade long cold war.
federal laws and practices established during the war the universal income tax a huge military establishment and multibillion dollar budgets to name but a few became part of american life.
so too did the active participation of the united states in international politics and alliances an engagement intensified by the unresolved issues of the wartime alliance with the soviet union and the postwar fate of colonized nations.
c h a p t e r r e v i e w m a k e i t s t i c k go to learningcurve to retain what youve read.
terms to know identify and explain the significance of each term below.
key concepts and events fascism p 768 national socialist nazi party p 768 rome berlin axis p 769 neutrality act of 1935 p 769 popular front p 770 munich conference p 770 committee to defend america by aiding the allies p 771 america first committee p 771 four freedoms p 771 lend lease act p 771 atlantic charter p 772 key people pearl harbor p 773 war powers act p 773 revenue act p 775 code talkers p 776 executive order 8802 p 780 servicemens readjustment act 1944 p 781 zoot suits p 783 executive order 9066 p 787 d day p 790 holocaust p 792 manhattan project p 793 benito mussolini p 768 adolf hitler p 768 hideki tojo p 773 charles a lindbergh p 769 winston churchill p 772 harry s truman p 781 gordon hirabayashi p 788 dwight d eisenhower p 790 part 7 chapter review review questions answer these questions to demonstrate your understanding of the chapter 8 manumission and gradual emancipation yet thousands of african americans supported the patriot cause.
eager to raise their social status free blacks in new england volunteered for military service in the first rhode island company and the massachusetts bucks in maryland some slaves took up arms for the rebels in return for the promise of freedom.
enslaved virginians struck informal bargains with their patriot owners trading loyalty in wartime for the hope of liberty.
following the virginia legislatures passage of a manumission act in 1782 allowing owners to free their slaves 10 000 slaves won their freedom.
two other developments one religious the other intellectual encouraged manumission.
beginning in the 1750s quaker evangelist john woolman urged friends to free their slaves and many did so.
rapidly growing evangelical churches especially methodists and baptists initially advocated slave emancipation in 1784 a conference of virginia methodists declared map 8 2 l the status of slavery 1800 s er up ior this simple map illustrates a complex process the abolition of slavery in the united states up to 1800 the political boundaries are those of the states and territories in 1800 vermont maine 1777 part of mass.
br i ti s h 1780 n o r th a mer i c a l l michigan ron hu n h 1783 rio l onta new york l e mass.
1780 rhode island conn rie pennsylvania new jersey ohio territory 1787 indiana territory 1787 delaware virginia sp a n i s h lou i s i a n a maryland kentucky some areas marked free on the map the indiana territory for example actually had slaves dating from the french colonial days.
north carolina in 1800 the free black population of the united states numbered about 100 000 roughly 10 percent of those of african ancestry.
half of these free blacks lived in states in which slavery remained legal until the end of the civil war.
georgia fl s free date when slavery eliminated gradual abolition slave o ri da gulf of me x i co e at l a n t i c ocean south carolina spanish n w tennessee future mississippi territory the three colors show areas where slavery was legally abolished where it continued to exist and where it was in the process of being eliminated.
after paullin that slavery was contrary to the identify causes golden law of god on which why did aristocratic repubhang all the law and prophets licanism develop in the meanwhile enlightenment south and what were its philosophy challenged the wide defining features.
spread belief among whites that africans were inherently inferior to europeans.
according to john locke ideas were not innate but stemmed from a persons experiences in the world.
pointing out the obvious a state of slavery has a mighty tendency to shrink and contract the minds of men enlightenment influenced americans suggested that the debased condition of blacks reflected their oppressive captivity.
quaker philanthropist anthony benezet declared that african americans were as capable of improvement as white people and funded a philadelphia school for their education.
swept along by these religious and intellectual currents legislators in northern states enacted gradual emancipation statutes map 8 2.
these laws recognized white property rights by requiring slaves to buy their freedom by years even decades of additional africa a settlement founded by english antislavery organizations.
in 1775 racial slavery was legal in all of the british colonies in north america.
by the time the confederated states achieved their independence in 1783 the new england region was mostly free of slavery.
by 1800 all of the states north of maryland had provided for the gradual abolition of slavery but the process of gradual emancipation dragged on until the 1830s.
some slave owners in the chesapeake region manumitted a number of their slaves leaving only the whites of the lower south firmly committed to racial bondage.
creating a republican culture 1790 1820 200 miles 200 kilometers part 3 revolution and republican culture 1763 1820 labor.
for example the new york emancipation act of 1799 allowed slavery to continue until 1828 and freed slave children only at the age of twenty five.
consequently as late as 1810 almost 30 000 blacks in the northern states nearly one fourth of the african americans living there were still enslaved.
freed blacks faced severe prejudice from whites who feared job competition and racial melding.
when massachusetts judges abolished slavery through case law in 1784 the legislature reenacted an old statute that prohibited whites from marrying blacks mulattos or indians.
for african americans in the north freedom meant second class citizenship.
slavery defended the southern states faced the most glaring contradiction between liberty and property rights because enslaved blacks represented a huge financial investment.
some chesapeake tobacco planters moved by evangelical religion or an oversupply of workers manumitted their slaves or allowed them to buy their freedom by working as artisans or laborers.
such measures gradually brought freedom to one third of the african americans in maryland.
farther south slavery remained ascendant.
fearing total emancipation hundreds of slave owners petitioned the virginia legislature to repeal the manumission act.
heeding this demand to protect the most valuable and indispensible article of our property our slaves legislators forbade further manumissions in 1792 following the lead of thomas jefferson who owned more than a hundred slaves political leaders now argued that slavery was a necessary evil required to maintain white supremacy and the luxurious planter lifestyle.
in north carolina legislators condemned private quaker manumissions as highly criminal and reprehensible moreover the slave hungry ricegrowing states of south carolina and georgia reopened the atlantic slave trade.
between 1790 and 1808 merchants in charleston and savannah imported about 115 000 africans selling thousands to french and american sugar planters in louisiana.
debate in the south over emancipation ended in 1800 when virginia authorities thwarted an uprising planned by gabriel prosser an enslaved artisan and hanged him and thirty of his followers.
liberty and equality have brought the evil upon us a letter to the virginia herald proclaimed denouncing such doctrines as dangerous and extremely wicked to preserve their privileged social position southern leaders redefined republicanism.
they restricted individual liberty and legal equality to whites creating what historians call a herrenvolk master race republic.
the north and south grow apart european visitors to the united states agreed that north and south had distinct characters.
a british observer labeled new england the home to religious fanaticism but added that the lower orders of citizens there had a better education and were more intelligent than those he met in the south.
the state of poverty in which a great number of white people live in virginia surprised the marquis de chastellux.
other visitors to the south likewise commented on the rude manners heavy drinking and weak work ethic of its residents.
white tenants and smallholding farmers seemed only to have a passion for gaming at the billiard table a cock fight or cards and rich planters squandered their wealth on extravagant lifestyles while their slaves endured bitter poverty.
some southerners worried that human bondage had corrupted white society.
where there are negroes a white man despises to work one south carolina merchant commented.
moreover well to do planters able to hire tutors for their own children did little to provide other whites with elementary schooling.
in 1800 elected officials in essex county virginia spent about 25 cents per person for local government including schools while their counterparts in acton massachusetts allocated about 1 per person.
this difference in support for education mattered by the 1820s nearly all native born men and women in new england could read and write while more than onethird of white southerners could not.
slavery and national politics as the northern states ended human bondage the souths commitment to slavery became a political issue.
at the philadelphia convention in 1787 northern delegates had reluctantly accepted clauses allowing slave imports for twenty years and guaranteeing the return of fugitive slaves chapters by answering these questions.
for the united states the period between world war i 1914 1918 and world war ii 1937 1945 was a prolonged series of conflicts and crises both domestically and internationally.
what connections can be drawn between world war i the great depression and world war ii.
did this long conflict draw the united states and europe closer together or drive them further apart.
how did american attitudes toward involvement in european affairs change over this period.
across time and place more to explore ments regulating of the economy and its taxing power.
visual evidence compare the photographs of soldiers and those contributing to the war effort.
how do these images help us understand a major event like world war ii from different perspectives.
how would their proximity to battle affect peoples experience of war.
start here to learn more about the events discussed in this chapter.
ronald a goldberg america in the forties 2012.
an engaging account of the home front during world war ii.
david kennedy freedom from fear the american people in depression and war 1929 1945 1999.
a fascinating exploration of both the domestic and military experience of world war ii.
elizabeth mullener war stories remembering world war ii 2002.
fifty three personal stories of war.
emily yellin our mothers war american women at home and at the front during world war ii 2004.
the war seen from the point of view of women.
for documents and images related to the war see a people at war and powers of persuasion poster art from world war ii archives gov exhibits exhibits list html women come to the front journalists photographers and broadcasters during world war ii lcweb loc gov exhibits wcf wcf0001 html the japanese american legacy project densho org densho asp and ansel adamss photographs of japanese american internment at manzanar memory loc gov ammem aamhtml.
the enola gay controversy how do we remember a war that we won at lehigh edu ineng enola.
lehigh university professor edward j gallaghers site on the decision to drop the atomic bomb.
chapters 10 and 12 explain how national expansion led to increasing sectional struggle.
this timeline arranges some of the impor tant events of this period into themes.
look at the entries under identity what identities emerged in this period and which issues shaped these developments.
in the work exchange and technology theme how did industrial output and the transportation system change over time.
work exchange technology peopling politics power ideas beliefs culture congress approves funds for a national road 1806 congress outlaws atlantic slave trade 1776 1809 struggle to expand the suffrage begins with maryland reformers in rural areas people of different ranks share a common culture first american textile factory opens in waltham massachusetts 1814 andrew jackson forces creeks to relinquish millions of acres during war of 1812 martin van buren creates first statewide political machine 1817 1821 upper class women sponsor charitable organizations identity american colonization society 1817 benjamin franklins autobiography 1818 spreads notion of the self made man missouri crisis 1819 1821 over slavery new england shoe industry expands slave trade moves african americans west rise of andrew jackson and democratic party benevolent reform movements erie canal completed 1825 rural women take factory work alter gender roles anti masonic party and working mens party rise and decline emerson champions transcendentalism henry clays american system of government assisted development u s textiles compete with british goods canal systems expand trade in eastern u s financial panic of 1837 begins six year depression rise of southern sectionalism industrialism fragments society into more distinct classes and cultures market economy expands nationwide charles finney and others advance revivalist religion david walkers appeal.
to the colored citizens 1829 attacks slavery indian removal act 1830 forces native peoples west cherokees trail of tears 1838 tariff battles 1828 1832 and nullification temperance crusade expands whig party forms 1834 joseph smith and mormonism jackson destroys second bank expands executive power middle class culture spreads boom in cotton output slavery defended as a positive good increase in waged work sparks conflict between labor and capital urban popular culture sex trade and minstrelsy w l garrisons american anti slavery society 1833 female moral reform society 1834 defines gender identity texas gains independence 1836 american machine tool industry expands working class districts emerge in cities log cabin campaign 1840 fourierist and other communal settlements antislavery liberty party 1840 walker tariff moves u s toward free trade system and principles of classical liberalism german and irish immigrants spark nativist movement second party system flourishes seneca falls convention 1848 calls for womens rights new african american culture develops in mississippi valley severe recession cuts industrial jobs 1858 immigrants replace native born women in textile mills american renaissance melville whitman and hawthorne black and white preachers promote christianity among slaves railroads connect midwest and eastern ports cotton production and prices rise as does the cost of enslaved laborers lawyers emerge as political leaders mormons resettle in utah white farm families settle trans mississippi west reform becomes political states enact maine style temperance laws 1851 on mormon war over polygamy 1858 part 1 harriet beecher stowes uncle toms cabin 1852 free blacks in north become politically active part 4 thematic timeline 1800 1860 transformations of north america 1450 1700 transforming the economy 1800 1860 c h a p t e r the american industrial revolution the division of labor and the factory the textile industry and british competition american mechanics and technological innovation wageworkers and the labor movement the market revolution the transportation revolution forges regional ties the growth of cities and towns new social classes and cultures the business elite the middle class urban workers and the poor the benevolent empire charles grandison finney revivalism and reform immigration and cultural conflict i n 1804 life turned grim for elevenidentify the big idea year old chauncey jerome.
his father what were the causes and consedied suddenly and jerome became an quences of the industrial and marindentured servant on a connecticut farm.
ket revolutions and how did they quickly learning that few farmers would change the way ordinary americans treat a poor boy like a human being lived.
jerome bought out his indenture by making dials for clocks and then found a job with clockmaker eli terry.
a manufacturing wizard terry used water power to drive precision saws and woodworking lathes.
soon his shop and dozens of outworkers were turning out thousands of tall clocks with wooden works.
then in 1816 terry patented an enormously popular desk clock with brass parts an innovation that turned waterbury connecticut into the clockmaking center of the united states.
in 1822 chauncey jerome set up his own clock factory.
by organizing work more efficiently and using new machines that stamped out interchangeable metal parts he drove down the price of a simple clock from 20 to 5 and then to less than 2.
by the 1840s jerome was selling his clocks in england the hub of the industrial revolution a decade later his workers were turning out 400 000 clocks a year clear testimony to american industrial enterprise.
by 1860 the united states was not only the worlds leading exporter of cotton and wheat but also the third ranked manufacturing nation behind britain and france.
business is the very soul of an american the fountain of all human felicity author francis grund observed shortly after arriving from europe.
it is as if all america were but one gigantic workshop over the entrance of which there is the blazing inscription no admission here except on business stimulated by the entrepreneurial culture of early nineteenth century america thousands of artisan inventors like chauncey jerome propelled the country into the industrial revolution a new system of production based on water and steam power and machine technology.
simultaneously thousands of traders fashioned a second great economic advance a market revolution that exploited advances in transportation and business organization to expand trade in farm products and manufactured goods.
not all americans embraced the new business dominated society and many failed to share in the new prosperity.
moreover the increase in manufacturing commerce and finance created class divisions that challenged the founders vision of an agricultural republic with few distinctions of wealth.
as the philosopher ralph waldo emerson warned in 1839 the invasion of nature by trade with its money its credit its steam and its railroad threatens to.
establish a new universal monarchy women weavers from maine c 1860 nineteenth century workers were proud of their skills and like these textiles operatives from winthrop maine often posed for photographs with the tools of their craft.
this small tintype 3 by 4 inches and printed on thin metal dates from the mid nineteenth century.
beginning in the 1830s cotton textile entrepreneurs built factories in rural maine attracted by its abundant water power and the inexpensive labor of young farm women.
the women wear striped dresses of cotton fabric which they probably helped to manufacture.
american textile history museum.
part 4 overlapping revolutions 1800 1860 the american industrial revolution the industrial revolution came to the united states between 1790 and 1860 as merchants and manufacturers reorganized work routines built factories and exploited a wide range of natural resources.
as output increased goods that once had been luxury items became part of everyday life figure 9 1.
the rapid construction of turnpikes canals and railroads by state governments and private entrepreneurs working together in the commonwealth system chapter 25 making connections recognize the larger developments and continuities within and across chapter review timeline ask yourself why this chapter 9 as much.
a journeyman carpenter in philadelphia reported that he was about even with the world after several years of work but that many of his coworkers were in debt.
the 18 000 women who sewed mens ready made clothing in new york city in the 1850s earned just a few pennies a day less than 100 a year about 3 000 today.
such meager wages barely paid for food and rent so poorer workers could not take advantage of the rapidly falling prices of manufactured goods.
only the most fortunate working class families could afford to educate their children buy apprenticeships for their sons or accumulate small dowries for their daughters.
most families sent ten year old children out to work and the death of a parent often threw the survivors into dire poverty.
as a charity worker noted what can a bereaved widow do with 5 or 6 little children destitute of every means of support but what her own hands can furnish which in a general way does not amount to more than 25 cents a day impoverished workers congregated in dilapidated housing in bad neighborhoods.
single men and women lived in crowded boardinghouses while families jammed themselves into tiny apartments in the basements and attics of small houses.
as immigrants poured in after 1840 urban populations soared and developers squeezed more and more dwellings and foul smelling outhouses onto a single lot.
venturing into the new york city slums in the 1850s shocked state legislators found gaunt shivering people with wild ghastly faces living amid hideous squalor and deadly effluvia the dim undrained courts oozing with pollution the dark narrow stairways decayed with age reeking with filth overrun with vermin many wage earners sought solace in alcohol leading to fistfights brawls and robberies.
the urban police mostly low paid watchmen and untrained constables were unable to contain the lawlessness.
the benevolent empire the disorder among wage earners alarmed the rising middle classes who wanted safe cities and a disciplined workforce.
to improve the world around them many upwardly mobile men and women embraced religious benevolence.
led by congregational and presbyterian ministers they created organizations of conservative social reform that historians call the benevolent empire which became prominent in the 1820s.
the reformers goal was to restore the moral government of god by reducing the consumption of alcohol and other vices that resulted in poverty explained presbyterian minister lyman beecher.
reform minded transforming the economy 1800 1860 individuals had regulated their own behavior now they tried to control the lives of working people by persuasion if possible by law if necessary.
the benevolent empire targeted age old evils such as drunkenness adultery prostitution and crime but its methods were new.
instead of relying on church sermons and identify causes admonitions from community what was the benevolent leaders to combat evil the reform empire and why did it ers created large scale organiza emerge at this specific tions the prison discipline society historical moment.
and the american society for the promotion of temperance among many others.
each organization had a managing staff a network of hundreds of chapter.
triumph of the middle class 1945 1963 c h a p t e r postwar prosperity and the affluent society economy from recovery to dominance a nation of consumers youth culture religion and the middle class the american family in the era of containment the baby boom women work and family challenging middle class morality a suburban nation the postwar housing boom rise of the sunbelt two nations urban and suburban a t the height of the cold war in identify the big idea 1959 u s vice president richard why did consumer culture become nixon debated soviet premier such a fixture of american life in nikita khrushchev on the merits of pepsithe postwar decades and how did it cola tv dinners and electric ovens.
faceaffect politics and society.
to face at the opening of an american exhibition in moscow nixon and khrushchev strolled through a model american home assembled to demonstrate the consumer products available to the typical citizen of the united states.
nixon explained to khrushchev that although the soviet union may have had superior rockets the united states was ahead in other areas such as color television.
this was cold war politics by other means a symbolic contest over which countrys standard of living was higher.
what was so striking about the so called kitchen debate was nixons insistence to a disbelieving khrushchev that a modern home filled with shiny new toasters televisions and other consumer products was accessible to the average american worker.
any steelworker could buy this house nixon told the soviet leader.
the kitchen debate settled little in the geopolitical rivalry between the united states and the soviet union.
but it speaks to us across the decades because it reveals how americans had come to see themselves by the late 1950s as home owners and consumers as a people for whom the middle class american dream was a commercial aspiration.
the real story of the postwar period was the growing number of americans who embraced that aspiration.
in the two decades following the end of world war ii a new middle class was born in the united states.
fortune magazine estimated that in the 1950s the middle class which fortune defined as families with more than 5 000 in annual earnings after taxes about 40 000 today was increasing at the rate of 1 1 million people per year.
riding a wave of rising incomes american dominance in the global economy and cold war federal spending the postwar middle class enjoyed the highest standard of living in the world.
however the success of the middle class could not hide deeper troubles.
this was an era of neither universal conformity nor diminishing social strife.
jim crow laws contradictions in womens lives a rebellious youth culture and changing sexual mores were only the most obvious sources of social tension.
suburban growth came at the expense of cities hastening urban decay and exacerbating racial segregation.
nor was prosperity ever as widespread as the moscow exhibit implied.
the suburban lifestyle was beyond the reach of the working poor the elderly immigrants mexican americans and most african americans indeed the majority of the country.
the middle class family ideal a family eats breakfast at a campground in zion national park utah.
americans embraced a middle class nuclear family ideal in the postwar decades.
photo by justin locke national geographic getty images.
part 8 the modern state and the age of liberalism 1945 1980 postwar prosperity and the affluent society the united states enjoyed enormous economic advantages at the close of world war ii.
while the europeans and japanese were still clearing the wars rubble america stood poised to enter a postwar boom.
as the only major industrial nation not devastated by war the united states held an unprecedented global position.
the american economy also benefitted from an expanding internal market and heavy investment in research and development.
two additional developments stood out first for the first time in the nations history employers generally accepted collective bargaining which for workers translated into rising wages expanding benefits and an increasing rate of home ownership.
second the federal governments outlays for military and domestic programs gave a huge boost to the economy.
economy from recovery to dominance u s corporations banks and manufacturers so dominated the global economy that the postwar period has been called the pax americana a latin term meaning american peace and harking back to the pax romana of the first and second centuries a d.
life magazine publisher henry luce was so confident in the nations growing power that during world war ii he had predicted the dawning of the american century the preponderance of american economic power in the postwar decades however was not simply an artifact of the world war it was not an inevitable development.
several key elements came together internationally and at home to propel three decades of unprecedented economic growth.
the bretton woods system american global supremacy rested partly on the economic institutions created at an international conference in bretton woods new hampshire in july 1944 the first of those institutions was the world bank created to provide loans for the reconstruction of war torn europe as well as for the development of former colonized nations the so called third world or developing world.
a second institution the international monetary fund imf was set up to stabilize currencies and provide a predictable monetary environment for trade with the u s dollar serving as the benchmark.
the world bank and the imf formed the cornerstones of the bretton woods system which guided the global economy after the war.
the bretton woods system was joined in 1947 by the first general agreement on tariffs and trade gatt which established an international framework for overseeing trade rules and practices.
together the bretton woods system and gatt served americas conception of an open market global economy and complemented the nations ambitious diplomatic aims in the cold war.
the chief idea of the bretton woods system was to make american capital available on cheap terms to nations that adopted free trade capitalist economies.
critics charged rightly that bretton woods and gatt favored the united states at the the kitchen debate at the american national exhibition in moscow in 1959 the united states put on display the technological wonders of american home life.
when vice president richard nixon visited he and soviet premier nikita khrushchev got into a heated debate over the relative merits of their rival systems with the up to date american kitchen as a case in point.
this photograph shows the debate in progress.
khrushchev is the bald man pointing his finger at nixon.
to nixons left stands leonid brezhnev who would be khrushchevs successor.
getty images.
chapter 26 saccharine consumer culture of the 1950s.
many artists writers and jazz musicians embarked on powerful new experimental projects in a remarkable flowering of intensely personal introspective art forms.
black musicians developed a hard driving improvisational style known as bebop.
whether the hot bebop of saxophonist charlie parker or the more subdued cool sound of the influential trumpeter miles davis postwar jazz was cerebral intimate and individualistic.
as such it stood in stark contrast to the commercialized dance oriented swing bands of the 1930s and 1940s.
black jazz musicians found eager fans not only in the african american community but also among young white beats a group of writers and poets centered in new york and san francisco who disdained middle class materialism.
in his poem howl 1956 which became a manifesto of the beat generation allen ginsberg lamented i saw the best minds of my generation destroyed by madness starving hysterical naked dragging themselves through the negro streets at dawn looking for an angry fix in works such as jack kerouacs novel on the road 1957 the beats glorified spontaneity sexual adventurism drug use and spirituality.
the beats were apolitical but their cultural rebellion would in the 1960s inspire a new generation of young rebels disenchanted with both the political and cultural status quo.
triumph of the middle class 1945 1963 therapeutic use of religion as an antidote to lifes trials and tribulations.
peale taught that with faith in god and positive thinking anyone could overcome obstacles and become a success.
graham schuller peale and other 1950s evangelicals laid the foundation for the rise of the televangelists who created popular television ministries in the 1970s.
the postwar purveyors of religious faith cast americans as a righteous people opposed to communist atheism.
when julius and ethel rosenberg were sentenced to death in 1953 the judge criticized them for devoting themselves to the russian ideology of denial of god cold war imperatives drew catholics protestants and jews into an influential ecumenical movement that downplayed doctrinal differences.
the phrase under god was inserted into the pledge of allegiance in 1954 and u s coins carried the words religion and the middle class in an age of anxiety about nuclear annihilation and the spread of godless communism americans yearned for a reaffirmation of faith.
church membership jumped from 49 percent of the population in 1940 to 70 percent in 1960 people flocked to the evangelical protestant denominations beneficiaries of a remarkable new crop of preachers.
most eloquent was the young reverend billy graham who made brilliant use of television radio and advertising.
his massive 1949 revival in los angeles and his 1957 crusade at madison square garden in new york attended or viewed by hundreds of thousands of americans established graham as the nations leading evangelical.
rather than clashing with the new middle class ethic of consumption the religious reawakening was designed to mesh with it.
preachers such as graham and the california based robert schuller told americans that so long as they lived moral lives they deserved the material blessings of modern life.
no one was more influential in this regard than the minister and author norman vincent peale whose best selling book the power of positive thinking 1952 embodied the billy graham charismatic and inspiring billy graham wore down shoe leather to bring christian conversion to hundreds of thousands of americans in the 1940s and 1950s preaching to large crowds such as this one in columbia south carolina.
he also migrated onto the radio and television airwaves using technology to reach even wider audiences.
graham used the cold war to sharpen his message telling americans that godless communism was an inferior system but that democracy in america required belief in god and a constant struggle against sin photo by john dominis time life pictures getty images.
part 8 the modern state and the age of liberalism 1945 1980 in god we trust after 1956 these religious initiatives struck a distinctly moderate tone however in comparison with the politicized evangelism that emerged in the 1960s and 1970s chapter 9 affect the lives of women in various social groups and how did it make their experiences different from those of their mothers whose political and social lives were explored in chapter 10 americans against expansion minded whites.
in 1825 u s commissioners had secured a treaty from one faction of creeks ceding its lands in georgia to the united states for eventual sale to the states citizens.
when the creek national council repudiated the treaty claiming that it was fraudulent adams called for new negotiations.
in response georgia governor george m troup attacked the president as a public enemy.
the unblushing ally of the savages mobilizing georgias congressional delegation troup persuaded congress to extinguish the creeks land titles forcing most creeks to leave the state.
elsewhere adamss primary weakness was his outof date political style.
the last notable to serve in the white house he acted the part aloof inflexible and paternalistic.
when congress rejected his activist economic policies adams accused its members of following the whims of public opinion and told them not to be enfeebled by the will of our constituents ignoring his waning popularity the president refused to dismiss hostile federal bureaucrats or to award offices to his supporters.
rather than run for reelection in 1828 adams stood for it telling friends if my country wants my services she must ask for them the democracy and the election of 1828 martin van buren and the politicians handling andrew jacksons campaign for the presidency had no reservations about running for office.
to put jackson in the white house van buren revived the political coalition created by thomas jefferson championing policies that appealed to both southern planters and northern farmers and artisans the plain republicans of the north john c calhoun jacksons running mate brought his south carolina allies into van burens party and jacksons close friends in tennessee rallied voters throughout the old southwest.
the little magician hoped that a national party would reconcile the diverse interests that as james madison suggested in federalist no.
10 chapter 8 worried that the u s congress would follow the british lead.
so they attacked the tariff both to lower rates and to discourage the use of federal power to attack slavery.
the crisis began in 1832 when high tariff congressmen ignored southern warnings that they were endangering the union and reenacted the tariff of abominations.
in response leading south carolinians called a state convention which in november boldly adopted an ordinance of nullification declaring the tariffs of 1828 and 1832 to be null and void.
the ordinance part 4 overlapping revolutions 1800 1860 who will be jacksons heir.
elected vice president in 1828 john c calhoun hoped to succeed jackson in the white house.
he failed to account for the ambition of martin van buren who managed jacksons campaign and claimed the prized office of secretary of state.
when van buren resigned as secretary in 1831 and jackson nominated him as minister to britain calhoun sought to destroy his rival by blocking his confirmation in the senate.
the little magician pounced on this miscalculation persuading jackson already disillusioned by calhouns support for nullification to oust him from the ticket.
van buren took his place as vice president in 1832 carried into the office as the cartoonist tells the tale on jacksons back and succeeded to the presidency in 1836.
collection of the new york historical society.
prohibited the collection of those duties in south carolina after february 1 1833 and threatened how did south carolina secession if federal officials tried justify nullification on to collect them.
constitutional grounds.
south carolinas act of nullification the argument that a state has the right to void within its borders a law passed by congress rested on the constitutional arguments developed in the south carolina exposition and protest 1828.
written anonymously by vice president john c calhoun the exposition gave a localist or sectional interpretation to the federal union.
because each state or geographic region had distinct interests localists argued protective tariffs and other national legislation that operated unequally on the various states lacked fairness and legitimacy in fact they were unconstitutional.
an obsessive defender of the interests of southern slave owners calhoun exaggerated the frequency and severity of such legislation declaring constitutional government and the government of a majority are utterly incompatible calhouns constitutional doctrines reflected the arguments advanced by jefferson and madison in the kentucky and virginia resolutions of 1798 those understand points of view resolutions asserted that because state based conventions had ratified the constitution sovereignty lay in the states not in the people.
beginning from this premise calhoun argued that a state convention could declare a congressional law to be void within the states borders.
replying to this states rights interpretation of the constitution which had little support in the text of the document senator daniel webster of massachusetts presented a nationalist interpretation that celebrated popular sovereignty and congresss responsibility to secure the general welfare jackson hoped to find a middle path between websters strident nationalism and calhouns radical doctrine of localist federalism.
the constitution clearly gave the federal government the authority to establish tariffs and jackson vowed to enforce it.
he declared that south carolinas ordinance of nullification violated the letter of the constitution and was destructive of the great object for which it was formed more pointedly he warned disunion by armed force is treason at jacksons request congress in early 1833 passed a military force bill authorizing the president to compel south carolinas obedience to national laws.
simultaneously jackson addressed the souths objections to high import duties with a new tariff act that chapter 10 a democratic revolution 1800 1844 the great webster hayne debate 1830 the tariff of abominations sparked one of the great debates in american history.
when senator robert y hayne of south carolina seated in the middle of the picture with his legs crossed opposed the federal tariffs by invoking the doctrines of states rights and nullification daniel webster rose to the defense of the union.
speaking for two days to a spellbound senate webster delivered an impassioned oration that celebrated the unity of the american people as the key to their freedom.
his parting words liberty and union now and forever one and inseparable quickly became part of the national memory.
websters reply to haynes by g p a.
healy city of boston art commission.
over the course of a decade reduced rates to the modest levels of 1816 subsequently export hungry midwestern wheat farmers joined southern planters in advocating low duties to avoid retaliatory tariffs by foreign nations.
illinois wants a market for her agricultural products declared senator sidney breese in 1846.
s he wants the market of the world having won the political battle by securing a tariff reduction the south carolina convention did not press its constitutional stance on nullification.
jackson was satisfied.
he had assisted the south economically while upholding the constitutional principle of national authority a principle that abraham lincoln would embrace to defend the union during the secession crisis of 1861 the bank war in the midst of the tariff crisis jackson faced a major challenge from politicians who supported the second bank of the united states.
founded in philadelphia in 1816 chapter 25.
this brought into focus an internal struggle developing within the democratic party and its still formidable new deal coalition.
would the civil rights aims of the partys liberal wing alienate southern white democrats as well as many suburban whites in the north.
it was the first hint of the discord that would eventually divide the democratic party in the 1960s.
race and anticommunism the cold war shaped civil rights in both positive and negative terms.
in a time of growing fear of communist expansionism truman worried about americas image in the world.
he reminded americans that when whites and blacks fail to live together in peace that failure hurt the cause of democracy itself in the whole world indeed the soviet union used american racism as a means of discrediting the united states abroad.
we cannot escape the fact that our civil rights record has been an issue in world politics the committee on civil rights wrote.
international tensions between the united states and the soviet union thus appeared to strengthen the hand of civil rights leaders because america needed to demonstrate to the rest of the world that its race relations were improving america compared p 876.
however the cold war strengthened one hand while weakening the other.
mccarthyism and the hunt for subversives at home held the civil rights movement back.
civil rights opponents charged that racial integration was communistic and the naacp was banned in many southern states as an anti american organization.
black americans who spoke favorably of the soviet understand union such as the actor and points of view singer paul robeson or had been how did the cold war fellow travelers in the 1930s work in the favor of civil such as the pacifist bayard rustin rights.
how did it work were persecuted.
robeson whose against the movement.
career was destroyed by such accusations told house un american activities committee huac interrogators my father was a slave and my people died to build this country and i am going to.
have a part of it just like you the fate of people like robeson showed that the cold war could work against the civil rights cause just as easily as for it.
mexican americans and japanese americans african americans were the most prominent but not the only group in american society to organize against racial injustice in the 1940s.
in the southwest from texas to california mexican immigrants and mexican americans endured a caste system not unlike the jim crow system in the south.
in texas for instance poll taxes kept most mexican american citizens from voting.
decades of discrimination by employers in agriculture and manufacturing made possible by the constant supply of cheap labor from across the border suppressed wages and kept the majority of mexican americans barely above poverty.
many lived in colonias or barrios neighborhoods separated from anglos and often lacking sidewalks reliable electricity and water and public services.
developments within the mexican american community set the stage for fresh challenges to these conditions in the 1940s.
labor activism in the 1930s and 1940s especially in congress of industrial organizations cio unions with large numbers of mexican americans improved wages and working conditions in some industries and produced a new generation of america c o m pa r e d freedom in the united states and africa hailou wolde giorghis hailou wolde giorghis was an ethiopian student who visited the united states at the invitation of the state department in the early 1960s.
negroes are dirty say the whites but in nearly all restaurants i saw negro waiters and cooks.
theyre lazy i noticed that it is the negro who does the hardest manual work.
they are said to be uncultivated and are therefore denied access to culture.
as george bernard shaw said the haughty american nation makes the negro shine its shoes and then demonstrates his physical and mental inferiority by the fact that he is a shoe cleaner.
what is known as integration in the south is the ability of a negro to enter a shop and buy a record or the fact that of ten thousand students enrolled in a university two of them are negroes.
a miracle they cry.
real integration however does not exist not even in the north and by real integration i mean interracial communication complete equality in the strict sense of the word.
still another example drawn from the south the manager of a television studio told me in frigid terms that he would not hire negroes there would be a scandal and all his sponsors would protest.
source hailou wolde giorghis my encounters with racism in the united states in views of america ed.
alan f westin et al.
new york harcourt brace and world 1966 228 231.
martin luther king jr here the american civil rights leader celebrates the independence of the african nation of ghana in 1957 and its a beautiful thing isnt it that.
ghana is now free and is free without rising up with arms and ammunition.
it is free through nonviolent means.
because of that the british empire will not have the bitterness for ghana that she has for china so to speak.
because of that when the british empire leaves ghana she leaves with a different attitude than she would have left with if she had been driven out by armies.
weve got to revolt in such a way that after revolt is over we can live with people as their brothers and sisters.
source martin luther king jr the birth of a new nation liberation 28 april 1957.
kwame nkrumah kwame nkrumah was the first president of the independent nation of ghana.
in the 1930s and 1940s nkrumah studied in the united states earning degrees at lincoln university and the university of pennsylvania.
the wind of change has become a raging hurricane sweeping away the old colonialist africa.
the year 1960 was africas year.
in that year alone seventeen african states emerged as proud and independent sovereign nations.
now the ultimate freedom of the whole of africa can no more be in doubt.
for centuries europeans dominated the african continent.
the white man arrogated to himself the right to rule and to be obeyed by the non white.
all this makes a sad story but now we must be prepared to bury the past with its unpleasant memories and look to the future.
all we ask of the former colonial powers is their goodwill and cooperation to remedy past mistakes and injustices and to grant independence to the colonies in africa.
source kwame nkrumah i speak of freedom a statement of african ideology new york praeger 1961 ix.
questions for analysis 1 wolde giorghis is especially critical of southern integration as an african what kind of perspective would he bring to this question.
2 what values and goals do king and nkrumah seem to share.
how were their circumstances and goals different.
3 compare the circumstances of african americans in the united states and africans in nations colonized by europeans.
what were the similarities and differences.
chapter 27 walking into freedom land the civil rights movement 1941 1973 bracero worker card in the southwest mexican immigrants and many mexican americans encountered a caste system not unlike jim crow segregation.
most of the hardest lowest paying work in states such as texas arizona and california was performed by people of mexican descent.
under a government program braceros or migrant mexican workers were allowed into the united states for a limited time to harvest a variety of fruit and vegetable crops.
a worker card issued to one such bracero is pictured here.
national museum of american history smithsonian institution behring center.
more than 400 000 mexican americans also served in world war ii.
having fought for their country many returned to the united states determined to challenge their second class citizenship.
additionally a new mexican american middle class began to take shape in major cities such as los angeles san antonio el paso and chicago which like the african american middle class gave leaders and resources to the cause.
in texas and california mexican americans created new civil rights organizations in the postwar years.
in corpus christi texas world war ii veterans founded the american gi forum in 1948 to protest the poor treatment of mexican american soldiers and veterans.
activists in los angeles created the community service organization cso the same year.
both groups arose to address compare and specific local injustices such as contrast the segregation of military ceme how were the circumteries but they quickly broad stances facing mexican ened their scope to encompass and japanese americans political and economic justice for similar to those facing the larger community.
among the african americans.
how first young activists to work for were they different.
the cso were cesar chavez and dolores huerta who would later found the united farm workers ufw and inspire the chicano movement of the 1960s.
activists also pushed for legal change.
in 1947 five mexican american fathers in california sued a local school district for placing their children in separate mexican schools.
the case mendez v westminster school district never made it to the u s supreme court.
but the ninth circuit court ruled such segregation unconstitutional laying the legal groundwork for broader challenges to racial inequality.
among those filing briefs in the case was the naacps thurgood marshall who was then developing the legal strategy to strike at racial segregation in the south.
in another significant legal victory the supreme court ruled in 1954 just two weeks before the landmark brown v board of education decision that mexican americans constituted a distinct class that could claim protection from discrimination.
also on the west coast japanese americans accelerated their legal challenge to discrimination.
undeterred by rulings in the hirabayashi 1943 and korematsu 1944 cases upholding wartime imprisonment chapter 24 the japanese american citizens league jacl filed lawsuits in the late 1940s to regain property lost during the war.
the jacl also challenged the constitutionality of californias alien land law which prohibited japanese immigrants from owning land and successfully lobbied congress to enable those same immigrants to become citizens a right they were denied for fifty years.
these efforts by mexican and japanese americans enlarged the sphere of civil rights and laid the foundation for a broader notion of racial equality in the postwar years.
fighting for equality before the law with civil rights legislation blocked in congress by southern democrats throughout the 1950s activists looked in two different directions for a breakthrough to northern state legislatures and to the federal courts.
school segregation remained a stubborn problem in northern states but the biggest obstacle to black part 8 the modern state and the age of liberalism 1945 1980 progress there was persistent job and housing discrimination.
the states with the largest african american populations and hence the largest share of black democratic party voters became testing grounds for state legislation to end such discriminatory practices.
winning antidiscrimination legislation depended on coalition politics.
african american activists forged alliances with trade unions and liberal organizations such as the american friends service committee a quaker group among many others.
progress was slow and often occurred only after long periods of unglamorous struggle to win votes in state capitals such as albany new york springfield illinois and lansing michigan.
the first fair employment laws had come in new york and new jersey in 1945 a decade passed however before other states with significant black populations passed similar legislation.
antidiscrimination laws in housing were even more difficult to pass with most progress not coming until the 1960s.
these legislative campaigns in northern states received little national attention but they were instrumental in laying the groundwork for legal equality outside the south.
thurgood marshall because the vast majority of southern african americans were prohibited from voting state legislatures there were closed to the kind of organized political pressure possible in the north.
thus activists also looked to federal courts for leverage.
in the late 1930s naacp lawyers thurgood marshall charles hamilton houston and william hastie had begun preparing the legal ground in a series of cases challenging racial discrimination.
the key was prodding the u s supreme court to use the fourteenth amendments equal protection clause to overturn its 1896 ruling in plessy v ferguson which upheld racial segregation under the separate but equal doctrine.
marshall was the great grandson of slaves.
of modest origins his parents instilled in him a faith in law and the constitution.
after his 1930 graduation from lincoln university a prestigious african american institution near philadelphia marshall applied to the university of maryland law school.
denied admission because the school did not accept black applicants he enrolled at all black howard university.
there marshall met houston a law school dean and the two forged a friendship and intellectual parttrace change nership that would change the over time face of american legal history.
how did the naacp go marshall with houstons and about developing a legal hasties critical strategic input strategy to attack racial would argue most of the naacps segregation.
landmark cases.
in the late 1960s president johnson appointed marshall to the supreme court the first african american to have that honor.
marshall houston hastie and six other attorneys filed suit after suit deliberately selecting each one from dozens of possibilities.
the strategy was slow and timeconsuming but progress came.
in 1936 marshall and hamilton won a state case that forced the university of maryland law school to admit qualified african americans a ruling of obvious significance to marshall.
eight years later in smith v allwright 1944 marshall convinced the u s supreme court that allwhite primaries were unconstitutional.
in 1950 with marshall once again arguing the case the supreme court ruled in mclaurin v oklahoma that universities could not segregate black students from others on campus.
none of these cases produced swift changes in the daily lives of most african americans but they confirmed that civil rights attorneys were on the right track.
brown v board of education the naacps legal strategy achieved its ultimate validation in a case involving linda brown a black pupil in topeka kansas who had been forced to attend a distant segregated school rather than the nearby white elementary school.
in brown v board of education of topeka 1954 marshall argued that such segregation was unconstitutional because it denied linda brown the equal protection of the laws guaranteed by the fourteenth amendment map 27 2.
in a unanimous decision on may 17 1954 the supreme court agreed overturning the separate but equal doctrine at last.
writing for the court the new chief justice earl warren wrote we conclude that in the field of public education the doctrine of separate but equal has no place.
separate educational facilities are inherently unequal in an implementing 1955 decision known as brown ii the court declared simply that integration should proceed with all deliberate speed in the south however virginia senator harry f byrd issued a call for massive resistance calling may 17 black monday the mississippi segregationist tom p brady invoked the language of the cold war to discredit the decision assailing the totalitarian government that had rendered the decision in the name of socialism and communism that year half a million southerners joined white citizens councils dedicated to blocking school integration.
some whites revived the old tactics of violence and intimidation swelling the ranks of the ku klux klan to levels not seen since the 1920s.
the southern manifesto signed in 1956 by 101 members of congress denounced the chapter 7 and the 1850s and what were the reactions of indian peoples to those policies.
4 thematic understanding review the events listed under politics and power on the thematic timeline on page 283 as the timeline indicates the working mens and anti masonic parties rose and declined between 1827 and 1834 and then the whig party emerged.
how do you explain the timing of these events.
part 4 chapters by answering these questions.
across time and place the chapter review under the law for all americans regardless of race.
this required patient work through the judicial system and the more arduous task of winning congressional legislation such as the civil rights act of 1964 and the voting rights act of 1965 second grassroots activists using nonviolent protest pushed all levels of government from city to federal to abide by supreme court decisions such as brown v board of education and civil rights laws.
third the movement worked to open economic opportunity for minority populations.
this was embodied in the 1963 march on washington for jobs and freedom.
ultimately the civil rights movement successfully established the principle of legal equality but it faced more difficult problems in fighting poverty and creating widespread economic opportunity.
the limitations of the civil rights model led black activists along with mexican americans native americans and others to adopt a more nationalist stance after 1966 nationalism stressed the creation of political and economic power in communities of color the celebration of racial heritage and the rejection of white cultural standards.
c h a p t e r r e v i e w m a k e i t s t i c k go to learningcurve to retain what youve read.
terms to know identify and explain the significance of each term below.
key concepts and events rights liberalism p 868 congress of racial equality core p 870 jim crow p 870 brotherhood of sleeping car porters p 873 to secure these rights p 875 states rights democratic party p 875 american gi forum p 877 brown v board of education of topeka p 878 montgomery bus boycott p 881 southern christian leadership conference sclc p 882 key people student nonviolent coordinating committee sncc p 882 march on washington p 886 civil rights act of 1964 p 890 mississippi freedom democratic party p 890 voting rights act of 1965 p 891 black nationalism p 892 nation of islam p 892 black panther party p 894 young lords organization p 894 united farm workers ufw p 897 american indian movement aim p 898 a philip randolph p 873 james farmer p 873 cesar chavez p 877 dolores huerta p 877 thurgood marshall p 877 rosa parks p 881 martin luther king jr p 881 malcolm x p 892 stokely carmichael p 892 part 8 chapter 27.
his motives were complex.
as a southerner who had previously opposed civil rights for african americans johnson wished to prove that he was more than a regional figure he would be the president of all the people.
he also wanted to make a mark on history telling martin luther king jr and other civil rights leaders to lace up their sneakers chapter 11 virginia staged a bloody revolt a chronological coincidence that had far reaching consequences.
as a child turner had taught himself to read and had hoped for emancipation but one new master forced him into the fields and another separated him from his wife.
becoming deeply spiritual turner had a religious vision in which the spirit explained that christ had laid down the yoke he had borne for the sins of men and that i should take it on and fight against the serpent for the time was fast approaching when the first should be last and the last should be first taking an eclipse of the sun in august 1831 as an omen turner and a handful of relatives and friends rose in rebellion and killed at least 55 white men women and children.
turner hoped that hundreds of slaves would rally to his cause but he mustered only 60 men.
the white militia quickly dispersed his poorly armed force and took their revenge.
one company of cavalry killed 40 blacks in two days and put 15 of their heads on poles to warn religion and reform 1800 1860 all those who should undertake a similar plot turner died by hanging still identifying his mission with that of his savior.
was not christ crucified he asked.
deeply shaken by turners rebellion the virginia assembly debated a law providing for gradual emancipation and colonization abroad.
when the bill failed by a vote of 73 to 58 the possibility that southern planters would voluntarily end slavery was gone forever.
instead the southern states toughened their slave codes limited black movement and prohibited anyone from teaching slaves to read.
they would meet walkers radical appeal with radical measures of their own.
evangelical abolitionism rejecting walkers and turners resort to violence a cadre of northern evangelical christians launched a moral crusade to abolish the slave regime.
if planters did not allow blacks their god given status as free the anti slavery alphabet girding themselves for a long fight abolitionists conveyed their beliefs to the next generation.
this primer written by quakers hannah and mary townsend and published in philadelphia in 1846 taught young children the alphabet by spreading the antislavery message.
a was for abolitionist and b was for a brother an enslaved black who though of a darker hue was considered by god as dear as you the huntington library art collections san marino ca.
part 4 overlapping revolutions 1800 1860 moral agents these radical christians warned they faced eternal damnation at the hands of a just god.
william lloyd garrison theodore weld and angelina and sarah grimk the most determined abolitionist was william lloyd garrison 1805 1879.
a massachusetts born printer garrison had worked during the 1820s in baltimore on an antislavery newspaper the genius of universal emancipation.
in 1830 garrison went to jail convicted of libeling a new england merchant engaged in the domestic slave trade.
in 1831 garrison moved to boston where he immediately started his own weekly the liberator 1831 1865 and founded the new england anti slavery society.
influenced by a bold pamphlet immediate not gradual abolition 1824 by an english quaker elizabeth coltman heyrick garrison demanded immediate abolition without compensation to slaveholders.
i will not retreat a single inch he declared and i will be heard garrison accused the american colonization society chapter 25.
in other words americas most disastrous military adventure of the twentieth century barely altered the geopolitical realities in southeast asia.
the hanoi regime called itself communist but never intended to be a satellite of any country least of all china vietnams ancient enemy.
many paid a steep price for the vietnam war.
americas vietnamese friends lost jobs and property spent years in reeducation camps or had to flee the country.
millions of vietnamese had died in a decade of war which included some of the most intensive aerial bombing of the twentieth century.
in bordering cambodia the maniacal khmer rouge followers of cambodias ruling communist party took power and murdered 1 7 million people in bloody purges.
and in the united states more than 58 000 americans had sacrificed their lives and 300 000 had been wounded.
on top of the wars 150 billion price tag slow to heal internal wounds divided the country and americans increasingly lost confidence in their political leaders.
the silent majority speaks out nixon placed himself on the side of what he called the nonshouters the nondemonstrators but moderate and conservative americans increasingly spoke out.
they were not in the mood to simply remain silent.
during nixons first presidential term those opposed to the direction liberalism had taken since the early 1960s focused their discontent on what they believed were the excesses of the rights revolution the enormous changes in american law and society initiated by the civil rights movement and advanced by feminists and others thereafter.
part 8 the modern state and the age of liberalism 1945 1980 the fall of saigon after the 1973 u s withdrawal from vietnam the south vietnamese government lasted another two years.
in march 1975 the north vietnamese forces launched a final offensive by april they had surrounded the capital saigon.
as seen here many vietnamese some of them associated with the fallen south vietnamese regime sought sanctuary at the u s embassy compound.
thousands of vietnamese and americans were evacuated before the last helicopter left the embassy on april 30 nik wheeler sipa ap wide world photos.
law and order and the supreme court the rights revolution found an ally in an unexpected place the u s supreme court.
the decision that stood as a landmark in the civil rights movement brown v board of education 1954 triggered a larger judicial revolution.
following brown the court increasingly agreed to hear human rights and civil liberties cases as opposed to its previous focus on property related suits.
surprisingly this shift was led by the man whom president dwight eisenhower had appointed chief justice in 1953 earl warren.
a popular republican governor of california warren surprised many including eisenhower himself with his robust advocacy of civil rights and civil liberties.
the warren court lasted from 1954 until 1969 and established some of the most far reaching liberal jurisprudence in u s history.
right wing activists fiercely opposed the warren court which they accused of legislating from the bench and contributing to social breakdown.
they pointed for instance to the courts rulings that people who are arrested have a constitutional right to counsel 1963 1964 and in miranda v arizona 1966 that arrestees have to be informed by police of their right to remain silent.
compounding conservatives frustration was a series of decisions that liberalized restrictions on pornography.
trying to walk the fine line between censorship and obscenity the court ruled in roth v united states 1957 that obscene material had to be utterly without redeeming social importance to be banned.
the social importance test however proved nearly impossible to define and left wide latitude for pornography to flourish.
that measure was finally abandoned in 1972 when the court ruled in miller v california that contemporary community standards were the rightful measure of obscenity.
but miller too had little effect on the pornographic magazines films and peep shows proliferating in the 1970s.
conservatives found these decisions especially distasteful since the court had also ruled that religious ritual of any kind in public schools including prayers and bible reading violated the constitutional separation of church and state.
to many chapter.
patricia cline cohen the murder of helen jewett the life and death of a prostitute in new york city 1998.
a gripping murder mystery that probes the nature of the new plebeian culture.
daniel walker howe what hath god wrought the transformation of america 1815 1848 2007.
a comprehensive history from a cultural perspective.
paul e johnson and sean wilentz the kingdom of matthias 1995.
a compelling story of religious utopianism gone mad.
stephen b oates the fires of jubilee 1975.
explores the life and rebellion of nat turner.
mark perry lift up thy voice 2001.
offers a study of the grimk family.
david roediger the wages of whiteness 1995.
shows how racism shaped white working class culture.
chapter 8 the southern plantation system was expanding rapidly.
in 1790 its western boundary ran through the middle of georgia by 1830 it stretched through western louisiana by 1860 the slave frontier extended far into texas map 12 1.
that advance of 900 miles more than doubled the geographical area cultivated by slave labor and increased the number of slave states from eight in 1800 to fifteen by 1850 the federal government played a key role in this expansion.
it acquired louisiana from the french in 1803 welcomed the slave states of mississippi and alabama into the union in 1817 and 1819 removed native americans from the southeastern states in the 1830s and annexed texas and mexican lands in the 1840s.
to cultivate this vast area white planters imported enslaved laborers first from africa and then from the chesapeake region.
between 1776 and 1809 when congress outlawed the atlantic slave trade planters purchased about 115 000 africans.
the planter will.
sacrifice every thing to attain negroes declared one slave trader.
despite the influx the demand for labor far exceeded the supply.
consequently planters imported new african workers illegally through the spanish colony of florida until 1819 and then through the mexican province of texas.
yet these africans about 50 000 between 1810 and 1865 did not satisfy the demand.
the upper south exports slaves planters seeking labor looked to the chesapeake region home in 1800 to nearly half of the nations black population.
there the african american population figure 12 1 cotton production and producers 1800 1860 millions of bales 4 5 4 0 3 5 3 0 2 5 2 0 1 5 1 0 0 5 100 1 tennessee 2 arkansas 3 texas 4 louisiana 5 mississippi 6 alabama 7 georgia florida panhandle 8 south carolina 9 north carolina 10 virginia until 1820 georgia and south carolina plantations marked 7 and 8 on the right side of the lower graph grew more than one half of american cotton.
as output increased significantly between 1820 and 1840 see the upper graph the locus of production shifted.
by the early 1840s planters had moved hundreds of thousands of slaves to the mississippi valley and louisiana mississippi and alabama 4 5 and 6 grew nearly 70 percent of a much larger cotton crop.
simultaneously production leapt dramatically reaching as the red bars show 2 million bales a year by the mid1840s 3 million by the mid 1850s and 4 million on the eve of the civil war.
source from time on the cross the economics of american negro slavery by robert w fogel and stanley l engerman.
copyright 1974 little brown.
chapters main ideas.
1 how do you explain the liberal resurgence in the first half of the 1960s.
2 what were the main elements of johnsons great society.
3 how did the debates over civil liberties particularly with respect to supreme court decisions under chief justice earl warren influence political life in the 1960s and 1970s.
making connections war.
how did the antiwar movement represent a break with cold war assumptions.
thematic understanding look at the events listed under america in the world on the thematic timeline on page 803 american global leadership is a major theme of part 8 how did the global role of the united states shift in the 1960s.
recognize the larger developments and continuities within and across chapter 12 slave trade mingled blacks from many states erased regional differences and prompted the emergence of a core culture in the lower mississippi valley.
a prime example was the fate of the gullah dialect which combined words from english and a variety of african languages in an african grammatical structure.
spoken by blacks in the carolina low country well into the twentieth century gullah did not take root on the cotton plantations of alabama and mississippi.
there slaves from carolina were far outnumbered by migrants from the chesapeake who spoke black english.
like gullah black english used double negatives and other african grammatical forms but it consisted primarily of english words rendered with west african pronunciation for example with th pronounced as d de preacher.
nonetheless african influences remained significant.
at least one third of the slaves who entered the united states between 1776 and 1809 came from the congo region of west central africa and they brought their cultures with them.
as traveler isaac holmes reported in 1821 in louisiana and the state of mississippi the slaves.
dance for several hours during sunday afternoon.
the general movement is in what they call the congo dance similar descriptions of blacks who danced the congo and sang a purely african song to the accompaniment of.
a drum appeared as late as 1890 african americans also continued to respect african incest taboos by shunning marriages between cousins.
on the good hope plantation in south carolina nearly half of the slave children born between 1800 and 1857 were related by blood to one another yet when they married only one of every forty one unions took place between cousins.
white planters were not the source of this taboo cousin marriages were frequent among the 440 south carolina men and women who owned at least one hundred slaves in 1860 in part because such unions kept wealth within an extended family thinking like a historian p 398.
unlike white marriages slave unions were not legally binding.
according to a louisiana judge slaves have no legal capacity to assent to any contract.
because slaves are deprived of all civil rights nonetheless many african americans took marriage vows before christian ministers or publicly marked their union in ceremonies that included the west african custom of jumping over a broomstick together.
once married newly arrived young people in the cotton south often chose older people in their new communities as fictive aunts and uncles the slave trade had destroyed their family but not their family values.
the south expands slavery and society 1800 1860 the creation of fictive kinship understand ties was part of a communitypoints of view building process a partial substi in what respects did tute for the family ties that sus african cultural practices tained whites during periods of affect the lives of enslaved crisis.
naming children was african americans.
recently imported slaves frequently gave their children african names.
males born on friday for example were often called cuffee the name of that day in several west african languages.
many american born parents chose names of british origin but they usually named sons after fathers uncles or grandfathers and daughters after grandmothers.
those transported to the cotton south often named their children for relatives left behind.
like incest rules and marriage rituals this intergenerational sharing of names evoked memories of a lost world and bolstered kin ties in the new one.
negotiating rights by forming stable families and communities african americans gradually created a sense of order in the harsh and arbitrary world of slavery.
in a few regions slaves won substantial control over their lives.
working lives during the revolutionary era blacks in the rice growing lowlands of south carolina successfully asserted the right to labor by the task under the task system workers had to complete a precisely defined job each day for example digging up a quarter acre of land hoeing half an acre or pounding seven mortars of rice.
by working hard many finished their tasks by early afternoon a methodist preacher reported and had the rest of the day for themselves which they spend in working their own private fields.
planting rice corn potatoes tobacco c for their own use and profit slaves on sugar and cotton plantations led more regimented lives thanks to the gang labor system.
as one field hand put it there was no time off between de change of de seasons.
dey was allus clearin mo lan or sump.
many slaves faced bans on growing crops on their own.
it gives an excuse for trading explained one owner and that encouraged roaming and independence.
still many masters hired out surplus workers as teamsters drovers steamboat workers turpentine gatherers and railroad builders in 1856 no fewer than 435 hired slaves laid track for the virginia tennessee railroad.
many owners regretted the result.
as an overseer remarked about a slave named john he is not as good a hand as he was before he went to alabamy thinking like a historian childhood in black and white a major theme of harriet beecher stowes powerful antislavery novel uncle toms cabin is the sin of separating black families and denying parental rights to enslaved mothers and fathers.
the following documents reveal the dynamics of plantation family life and particularly mother child relations.
1 ex slave josephine smith interviewed at age ninety four by mary a hicks raleigh north carolina 1930s.
slave children had loving but limited relationships with their mothers who worked long hours in the fields and were sometimes sold away from their children.
i members seein a heap o slave sales wid de niggers in chains an de speculators sellin an buyin dem off.
i also members seein a drove of slaves wid nothin on but a rag twixt dere legs bein galloped roun fore de buyers.
bout de wust thing dat eber i seed do wuz a slave woman at louisburg who had been sold off from her three weeks old baby an wuz bein marched ter new orleans.
she had walked till she quz give out an she wuz weak enough ter fall in de middle o de road.
as i pass by dis oman begs me in gods name fer a drink o water an i gives it ter her.
i aint neber be so sorry fer nobody.
dey walk fer a little piece an dis oman fall out.
she dies dar side o de road an right dar dey buries her cussin dey tells me bout losin money on her.
ole mammy lit wus mity ole en she lived in one corner of de big yard en she keered fur all de black chilluns while de old folks wurk in de field.
mammy lit wus good to all de chilluns en i had ter help her wid dem chilluns en keep dem babies on de pallet.
mammy lit smoked a pipe en sum times i wuld hide dat pipe en she wuld slap me fur it den sum times i wuld run way en go ter de kitchen whar my mammy wus at wurk en mammy lit wuld hafter cum fur me en den she wuld whip me er gin.
she sed i wus bad.
meriwether administering bitters illustration from john pendleton kennedy swallow barn or a sojourn in the old dominion 1851 bitters strong alcoholic beverages flavored with bitter herbs were administered as medicine in the nineteenth century as in this depiction of a planters wife tending to enslaved children.
kennedys cheerful depictions of virginia plantation life in this popular book first published in 1832 reinforced the notion of slavery as a positive good 2.
narrative of james curry a fugitive slave the liberator january 10 1840 the abolitionist newspaper the liberator published heartrending accounts of death and separation in slave families and how fictive kinship assisted the survivors.
my mothers labor was very hard.
she would go to the house in the morning take her pail upon her head and go away to the cow pen and milk fourteen cows.
she then put on the bread for the family breakfast and got the cream ready for churning and set a little child to churn it she having the care of from ten to fifteen children whose mothers worked in the field.
among the slave children were three little orphans whose mothers at their death committed them to the care of my mother.
one of them was a babe.
she took them and treated them as her own.
the master took no care about them.
she always took a share of the cloth she had provided for her own children to cover these little friendless ones.
3 former slave barney alford interview for the works progress administration in mississippi 1930s.
source picture research consultants archives.
g m j early culture of children 1855 this excerpt from a christian advice manual for mothers reflects the values of the mid nineteenth century white protestant middle class.
train up a child in the way he should go is a law as imperative in the 19th century as when first uttered by the lips of the wise man.
mothers are the natural executors of this law to their daughters.
nothing but the most unavoidable and pressing force of circumstances should wrench this power from their hands.
who will guard with a mothers jealous eye the health habits morals and religion of this most delicate part of creation.
how often i have been pained to see mothers place those delicate plants in the nursery with servants whose tastes feelings morals manners and language are but a little removed from the lower animals of creation there to receive impressions and imbibe habits which will grow with their growth and strengthen with their strength until like the branches of the giant oak they shall expand and deepen into a shade that will forever conceal the parent stock.
6 visiting cards created by philadelphia portrait painter and photographer peregrine f cooper as we found them left as they are now right 1864 one of the ways to train up a child in the way he should go was to inculcate abolitionist sentiments early and often.
source george eastman house.
sources 1 wpa slave narrative project 1936 38 learnnc org 2 narrative of james curry a fugitive slave the liberator january 10 1840 learnnc org 3 the ms gen web project msgw org slaves alford xslave htm 5 home garner or the intellectual and moral store house ed.
mary g clarke philadelphia j p lippincott co 1855 115 analyzing the evidence putting it all together 1 what do these sources reveal about slave communities.
about the extent to which the ideology of benevolent paternalism governed the behavior of slave owners.
2 how does the engraving source 4 compare to the descriptions of the care of slave children sources 1 3.
what biases if any can you detect in these sources.
3 how would a person holding the beliefs described in source 5 react to the engraving of mrs meriwether.
to images showing slave mammies raising the masters children.
4 how do the images of enslaved children in source 6 pertain to train ing up a child in the way he should go.
how effective are they.
what emotions do they play upon.
in the political system debate over the peculiar institution of slavery often focused on property rights and constitutional principles.
in the actual world of the plantation human bondage evoked a range of human emotions jealousy resentment anger love fear tenderness and human pain.
write an essay that assesses the economic legal and political arguments over slavery in light of the experiences of enslaved mothers and children.
part 4 overlapping revolutions 1800 1860 antebellum slave quarters during the colonial period owners often housed their slaves by gender in communal barracks.
in the nineteenth century slaves usually lived in family units in separate cabins.
the slave huts on this south carolina plantation were sturdily built but had few windows.
inside they were sparsely furnished.
library of congress.
the planters greatest fear was that enslaved african americans a majority of the population in most cotton growing counties would rise in rebellion.
legally speaking owners had virtually unlimited power over their slaves.
the power of the master must be absolute intoned justice thomas ruffin of the north carolina supreme court in 1829 but absolute power required brutal coercion and only hardened or sadistic masters had the stomach for such violence.
these poor negroes receiving none of the fruits of their labor do not love work explained one woman who worked her own farm if we had slaves we should have to.
beat them to make use of them moreover passive resistance by african americans seriously limited their owners power.
slaves slowed the pace of work by feigning illness and losing or breaking tools.
one maryland slave faced with transport to mississippi and separation from his wife flatly refused to accompany my people or to place events be exchanged or sold his owner in context reported.
masters ignored such how successful were slaves feelings at their peril.
a slave or a in securing significant conrelative might retaliate by setting trol over their lives.
fire to the masters house and barns poisoning his food or destroying his crops.
fear of resistance as well as critical scrutiny by abolitionists prompted many masters to reduce their reliance on the lash and use positive incentives such as food and special privileges.
noted frederick law olmsted men of sense have discovered that it was better to offer them rewards than to whip them nonetheless owners could always resort to violence and countless masters regularly asserted their power by demanding sex from their female slaves.
as ex slave bethany veney lamented in her autobiography from the unbridled lust of the slave owner.
the law holds.
no protecting arm over black women.
survival strategies slavery remained an exploitative system grounded in fear and coercion.
over the decades hundreds of individual slaves responded by attacking their masters and overseers.
but only a few blacks among them gabriel and martin prosser 1800 and nat turner 1831 plotted mass uprisings.
most slaves recognized that revolt would be futile they lacked the autonomous institutions such as the communes of european peasants for example needed to organize a successful rebellion.
moreover whites chapter review c h a p t e r r e v i e w m a k e i t s t i c k go to learningcurve to retain what youve read.
terms to know identify and explain the significance of each term below.
key concepts and events coastal trade p 380 inland system p 380 chattel principle p 381 benevolent masters p 382 republican aristocracy p 386 positive good argument p 386 key people gang labor system p 388 slave society p 388 alamo p 391 secret ballot p 393 black protestantism p 395 task system p 397 harriet jacobs p 382 james henry hammond p 384 stephen austin p 391 antonio lpez de santa anna p 391 sam houston p 391 review questions answer these questions to demonstrate your understanding of the chapter 12 contains a number of paintings or photographs of enslaved african americans.
in your judgment do those images either individually or as a group capture the reality of slave life.
explain your position while evaluating the strengths and weaknesses of paintings and photographs as historical evidence.
visual evidence chapter review start here to learn more about the events discussed in this chapter 12.
now rumors swirled that great britain was encouraging texas to remain independent wanted california as payment for the mexican debts owed to british investors and had designs on spanish cuba which some slave owners wanted to add to the united states.
to thwart such imagined schemes southern expansionists demanded the immediate annexation of texas.
at this crucial juncture oregon fever altered the political landscape in the north.
in 1843 americans in the ohio river valley and the great lakes states organized oregon conventions and democratic and whig politicians alike called for american sovereignty over the entire oregon country from spanish california to russian alaska which began at 5440 north latitude.
with northerners demanding oregon part 5 creating and preserving a continental nation 1844 1877 president john tyler a proslavery zealot called for the annexation of texas.
disowned by the whigs because he thwarted henry clays nationalist economic program tyler hoped to win reelection in 1844 as a democrat.
to curry favor among northern expansionists tyler supported claims to all of oregon.
in april 1844 tyler and john c calhoun his proslavery expansionist minded secretary of state sent the senate a treaty to bring texas into the union.
however the understand two major presidential hopefuls points of view democrat martin van buren and why did party politiwhig henry clay opposed tylers cians initially oppose the initiative.
fearful of raising the annexation of texas and issue of slavery they persuaded how did this view change during the election of the senate to reject the treaty.
nonetheless expansion into texas and oregon became the central issue in the election of 1844 most southern democrats favored texas annexation and refused to support van burens candidacy.
the party also passed over tyler whom they did not trust.
instead the democrats selected governor james k polk of tennessee a slave owner and an avowed expansionist.
known as young hickory because he was a protg of andrew jackson polk shared his mentors iron will boundless ambition and determination to open up lands for american settlement.
accepting the false claim in the democratic party platform that both areas already belonged to the united states polk campaigned for the re occupation of oregon and the re annexation of texas he insisted that the united states defy british claims and occupy the whole of the territory of oregon to the alaskan border.
fifty four forty or fight became his jingoistic cry.
the whigs nominated henry clay who again advocated his american system of high tariffs internal improvements and national banking.
clay initially dodged the issue of texas but seeking southern votes ultimately supported annexation.
northern whigs who opposed the admission of a new slave state refused to vote for clay and cast their ballots for james g birney of the liberty party chapter 30 corporations and wealthy americans who could then use these funds to expand production.
supply siders maintained that the resulting economic expansion would increase government revenues and offset the loss of tax dollars stemming from the original tax cuts.
meanwhile the increasing supply would generate its own demand as consumers stepped forward to buy ever more goods.
supply side theory presumed in fact gambled that future tax revenues would make up for present tax cuts.
the idea had a growing list of supporters in congress led by an exprofessional football player from buffalo named jack kemp.
kemp praised supply side economics as an alternative to the slow growth recession oriented policies of the carter administration reagan took advantage of republican control of the senate as well as high profile allies such as kemp to win congressional approval of the 1981 economic recovery tax act erta a massive tax cut that embodied supply side principles.
the act reduced income tax rates for most americans by 23 percent over three years.
for the wealthiest americans those with millions to invest the highest marginal tax rate dropped from 70 to 50 percent.
the act also slashed estate taxes levies on inheritances instituted during the progressive era to prevent the transmission of huge fortunes from one generation to the next.
finally the new legislation trimmed the taxes paid by business corporations by 150 billion over a period of five years.
as a result of erta by 1986 the annual revenue of the federal government had been cut by 200 billion nearly half a trillion in 2010 dollars.
david stockman reagans budget director hoped to match this reduction in tax revenue with a comparable cutback in federal expenditures.
to meet this ambitious goal he proposed substantial cuts in social security and medicare.
but congress and even the president himself rejected his idea they were not willing to antagonize middle class and elderly voters who viewed these government entitlements as sacred.
as conservative columnist george will noted ironically americans are conservative.
what they want to conserve is the new deal after defense spending social security and medicare were by far the nations largest budget items reductions in other programs would not achieve the savings the administration desired.
this contradiction between new right republican ideology and political reality would continue to frustrate the party into the twenty first century.
a more immediate embarrassment confronted conservatives however.
in a 1982 atlantic article stockman admitted that supply side theory was based conservative america in the ascent 1980 1991 on faith not economics.
to produce optimistic projections of higher tax revenue in future years stockman had manipulated the figures.
worse stockman told the atlantic reporter candidly that supply side theory was based on a long discredited idea the trickle down notion that helping the rich would eventually benefit the lower and middle classes.
stockman had drawn back the curtain much to republicans consternation on the flawed reasoning of supply side theory.
but it was too late.
the plan had passed congress and since stockman could not cut major programs such as social security and medicare he had few options to balance the budget.
as the administrations spending cuts fell short the federal budget deficit increased dramatically.
military spending contributed a large share of the growing national debt.
but president reagan remained undaunted.
defense is not a budget item he declared.
you spend what you need to make america number one again reagan and defense secretary caspar weinberger pushed through congress a five year 1 2 trillion military spending program in 1981 during reagans presidency military spending accounted for one fourth of all federal expenditures and contributed to rising annual budget deficits the amount overspent by the government in a single year and a skyrocketing national debt the cumulative total of all budget deficits.
by the time reagan left office the total federal debt had tripled rising from 930 billion in 1981 to 2 8 trillion in 1989 the rising annual deficits of the 1980s contradicted reagans pledge of fiscal conservatism figure 30 1.
deregulation advocates of reaganomics asserted that excessive regulation by federal agencies impeded economic growth.
deregulation of prices in the trucking airline and railroad industries had begun under president carter in the late 1970s but reagan expanded the mandate to include cutting back on government protections of consumers workers and the environment.
some of the targeted federal bureaucracies such as the u s department of labor had risen to prominence during the new deal others such as the occupational safety and health administration osha and the environmental protection agency epa had been created during the johnson and nixon administrations.
although these agencies provided many services to business corporations they also increased their costs by protecting the rights of workers mandating safety improvements in factories and requiring expensive equipment to limit the release of toxic chemicals into the environment.
to reduce the part 9 global capitalism and the end of the american century 1980 to the present figure 30 1 in billions the annual federal budget deficit or surplus 1940 2009 clinton 200 400 600 world war ii r reagan and g h w bush 800 g w bush 1 000 1 200 1 400 1940 1945 1950 1955 1960 1965 1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2009 reach of federal regulatory agencies the reagan administration in 1981 cut their budgets by an average of 12 percent.
reagan also rendered regulatory agencies less effective by staffing them with leaders who were opposed to the agencies missions.
james watt an outspoken conservative who headed the department of the interior attacked environmentalism as a left wing cult acting on his free enterprise principles watt opened public lands for use by private businesses oil and coal corporations large scale ranchers and timber companies.
anne gorsuch burford whom reagan appointed to head the epa likewise disparaged environmentalists and refused to cooperate with congress to clean up toxic waste sites under a program known as the superfund.
the sierra club and other environmental groups aroused enough public outrage about these appointees that the administration changed its position.
during president reagans second term he significantly increased the epas budget and added acreage to the national wilderness preservation system and animals and plants to the endangered species lists.
ultimately as these adjustments demonstrate politics in the united states remained the art of the possible savvy politicians know when to advance and when to retreat.
having attained two of his prime goals a major tax cut and a draexplain matic increase in defense spendconsequences ing reagan did not seriously why was reagan unable attempt to scale back big governto reduce federal expendiment and the welfare state.
when tures as much as many of he left office in 1989 federal his supporters had hoped.
spending stood at 22 1 percent of during world war ii the federal government incurred an enormous budget deficit.
but between 1946 and 1965 it ran either an annual budget surplus or incurred a relatively small debt.
the annual deficits rose significantly during the vietnam war and the stagflation of the 1970s but they really exploded between 1982 and 1994 in the budgets devised by the ronald reagan and george h w bush administrations and again between 2002 and 2005 in those prepared by george w bush.
the republican presidents increased military spending while cutting taxes an enjoy it now philosophy that transferred costs to future generations of americans.
the gross domestic product gdp and federal taxes at 19 percent of gdp both virtually the same as in 1981 in the meantime though the federal debt had tripled in size and the number of government workers had increased from 2 9 to 3 1 million.
this outcome because it cut against the presidents rhetoric about balancing budgets and downsizing government elicited harsh criticism from some conservative commentators.
there was no reagan revolution one conservative noted.
a former reagan aide offered a more balanced assessment ronald reagan did far less than he had hoped.
and a hell of a lot more than people thought he would remaking the judiciary even if he did not achieve everything many of his supporters desired reagan left an indelible imprint on politics public policy and american culture.
one place this imprint was felt in far reaching ways was the judiciary where reagan and his attorney general edwin meese aimed at reversing the liberal judicial philosophy that had prevailed since the late 1950s.
during his two terms reagan appointed 368 federal court judges most of them with conservative credentials and three supreme court justices sandra day oconnor 1981 antonin scalia 1986 and anthony kennedy 1988.
ironically oconnor and kennedy turned out to be far less devoted to new right conservatism than reagan and his supporters imagined.
oconnor the first woman to serve on the court shaped its decision making as a swing vote between liberals and conservatives.
kennedy also emerged as a judicial moderate leaving scalia as reagans only genuinely conservative appointee.
chapter 30 conservative america in the ascent 1980 1991 iran contra the 1987 iran contra congressional hearings which lasted more than a month and were broadcast on live television helped to uncover a secret and illegal white house scheme to provide arms to the nicaraguan contras.
though lt col oliver north shown here during his testimony before congress concocted much of the scheme and was convicted of three felonies he never served prison time and emerged from the hearings as a populist hero among american conservatives who saw him as a patriot.
bettmann corbis.
oliver north a lieutenant colonel in the u s marines and an aide to the national security council defied that ban.
with the tacit or explicit consent of high ranking administration officials including the president north used the profits from the iranian arms deal to assist the contras.
when asked whether he knew of norths illegal actions reagan replied i dont remember the iran contra affair not only resulted in the prosecution of north and several other officials but also weakened reagan domestically he proposed no bold domestic policy initiatives in his last two years.
but the president remained steadfastly engaged in international affairs where events were unfolding that would bring a dramatic close to the cold war.
gorbachev and soviet reform the soviet system of state socialism and central economic planning had transformed russia from an agricultural to an industrial society between 1917 and the 1950s.
but it had done so inefficiently.
lacking the incentives of a market economy most enterprises hoarded raw materials employed too many workers and did not develop new products.
except in military weaponry and space technology the russian economy fell further and further behind those of capitalist societies and most people in the soviet bloc endured a low standard of living.
moreover the soviet invasion of afghanistan in 1979 like the american war in vietnam turned out to be a major blunder an unwinnable war that cost vast amounts of money destroyed military morale and undermined popular support of the government.
mikhail gorbachev a relatively young russian leader who became general secretary of the communist party in 1985 recognized the need for internal economic reform and an end to the war in afghanistan.
an iconoclast in soviet terms gorbachev introduced policies of glasnost openness and perestroika economic restructuring which encouraged widespread criticism of the rigid institutions and authoritarian controls of the communist regime.
to lessen tensions with the united states gorbachev met with reagan in 1985 and the two leaders established a warm personal rapport.
by 1987 they had agreed to eliminate all intermediate range nuclear missiles based in europe.
a year later gorbachev ordered soviet troops out of afghanistan and reagan replaced many of his hardline advisors with policymakers who favored a renewal of dtente.
reagans sudden reversal with regard to the soviet union remains one of the most intriguing aspects trace change of his presidency.
many conserva over time how did reagans tives worried that their cowboyapproach to the soviet hero president had been duped union change between by a duplicitous gorbachev but 1981 and 1989.
reagans gamble paid off the part 9 global capitalism and the end of the american century 1980 to the present united states new orleans.
atlantic ocean 500 miles 500 kilometers gulf of mexico.
mexico mexico city miami.
b 1959 castro ousts dictator batista.
1961 cia backed cuban exiles launch unsuccessful invasion at bay of pigs.
1962 cuban missile crisis u s blockades cuba.
h a m a 1991 military coup ousts president aristide.
1994 u s troops oversee peaceful return of aristide to power.
s cuba dominican republic yucatan peninsula haiti belmopan.
1954 u s backed coup kingston.
overthrows arbenzs socialist government.
jamaica port au.
santo domingo belize pacific ocean guatemala.
san guatemala salvador.
tegucigalpa el salvador.
managua 1980s u s sends money and military advisors to aid nicaragua right wing regime san jose.
against leftist uprising.
1964 u s troops quell anti american rioting in canal zone.
1978 treaty provides for joint u s panama control of canal zone in preparation for full turnover of canal.
1989 u s troops invade capturing dictator noriega.
1999 control of canal returned to panama.
1979 somoza regime overthrown sandinistas come to power.
1979 u s backed contra rebels and 89 sandinistas fight civil war.
1990 sandinistas defeated in elections coalition government comes to power.
caribbean sea costa rica.
1965 u s troops invade to prevent leftist takeover.
san juan n puerto rico u s w virgin islands 1983 u s troops invade to oust a communist regime.
e s grenada.
caracas panama venezuela panama colombia map 30 2 u s involvement in latin america and the caribbean 1954 2000 ever since the monroe doctrine 1823 the united states has claimed a special interest in latin america.
during the cold war u s foreign policy throughout latin america focused on containing instability and the appeal of communism in a region plagued by poverty and military dictatorships.
providing foreign aid was one approach to addressing social and economic needs but the united states frequently intervened with military forces or by supporting military coups to remove unfriendly or socialist governments.
the reagan administrations support of the contra rebels in nicaragua some of which was contrary to u s law was one of those interventions.
easing of tensions with the united states allowed the soviet leader to press forward with his domestic reforms.
as gorbachevs efforts revealed the flaws of the soviet system the peoples of eastern and central europe demanded the ouster of their communist governments.
in poland the roman catholic church and its pope polish born john paul ii joined with solidarity the trade union movement to overthrow the pro soviet regime.
in 1956 and 1964 russian troops had quashed similar popular uprisings in hungary and east germany.
now they did not intervene and a series of peaceful uprisings velvet revolutions created a new political order throughout the region.
the destruction of the berlin wall in 1989 symbolized the end of communist rule in central europe.
millions of television viewers worldwide watched jubilant germans knock down the hated wall that had divided the city since 1961 a vivid symbol of communist repression and the cold war division of europe.
a new geopolitical order in europe was in the making.
alarmed by the reforms soviet military leaders seized power in august 1991 and arrested gorbachev.
but widespread popular opposition led by boris yeltsin the president of the russian republic thwarted their efforts to oust gorbachev from office.
this failure broke the dominance of the communist party.
on december 25 1991 the union of soviet socialist republics formally dissolved to make way for an eleven member commonwealth of independent states cis.
the russian republic assumed leadership of the cis but chapter 31.
thus the end of the cold war brought not peace but a new american presence in the middle east.
for half a century the united states and the soviet union had tried to divide the world into two rival economic and ideological blocs communist and capitalist.
the next decades promised a new set of struggles one of them between a western led agenda of economic and cultural globalization and an anti western ideology of muslim and arab regionalism.
still more post cold war shifts were coming into view as well.
one was the chapter 13 concept of popular sovereignty to the test.
on the side of slavery missouri senator david r atchison encouraged residents of his state to cross temporarily into kansas to vote in crucial elections there.
opposing atchison was the abolitionist new england emigrant aid society which dispatched free soilers to kansas.
in 1855 the pierce administration accepted the legitimacy of a proslavery legislature in lecompton kansas which had been elected with aid from border crossing missourians.
however the majority of kansas residents favored free soil and refused allegiance to the lecompton government.
in 1856 both sides turned to violence prompting horace greeley of the new york tribune to label the territory bleeding kansas a proslavery force seven hundred strong looted and burned the free soil town of lawrence.
the attack enraged john brown a fiftysix year old abolitionist from new york and ohio who commanded a free state militia.
brown was a complex man with a record of failed businesses but he had an intellectual and moral intensity that won the trust of influential people.
avenging the sack of lawrence brown and his followers murdered five proslavery settlers at pottawatomie.
abolitionists must fight fire with fire and strike terror in the hearts of the proslavery people brown declared.
the attack on lawrence and the pottawatomie killings started a guerrilla war in kansas that took nearly two hundred lives.
buchanans failed presidency the violence in kansas dominated the presidential election of 1856 the new republican party counted on anger over bleeding kansas to boost the partys fortunes.
its platform denounced the kansas nebraska act and demanded that the federal government prohibit slavery in all the territories.
republicans also called for federal subsidies for transcontinental railroads reviving a whig economic proposal popular among midwestern democrats.
for president the republicans nominated colonel john c frmont a free soiler who had won fame in the conquest of mexican california.
the election of 1856 the american party entered the election with equally high hopes but like the whigs and democrats it split along sectional lines over slavery.
the southern faction of the american party nominated former whig president millard fillmore while the northern contingent endorsed frmont.
during the campaign the republicans won the votes expansion war and sectional crisis 1844 1860 of many northern know nothings by demanding legislation banning foreign immigrants and imposing high tariffs on foreign manufactures.
as a pennsylvania republican put it let our motto be protection to everything american against everything foreign in new york republicans campaigned on a reform platform designed to unite all of the anti slavery antipopery and anti whiskey voters.
the democrats reaffirmed their support for popular sovereignty and the kansas nebraska act and they nominated james buchanan of pennsylvania.
a tall dignified and experienced politician buchanan was staunchly prosouthern.
he won the three way race with 1 8 million popular votes 45 3 percent and 174 electoral votes.
frmont polled 1 3 million popular votes 33 2 percent and 114 electoral votes fillmore won 873 000 popular votes 21 5 percent but captured only 8 electoral votes.
the dramatic restructuring of the political system was now apparent map 13 7.
with the splintering of the american party the republicans had replaced the whigs as the second major party.
however frmont had not won a single vote in the south had he triumphed a north carolina newspaper warned the result would have been a separation of the states the fate of the republic hinged on president buchanans ability to quiet the passions of the past decade and to hold the democratic party the only national party together.
dred scott petitioner for freedom events and his own values and weaknesses conspired against buchanan.
early in 1857 the supreme court decided the case of dred scott v sandford which raised the controversial issue of congresss constitutional authority over slavery.
dred scott was an enslaved african american who had lived for a time with his owner an army surgeon in the free state of illinois and at fort snelling in the northern part of the louisiana purchase then part of the wisconsin territory where the missouri compromise 1820 prohibited slavery.
scott claimed that residence in a free state and a free territory had made him free.
buchanan opposed scotts appeal and pressured the two justices from pennsylvania to place events side with their southern col in context leagues.
seven of the nine justices declared that scott was still a slave but they disagreed on the legal rationale thinking like a historian p 434.
why did northern democratic presidents such as pierce and buchanan adopt prosouthern policies.
thinking like a historian biography as history sometimes the life of one individual can exemplify an era and bridget biddy mason was such a person.
mason was born into slavery in georgia in 1818 of mixed african american and native american descent.
in 1836 her owner gave biddy age eighteen to his recently married cousins robert and rebecca smith who owned a mississippi plantation.
trained as a midwife biddy delivered all six of rebeccas babies as well as working in the fields.
biddy herself gave birth to three daughters probably fathered by smith as were at least two of her sister hannahs eight children.
in the mid 1840s the smiths converted to mormonism and in 1847 along with other mississippi converts and their slaves journeyed 1 700 miles to the utah territory.
1 joseph smiths plan to end slavery february 7 1844 like many americans members of the church of jesus christ of latter day saints struggled with the question of slavery.
running for president in 1844 its founder joseph smith decried the institution.
petition also ye goodly inhabitants of the slave states your legislators to abolish slavery by the year 1850 or now.
pray congress to pay every man a reasonable price for his slaves out of the surplus revenue arising from the sale of public lands and from the deduction of pay from the members of congress.
break off the shackles from the poor black man and hire him to labor like other human beings for an hour of virtuous liberty on earth is worth a whole eternity of bondage 3 mormon apostle amasa mason lyman and his wives.
in 1851 at the behest of brigham young five hundred mormons including the robert smiths and their slaves moved to san bernardino california.
they settled on land purchased from antonio maria lugo who held the 35 000 acres of the rancho bernardino under a mexican grant a claim protected by the treaty of guadalupe hidalgo 1848 that ended the mexican war.
the settlements leader was amasa mason lyman whom biddy knew through the smith family and whose middle name she eventually took for her surname.
2 orson hyde on slavery the millennial star february 15 1851 orson hyde was an important mormon missionary who like most mormons refused to baptize slaves without their owners permission.
the laws of the land recognize slavery we do not wish to oppose the laws of the country.
our counsel to all our ministers in the north and south is to avoid contention upon the subject and to oppose no institution which the laws of the country authorize but to labor to bring men into the church and kingdom of god and teach them to do right and honor their god in his creatures.
source george and sadie frey family.
4 mason v smith 1856 the bridget biddy mason case.
most mormon migrants to california heeded brigham youngs advice to free their slaves as california was a free state.
robert smith refused to do so and in 1855 prepared to move to texas.
however in 1856 members of the free black community assisted biddy to file a habeas corpus petition and obtain freedom for herself and her extended family of thirteen women and children.
in a later interview mason stated i feared this trip to texas since i first heard of it and it further appearing by satisfactory proof to the judge here that all of the said persons of color are entitled to their freedom and are free and cannot be held in slavery or involuntary servitude.
and it further appearing to the satisfaction of the judge here that the said robert smith intended to and is about to remove from the state of california where slavery does not exist to the state of texas where slavery of negroes and persons of color does exist and is established by the municipal laws and intends to remove the said before mentioned persons of color to his own use without the free will and consent of all or any of the said persons of color whereby their liberty will be greatly jeopardized and there is good reason to apprehend and believe that they may be sold into slavery or involuntary servitude.
and it further appearing that none of the said persons of color can read and write and are almost entirely ignorant of the laws of the state of california as well as those of the state of texas and of their rights and that the said robert smith from his past relations to them as members of his family does possess and exercise over them an undue influence in respect to the matter of their said removal insofar that they have been in duress and not in possession and exercise of their free will so as to give a binding consent to any engagement or arrangement with him.
5 photograph of biddy mason and the deed of her first land purchase 1866 once free biddy prospered as a midwife and an investor in los angeles real estate.
when she died in 1891 biddy had accumulated a fortune of 300 000 about 7 6 million today.
despite her contact with mormonism biddy mason never joined the mormon church.
instead in 1872 she was a founding member of the first african methodist episcopal ame church in los angeles.
an active philanthropist of charitable causes she funded a travelers aid society and an elementary school for black children.
source los angeles public library.
sources 1 history of the church of jesus christ of latter day saints vol.
vi salt lake city ut mormon church 1912 205 2 the latter day saints millennial star vol.
xiii liverpool franklin d richards 1851 63 4 golden state insurance company records ucla dept.
of special collections charles e young research library.
analyzing the evidence 1 were smiths and hydes positions on slavery and property rights sources 1 and 2 similar or different.
2 how might the set of photographs of amasa mason lyman and his wives source 3 suggest that mormon family life resembled biddys experience in growing up on a southern plantation.
how might it mirror her own sexual experience and that of her sister hannah as robert smiths slaves.
3 as a slave biddy did not have a surname.
why might have she taken lymans middle name as her surname when she became free in 1856.
4 how does the ruling in biddys case source 4 by judge benjamin ignatius hayes in a california state court reflect the political and constitutional turmoil that westward expansion created with regard to slavery.
how is this ruling similar to and different from the famous case brought by dred scott in missouri and decided eventually by the u s supreme court in dred scott v sandford 1857.
5 what do you think explains biddy masons religious choices and charitable activities as described in the headnote to source 5.
putting it all together list the main themes and arguments presented in chapters by answering these questions.
across time and place compare the two major periods of liberal legislative accomplishment the new deal in the 1930s chapter we examined four related themes the ideology of manifest destiny and the westward movement of americans in the 1840s the impact of american traders and settlers on the indian peoples of the great plains and california the causes and consequences of the mexican war 1846 1848 and the disintegration of the second party system during the 1850s.
c h a p t e r we saw that the determination of presidents john tyler and james polk to add territory and slave states to the union pushed the united states into the mexican war and into a new debate over the expansion of slavery.
to resolve the resulting crisis henry clay daniel webster and stephen douglas devised the compromise of 1850 their efforts were in vain antislavery northerners defied the fugitive slave act and expansionistminded southerners sought new slave states in the caribbean.
ideology the pursuit of absolutes replaced politics the art of compromise as the ruling principle of american political life.
the second party system rapidly disintegrated.
the whig party vanished and two issue oriented parties the nativist american party and the antislavery republican party competed for its members.
as the republicans gained strength the democratic party splintered into sectional factions over bleeding kansas and other slavery related issues.
the stage was set for lincolns victory in the climactic election of 1860 r e v i e w m a k e i t s t i c k go to learningcurve to retain what youve read.
terms to know identify and explain the significance of each term below.
key concepts and events manifest destiny p 412 californios p 415 fifty four forty or fight p 418 conscience whigs p 421 wilmot proviso p 421 free soil movement p 421 squatter sovereignty p 424 forty niners p 425 slavery follows the flag p 428 key people compromise of 1850 p 429 personal liberty laws p 431 gadsden purchase p 431 ostend manifesto p 431 kansas nebraska act p 432 american or know nothing party p 432 bleeding kansas p 433 dred scott v sandford p 433 freeport doctrine p 438 james k polk p 418 frederick douglass p 421 zachary taylor p 424 lewis cass p 424 stephen douglas p 431 harriet beecher stowe p 431 john brown p 433 abraham lincoln p 437 chapters main ideas.
1 in what specific ways did the ideology of manifest destiny influence events during the 1840s and 1850s.
2 what were the main constitutional arguments pre sented during the debate over slavery in the territories.
which of those arguments influenced chief justice taneys opinion in dred scott.
3 how did the compromise of 1850 the kansas address the issue of slavery and what was the effect of each of them on sectional conflicts.
4 thematic understanding some histo rians claim that the mistakes of a blundering generation of political leaders led by 1860 to the imminent breakup of the union.
using the events from politics and power on the thematic timeline on page 409 explain why you agree or disagree.
nebraska act and the dred scott decision seek to making connections recognize the larger developments and continuities within and across chapter national lawyers guild bringing in an undemocratic institution brings an undemocratic response 2000 many of the businesses that most promote the wto world trade organization and its allied institutions rely on undemocratic practices to promote their business interest.
in recent years these policies have included not only monopolistic business practices but also outright interference with local governments.
frequently to promote the interests of business a militaristic type of government is either promoted or even created.
the effects these governments and their policies have on the citizenry of these nations are disastrous.
farms and forests are ruined and denuded.
low cost toxic waste dumps are created near population centers to service skyrocketing debts.
the wto was nominally chartered as a dispute resolution organization.
the problem is it is an organization with no real oversight or accountability and a process that favors the most powerful corporations.
4 world trade organization press release 2000.
extreme poverty is a huge problem.
1 2 billion people survive on less than a dollar a day.
a further 1 6 billion more than a quarter of the worlds population make do with one to two dollars a day.
to alleviate poverty developing economies need to grow faster and the poor need to benefit from this growth.
trade can play an important part in reducing poverty because it boosts economic growth and the poor tend to benefit from that faster growth.
the study finds that in general living standards in developing countries are not catching up with those in developed countries.
but some developing countries are catching up.
what distinguishes them is their openness to trade.
the countries that are catching up with rich ones are those that are open to trade and the more open they are the faster they are converging.
5 stuart carlson political cartoon from the milwaukee journal sentinel 2005.
6 former president bill clinton speech at guildhall london 2006 i spent a lot of time working on globalization when i was president coming to terms with the fundamental fact of interdependence that goes far beyond economics open border easy travel easy immigration free flow of money as well as people products and services.
i tried to figure out how to maximize the dynamism of global interdependence and still broaden its impact in terms of economics and opportunity.
the one thing that i am quite sure of is that interdependence is not a choice its not a policy it is the inevitable condition of our time.
so divorce is not an option.
therefore the mission of the moment clearly is to build up the positive and reduce the negative forces of global interdependence in a way that enables us to keep score in the right way.
are people going to be better off will our children have a better chance will we be more united than divided.
sources 1 from shafted free trade and americas working poor by christine ahn food first books 2003.
reprinted by permission of the institute for food and development policy 398 60th street oakland ca 94618 2 kenneth l kraemer greg linden and jason dedrick capturing value in global networks apples ipad and iphone paul merage school of business university of california irvine july 2011.
used by permission of the authors 3 seattle chapter 13 chapter 31 confronting global and national dilemmas 1989 to the present kill americans and their allies.
after the embassy attacks clinton ordered air strikes on al qaeda bases in afghanistan where an estimated 15 000 radical operatives had been trained since 1990 the strikes failed to disrupt this growing terrorist network and when clinton left office the central intelligence agency cia the state department and the pentagon were well aware of the potential threat posed by bin ladens followers.
that was where things stood on september 10 2001 into a new century in the second decade of the new century americans can reflect on two significant developments that have profoundly shaped their own day the terrorist attack on the united states on september 11 2001 and the election of the nations first african american president barack obama on november 4 2008 too little time has passed for us to assess whether either event will be remembered as helping to define the twentyfirst century.
but both have indelibly marked our present.
and both had distinct antecedents and still have profound implications.
the ascendance of george w bush the 2000 presidential election briefly offered the promise of a break with the intense partisanship of the final clinton years.
the republican nominee george w bush the son of president george h w bush pre the contested vote in florida 2000 when the vote recount got under way in palm beach florida in 2000 both sides brought out supporters to demonstrate outside the supervisor of elections office in hopes of influencing the officials doing the counting.
in this photograph supporters of george w bush clash with supporters of al gore after a rally on november 13 2000 that had been addressed by jesse jackson the dominant african american figure in the democratic party.
reuters corbis.
sented himself as an outsider deploring washington partisanship and casting himself as a uniter not a divider his opponent al gore clintons vice president was a liberal policy specialist.
the election of 2000 would join those of 1876 and 1960 as the closest and most contested in american history.
gore won the popular vote amassing 50 9 million votes to bushs 50 4 million but fell short in the electoral college 267 to 271 consumer and labor rights activist ralph nader ran as the green party candidate and drew away precious votes in key states that certainly would have carried gore to victory.
late on election night the vote tally in florida gave bush the narrowest of victories.
as was their legal prerogative the democrats demanded hand recounts in several counties.
a month of tumult followed until the u s supreme court voting strictly along conservative liberal lines ordered the recount stopped and let bushs victory stand.
recounting ballots without a consistent standard to determine voter intent the court reasoned violated the rights of floridian voters under the fourteenth amendments equal protection clause.
as if acknowledging the frailty of this argument the court declared that bush v gore was not to be regarded as precedent.
but in a dissenting opinion justice john paul stevens warned that the transparently partisan decision undermined the nations confidence in the judge as an impartial guardian of the rule of law although bush had positioned himself as a moderate countertendencies drove his administration from the start.
his vice president the uncompromising conservative richard dick cheney became with bushs part 9 global capitalism and the end of the american century 1980 to the present consent virtually a copresident.
bush also brought into the administration his campaign advisor karl rove whose advice made for an exceptionally politicized white house.
rove foreclosed the easygoing centrism of bush the campaigner by arguing that a permanent republican majority could be built on the partys conservative base.
on capitol hill roves hard line was reinforced by tom delay the house majority leader who in 1995 had declared all out war on the democrats.
to win that war delay pushed congressional republicans to endorse a fierce partisanship.
the senate although more collegial went through a similar hardening process.
after 2002 with republicans in control of both congress and the white house bipartisan lawmaking came to an end.
tax cuts the domestic issue that most engaged president bush as it had ronald reagan was taxes.
bushs economic growth and tax relief act of 2001 had something for everyone.
it slashed income tax rates extended the earned income credit for the poor and marked the estate tax to be phased out by 2010 a second round of cuts in 2003 targeted dividend income and capital gains.
bushs signature cuts those favoring big estates and well to do owners of stocks and bonds skewed the distribution of tax benefits upward table 31 1.
bush had pushed far compare and beyond any other postwar presicontrast dent even reagan in slashing in what ways was george federal taxes.
h w bush a political folcritics warned that such maslower of ronald reagan sive tax cuts would plunge the chapter 14 map 14 5 two societies at war 1861 1865 potomac r grant the closing virginia campaign 1864 1865 lee confederate defense line beginning in may 1864 general ulysses s grant launched an all out campaign against richmond trying to lure general robert e lee into open battle.
lee avoided a major test of strength.
instead he retreated to defensive positions and inflicted heavy casualties on union attackers at the wilderness spotsylvania court house north anna and cold harbor 1 4.
from june 1864 to april 1865 the two armies faced each other across defensive fortifications outside richmond and petersburg 5.
grant finally broke this ten month siege by a flanking maneuver at five forks 6.
lees surrender followed shortly.
confederate victory 1 the wilderness union victory id p ra railroads sequence of battles chancellorsville may 5 7 1864 orange an r court house fredericksburg ra spotsylvania may 8 19 1864 p pa han noc kr.
north anna may 23 26 1864 n jame s r e w s cold harbor june 1 3 richmond ttox r poma ap sayler s creek april 6 1865 appomattox court house lee surrenders to grant april 9 1865 his opposition to emancipation.
like mcclellan the democratic delegates rejected emancipation and condemned lincolns repression of domestic dissent particularly the suspension of habeas corpus and the use of military courts to prosecute civilians.
however they split into two camps over war policy.
war democrats vowed to continue fighting until the rebellion ended while peace democrats called for a cessation of hostilities and a constitutional convention to negotiate a peace settlement.
although personally a war democrat mcclellan promised if elected to recommend to congress an immediate armistice and a peace convention.
hearing this news confederate vice president alexander stephens celebrated the first ray of real light i have seen since the war began he predicted that if atlanta and richmond held out lincoln would be defeated and mcclellan would eventually accept an independent confederacy.
the fall of atlanta and lincolns victory stephenss hopes collapsed on september 2 1864 as atlanta fell to shermans army.
in a stunning move the union general pulled his troops from the trenches swept around the city and destroyed its rail links to the south.
fearing that sherman would encircle his army confederate general john b hood abandoned the city.
atlanta is ours and fairly won sherman telegraphed lincoln sparking hundred gun salutes and wild republican amelia court house petersburg campaign june 1864 april 1865 40 miles 40 kilometers 6 five forks april 1 1865 celebration.
we are gaining strength lincoln warned confederate leaders and may if need be maintain the contest indefinitely a deep pessimism settled over the confederacy.
mary chesnut a plantation mistress and generals wife wrote in her diary i felt as if all were dead within me forever and foresaw the end of the confederacy we are going to be wiped off the earth recognizing the dramatically changed military situation mcclellan repudiated the democratic peace platform.
the national union party went on the offensive attacking mcclellans inconsistency and labeling peace democrats as copperheads poisonous snakes who were hatching treasonous plots.
a man must go for the union at all hazards declared a republican legislator in pennsylvania if he would entitle himself to be considered a loyal man lincoln won a clear cut victory in november.
the president received 55 percent of the popular vote and won 212 of 233 electoral votes.
republicans and national unionists captured 145 of the 185 seats in the house of representatives and increased their senate majority to 42 of 52 seats.
many republicans owed their victory to the votes of union troops who wanted to crush the rebellion and end slavery.
legal emancipation was already under way at the edges of the south.
in 1864 maryland and missouri amended their constitutions to end slavery and the part 5 creating and preserving a continental nation 1844 1877 william tecumseh sherman a man of nervous energy sherman smoked cigars and talked continuously.
when seated he crossed and uncrossed his legs incessantly and a journalist described his fingers as constantly twitching his red whiskers his coat buttons playing a tattoo on the table or running through his hair on the battlefield sherman was a decisive general who commanded the loyalty of his troops.
a photographer captured this image of sherman in 1865 following his devastating march through georgia and the carolinas.
library of congress.
three confederate states occupied by the union army tennessee arkansas and louisiana followed suit.
still abolitionists worried that the emancipation proclamation based legally on the presidents wartime powers would lose its force at the end of the war.
urged on by lincoln and the national equal rights league in january 1865 the republican congress approved the thirteenth amendment ending slavery and sent it to the states for ratification.
slavery was nearly dead.
william tecumseh sherman hard war warrior thanks to william tecumseh sherman the confederacy was nearly dead as well.
as a young military officer stationed in the south sherman sympathized with the planter class and felt that slavery upheld social stability.
however sherman believed in the union.
secession meant anarchy he told his southern friends in early 1861 if war comes.
i must fight your people whom i best love serving under grant sherman distinguished himself at shiloh and vicksburg.
taking command of the army of the tennessee he developed the philosophy and tactics of hard war when one nation is at war with another all the people of one are enemies of the other sherman declared.
when confederate guerrillas fired on a boat carrying unionist civilians near randolph tennessee sherman sent a regiment to destroy the town asserting we are justified in treating all inhabitants as combatants after capturing atlanta sherman advocated a bold strategy.
instead of pursuing the retreating confederate army northward into tennessee he proposed to move south live off the land and cut a swath through to the sea to persuade lincoln and grant to approve his unconventional plan sherman argued that his march would be a demonstration to the world foreign and domestic that we have a power jefferson davis cannot resist the union general lived up to his pledge.
we are not only fighting hostile armies sherman wrote but a hostile people and must make old and young rich and poor feel the hard hand of war he left atlanta in flames and during his 300 mile march to the sea map 14 6 his army consumed or demolished everything in its path.
a union veteran wrote we destroyed all we could not eat stole their niggers burned their cotton gins spilled their sorghum burned twisted their r roads and raised hell generally although shermans army usually did not harm noncombatants who kept to their peaceful business the havoc so demoralized confederate soldiers that many deserted their units and returned home american voices p 472.
when sherman reached savannah in mid december the citys 10 000 defenders left without a fight.
georgias african americans treated sherman as a savior.
they flock to me old and young he wrote.
t hey pray and shout and mix up my name with moses.
as well as abram linkom the great messiah of dis jubilee to provide for the hundreds of blacks now following his army sherman issued special field order no.
15 which set aside 400 000 acres of prime rice growing land for the exclusive use of freedmen.
by june 1865 about 40 000 blacks were cultivating sherman lands many freedmen believed that the lands were to be theirs forever belated payment for generations of unpaid labor all the land belongs to the yankees now and they gwine divide it out among de coloured people to see more of shermans writing along with other primary sources from this period see sources for americas history.
chapter review summary an uncounted casualty of the war many men who died in the war were husbands and fathers leaving tens of thousands of widows and even more children to grieve over their loss.
dressed in mourning clothes this unidentified sad faced young girl holds an image of her dead father a cavalryman holding a sword and wearing a regulation dress hat.
library of congress.
in this chapter has stressed how globalization the worldwide flow of capital goods and people entered a new phase after the end of the cold war.
the number of multinational corporations many of them based in the united states increased dramatically and people goods and investment capital moved easily across chapter begins and ends with these dates and then identify the links among related events.
democratic moderate bill clinton elected president planned parenthood of southeastern pennsylvania v casey north american free trade agreement nafta clinton budget plan balances federal budget and begins to pay down federal debt clinton health insurance reform effort fails republicans gain control of congress u s troops enforce peace in bosnia personal responsibility and work opportunity reconciliation act reforms welfare system bill clinton impeached by house of representatives defense of marriage act clinton acquitted by senate world trade organization wto protests george w bush wins contested presidential election bush tax cuts september 11 al qaeda terrorists attack world trade center and pentagon congress passes usa patriot act united states unseats taliban in afghanistan president bush declares iran north korea and iraq an axis of evil united states invades iraq in march torture at abu ghraib prison becomes public president bush wins reelection great recession begins barack obama elected president american recovery and reinvestment act patient protection and affordable care act dont ask dont tell military policy on homosexuality ended osama bin laden killed by u s forces last u s combat troops withdrawn from iraq continued drawdown of u s forces in afghanistan toward planned full exit by 2014 key turning points based on the timeline what were the major domestic and foreign policy challenges between the 1990s and 2013.
chapters have done you can do.
write to day.
4 confederate veterans letter confederate veteran magazine 1910 an anonymous georgian who had served in lees army sent the following letter to the veterans magazine after attending a reunion in memphis.
reunion gatherings are supposed to be for the benefit of the old veterans but will you show us where the privates the men who stood the hardships and did the fighting have any consideration when they get to the city that is expected to entertain them.
in memphis i stopped at the school building where there were at least twenty five or thirty old veterans lying on the ground and had been there all night.
all this while the officers were being banqueted wined dined and quartered in the very best hotels but the private must shift for himself stand around on the street or sit on the curbstone.
he must march if he is able but the officers ride in fine carriages.
pay more attention to the men of the ranks men who did service.
i always go prepared to pay my way but i do not like to be ignored.
5 matthew page andrews the women of the south in war times 1923 matthew page andrewss the women of the south in war times approved by the udc was a popular textbook for decades in schools throughout the south.
the southern people of the old regime have been pictured as engaged primarily in a protracted struggle for the maintenance of negro slavery.
fighting on behalf of slavery was as far from the minds of these americans as going to war in order to free the slaves was from the purpose of abraham lincoln whose sole object frequently expressed by him was to preserve the union.
that in the midst of war there were almost no instances of arson murder or outrage committed by the analyzing the evidence 1 what do sources 2 and 3 tell us about the work of local udc chapter p 479 which shows a celebration in baltimore after ratification of the fifteenth amendment.
note the distinguished african visual evidence more to explore from being a loose union of states to being a more unified and inclusive nation.
to what extent do you agree.
use the events of reconstruction as evidence in making your case.
american heroes depicted at the top and the three scenes at the bottom.
in the complete version of this popular lithograph additional images appear on the left and right black union soldiers in battle an african american minister preaching at an independent black church a teacher and her students in a freedpeoples school an african american farmer in a wheat field and a drawing of a proud black family on their farm with the caption we till our own fields if a freedperson and a former slave owner had seen this image in 1870 how might each have responded.
imagine that an african american family had placed the picture in their home in 1870 how might they have reflected differently twenty years later on its significance.
start here to learn more about the events discussed in this chapter.
american social history project freedoms unfinished revolution 1996.
a wonderful collection of images and eyewitness accounts.
philip dray capitol men 2008.
a readable history of reconstruction from the perspective of the first african american congressmen.
faye e dudden fighting chance the struggle over woman suffrage and black suffrage in reconstruction america 2011.
a thoughtful exploration of the split among radical reformers.
eric foner a short history of reconstruction 1990.
the best short overview of events in this decade combining grassroots and political perspectives.
steven hahn a nation under our feet 2003.
hahns groundbreaking study of the rural south shows how african americans strategies during reconstruction were built on earlier experiences during slavery and the civil war.
brooks d simpson the reconstruction presidents 1998.
a lively assessment of presidential politics from lincoln through hayes full of entertaining quotations.
chapter 15 timeline chapter 17 industrial america corporations and conflicts 1877 1911 mi md.
s si pp r w va i st louis ark ansa s r mo.
o r louisville o hi.
chattanooga.
birmingham miss.
greensboro nashville tenn.
memphis n c charlotte s c.
augusta ga.
macon ala richmond.
newport news.
charleston.
savannah la.
texas at l a n t i c ocean mobile.
new orleans n e w fla s gulf of mexico mexico major railroads textile manufacturing coal and iron mining cotton growing regions tobacco growing regions 400 miles 400 kilometers map 17 1 the new south 1900 the economy of the old south focused on raising staple crops especially cotton and tobacco.
in the new south staple agriculture continued to dominate but there was marked industrial development as well.
industrial regions evolved producing textiles coal and iron.
by 1900 the souths industrial pattern was well defined though the region still served like the west as a major producer of raw materials for the industrial region that stretched from new england to chicago.
european descent but also southern and eastern europeans mexicans and asians.
in 1900 census takers found that more than 75 percent of san francisco and new york city residents had at least one parent who was foreign born.
in the new industrial order immigrants made an ideal labor supply.
they took the worst jobs at low pay and during economic downturns tens of thousands returned to their home countries reducing the shock of unemployment in the united states.
but many native born americans viewed immigrants with hostility through the lens of racial ethnic and religious prejudices.
they also feared that immigrants would take more coveted jobs and erode white mens wages.
for immigrants themselves america could be disorienting liberating and disappointing.
newcomers from europe mass migration from western europe had started in the 1840s when more than one million irish fled a terrible famine.
in the following decades as europes population grew rapidly and agriculture became commercialized peasant economies suffered first in germany and scandinavia then across austria hungary russia italy and the balkans.
this upheaval displaced millions of rural people.
some went to europes mines and factories others headed for south america and part 6 industrializing america upheavals and experiments 1877 1917 german beer mexican workers c 1900 immigrants from germany owned and managed most of the breweries in the united states.
but workers at the maier and zoblein brewery in los angeles came from many nations including mexico.
at that time about 4 000 mexicans lived in los angeles county about 4 percent of the population by 1930 150 000 mexican born immigrants lived in los angeles making up about 7 percent of the citys rapidly growing population.
los angeles public library.
the united states map 17 2 america compared p 560.
america was known to foreigners remembered one jewish woman from lithuania as the land where youd get rich but the reality was much harsher.
even in the age of steam a transatlantic voyage was grueling.
for ten to twenty days passengers in steerage class crowded belowdecks eating terunderstand rible food and struggling with points of view seasickness.
an investigator who what factors accounted traveled with immigrants from for the different expectanaples asked how can a steerage tions and experiences of passenger remember that he is a immigrants in this era.
human being when he must first pick the worms from his food after 1892 european immigrants were routed through the enormous receiving station at new yorks ellis island.
some immigrants brought skills.
many welshmen for example arrived in the united states as experienced tin plate makers germans came as machinists and carpenters scandinavians as sailors.
but industrialization required most of all increasing quantities of unskilled labor.
as poor farmers from italy greece and eastern europe arrived in the united states heavy low paid labor became their domain.
in an era of cheap railroad and steamship travel many immigrants expected to work and save for a few years and then head home.
more than 800 000 french chapter 17 industrial america corporations and conflicts 1877 1911 the knights of labor the most important union of the late nineteenth century the knights of labor was founded in 1869 as a secret society of garment workers in philadelphia.
in 1878 as the greenback movement reached its height some knights served as delegates to greenback labor conventions.
like grangers knights believed that ordinary people needed control over the enterprises in which they worked.
they proposed to set up shops owned by employees transforming america into what they called a cooperative commonwealth.
in keeping with this broad based vision the order practiced open membership irrespective of race gender or field of employment though like other labor groups the knights excluded chinese immigrants.
the knights had a strong political bent.
they believed that only electoral action could bring about many of their goals such as government regulation of corporations and laws that required employers to negotiate during strikes.
their 1878 platform denounced the aggressiveness of great capitalists and corporations if we desire to enjoy the full blessings of life the knights warned a check must be placed upon unjust accumulation and the power for evil of aggregated wealth among their demands were workplace safety laws prohibition of child labor a federal tax on the nations highest incomes public ownership of telegraphs and railroads and government recognition of workers right to organize.
the knights also advocated personal responsibility and self discipline.
their leader terence powderly warned that the abuse of liquor robbed as many workers of their wages as did ruthless employers.
growing rapidly in the 1880s the knights union was sprawling and decentralized.
it included not only skilled craftsmen such as carpenters ironworkers and beer brewers but also textile workers in rhode island domestic workers in georgia and tenant farmers in arkansas.
knights organized workingmens parties to advocate a host of reforms ranging from an eight hour workday to cheaper streetcar fares and better garbage collection in urban areas.
one of their key innovations was hiring a full time womens organizer leonora barry.
an irish american widow who was forced into factory work after her husbands death barry became a labor advocate out of horror at the conditions she experienced on the job.
to the discomfort of some male knights she investigated and exposed widespread evidence of sexual harassment on the job.
the knights growth in the 1880s showed the grassroots basis of labor activism.
powderly tried to avoid the knights of labor the caption on this union card by industry we thrive expresses the core principle of the knights of labor that everything of value is the product of honest labor.
the two figures are ideal representations of that producerist belief handsome workers respectably attired doing productive labor.
a picture of the grand master workman terence v powderly hangs on the wall benignly watching them.
picture research consultants archives.
strikes which he saw as costly and risky.
but the organizations greatest growth resulted from spontaneous grassroots striking.
in 1885 thousands of workers on the southwest railroad walked off the job to protest wage cuts afterward they telegraphed the knights and asked to be admitted as members.
the strike enhanced the knights reputation among workers and built membership to 750 000 by the following year local assemblies had sprung up in every state and almost every county in the united states.
just as the knights reached identify causes this pinnacle of influence an epi what factors contributed to the rapid rise of the sode of violence brought them knights of labor.
to its down.
in 1886 a protest at the decline.
mccormick reaper works in part 6 industrializing america upheavals and experiments 1877 1917 industrial violence a dynamited mine 1894 strikes in the western mining regions pitted ruthless owners bent on control of their property and workforce against fiercely independent miners who knew how to use dynamite.
some of the bloodiest conflicts occurred in colorado mining towns where the western federation of miners wfm had strong support and a series of republican governors sent state militia to back the mine owners.
violence broke out repeatedly between the early 1890s and the 1910s.
at victor colorado in may 1894 as dozens of armed sheriffs deputies closed in on angry wfm members occupying the strong mine in protest the miners blew up the mines shaft house and boiler.
showered with debris the deputies boarded the next train out of town.
because colorado then had a populist governor davis waite who sympathized with the miners and ordered the deputies to disband this strike was one of the few in which owners and miners reached a peaceful settlement a temporary victory for the union.
library of congress.
chicago led to a clash with police that left four strikers dead.
three unions including a knights of labor assembly had struck but the knights had reached an agreement and returned to work.
only the machinists union remained on strike when the incident occurred.
chicago was a hotbed of anarchism the revolutionary advocacy of a stateless society.
local anarchists many of them german immigrants called a protest meeting the next day may 4 1886 at haymarket square.
when police tried to disperse the crowd someone threw a bomb that killed several policemen.
officers responded with gunfire.
in the trial that followed eight anarchists were found guilty of murder and criminal conspiracy.
all were convicted not on any definitive evidence that one of them threw the bomb the bombers identity still remains unknown but on the basis of their antigovernment speeches.
four of the eight were executed by hanging one committed suicide in prison and the others received long sentences.
the haymarket violence profoundly damaged the american labor movement.
seizing on resulting antiunion hysteria employers took the offensive.
they broke strikes with mass arrests tied up the knights in expensive court proceedings and forced workers to sign contracts pledging not to join labor organizations.
the knights of labor never recovered.
in the view of the press and many prosperous americans they were tainted by their alleged links with anarchism.
struggles between industrialists and workers had created bitter divides.
farmers and workers the cooperative alliance in the aftermath of haymarket the knights cooperative vision did not entirely fade.
a new rural movement the farmers alliance arose to take up many of the issues that grangers and greenbackers had earlier chapter review review questions answer these questions to demonstrate your understanding of the chapters main ideas.
1 how did the rise of big business in the united states transform the economy and affect the lives of working people.
2 how did patterns of immigration to the united states change between the 1840s and the 1910s.
what roles did newly arrived immigrants play in the economy during the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries.
3 compare the accomplishments and limitations of american farmer labor movements of the 1870s and 1880s such as the greenback labor party and the knights of labor with those of the american federation of labor.
why did the latter choose a different strategy.
making connections tion from many points of view.
based on this information do you think the term industrial statesmen or robber barons is more accurate as a description for andrew carnegie john d rockefeller and other early titans.
or would you prefer a different term.
explain why.
review the events listed under politics and power peopling and work exchange and technology on the thematic timeline on page 543 industrialization was an economic process but it also transformed american society and politics.
thematic understanding recognize the larger developments and continuities within and across chapter 19.
other institutions served middle class customers who wanted novelty and variety at a reasonable price.
a victorian ethos of selfrestraint and moral uplift gave way to expectations of leisure and fun.
as african americans and women claimed a right to public spaces to shop dine and travel freely they built powerful reform movements.
at the same time the new pressures faced by professional men led to aggressive calls for masculine fitness exemplified by the rise of sports.
stunning scientific discoveries from dinosaur fossils to distant galaxies also challenged long held beliefs.
faced with electricity medical vaccines and other wonders americans celebrated technological solutions to human problems.
but while science gained popularity religion hardly faded.
in fact religious diversity grew as immigrants brought new faiths and protestants responded with innovations of their own.
americans found themselves living in a modern world one in which their grandparents beliefs and ways of life no longer seemed to apply.
in a market driven society that claimed to champion individual freedom americans took advantage of new ideas while expressing anxiety over the accompanying upheavals and risks.
chicago department store advertisement 1893 in the same year that the chicago worlds columbian exhibition offered an array of dazzling experiences for visitors the citys siegel cooper department store did the same for consumers who could afford to shop in its halls.
note the many types of goods and services offered in its sixty five complete departments from meat and groceries to medical and legal advice.
what evidence here shows the types of customers the store sought to attract inviting them to say ill meet you at the fountain.
how did the store encourage shoppers to linger.
chicago history museum.
part 6 industrializing america upheavals and experiments 1877 1917 commerce and culture as the united states industrialized the terms middle class and working class came widely into use.
americans adopted these broad identities not only in the workplace but also in their leisure time.
professionals and corporate managers prospered they and their families enjoyed rising income and an array of tempting ways to spend their dollars.
celebrating these new technological wonders americans hailed inventors as heroes.
the most famous thomas edison operated an independent laboratory rather than working for a corporation.
edison like many of the eras businessmen was a shrewd entrepreneur who focused on commercial success.
he and his colleagues helped introduce such lucrative products as the incandescent lightbulb and the phonograph which came widely into use in american homes.
even working class americans enjoyed cheaper products delivered by global trade and mass production from bananas and cigarettes to colorful dime novels and magazines.
edisons moving pictures for example first found popularity among the urban working class.

chapter 23 the national security strategy outlined a fundamental shift in american foreign policy.
and like nsc 68 it began with a discussion not of weaponry or military strategy but of freedom.
the document defined freedom as consisting of political democracy freedom of expression religious toleration free trade and free markets.
these it proclaimed were universal ideals right and true for every person in every society it went on to promise that the united states would extend the benefits of freedom by fighting not only terrorists but also tyrants around the world.
since nothing less than freedom was at stake the document insisted that the united states must maintain an overwhelming preponderance of military power not allowing any other country to challenge either its overall strength or its dominance in any region of the world.
and to replace the cold war doctrine of deterrence which assumed that the certainty of retaliation would prevent attacks on the what were the major policy elements of the war on terror in the wake of september 11 2001.
united states and its allies the national security strategy announced a new foreign policy principle preemptive war.
if the united states believed that a nation posed a possible future threat to its security it had the right to attack before such a threat materialized.
an american empire.
the axis of evil speech and national security strategy sent shock waves around the world.
in the immediate aftermath of september 11 a wave of sympathy for the united states had swept across the globe.
most of the world supported the war in afghanistan as a legitimate response to the terrorist attacks.
by late 2002 however many persons overseas feared that the united states was claiming the right to act as a world policeman in violation of international law.
relations between the united states and europe warned ivo daalder a dutch born former official of the clinton administration were on a collision course because washington had become dismissive of the perspectives of others critics including leaders of close american allies wondered whether dividing the world into friends and enemies of freedom ran the danger of repeating some of the mistakes of the cold war.
antiamericanism in the middle east they argued reached far beyond bin ladens organization and stemmed not simply from dislike of american freedom but rightly or wrongly from opposition to specific american policies toward israel the palestinians and the regions corrupt and undemocratic regimes.
and like the battle against communism the war on terrorism seemed to be leading the united states to forge closer and closer ties with repressive governments like pakistan and the republics of central asia that consistently violated human rights.
charges quickly arose that the united states was bent on establishing itself as a new global empire.
indeed september 11 and its aftermath highlighted not only the vulnerability of the united states but also its overwhelming strength.
in every index of power military economic cultural the united states far outpaced the rest of the world.
it accounted for just under one third of global economic output and more than one third of global military spending.
its defense budget exceeded that of the next twenty powers combined.
the united states maintained military bases throughout the world and deployed its navy on every ocean.
it was not surprising that in such circumstances many american policymakers felt that the country had a responsibility to impose order in a dangerous world even if this meant establishing its own rules of international conduct.
in public discussion in the united states after september 11 the word empire once a term of abuse came back into widespread use.
the need to shoulder the burdens of empire emerged as a common theme in discussions among foreign policy analysts and political commentators who embraced the new foreign policy.
as we have seen the idea of the united states as an empire has a long history dating back to jeffersons empire of liberty see chapter 9 nativism hostility to immigrants especially catholics emerged as a local political movement in the 1840s.
but in 1854 with the party system in crisis it burst on the national political scene with the sudden appearance of the american or know nothing party so called because it began as a secret organization whose members when asked about its existence were supposed to respond i know nothing.
the party trumpeted its dedication to reserving political office for native born americans and to resisting the aggressions of the catholic church such as its supposed efforts to undermine public school systems.
the knownothings swept the 1854 state elections in massachusetts electing the governor all of the states congressmen and nearly every member of the state legislature.
they captured the mayors office in cities like philadelphia chicago and san francisco as well.
in many states nativists emerged as a major component of victorious anti nebraska coalitions of voters opposed to the kansas nebraska act.
in the north the know nothings appeal combined anti catholic and antislavery sentiment with opposition to the sale of liquor often added to the equation.
after all most catholics as noted in the previous chapter 10.
unlike the eastern indians however the navajo were eventually allowed to return to a portion of their lands.
ironically the confederacy although defending slavery treated native americans more fairly than the union.
the confederate constitution provided for indian tribes to elect representatives to congress and the davis c h.
14 a new birth of freedom the civil war 1861 1865 a union soldier stands guard over a group of indians during the navajos long walk in which the army removed them from their new mexico homeland to a reservation hundreds of miles away.
the second american revolution administration removed state jurisdiction over indian reservations allowing them complete self government.
some tribes that owned slaves like the cherokee sided with the confederacy.
after 1865 they were forced to cede much of their land to the federal government and to give some land to their former slaves the only slaveowners required to do so.
a new financial system the need to pay for the war produced dramatic changes in financial policy.
to raise money the government increased the tariff to unprecedented heights thus promoting the further growth of northern industry imposed new taxes on the production and consumption of goods and enacted the nations first income tax.
it also borrowed more than 2 billion by selling interest bearing bonds thus creating an immense national debt.
and it printed more than 400 million worth of paper money called greenbacks declared to be legal tender that is money that must be accepted for nearly all public and private payments and debts.
to rationalize the banking system congress established a system of nationally chartered banks which were required to purchase government bonds and were given the right to issue bank notes as currency.
a heavy tax drove money issued by state banks out of existence.
thus the united states whose money supply before the war was a chaotic mixture of paper notes issued by state and local banks now had essentially two kinds of national paper currency greenbacks printed directly by the federal government and notes issued by the new national banks.
along with profitable contracts to supply goods for the military effort wartime economic policies greatly benefited northern manufacturers railroad men and financiers.
numerous americans who would take the lead in reshaping the nations postwar economy created or consolidated their fortunes during the civil war among them iron and steel entrepreneur andrew carnegie oil magnate john d rockefeller financiers jay gould and j p morgan and philip d armour who earned millions supplying beef to the union army.
these and other captains of industry managed to h o w d i d t h e c i v i l wa r t r a n s f o r m t h e n a t i o n a l e c o n o m y a n d c r e a t e a s t r o n g e r n a t i o n s t a t e.
escape military service sometimes by purchasing exemptions or hiring substitutes as allowed by the draft law.
taken together the unions economic policies vastly increased the power and size of the federal government.
the federal budget for 1865 exceeded 1 billion nearly twenty times that of 1860 with its new army of clerks tax collectors and other officials the government became the nations largest employer.
and while much of this expansion proved temporary the government would never return to its weak and fragmented condition of the prewar period.
women and the war for many northern women the conflict opened new doors of opportunity.
women took advantage of the wartime labor shortage to move into jobs in factories and into certain largely male professions particularly nursing.
the expansion of the activities of the national government opened new jobs for women as clerks in government offices.
many of these wartime gains were short lived but in white collar government jobs retail sales and nursing women found a permanent place in the workforce.
some northern women took a direct part in military campaigns.
clara barton a clerk in the patent office in washington d c when the war began traveled with the army of northern virginia helping to organize supply lines and nursing wounded soldiers.
barton worked alone rather than as a part of the department of female nurses and she never received compensation from the government.
hundreds of thousands of northern women took part in organizations that gathered money and medical supplies for soldiers and sent books clothing and food to freedmen.
the united states sanitary commission emerged as a centralized national relief agency to coordinate donations on the northern home front.
although control at the national level remained in male hands patriotic women did most of the grassroots work.
women played the leading role in organizing sanitary fairs filling cartridges at the u s arsenal of watertown massachusetts an engraving from harpers weekly september 21 1861 both men and women were drawn to work in the booming war related industries of the north.
a female nurse photographed between two wounded union soldiers in a nashville military hospital in 1862 many northern women served the army as nurses during the war.
14 a new birth of freedom the civil war 1861 1865 the second american revolution whimsical potholders expressing hope for a better life for emancipated slaves were sold at the chicago sanitary fair of 1865 to raise money for soldiers aid.
camp of thirty first pennsylvania infantry near washington d c an 1862 photograph by the mathew brady studio.
many women worked for the army as laundresses.
some accompanied their husbands and even brought their children.
grand bazaars that displayed military banners uniforms and other relics of the war and sold goods to raise money for soldiers aid.
new york citys three week fair of 1864 attracted a crowd of 30 000 and raised more than 1 million.
many men understood womens war work as an extension of their natural capacity for self sacrifice.
but the very act of volunteering to work in local soldiers aid societies brought many northern women into the public sphere and offered them a taste of independence.
the suffrage movement suspended operations during the war to devote itself to the union and emancipation.
but womens continuing lack of the vote seemed all the more humiliating as their involvement in war work increased.
from the ranks of this wartime mobilization came many of the leaders of the postwar movement for womens rights.
mary livermore the wife of a chicago minister for example toured military hospitals to assess their needs cared for injured and dying soldiers and organized two sanitary fairs.
she emerged from the war with a deep resentment of womens legal and political subordination and organized her states first woman suffrage convention.
women she had concluded must think and act for themselves after the war clara barton not only became an advocate of woman suffrage but as president of the american national red cross lobbied for the united states to endorse the first geneva convention of 1864 which mandated the humane treatment of battlefield casualties.
largely as a result of bartons efforts the senate ratified the convention in 1882.
subsequent geneva conventions in the twentieth century would deal with the treatment of prisoners of war and civilians during wartime.
h o w d i d t h e c i v i l wa r t r a n s f o r m t h e n a t i o n a l e c o n o m y a n d c r e a t e a s t r o n g e r n a t i o n s t a t e.
the divided north despite lincolns political skills the war and his administrations policies divided northern society.
republicans labeled those opposed to the war copperheads after a poisonous snake that strikes without warning.
mounting casualties and rapid societal changes divided the north.
disaffection was strongest among the large southern born population of states like ohio indiana and illinois and working class catholic immigrants in eastern cities.
as the war progressed it heightened existing social tensions and created new ones.
the growing power of the federal government challenged traditional notions of local autonomy.
the unions draft law which allowed individuals to provide a substitute or buy their way out of the army caused widespread indignation.
workers resented manufacturers and financiers who reaped large profits while their own real incomes dwindled because of inflation.
the war witnessed the rebirth of the northern labor movement which organized numerous strikes for higher wages.
the prospect of a sweeping change in the status of blacks called forth a racist reaction in many parts of the north.
throughout the war the democratic party subjected lincolns policies to withering criticism although it remained divided between war democrats who supported the military effort while criticizing emancipation and the draft and those who favored immediate peace.
on occasion dissent degenerated into outright violence.
in july 1863 the introduction of the draft provoked four days of rioting in new york city.
the mob composed largely of irish immigrants assaulted symbols of the new order being created by the war draft offices the mansions of wealthy republicans industrial establishments and the citys black population many of whom fled to new jersey or took refuge in central park.
only the arrival of union troops quelled the uprising but not before more than 100 persons had died.
the riots in new york the mob lynching a negro in clarkson street an engraving from the british magazine illustrated london news august 8 1863 reveals how the new york city draft riots escalated from an attempt to obstruct the draft into an assault on the citys black population.
14 a new birth of freedom the civil war 1861 1865 the confederate nation t h e c o n f e d e r at e n at i o n leadership and government the man charged with the task of rallying public support for the confederacy proved unequal to the task.
born in 1808 in kentucky within eight months and 100 miles of lincolns birth jefferson davis had moved to mississippi as a youth attended west point and acquired a large plantation.
aloof stubborn and humorless he lacked lincolns common touch and political flexibility.
although known before the war as the cicero of the senate for his eloquent speeches davis unlike lincoln proved unable to communicate the wars meaning effectively to ordinary men and women.
moreover the confederacys lack of a party system proved to be a political liability.
like the founders of the american republic southern leaders saw parties as threats to national unity.
as a result davis lacked a counterpart to the well organized republican party which helped to mobilize support for the lincoln administration.
under davis the confederate nation became far more centralized than the old south had been.
the government raised armies from scratch took control of southern railroads and built manufacturing plants.
but it failed to find an effective way of utilizing the souths major economic resource cotton.
in the early part of the war the administration tried to suppress cotton production urging planters to grow food instead and banning cotton exports.
this it was hoped would promote economic self sufficiency and force great britain whose textile mills could not operate without southern cotton to intervene on the side of the confederacy.
the centrality of slavery to the confederacy is illustrated by the paper money issued by state governments and private banks which frequently juxtaposed scenes of slaves at work with other revered images.
the ten dollar note of the eastern bank of alabama depicts slaves working in the field and at a port along with an idealized portrait of southern white womanhood.
alabamas five dollar bill includes an overseer directing slaves in the field and a symbol of liberty.
how did the war effort and leadership problems affect the society and economy of the confederacy.
5 6 9 king cotton diplomacy turned out to be ineffective.
large crops in 1859 and 1860 had created a huge stockpile in english warehouses.
by the time distress hit the manufacturing districts in 1862 the government of prime minister palmerston had decided not to intervene partly because britain needed northern wheat almost as much as southern cotton.
but the confederate policy had far reaching global consequences.
recognizing their overdependence on southern cotton other nations moved to expand production.
britain promoted cultivation of the crop in egypt and india and russia did the same in parts of central asia.
as a result the resumption of american cotton production after the war led directly to a worldwide crisis of overproduction that drove down the price of cotton impoverishing farmers around the world.
nor did davis deal effectively with obstructionist governors like joseph e brown of georgia who denounced the confederate draft as a dangerous usurpation of states rights and individual liberty.
all in all davis was so inferior to lincoln as a wartime leader that one historian has suggested that had the north and south exchanged presidents the south would have won the war.
the inner civil war as the war progressed social change and internal turmoil engulfed much of the confederacy.
at the outset most white southerners rallied to the confederate cause.
no less fervently than northern troops southern soldiers spoke of their cause in the language of freedom.
we are fighting for our liberty wrote one volunteer without any sense of contradiction against tyrants of the north.
who are determined to destroy slavery but public disaffection eventually became an even more serious problem for the confederacy than for the union.
even as it waged a desperate struggle for independence the south found itself increasingly divided.
one grievance was the draft.
like the union the confederacy allowed individuals to provide a substitute.
because of the accelerating disintegration of slavery it also exempted one white male for every twenty slaves on a plantation thus releasing many overseers and planters sons from service.
the twenty negro provision convinced many yeomen that the struggle for southern independence had become a rich mans war and a poor mans fight economic problems economic deprivation also sparked disaffection.
as the blockade tightened areas of the confederacy came under union occupation and production by a drawing by langdon cheves iii the teenage grandson of a prominent south carolina political leader depicts a confederate killing a yankee officer.
14 a new birth of freedom the civil war 1861 1865 an engraving in the new york illustrated news depicts the bread riot that took place in mobile alabama in the fall of 1863 the confederate nation slaves declined shortages arose of essential commodities such as salt corn and meat.
the war left countless farms plantations businesses and railroads in ruins.
the economic crisis which stood in glaring contrast to the norths boom was an unavoidable result of the war.
but confederate policies exaggerated its effects.
war requires sacrifice and civilian support for war depends in part on the belief that sacrifice is being fairly shared.
many non slaveholders however became convinced that they were bearing an unfair share of the wars burdens.
like the union the confederacy borrowed heavily to finance the war.
unlike federal lawmakers however the planter dominated confederate congress proved unwilling to levy heavy taxes that planters would have to pay.
it relied on paper money of which it issued 1 5 billion far more than the norths greenbacks.
congress also authorized military officers to seize farm goods to supply the army paying with increasingly worthless confederate money.
small farmers deeply resented this practice known as impressment the rebel army treated us a heap worse than union general william t sherman did a georgia farmer later recalled.
i had hogs and a mule and a horse and they took them all numerous yeoman families many of whom had gone to war to preserve their economic independence sank into poverty and debt.
food riots broke out in many places including richmond virginia and mobile alabama where in 1863 large crowds of women plundered army food supplies.
in 1862 joshua b moore a slaveholder in northern alabama commented on how slavery threatened the confederate war effort men who have no interest in it he wrote are not going to fight through a long war to save it never.
they will tire of it and quit as the war progressed desertion became what one officer called a crying evil for the southern armies.
by the wars end more than 100 000 men had deserted almost entirely from among the poorest class of nonslaveholders whose labor is indispensable to the daily support of their families men another official noted cannot be expected to fight for the government that permits their wives and children to starve southern unionists by 1864 organized peace movements had appeared in several southern states and secret societies such as the heroes of america were actively promoting disaffection.
confederate military tribunals imprisoned hundreds of unionists.
others were violently driven from their homes and a few were executed by the army or civilian authorities.
but southerners loyal to the union made a significant contribution to northern victory.
by the end of the war an estimated 50 000 white southerners had fought in the union armies.
how did the war effort and leadership problems affect the society and economy of the confederacy.
5 7 1 one of the most celebrated union heroes of the war was elizabeth van lew of richmond who had persuaded her mother to free the familys slaves when her father died in 1843 during the war she frequently visited libby prison in the confederate capital bringing supplies to union prisoners of war and helping some of them to escape.
with the aid of mary elizabeth bowser a former slave of the van lew family who worked as a servant in the southern white house van lew passed information about confederate plans to union forces.
women and the confederacy even more than in the north the war placed unprecedented burdens on southern white women.
left alone on farms and plantations they were often forced to manage business affairs and discipline slaves previously the responsibility of men.
as in the north women mobilized to support soldiers in the field and stepped out of their traditional sphere to run commercial establishments and work in arms factories.
in richmond government girls staffed many of the clerkships in the new confederate bureaucracy.
rose greenhow the widow of a former american diplomat headed an espionage ring in washington d c that passed valuable information about union troop movements to the confederacy early in the war.
even after her arrest and jailing she managed to smuggle out intelligence until she was exiled to richmond in 1862 jefferson davis rewarded greenhow with 2 500 for her services.
southern womens self sacrificing devotion to the cause became legendary.
but as the war went on and the death toll mounted increasing numbers of women came to believe that the goal of independence was not worth the cost.
the growing disaffection of southern white women conveyed in letters to loved ones at the front contributed to the decline in civilian morale and encouraged desertion from the army.
black soldiers for the confederacy the growing shortage of white manpower eventually led confederate authorities to a decision no one could have foreseen when the war began they authorized the arming of slaves to fight for the south.
as early as september 1863 a mississippi newspaper had argued for freeing and enlisting able bodied black men.
let them it wrote be declared free placed in the ranks and told to fight for their homes and country but many slaveholders fiercely resisted this idea and initially the confederate senate rejected it.
not until march 1865 after robert e lee had endorsed the plan did the confederate congress authorize the arming of slaves.
the war ended before the recruitment of black soldiers actually began.
but the confederate army did employ numerous blacks nearly all of them slaves as laborers.
this later led to some confusion over whether blacks actually fought for the confederacy apart from a handful who passed for white none in fact did.
but the souths decision to raise black troops illustrates how the war undermined not only slavery but also the proslavery ideology.
the day you make soldiers of them is the beginning of the end of the revolution declared howell cobb a georgia planter and politician.
if slaves make good soldiers our whole theory of slavery is wrong c h.
14 a new birth of freedom the civil war 1861 1865 turning points turning points gettysburg and vicksburg despite the accelerating demise of slavery and the decline of morale in the south the wars outcome remained very much in doubt for much of its third and fourth years.
in april 1863 fighting joe hooker who had succeeded ambrose e burnside as the union commander in the east brought the army of the potomac into central virginia to confront lee.
outnumbered two to one lee repelled hookers attack at chancellorsville although he lost his ablest lieutenant stonewall jackson mistakenly killed by fire from his own soldiers.
lee now gambled on another invasion of the north although his strategic objective remains unclear.
perhaps he believed a defeat on its own territory would destroy the morale of the northern army and public.
in any event the two armies with union soldiers now under the command of in july 1863 the union won major victories at gettysburg and vicksburg.
l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l georgia l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l new orleans florida gulf of mexico l hooker l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l atl anti c o cean l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l alabama south carolina l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l ll l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l north carolina l l l l l l washington d c l chickamauga september 1863 l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l grant l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l virginia l grant l l l l l r l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l jackson l missis sip pi l l l l l l l l l l l l l port hudson july 1863 l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l louisiana l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l chattanooga november 1863 l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l vicksburg july 4 1863 l l l tennessee nashville l l chancellorsville may 1 4 1863 l l l kentucky.
l l l mississippi l l l pp i r s si l l l l l l l l l arkansas lee l l l r oh io louisville l l maryland delaware l l l west virginia l l memphis meade l l missouri iss i l l l m l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l new jersey gettysburg july 1 3 1863 l l l l l l indiana l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l ohio l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l pennsylvania illinois mi ssou ri r l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l war l civil l l l the 200 miles 200 kilometers confederate victory union victory confederate advance union advance confederate states union states what were the military and political turning points of the war.
general george g meade met at gettysburg pennsylvania on the first three days of july 1863 with 165 000 troops involved gettysburg remains the largest battle ever fought on the north american continent.
lee found himself in the unusual position of confronting entrenched union forces.
after two days of failing to dislodge them he decided to attack the center of the union line.
on july 3 confederate forces led by major general george e picketts crack division marched across an open field toward union forces.
withering artillery and rifle fire met the charge and most of picketts soldiers never reached union lines.
of the 14 000 men who made the advance the flower of lees army fewer than half returned.
later remembered as the high tide of the confederacy picketts charge was also lees greatest blunder.
his army retreated to virginia never again to set foot on northern soil.
on the same day that lee began his retreat from gettysburg the union achieved a significant victory in the west.
late in 1862 grant had moved into mississippi toward the city of vicksburg.
from its heights defended by miles of trenches and earthworks the confederacy commanded the central mississippi river.
when direct attacks failed as did an attempt to divert the river by digging a canal grant launched a siege.
on july 4 1863 vicksburg surrendered and with it john c pembertons army of 30 000 men a loss the confederacy could ill afford.
the entire mississippi valley now lay in union hands.
the simultaneous defeats at gettysburg and vicksburg dealt a heavy blow to southern morale.
today absolute ruin seems our portion one official wrote in his diary.
the confederacy totters to its destruction nearly two years however would pass before the war ended.
brought east to take command of union forces grant in 1864 began a war of attrition against lees army in virginia.
that is he was willing to accept high numbers of casualties knowing that the north could replace its manpower losses while the south could not.
grant understood that to bring the norths manpower advantage into play he must attack continuously all along the line thereby preventing the enemy from concentrating its forces or retreating to safety after an engagement.
in may 1864 the 115 000 man army of the potomac crossed the rapidan river to do battle with lees forces in virginia.
a month of the wars bloodiest fighting followed.
grant and lee first encountered each other in the wilderness a wild shrub covered region where one participant recalled it was as though christian men had turned to fiends and hell itself had usurped the place of earth grants army suffered 18 000 casualties while lees far smaller forces incurred 7 500 previous union generals had broken off engagements after losses of this magnitude.
but grant continued to press forward attacking again at spotsylvania and then at cold harbor.
at the end of six weeks of fighting grants casualties stood at 60 000 almost the size of lees entire army while lee had lost 30 000 men.
the sustained fighting in virginia was a turning point in modern warfare.
with daily combat and a fearsome casualty toll it had far more in common with the trench warfare of world war i discussed in chapter 20 previously associated with intellectuals like horace kallen and the self defense of ethnic and catholic communities against enforced americanization.
we are the only americans who take them into our organization as equals wrote labor organizer rose pesotta referring to the mexicanamericans who flocked to the cannery and agricultural workers union.
popular front culture presented a heroic but not uncritical picture of the countrys past.
martha grahams modern dance masterpiece american visions of freedom americans all immigrants all.
an image from a brochure that accompanied a twenty six week government sponsored radio series 1938 1939 celebrating the history of various immigrant groups and their contributions to american society.
one week was devoted to black americans.
the map highlights the distribution of members of racial and ethnic minorities throughout the country and suggests some of their economic contributions.
questions 1 what does this map suggest about how the government was trying to shape public opinion during the 1930s.
2 how does the picture of american society presented here differ from the governments approach during world war i.
21 the new deal 1932 1940 a new conception of america a dorothea lange photograph of a sharecropper and his family outside their modest home.
document 1938 an embodiment of popular front aesthetics with its emphasis on americas folk traditions and multi ethnic heritage centered its account of history on the declaration of independence and the gettysburg address.
yet graham did not neglect what her narrator called things we are ashamed of including the dispossession of the indians and the plight of the unemployed.
grahams answer to hector st john de crvecoeurs old question what then is the american this new man was that americans were not only middle class anglo saxons but also blacks immigrants and the working class.
earl robinsons song ballad for americans a typical expression of popular front culture that celebrated the religious racial and ethnic diversity of american society became a national hit and was performed in 1940 at the republican national convention.
challenging the color line it was fitting that ballad for americans reached the top of the charts in a version performed by the magnificent black singer paul robeson.
popular front culture moved well beyond new deal liberalism in condemning racism as incompatible with true americanism.
in the 1930s groups like the american jewish committee and the national conference of christians and jews actively promoted ethnic and religious tolerance defining pluralism as the american way but whether in harlem or east los angeles the communist party was the eras only predominantly white organization to make fighting racism a top priority.
the communists declared charles h houston the naacps chief lawyer made it impossible for any aspirant to negro leadership to advocate less than full economic political and social equality communist influence spread even to the south.
the communistdominated international labor defense mobilized popular support for black defendants victimized by a racist criminal justice system.
it helped to make h o w d i d t h e po p u l a r f r o n t i n f l u e n c e a m e r i c a n c u l t u r e i n t h e 1 9 3 0 s.
a scene from the emancipation episode of martha grahams american document photographed by barbara morgan.
the dancers are martha graham and eric hawkins.
the scottsboro case an international cause clbre.
the case revolved around nine young black men arrested for the rape of two white women in alabama in 1931 despite the weakness of the evidence against the scottsboro boys and the fact that one of the two accusers recanted alabama authorities three times put them on trial and three times won convictions.
landmark supreme court decisions overturned the first two verdicts and established legal principles that greatly expanded the definition of civil liberties that defendants have a constitutional right to effective legal representation and that states cannot systematically exclude blacks from juries.
but the court allowed the third set of convictions to stand which led to prison sentences for five of the defendants.
in 1937 a defense lawyer worked out a deal whereby alabama authorities released nearly all the defendants on parole although the last of the scottsboro boys did not leave prison until thirteen years had passed.
despite considerable resistance from white workers determined to preserve their monopoly of skilled positions and access to promotions the cio welcomed black members and advocated the passage of antilynching laws and the return of voting rights to southern blacks.
the cio brought large numbers of black industrial workers into the labor movement for the first time and ran extensive educational campaigns to persuade white workers to recognize the interests they shared with their black counterparts.
black workers many of them traditionally hostile to unions because of their long experience of exclusion responded with enthusiasm to cio organizing efforts.
the union offered the promise of higher wages dignity in the workplace and an end to the arbitrary power of often racist foremen.
ed mcrea a white cio organizer in memphis tennessee reported that he had little difficulty persuading black workers of the value of unionization you didnt have any trouble explaining this to blacks with the kinds of oppression and conditions they had.
it was a question of freedom ch.
21 the new deal 1932 1940 labor the scottsboro boys flanked by two prison guards with their lawyer samuel liebowitz.
a new conception of america and civil liberties another central element of popular front public culture was its mobilization for civil liberties especially the right of labor to organize.
the struggle to launch industrial unions encountered sweeping local restrictions on freedom of speech as well as repression by private and public police forces.
nationwide publicity about the wave of violence directed against the southern tenant farmers union in the south and the cio in industrial communities in the north elevated the rights of labor to a central place in discussions of civil liberties.
the american civil liberties union primarily concerned in the 1920s with governmental repression by 1934 concluded that the masters of property posed as great a danger to freedom of speech and assembly as political authorities.
beginning in 1936 a senate subcommittee headed by robert m la follette jr exposed the methods employers used to combat unionization including spies and private police forces.
workers had no liberties at all an employee of general motors wrote to the committee from saginaw michigan.
the extensive violence unleashed against strikers in californias cotton and lettuce fields made that state the committee report concluded seem more like a european dictatorship than part of the united states.
labor militancy helped to produce an important shift in the understanding of civil liberties.
previously conceived of as individual rights that must be protected against infringement by the government the concept now expanded to include violations of free speech and assembly by powerful private groups.
as a result just as the federal government emerged as a guarantor of economic security it also became a protector of freedom of expression.
by the eve of world war ii civil liberties had assumed a central place in the new deal understanding of freedom.
in 1939 attorney general frank murphy established a civil liberties unit in the department of justice.
for the first time in our history murphy wrote the president the full weight of the department will be thrown behind the effort to preserve in this country the blessings of liberty meanwhile the same supreme court that in 1937 relinquished its role as a judge of economic legislation moved to expand its authority over civil liberties.
the justices insisted that constitutional guarantees of free thought and expression were essential to nearly every other form of freedom and therefore deserved special protection by the courts.
thus civil liberties replaced liberty of contract as the judicial foundation of freedom.
in 1937 the court overturned on free speech grounds the conviction of angelo herndon a communist organizer jailed in georgia for inciting insurrection three years later it invalidated an alabama law that prohibited picketing in labor disputes.
since 1937 the large majority of state and national laws overturned by the courts have been those that infringe on civil liberties not the property rights of business.
the new appreciation of free expression was hardly universal.
in 1938 the house of representatives established an un american activities committee to investigate disloyalty.
its expansive definition of un american included communists labor radicals and the left of the democratic party and its hearings led to the dismissal of dozens of federal employees on charges of subversion.
two years later congress enacted the smith act which made it a federal crime to teach advocate or encourage the overthrow of the h o w d i d t h e po p u l a r f r o n t i n f l u e n c e a m e r i c a n c u l t u r e i n t h e 1 9 3 0 s.
government.
a similar pursuit of radical views took place at the state level.
the new york legislatures rapp coudert committee held sweeping hearings investigating subversive influences in new york citys public colleges resulting in the firing in 1941 of some sixty faculty members charged with communist sympathies.
the end of the new deal by then the new deal as an era of far reaching social reform had already begun to recede.
one reason was that more and more southern democrats were finding themselves at odds with roosevelts policies.
in 1938 the administration released a report on economic conditions in the south along with a letter by the president referring to the region as the nations no.
1 economic problem the document revealed that the south lagged far behind other parts of the country in industrialization and investment in education and public health.
its per capita income stood at half that of the rest of the nation.
also in 1938 a new generation of homegrown radicals southern new dealers black activists labor leaders communists even a few elected officials founded the southern conference for human welfare to work for unionization unemployment relief and racial justice.
until the late 1930s prominent southern democrats had been strong supporters of the new deal while at the same time working to shape legislation to allow for the local administration of relief and the exclusion of most black workers.
now southern business and political leaders feared that continuing federal intervention in their region would encourage unionization and upset race relations.
roosevelt concluded that the enactment of future new deal measures required a liberalization of the southern democratic party.
in 1938 he tried to persuade the regions voters to replace conservative congressmen with ones who would support his policies.
the souths small electorate dealt him a stinging rebuke.
in the north where the economic downturn the court packing plan and the upsurge of cio militancy alarmed many middle class voters republicans increased their congressional representation.
a period of political stalemate followed the congressional election of 1938 for many years a conservative coalition of southern democrats and northern republicans dominated congress.
further reform initiatives became almost impossible and congress moved to abolish existing ones beginning with the federal theater project which had alarmed conservatives because of the presence of radicals and homosexuals on its payroll.
congress repealed an earlier tax on corporate profits and rejected a proposed program of national medical insurance.
the administration moreover increasingly focused its attention on the storm gathering in europe.
even before december 1941 when the united states entered world war ii dr.
win the war as roosevelt put it had replaced dr.
new deal the new deal in american history given the scope of the economic calamity it tried to counter the new deal seems in many ways quite limited.
compared to later european welfare states social security remained restricted in scope and modest in cost.
21 the new deal 1932 1940 suggested reading new deal failed to address the problem of racial inequality which in some ways it actually worsened.
yet even as the new deal receded its substantial accomplishments remained.
it greatly expanded the federal governments role in the american economy and made it an independent force in relations between industry and labor.
the government told farmers what they could and could not plant required employers to deal with unions insured bank deposits regulated the stock market loaned money to home owners and provided payments to a majority of the elderly and unemployed.
it transformed the physical environment through hydroelectric dams reforestation projects rural electrification and the construction of innumerable public facilities.
it restored faith in democracy and made the government an institution directly experienced in americans daily lives and directly concerned with their welfare.
it redrew the map of american politics.
it helped to inspire and was powerfully influenced by a popular upsurge that recast the idea of freedom to include a public guarantee of economic security for ordinary citizens and that identified economic inequality as the greatest threat to american freedom.
one thing the new deal failed to do was generate sustained prosperity.
more than 15 percent of the workforce remained unemployed in 1940 only the mobilization of the nations resources to fight world war ii would finally end the great depression.
suggested reading books brinkley alan.
voices of protest huey long father coughlin and the great depression 1982.
an account of the political careers of two key figures of the new deal era and their influence on national events.
cohen lizabeth.
making a new deal industrial workers in chicago 1919 1939 1990.
describes how the assimilation of immigrants and their children paved the way for the creation of the new deal political coalition.
denning michael.
the cultural front the laboring of american culture in the twentieth century 1996.
a comprehensive account of the rise of cultural activity associated with the political left and the new deal.
dickstein morris.
dancing in the dark a cultural history of the great depression 2009.
a comprehensive survey of how the depression and new deal affected the arts in the united states.
goodman james.
stories of scottsboro 1994.
discusses how different participants viewed one of the most notorious legal cases of the 1930s.
hawley ellis w the new deal and the problem of monopoly a study in economic ambivalence 1966.
explores the changing approach toward concentrated economic power adopted by the roosevelt administration.
katznelson ira.
when affirmative action was white 2005.
an examination of the racial exclusion built into many new deal policies and their long term consequences.
kessler harris alice.
in pursuit of equity men women and the quest for economic citizenship in 20th century america 2001.
explores how assumptions regarding the proper roles of men and women helped to shape new deal measures such as social security.
suggested reading kirby jack t rural worlds lost the american south 1920 1960 1987.
traces the transformation of the south in these four decades with emphasis on how the new deal affected the southern states.
leuchtenberg william e franklin d roosevelt and the new deal 1932 1940 1963.
still the standard one volume account of roosevelts first two terms as president.
naison mark.
communists in harlem during the depression 1983.
examines the rise and decline of the communist party in a center of black life and its impact on the movement for racial justice.
phillips sarah t the land this nation conservation rural america and the new deal 2007.
examines new deal policies regarding agricultural development rural conservation and land use and its attempt to modernize and uplift rural life.
sanchez george.
becoming mexican american ethnicity culture and identity in chicano los angeles 1900 1945 1995.
a careful study of mexican americans in los angeles including their participation in the social unrest of the 1930s and the movement for deporting them during that decade.
sitkoff harvard.
a new deal for blacks the emergence of civil rights as a national issue 1978.
discusses the changing approach of the roosevelt administration toward black americans.
smith jason b building new deal liberalism the political economy of public works 2006.
places the great construction projects of the 1930s at the center of new deal economic policy.
sullivan patricia.
days of hope race and democracy in the new deal era 1996.
analyzes how the new deal inspired the emergence of a biracial movement for civil rights in the south.
worster donald.
dust bowl the southern plains in the 1930s 1979.
a social and environmental history of one of the key episodes in rural america during the 1930s.
zieger robert h the cio 1935 1955 1995.
a comprehensive history of the congress of industrial organizations the major labor group to emerge during the new deal.
websites america from the great depression to world war ii ammem fsowhome html fdr cartoon archive flint sit down strike new deal network c hapter r eview review questions 1 discuss how regional planning such as the tennessee valley authority and the columbia river project reflected broader changes in american life during the new deal.
2 what actions did president roosevelt and congress take to prevent the collapse of the banking system and reform its operations.
3 how did the actions of the aaa benefit many farmers injure others and provoke attacks by conservatives.
4 explain what labor did in the 1930s to rise from being slaves of the depression to secure economic freedom and industrial democracy for american workers.
5 how did the emphasis of the second new deal differ from the first new deal.
6 how did the entrenched power of southern conservatives limit women and blacks from enjoying the full benefits of the new deal.
7 analyze the effects of the indian reorganization act of 1934 on native americans.
8 explain how new deal programs contributed to the stigma of blacks as welfare dependent.
9 illustrate how labor militancy helped produce a shift in the legal understanding of civil liberties.
10 what were the major characteristics of liberalism by 1939.
freedom questions 1 how did the new deal make economic security a vital element of american freedom.
2 illustrate how fdr and the new deal repudiated the 1920s idea that liberty was based on unrestrained marketplace competition.
3 what did roosevelt mean when he said that for too many americans during the depression life was no longer free liberty no longer real.
4 describe how the popular front redefined both popular culture and the concept of the american people 5 how did the new deal link the idea of freedom to the expanding power of the national state.
study and review at key terms r e v i e w ta b l e public works revolution p 860 landmark new deal legislation bank holiday p 864 legislation date purpose federal deposit insurance corporation to insure deposits protecting customers against bank failures national recovery administration to bring business and labor together to establish standards for output prices and working conditions agricultural adjustment act to authorize the federal government to raise farm prices by setting production quotas civilian conservation corps sit down strike p 873 to employ young men to work on conservation projects share our wealth movement p 874 tennessee valley authority to supply hydroelectric power to the tennessee valley townsend plan p 875 works project administration to employ a significant number of blacks white collar workers professionals and artists social security to create a system of unemployment insurance old age pensions and aid to the disabled the elderly poor and families with dependent children wagner act to protect the rights of unions fair labor standards to set a minimum hourly wage and maximum hours of work the hundred days p 865 national recovery administration p 865 public works administration p 866 agricultural adjustment act p 867 dust bowl p 868 rural electrification agency p 876 works progress administration p 876 social security act p 877 court packing plan p 883 minimum wage laws p 883 indian new deal p 887 the popular front p 891 scottsboro boys p 895 smith act p 896 house un american activities committee p 897 c hapter 22 japan invades manchuria united states officially recognizes the soviet union 1935 neutrality acts passed by 1939 congress sino japanese war begins munich agreement germany invades poland draft established four freedoms speech lend lease act atlantic charter executive order 8802 henry luces the american century pearl harbor attacked office of war information established congress of racial equality core formed executive order 9066 battle of midway island wendell willkies one world zoot suit riots congress lifts chinese exclusion act detroit race riot d day smith v allwright gunnar myrdals an american dilemma friedrich a hayeks the road to serfdom bretton woods conference korematsu v united states gi bill of rights battle of the bulge yalta conference roosevelt dies harry truman becomes president v e day may atomic bombs dropped on japan v j day september fighting for the four freedoms world war ii 1941 1945 fighting world war ii the american dilemma good neighbors the road to war isolationism war in europe toward intervention pearl harbor the war in the pacific the war in europe patriotic assimilation the bracero program mexican american rights indians during the war asian americans in wartime japanese american internment blacks and the war blacks and military service birth of the civil rights movement the double v what the negro wants an american dilemma black internationalism the home front mobilizing for war business and the war labor in wartime fighting for the four freedoms freedom from want the office of war information the fifth freedom women at war women at work visions of postwar freedom toward an american century the way of life of free men an economic bill of rights the road to serfdom the end of the war the most terrible weapon the dawn of the atomic age the nature of the war planning the postwar world yalta and bretton woods the united nations peace but not harmony one of the patriotic war posters issued by the office of war information during world war ii linking modern day soldiers with patriots of the american revolution as fighters for freedom a major theme of government efforts to mobilize support for the war.
the caption on the original poster states americans will always fight for liberty f ocus q uestions what steps led to american participation in world war ii.
how did the united states mobilize economic resources and promote popular support for the war effort.
what visions of americas postwar role began to emerge during the war.
how did american minorities face threats to their freedom at home and abroad during world war ii.
how did the end of the war begin to shape the postwar world.
l b y far the most popular works of art produced during world war ii were paintings of the four freedoms by the magazine illustrator norman rockwell.
in his state of the union address delivered before congress on january 6 1941 president roosevelt spoke eloquently of a future world order founded on the essential human freedoms freedom of speech freedom of worship freedom from want and freedom from fear.
the four freedoms became roosevelts favorite statement of allied aims.
at various times he compared them with the ten commandments the magna carta and the emancipation proclamation.
they embodied roosevelt declared in a 1942 radio address the rights of men of every creed and every race wherever they live and made clear the crucial difference between ourselves and the enemies we face today rockwells paintings succeeded in linking the four freedoms with the defense of traditional american values.
words like freedom or liberty declared one wartime advertisement draw close to us only when we break them down into the homely fragments of daily life this insight helps to explain rockwells astonishing popularity.
born in new york city in 1894 rockwell had lived in the new york area until 1939 when he and his family moved to arlington vermont where they could enjoy as he put it the clean simple country life as opposed to the complicated world of the city drawing on the lives of his vermont neighbors rockwell translated the four freedoms into images of real people situated in small town america.
each of the paintings focuses on an instantly recognizable situation.
an ordinary citizen rises to speak at a town meeting members of different religious groups are seen at prayer a family enjoys a thanksgiving dinner a mother and father stand over a sleeping child.
the four freedoms paintings first appeared in the saturday evening post early in 1943 letters of praise poured in to the magazines editors.
the government produced and sold millions of reprints.
the paintings toured the country as the centerpiece of the four freedoms show which included theatrical presentations parades and other events aimed at persuading americans to purchase war bonds.
by the end of its tour the four freedoms show had raised 133 million.
even as rockwell invoked images of small town life to rally americans to the war effort however the country experienced changes as deep as at any time in its history.
many of the economic trends and social movements that we associate with the last half of the twentieth century had their roots in the war years.
as during world war i but on a far larger scale wartime mobilization expanded the size and scope of government and energized the economy.
the gross national product more than doubled and unemployment disappeared as war production finally w h a t s t e p s l e d t o a m e r i c a n p a r t i c i p a t i o n i n wo r l d wa r i i.
conquered the depression.
the demand for labor drew millions of women into the workforce and sent a tide of migrants from rural america to the industrial cities of the north and west permanently altering the nations social geography.
some 30 million americans moved during the war half going into military service and half taking up new jobs.
world war ii gave the country a new and lasting international role and greatly strengthened the idea that american security was global in scope and could only be protected by the worldwide triumph of core american values.
government military spending sparked the economic development of the south and west laying the foundation for the rise of the modern sunbelt.
the war created a close link between big business and a militarized federal government a military industrial complex as president dwight d eisenhower would later call it that long survived the end of fighting.
world war ii also redrew the boundaries of american nationality.
in contrast to world war i the government recognized the new a draft of fdrs four freedoms speech of 1941 shows how he added the words everywhere in the world 8 and 13 lines down indicating that the four freedoms should be truly international ideals.
22 fighting for the four freedoms the immensely popular office of war information poster reproducing norman rockwells paintings of the four freedoms president franklin d roosevelts shorthand for american purposes in world war ii.
fighting world war ii immigrants of the early twentieth century and their children as loyal americans.
black americans second class status assumed for the first time since reconstruction a prominent place on the nations political agenda.
but toleration had its limits.
with the united states at war with japan the federal government removed more than 100 000 japanese americans the majority of them american citizens from their homes and placed them in internment camps.
as a means of generating support for the struggle the four freedoms provided a crucial language of national unity.
but this unity obscured divisions within american society that the war in some ways intensified divisions reflected in debates over freedom.
while some americans looked forward to a worldwide new deal others envisioned free enterprise replacing government intervention in the economy.
the war gave birth to the modern civil rights movement but strengthened the commitment of many white americans to maintain the existing racial order.
the movement of women into the labor force challenged traditional gender relations but most men and not a few women longed for the restoration of family life with a male breadwinner and a wife responsible for the home.
even rockwells popular paintings suggested some of the ambiguities within the idea of freedom.
with the exception of freedom of speech which depicts civic democracy in action the paintings emphasized private situations.
the message seemed to be that americans were fighting to preserve freedoms enjoyed individually or within the family rather than in the larger public world.
this emphasis on freedom as an element of private life would become more and more prominent in postwar america.
f i g h t i n g w o r l d wa r i i good neighbors during the 1930s with americans preoccupied by the economic crisis international relations played only a minor role in public affairs.
from the outset of his administration nonetheless fdr embarked on a number of departures in foreign policy.
in 1933 hoping to stimulate american trade he exchanged ambassadors with the soviet union whose government his republican predecessors had stubbornly refused to recognize.
roosevelt also formalized a policy initiated by herbert hoover by which the united states repudiated the right to intervene militarily in the internal affairs of latin american countries.
this good neighbor policy as it was called had mixed results.
during the 1930s the united states withdrew its w h a t s t e p s l e d t o a m e r i c a n p a r t i c i p a t i o n i n wo r l d wa r i i.
troops from haiti and nicaragua.
fdr accepted cubas repeal of the platt amendment discussed in chapter 1 it was quickly followed by the founding of quebec by france in 1608 and henry hudsons exploration in 1609 of the river that today bears his name leading to the founding of the dutch colony of new netherland.
in 1610 the spanish established santa fe as the capital of new mexico.
more than a century after the voyages of columbus the european penetration of north america had finally begun in earnest.
it occurred from many directions at once from east to west at the atlantic coast north to south along the st lawrence and mississippi rivers and south to north in what is now the american southwest.
english north america in the seventeenth century was a place where entrepreneurs sought to make fortunes religious minorities hoped to worship without governmental interference and to create societies based on biblical teachings and aristocrats dreamed of re creating a vanished world of feudalism.
those who drew up blueprints for settlement expected to reproduce the social structure with which they were familiar with all its hierarchy and inequality.
the lower orders would occupy the what were the main contours of english colonization in the seventeenth century.
same less than fully free status as in england subject to laws regulating their labor and depriving them of a role in politics.
but for ordinary men and women emigration offered an escape from lives of deprivation and inequality.
no man wrote john smith an early leader of jamestown will go from england to have less freedom in america.
the charter of the virginia company granted by james i in 1606 promised that colonists would enjoy all liberties of those residing in our realm of england the settlers of english america came to enjoy greater rights than colonists of other empires including the power to choose members of elected assemblies protections of the common law such as the right to trial by jury and access to land the key to economic independence.
many degrees of freedom coexisted in seventeenth century north america from the slave stripped completely of liberty to the independent landowner who enjoyed a full range of rights.
during a lifetime a person might well occupy more than one place on this spectrum.
the settlers success however rested on depriving native americans of their land and in some colonies on importing large numbers of african slaves as laborers.
freedom and lack of freedom expanded together in seventeenth century america.
england and the new world unifying the english nation although john cabot sailing from england in 1497 had been the first european since the vikings to encounter the north american continent english exploration and colonization would wait for many years.
as the case of spain suggests early empire building was in large part an extension of the consolidation of national power in europe.
but during the sixteenth century england was a second rate power racked by internal disunity.
henry vii who assumed the throne in 1485 had to unify the kingdom after a long period of civil war.
his son and successor henry viii launched the reformation in england.
when the pope refused to annul his marriage to catherine of aragon henry severed the nation from the catholic church.
in its place he established the church of england or anglican church with himself at the head.
decades of religious strife followed.
under henrys son edward vi who became king at the age of ten in 1547 the regents who governed the country persecuted catholics.
when edward died in 1553 his half sister mary became queen.
mary temporarily restored catholicism as the state religion and executed a number of protestants.
her rule was so unpopular that reconciliation with rome became impossible.
marys successor elizabeth i reigned 1558 1603 restored the anglican ascendancy and executed more than 100 catholic priests.
mary tudor the queen who tried to restore catholicism in england as painted in 1554 by antonio moro who made numerous portraits of european royalty.
he depicts her as a woman of firm determination.
2 beginnings of english america 1607 1660 england and england and the new world ireland englands long struggle to conquer and pacify ireland which lasted well into the seventeenth century absorbed money and energy that might have been directed toward the new world.
in subduing ireland whose catholic population was deemed a threat to the stability of protestant rule in england the government employed a variety of approaches including military conquest the slaughter of civilians the seizure of land and introduction of english economic practices and the dispatch of large numbers of settlers.
rather than seeking to absorb the irish into english society the english excluded the native population from a territory of settlement known as the pale where the colonists created their own social order.
just as the reconquest of spain from the moors established patterns that would be repeated in spanish new world colonization the methods used in ireland anticipated policies england would undertake in america.
some sixteenth century english writers directly compared the allegedly barbaric wild irish with american indians.
like the indians the irish supposedly confused liberty and license.
they refused to respect english authority and resisted conversion to english protestantism.
the early english colonies in north america and the west indies were known as plantations that is communities planted from abroad among an alien population the same term was originally used to describe protestant settlements in ireland.
england and north america not until the reign of elizabeth i did the english turn their attention to north america although sailors and adventurers still showed more interest in raiding spanish cities and treasure fleets in the caribbean than establishing settlements.
the government granted charters grants of exclusive rights and privileges to sir humphrey gilbert and sir walter raleigh authorizing them to establish colonies in north america at their own expense.
with little or no support from the crown both ventures failed.
gilbert who had earned a reputation for brutality in the irish wars by murdering civilians and burning their crops established a short lived settlement on newfoundland in 1582 three years later raleigh dispatched a fleet of five ships with some 100 colonists many of them his personal servants to set up a base on roanoke island off the north carolina coast partly to facilitate continuing raids on spanish shipping.
but the colonists mostly young men under military leadership abandoned the venture in 1586 and returned to england.
a second group of 100 settlers composed of families who hoped to establish a permanent colony was dispatched that year.
their fate remains a mystery.
when a ship bearing supplies arrived in 1590 the sailors found the colony abandoned with the inhabitants evidently having moved to live among the indians.
the word croaton the indian name for a nearby island or tribe had been carved on a tree.
raleigh by now nearly bankrupt lost his enthusiasm for colonization.
to establish a successful colony it seemed clear would require more planning and economic resources than any individual could provide.
what were the main contours of english colonization in the seventeenth century.
spreading protestantism as in the case of spain national glory profit and religious mission merged in early english thinking about the new world.
the reformation heightened the english governments sense of catholic spain as its mortal enemy a belief reinforced in 1588 when a spanish naval armada unsuccessfully attempted to invade the british isles.
just as spain justified its empire in part by claiming to convert indians to catholicism england expressed its imperial ambitions in terms of an obligation to liberate the new world from the tyranny of the pope.
by the late sixteenth century anticatholicism had become deeply ingrained in english popular culture.
reports of the atrocities of spanish rule were widely circulated.
english translations of bartolom de las casass writings appeared during elizabeths reign.
one using a common protestant term for the catholic church bore the title popery truly displayed although atrocities were hardly confined to any one nation as englands own conduct in ireland demonstrated the idea that the empire of catholic spain was uniquely murderous and tyrannical enabled the english to describe their own imperial ambitions in the language of freedom.
in a discourse concerning western planting written in 1584 at the request of sir walter raleigh the protestant minister and scholar richard hakluyt listed twenty three reasons why queen elizabeth i should support the establishment of colonies.
among them was the idea that english settlements would strike a blow against spains empire and therefore form part of a divine mission to rescue the new world and its inhabitants from the influence of catholicism and tyranny.
tied as slaves under spanish rule he wrote the indians of the new world were crying out to us.
to come and help they would welcome english settlers and revolt clean from the spaniard crying with one voice liberta liberta as desirous of liberty and freedom england would repeat much of spains behavior in the new world.
but the english always believed that they were unique.
in their case empire and freedom would go hand in hand.
motives for colonization but bringing freedom to indians was hardly the only argument hakluyt marshaled as england prepared to step onto the world stage.
national power and glory were never far from the minds of the eras propagandists of empire.
through colonization hakluyt and other writers argued england a relatively minor power in europe at the end of the sixteenth century could come to rival the wealth and standing of great nations like spain and france.
other considerations also weighed heavily in their arguments.
spanish claims to the south and french explorations in the area of present day canada left to england the middle part of north america a region deemed worthless by other powers because it lacked an engraving by theodor de bry depicts colonists hunting and fishing in virginia.
promotional images such as this emphasized the abundance of the new world and suggested that colonists could live familiar lives there.
2 beginnings of english america 1607 1660 england and the new world precious metals and was unsuitable for sugar cultivation the two paths to riches in early american empires.
this did not however prevent promoters of colonization from painting a portrait of a fertile land of great plenty its animals were supposedly so abundant and its climate and soil so favorable that colonists could enrich the mother country and themselves by providing english consumers with goods now supplied by foreigners and opening a new market for english products.
unlike early adventurers such as raleigh who thought of wealth in terms of deposits of gold hakluyt insisted that trade would be the basis of englands empire.
the william hogarths well known engraving gin lane 1751 offers a satiric glimpse of lower class life in london.
hogarth was particularly concerned about the abuse of alcohol.
a drunken woman allows her baby to fall from her arms while on the left a man and his wife pawn their coats tools and cooking utensils for money for liquor.
social crisis equally important america could be a refuge for englands surplus population benefiting mother country and emigrants alike.
the late sixteenth century was a time of social crisis in england with economic growth unable to keep pace with the needs of a population that grew from 3 million in 1550 to about 4 million in 1600 for many years english peasants had enjoyed a secure hold on their plots of land.
but in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries landlords sought profits by raising sheep for the expanding trade in wool and introducing more modern farming practices such as crop rotation.
they evicted small farmers and fenced in commons previously open to all.
while many landlords farmers and town merchants benefited from the enclosure movement as this process was called thousands of persons were uprooted from the land.
many flooded into englands cities where wages fell dramatically.
others denounced by authorities as rogues vagabonds and vagrants wandered the roads in search of work.
their situation grew worse as prices throughout europe rose buoyed by the influx of gold and silver from the mines of latin america into spain.
a pioneering study of english society conducted at the end of the seventeenth century estimated that half the population lived at or below the poverty line.
the cost of poor relief fell mainly on local communities.
all our towns wrote the puritan leader john winthrop in 1629 shortly before leaving england for massachusetts complain of the burden of poor people and strive by all means to rid any such as they have england he added somberly grows weary of her inhabitants the government struggled to deal with this social crisis.
under henry viii those without jobs could be whipped branded forced into the army or hanged.
during elizabeths reign a law authorized justices of the peace to regulate hours and wages and put the unemployed to work.
vagrants were required to accept any job offered to them and could be punished if they sought to change employment.
another solution was to encourage the unruly poor to leave for the new world.
richard hakluyt wrote of the advantages of settling in america such needy people of our country who now what were the main contours of english colonization in the seventeenth century.
trouble the commonwealth and.
commit outrageous offenses as colonists they could become productive citizens contributing to the nations wealth.
masterless men as early as 1516 when thomas more published utopia a novel set on an imaginary island in the western hemisphere the image of america as a place where settlers could escape from the economic inequalities of europe had been circulating in england.
this ideal coincided with the goals of ordinary englishmen.
although authorities saw wandering or unemployed masterless men as a danger to society and tried to force them to accept jobs popular attitudes viewed economic dependence as itself a form of servitude.
working for wages was widely associated with servility and loss of liberty.
only those who controlled their own labor could be regarded as truly free.
indeed popular tales and ballads romanticized the very vagabonds highwaymen and even beggars denounced by the propertied and powerful since despite their poverty they at least enjoyed freedom from wage work.
the image of the new world as a unique place of opportunity where the english laboring classes could regain economic independence by acquiring land and where even criminals would enjoy a second chance was deeply rooted from the earliest days of settlement.
john smith had scarcely landed in virginia in 1607 when he wrote that in america every man may be the master and owner of his own labor and land in 1623 the royal letter approving the recruitment of emigrants to new england promised that any settler could easily become lord of 200 acres of land an amount far beyond the reach of most englishmen.
the main lure for emigrants from england to the new world was not so much riches in gold and silver as the promise of independence that followed from owning land.
economic freedom and the possibility of passing it on to ones children attracted the largest number of english colonists.
the coming of the english english emigrants seventeenth century north america was an unstable and dangerous environment.
diseases decimated indian and settler populations alike.
colonies were racked by religious political and economic tensions and drawn into imperial wars and conflict with indians.
they remained dependent on the mother country for protection and economic assistance.
without sustained immigration most settlements would have collapsed.
with a population of between 4 million and 5 million about half that of spain and a quarter of that of france england produced a far larger number of men women and children willing to brave the dangers of emigration to the new world.
in large part this was because economic conditions in england were so bad.
between 1607 and 1700 more than half a million people left england.
a pamphlet published in 1609 promoting emigration to virginia.
2 beginnings of english america 1607 1660 the coming of the english north america was not the destination of the majority of these emigrants.
approximately 180 000 settled in ireland and about the same number migrated to the west indies where the introduction of sugar cultivation promised riches for those who could obtain land.
nonetheless the population of englands mainland colonies quickly outstripped that of their rivals.
the chesapeake area where the tobacco producing colonies of virginia and maryland developed a constant demand for cheap labor received about 120 000 settlers most of whom landed before 1660 new england attracted 21 000 emigrants nearly all of them arriving before 1640 in the second part of the seventeenth century the middle colonies new york new jersey and pennsylvania attracted about 23 000 settlers.
although the arrivals to new england and the middle colonies included many families the majority of newcomers were young single men from the bottom rungs of english society who had little to lose by emigrating.
many had already moved from place to place in england.
colonial settlement was in many ways an extension of the migration at home of an increasingly mobile english population.
indentured an indenture a contract for labor for a period of years signed by james mahoney who emigrated from ireland to north america in 1723 servants settlers who could pay for their own passage government officials clergymen merchants artisans landowning farmers and members of the lesser nobility arrived in america as free persons.
most quickly acquired land.
in the seventeenth century however nearly two thirds of english settlers came as indentured servants who voluntarily surrendered their freedom for a specified time usually five to seven years in exchange for passage to america.
like slaves servants could be bought and sold could not marry without the permission of their owner were subject to physical punishment and saw their obligation to labor enforced by the courts.
to ensure uninterrupted work by female servants the law lengthened the term of their indenture if they became pregnant.
many negroes are better used complained elizabeth sprigs an indentured servant in maryland who described being forced to work day and night.
then tied up and whipped but unlike slaves servants could look forward to a release from bondage.
assuming they survived their period of labor servants would receive a payment known as freedom dues and become free members of society.
for most of the seventeenth century however indentured servitude was not a guaranteed route to economic autonomy.
given the high death rate many servants did not live to the end of their terms.
freedom dues were sometimes so meager that they did not enable recipients to acquire land.
many servants found the reality of life in the new world less appealing than they had anticipated.
employers constantly complained of servants running away not working diligently or being unruly all manifestations of what one commentator called their fondness for freedom land and liberty access to land played many roles in seventeenth century america.
land english settlers believed was the basis of liberty.
owning land gave men what obstacles did the english settlers in the chesapeake overcome.
control over their own labor and in most colonies the right to vote.
the promise of immediate access to land lured free settlers and freedom dues that included land persuaded potential immigrants to sign contracts as indentured servants.
land in america also became a way for the king to reward relatives and allies.
each colony was launched with a huge grant of land from the crown either to a company or to a private individual known as a proprietor.
some grants if taken literally stretched from the atlantic ocean to the pacific.
land was a source of wealth and power for colonial officials and their favorites who acquired enormous estates.
without labor however land would have little value.
since emigrants did not come to america intending to work the land of others except temporarily in the case of indentured servants the very abundance of free land eventually led many property owners to turn to slaves as a workforce.
englishmen and indians land in north america of course was already occupied.
and the arrival of english settlers presented the native inhabitants of eastern north america with the greatest crisis in their history.
unlike the spanish english colonists did not call themselves conquerors they wanted land not dominion over the existing population.
they were chiefly interested in displacing the indians and settling on their land not intermarrying with them organizing their labor or making them subjects of the crown.
the marriage between john rolfe and pocahontas the daughter of virginias leading chief discussed below is well known but almost unique.
no such mixed marriage took place in seventeenthcentury massachusetts and only two more in virginia before the legislature outlawed the practice in 1691 the english exchanged goods with the native population and indians often traveled through colonial settlements.
fur traders on the frontiers of settlement sometimes married indian women partly as a way of gaining access to native societies and the kin networks essential to economic relationships.
most english settlers however remained obstinately separate from their indian neighbors.
despite their insistence that indians had no real claim to the land since they did not cultivate or improve it most colonial authorities in practice recognized indians title based on occupancy.
they acquired land by purchase often in treaties forced upon indians after they had suffered military defeat.
colonial courts recorded numerous sales of indian land to governments or individual settlers.
to keep the peace some colonial governments tried to prevent the private seizure or purchase of indian lands or they declared certain areas off limits to settlers.
but these measures were rarely enforced and ultimately proved ineffective.
an engraving by john white of an indian village surrounded by a stockade.
2 beginnings of english america 1607 1660 the coming of the english new settlers and freed servants sought land for themselves and those who established families in america needed land for their children.
the seventeenth century was marked by recurrent warfare between colonists and indians.
these conflicts generated a strong feeling of superiority among the colonists and left them intent on maintaining the real and imagined boundaries separating the two peoples.
in the initial stages of settlement english colonists often established towns on sites indians had cleared planted indian crops and adopted indian technology such as snowshoes and canoes which were valuable for travel in the american wilderness.
but over time the english displaced the original inhabitants more thoroughly than any other european empire.
the the only known contemporary portrait of a new england indian this 1681 painting by an unnamed artist was long thought to represent ninigret ii a leader of the narragansetts of rhode island.
it has been more recently identified as david an indian who saved the life of john winthrop ii a governor of colonial connecticut.
apart from the wampum beads around his neck everything the indian wears is of english manufacture.
transformation of indian life many eastern indians initially welcomed the newcomers or at least their goods which they appreciated for their practical advantages.
items like woven cloth metal kettles iron axes fishhooks hoes and guns were quickly integrated into indian life.
indians also displayed a great desire for goods like colorful glass beads and copper ornaments that could be incorporated into their religious ceremonies.
as indians became integrated into the atlantic economy subtle changes took place in indian life.
european metal goods changed their farming hunting and cooking practices.
men devoted more time to hunting beaver for fur trading.
older skills deteriorated as the use of european products expanded and alcohol became increasingly common and disruptive.
indians learned to bargain effectively and to supply items that europeans desired.
later observers would describe this trade as one in which indians exchanged valuable commodities like furs and animal skins for worthless european trinkets.
in fact both europeans and indians gave up goods they had in abundance in exchange for items in short supply in their own society.
but as the colonists achieved military superiority over the indians the profits of trade mostly flowed to colonial and european merchants.
growing connections with europeans stimulated warfare among indian tribes and the overhunting of beaver and deer forced some groups to encroach on territory claimed by others.
and newcomers from europe brought epidemics that decimated indian populations.
changes in the land traders religious missionaries and colonial authorities all sought to reshape indian society and culture.
but as settlers spread over the land they threatened indians ways of life more completely than any company of soldiers or group of bureaucrats.
as settlers fenced in more and more land and introduced new crops and livestock the natural environment changed in ways that undermined traditional indian agriculture and hunting.
pigs and cattle roamed freely trampling indian cornfields and gardens.
the need for wood to build what obstacles did the english settlers in the chesapeake overcome.
and heat homes and export to england depleted forests on which indians relied for hunting.
the rapid expansion of the fur trade diminished the population of beaver and other animals.
since you are here strangers and come into our country one group of indians told early settlers in the chesapeake you should rather conform yourselves to the customs of our country than impose yours on us but it was the indians whose lives were most powerfully altered by the changes set in motion in 1607 when english colonists landed at jamestown.
settling the chesapeake the jamestown colony ch by 1650 english settlement in the the early history of jamestown was to say the least not promising.
the chesapeake had spread well beyond the colonys leadership changed repeatedly its inhabitants suffered an extraorinitial colony at jamestown as tobacco dinarily high death rate and with the company seeking a quick profit supplanters sought fertile land near navigable plies from england proved inadequate.
the hopes of locating riches such as waterways.
the spanish had found in mexico were quickly dashed.
silver and gold they have none one spanish observer english settlement commented their local resources were not much to be in the chesapeake regarded and they had no commerce with any nation ca.
1650 the first settlers were a quarrelsome band of gentlemen and servants they included few farmers and laborers and 50 miles numerous sons of english gentry and high status crafts0 50 kilometers maryland men jewelers stonecutters and the like who preferred to 1632 prospect for gold rather than farm.
they would rather starve than work declared john smith one of the colonys first leaders.
jamestown lay beside a swamp containing malariacarrying mosquitoes and the garbage settlers dumped into maryland 1632 the local river bred germs that caused dysentery and nantaughtacund onawmanient typhoid fever.
disease and lack of food took a heavy toll.
by chi ch h ic cac ca ac a co oa an mattaponi chicacoan rappahannock the end of the first year the original population of 104 wicocomoco chickahominy cuttatowomen had fallen by half.
new arrivals including the first two accohannock pamunkey women who landed in 1608 brought the numbers up to virginia chiskiak y 400 in 1609 but by 1610 after a winter long remembered accomac o 1607 as the starving time only 65 settlers remained alive.
appomattoc one point the survivors abandoned jamestown and sailed jamestown ja me sr for england only to be intercepted and persuaded to return weyanock.
to virginia by ships carrying a new governor 250 colonists and supplies.
by 1616 about 80 percent of the immigrants nansemond who had arrived in the first decade were dead.
only rigorous military discipline held the colony ro together.
john smith was a forceful man whose career a before coming to america included a period fighting the turks in hungary where he was captured and for a time 1607 date of settlement enslaved.
he imposed a regime of forced labor on company roan oke english settlement ca.
1650 islan d lands.
he that will not work shall not eat smith declared.
smiths autocratic mode of governing alienated many of esa pea ke bay r rk no ke r c h.
2 beginnings of english america 1607 1660 settling the chesapeake the colonists.
after being injured in an accidental gunpowder explosion in 1609 he was forced to return to england.
but his immediate successors continued his iron rule.
from a portrait of john smith the leader of the early virginia colony engraved on a 1624 map of new england.
the only portrait of pocahontas during her lifetime was engraved by simon van de passe in england in 1616 after converting to christianity pocahontas took the name rebecca.
company to society the virginia company slowly realized that for the colony to survive it would have to abandon the search for gold grow its own food and find a marketable commodity.
it would also have to attract more settlers.
with this end in view it announced new policies in 1618 that powerfully shaped virginias development as a functioning society rather than an outpost of london based investors.
instead of retaining all the land for itself the company introduced the headright system awarding fifty acres of land to any colonist who paid for his own or anothers passage.
thus anyone who brought in a sizable number of servants would immediately acquire a large estate.
in place of the governors militaristic regime a charter of grants and liberties was issued including the establishment of a house of burgesses.
when it convened in 1619 this became the first elected assembly in colonial america.
the house of burgesses was hardly a model of democracy only landowners could vote and the company and its appointed governor retained the right to nullify any measure the body adopted.
but its creation established a political precedent that all english colonies would eventually follow.
also in 1619 the first twenty blacks arrived in virginia on a dutch vessel.
the full significance of these two events would not be apparent until years later.
but they laid the foundation for a society that would one day be dominated economically and politically by slaveowning planters.
powhatan and pocahontas when the english arrived at jamestown they landed in an area inhabited by some 15 000 to 25 000 indians living in numerous small agricultural villages.
most acknowledged the rule of wahunsonacock a shrewd and forceful leader who had recently consolidated his authority over the region and collected tribute from some thirty subordinate tribes.
called powhatan by the settlers after the indian word for both his tribe and his title of paramount chief he quickly realized the advantages of trade with the newcomers.
for its part mindful of las casass condemnation of spanish behavior the virginia company instructed its colonists to treat local indians kindly and to try to convert them to christianity.
realizing that the colonists depended on the indians for food john smith tried to stop settlers from seizing produce from nearby villages lest the indians cut off all trade.
in the first two years of jamestowns existence relations with indians were mostly peaceful and based on a fairly equal give and take.
at one point smith was captured by the indians and threatened with execution by powhatan only to be rescued by pocahontas reputedly the favorite among his many children by dozens of wives.
the incident has come down in legend most recently a popular animated film as an example of a rebellious love struck teenager defying her father.
in fact it was probably part of an elaborate ceremony designed by powhatan to demonstrate his power over the colonists and incorporate them into his realm.
pocahontas subsequently how did virginia and maryland develop in their early years.
became an intermediary between the two peoples bringing food and messages to jamestown.
john smiths return to england raised tensions between the two groups and a period of sporadic conflict began in 1610 with the english massacring villagers indiscriminately and destroying indian crops.
pocahontas herself was captured and held as a hostage by the settlers in 1613 while confined to jamestown she converted to christianity.
as part of the restoration of peace in 1614 she married the english colonist john rolfe.
two years later she accompanied her husband to england where she caused a sensation in the court of james i as a symbol of anglo indian harmony and missionary success.
but she succumbed to disease in 1617 her father died the following year.
the uprising of once it became clear that the english were interested in establishing a permanent and constantly expanding colony not a trading post conflict with local indians was inevitable.
the peace that began in 1614 ended abruptly in 1622 when powhatans brother and successor opechancanough led a brilliantly planned surprise attack that in a single day wiped out one quarter of virginias settler population of 1 200 the surviving 900 colonists organized themselves into military bands which then massacred scores of indians and devastated their villages.
a spokesman for the virginia company explained the reason behind the indian assault the daily fear that.
in time we by our growing continually upon them would dispossess them of this country but by going to war declared governor francis wyatt the indians had forfeited any claim to the land.
virginias policy he continued must now be nothing less than the expulsion of the savages to gain the free range of the country indians remained a significant presence in virginia and trade continued throughout the century.
but the unsuccessful uprising of 1622 fundamentally shifted the balance of power in the colony.
the settlers supremacy was reinforced in 1644 when a last desperate rebellion led by opechancanough now said to be 100 years old was crushed after causing the deaths of some 500 colonists.
virginia forced a treaty on the surviving coastal indians who now numbered less than 2 000 that acknowledged their subordination to the government at jamestown and required them to move to tribal reservations to the west and not enter areas of european settlement without permission.
this policy of separation followed the precedent already established in ireland.
settlers spreading inland into the virginia countryside continued to seize indian lands.
the destruction caused by the uprising of 1622 was the last in a series of blows suffered by the virginia company.
two years later it surrendered its charter and virginia became the first royal colony its governor now appointed by the crown.
virginia had failed to accomplish any of its goals for either the company or the settlers.
investors had not turned a profit and although the company had sent 6 000 settlers to virginia its white population numbered only 1 200 when the king assumed control.
preoccupied with affairs at home the government in london for years paid little attention to virginia.
henceforth the local elite not a faraway company controlled the colonys development.
and that elite was growing rapidly in powhatan the most prominent indian leader in the original area of english settlement in virginia.
this image showing powhatan and his court was engraved on john smiths map of virginia and included in smiths general history of virginia published in 1624 c h.
2 beginnings of english america 1607 1660 settling the chesapeake theodor de brys engraving of the 1622 indian uprising in virginia depicts the indians massacring defenseless colonists who are shown unarmed although many in fact owned guns.
wealth and power thanks to the cultivation of a crop introduced from the west indies by john rolfe tobacco.
a an advertisement for tobacco includes images of slaves with agricultural implements.
tobacco colony king james i considered tobacco harmful to the brain and dangerous to the lungs and issued a spirited warning against its use.
but increasing numbers of europeans enjoyed smoking and believed the tobacco plant had medicinal benefits.
as a commodity with an ever expanding mass market in europe tobacco became virginias substitute for gold.
it enriched an emerging class of tobacco planters as well as members of the colonial government who assigned good land to themselves.
the crown profited from customs duties taxes on tobacco that entered or left the kingdom.
by 1624 more than 200 000 pounds were being grown producing startling profits for landowners.
forty years later the crop totaled 15 million pounds and it doubled again by the 1680s.
the spread of tobacco farming produced a dispersed society with few towns and little social unity.
it inspired a get richquick attitude and a frenzied scramble for land and labor.
by the middle of the seventeenth century a new influx of immigrants with ample financial resources sons of merchants and english gentlemen had taken advantage of the headright system and governmental connections to acquire large estates along navigable rivers.
they established themselves as the colonys social and political elite.
the expansion of tobacco cultivation also led to an increased demand for field labor met for most of the seventeenth century by young male indentured servants.
despite harsh conditions of work in the tobacco fields a persistently high death rate and laws mandating punishments from whipping to an extension of service for those who ran away or were unruly the how did virginia and maryland develop in their early years.
abundance of land continued to attract migrants.
of the 120 000 english immigrants who entered the chesapeake region during the seventeenth century three quarters came as servants.
virginias white society increasingly came to resemble that of england with a wealthy landed gentry at the top a group of small farmers mostly former indentured servants who had managed to acquire land in the middle and an army of poor laborers servants and landless former indentured servants at the bottom.
by 1700 the regions white population had grown to nearly 90 000 women and the fa m i ly virginia however lacked one essential element of english society stable family life.
the colony avidly promoted the immigration of women including several dozen tobacco brides who arrived in 1620 and 1621 for arranged marriages.
but given the demand for male servants to work in the tobacco fields men in the chesapeake outnumbered women for most of the seventeenth century by four or five to one.
the vast majority of women who emigrated to the region came as indentured servants.
since they usually had to complete their terms of service before marrying they did not begin to form families until their mid twenties.
the high death rate unequal ratio between the sexes and late age of marriage for those who found partners retarded population growth and produced a society with large numbers of single men widows and orphans.
although patriarchal ideals remained intact in virginia in practice the traditional authority of husbands and fathers was weakened.
because of their own low life expectancy fathers found it difficult to supervise the careers and marriages of their children.
in the colonies as in england a married woman possessed certain rights before the law including a claim to dower rights of one third of her husbands property in the event that he died before she did.
when the widow processing tobacco was as labor intensive as caring for the plant in the fields.
here scantily clad slaves and female indentured servants work with the crop after it has been harvested.
2 beginnings of english america 1607 1660 settling the chesapeake died however the property passed to the husbands male heirs.
english law was far less generous than in spain where a woman could hold independently any property inherited from her parents and a man and wife owned jointly all the wealth accumulated during a marriage.
social conditions in the colonies however opened the door to roles women rarely assumed in england.
widows and the few women who never married took advantage of their legal status as femme sole a woman alone who enjoyed an independent legal identity denied to married women to make contracts and conduct business.
margaret brent who emigrated to the chesapeake in 1638 acquired land managed her own plantation and acted as a lawyer in court.
some widows were chosen to administer their husbands estates or were willed their husbands property outright rather than receiving only the one third dower rights but because most women came to virginia as indentured servants they could look forward only to a life of hard labor in the tobacco fields and early death.
servants were frequently subjected to sexual abuse by their masters.
those who married often found themselves in poverty when their husbands died.
the maryland experiment although it began under very different sponsorship and remained much smaller than virginia during the seventeenth century the second chesapeake colony maryland followed a similar course of development.
as in virginia tobacco came to dominate the economy and tobacco planters the society.
but in other ways marylands history was strikingly different.
maryland was established in 1632 as a proprietary colony that is a grant of land and governmental authority to a single individual.
this was cecilius calvert the son of a recently deceased favorite of king charles i the charter made calvert proprietor of the colony and granted him full free and absolute power including control of trade and the right to initiate all legislation with an elected assembly confined to approving or disapproving his proposals.
calvert imagined maryland as a feudal domain.
land would be laid out in manors with the owners paying quitrents to the proprietor.
calvert disliked representative institutions and believed ordinary people should not meddle in governmental affairs.
on the other hand the charter also guaranteed to colonists all privileges franchises and liberties of englishmen.
while these were not spelled out they undoubtedly included the idea of a government limited by the law.
here was a recipe for conflict and maryland had more than its share during the seventeenth century.
religion in maryland further aggravating instability in the colony was the fact that calvert a catholic envisioned maryland as a refuge for his persecuted coreligionists in england especially the younger sons of catholic gentry who had few economic or political prospects in england.
in maryland he hoped protestants and catholics could live in a harmony unknown in europe.
the first group of 130 colonists included a number of catholic gentlemen and two priests.
most appointed officials were also catholic including relatives of the proprietor as were those to whom he awarded the choicest land grants.
but protestants always formed a majority of the settlers.
most as how did virginia and maryland develop in their early years.
in virginia came as indentured servants but others took advantage of marylands generous headright system to acquire land by transporting workers to the colony.
as in virginia the death rate remained very high.
in one county half the marriages during the seventeenth century lasted fewer than eight years before one partner died.
almost 70 percent of male settlers in maryland died before reaching the age of fifty and half the children born in the colony did not live to adulthood.
but at least initially maryland seems to have offered servants greater opportunity for landownership than virginia.
unlike in the older colony freedom dues in maryland included fifty acres of land.
as tobacco planters engrossed the best land later in the century however the prospects for landless men diminished.
t h e n e w e n g l a n d way the rise of puritanism as virginia and maryland evolved toward societies dominated by a small aristocracy ruling over numerous bound laborers a very different social order emerged in seventeenth century new england.
the early history of that region is intimately connected to the religious movement known as puritanism which arose in england late in the sixteenth century.
the term was initially coined by opponents to ridicule those not satisfied with the progress of the protestant reformation in england who called themselves not puritans but godly or true protestants puritanism came to define a set of religious principles and a view of how society should be organized.
puritans differed among themselves on many issues.
but all shared the conviction that the church of england retained too many elements of catholicism in its religious rituals and doctrines.
puritans saw elaborate church ceremonies the rule that priests could not marry and ornate church decorations as vestiges of popery many rejected the catholic structure of religious authority descending from a pope or king to archbishops bishops and priests.
only independent local congregations they believed should choose clergymen and determine modes of worship.
these puritans were called congregationalists all puritans shared many of the beliefs of the church of england and the society as a whole including a hatred of catholicism and a pride in englands greatness as a champion of liberty.
but they believed that neither the church nor the nation was living up to its ideals.
puritans considered religious belief a complex and demanding matter and urged believers to seek the truth by reading the bible and listening to sermons by educated ministers rather than devoting themselves to sacraments administered by priests and to what puritans considered formulaic prayers.
the sermon was the central rite of puritan practice.
in the course of a lifetime according to one estimate the average puritan listened to some 7 000 sermons.
in their religious beliefs puritans followed the ideas of the french born swiss theologian john calvin.
the world calvin taught was divided between the elect and the damned.
all persons sought salvation but whether one was among the elect destined to be saved had already been determined by god.
his will ultimately was unknowable and nothing one did on earth including prayers good works and offerings would make the first book printed in the english mainland colonies the whole book of psalmes faithfully translated into english metre was published in cambridge massachusetts in 1640 worshipers used it to sing psalms religious songs from the bible sung in massachusetts unaccompanied by music which puritan churches banned.
2 beginnings of english america 1607 1660 the new england way any difference.
but while there were no guarantees of salvation worldly success leading a good life prospering economically might well be indications of gods grace.
idleness and immoral behavior were sure signs of damnation.
moral a portrait of john winthrop first governor of the massachusetts bay colony painted in the 1640s.
liberty puritanism however was not simply a set of ideas but a state of mind a zealousness in pursuing the true faith that alienated many who held differing religious views.
a minority of puritans such as those who settled in plymouth colony became separatists abandoning the church of england entirely to form their own independent churches.
most however hoped to purify the church from within.
but in the 1620s and 1630s as charles i seemed to be moving toward a restoration of catholic ceremonies and the church of england dismissed puritan ministers and censored their writings many puritans decided to emigrate.
they departed england not so much due to persecution but because they feared that popish practices had grown to such an intolerable height as one minister complained that the consciences of gods saints.
could no longer bear them by the same token puritans blamed many of englands social problems on the wandering poor whom they considered indolent and ungodly.
when puritans emigrated to new england they hoped to escape what they believed to be the religious and worldly corruptions of english society.
they would establish a city set upon a hill a bible commonwealth whose influence would flow back across the atlantic and rescue england from godlessness and social decay.
like so many other emigrants to america puritans came in search of liberty especially the right to worship and govern themselves in what they deemed a truly christian manner.
freedom for puritans was primarily a spiritual affair.
it implied the opportunity and the responsibility to obey gods will through self government and self denial.
it certainly did not mean unrestrained action improper religious practices or sinful behavior of which puritans thought there were far too many examples in england.
in a 1645 speech to the massachusetts legislature explaining the puritan conception of freedom john winthrop the colonys governor distinguished sharply between two kinds of liberty.
natural liberty or acting without restraint suggested a liberty to do evil this was the false idea of freedom supposedly adopted by the irish indians and bad christians generally.
genuine moral liberty the christian liberty described in chapter 6 northern free blacks were the last large group to experience indentured servitude since the terms of emancipation generally required children of slave mothers to work for their owners before being freed.
at the time of abolition because of widespread slave ownership among eighteenth century artisans a considerable number of northern blacks possessed craft skills.
but it became more and more difficult for blacks to utilize these skills once they became free.
although many white artisans criticized slavery most viewed the freed slaves as low wage competitors and sought to bar them from skilled employment.
they are leaders in the cause of equal rights for themselves a black editor commented of new york citys artisans in the 1830s.
hostility from white craftsmen however was only one of many obstacles that kept blacks confined to the lowest ranks of the labor market.
white juliann jane tillman a preacher in the african methodist episcopal church in an 1844 engraving.
many protestant denominations allowed women to preach although their presence also aroused much criticism.
9 the market revolution 1800 1840 the crowning of flora a painting from 1816 depicts idealized women of virtue and modesty.
these were the qualities the nineteenth centurys cult of domesticity emphasized as essential to proper womanhood.
the limits of prosperity employers refused to hire them in anything but menial positions and white customers did not wish to be served by them.
the result was a rapid decline in economic status until by mid century the vast majority of northern blacks labored for wages in unskilled jobs and as domestic servants.
the state census of 1855 revealed 122 black barbers and 808 black servants in new york city but only 1 lawyer and 6 doctors.
nor could free blacks take advantage of the opening of the west to improve their economic status a central component of american freedom.
federal law barred them from access to public land and by 1860 four states indiana illinois iowa and oregon prohibited them from entering their territory altogether.
the c u lt of domesticity women too found many of the opportunities opened by the market revolution closed to them.
as the household declined as a center of economic production many women saw their traditional roles undermined by the availability of mass produced goods previously made at home.
some women as noted above followed work as it moved from household to factory.
others embraced a new definition of femininity which glorified not a womans contribution to the familys economic well being but her ability to create a private environment shielded from the competitive tensions of the market economy.
womans place was in the home a site increasingly emptied of economically productive functions as work moved from the household to workshops and factories.
her role was to sustain nonmarket values like love friendship and mutual obligation providing men with a shelter from the competitive marketplace.
the earlier ideology of republican motherhood which allowed how did the market revolution affect the lives of workers women and african americans.
women a kind of public role as mothers of future citizens subtly evolved into the mid nineteenth century cult of domesticity virtue which in the eighteenth century was a political characteristic of men essential to the success of republican government came to be redefined as a personal moral quality associated more and more closely with women.
virtue for a woman meant not only sexual innocence but beauty frailty and dependence on men.
in whatever situation of life a woman is placed from her cradle to her grave declared the young ladys book one of numerous popular magazines addressed to female audiences of the 1820s and 1830s a spirit of obedience and submission pliability of temper and humility of mind are required from her these magazines carried articles such as woman a source of comfort woman a being to come home to and woman mans best friend with more and more men leaving the home for work women did exercise considerable power over personal affairs within the family.
the rapid decline in the american birthrate during the nineteenth century from an average of seven children per woman in 1800 to four in 1900 cannot be explained except by the conscious decision of millions of women to limit the number of children they bore.
but the idea of domesticity minimized womens even indirect participation in the outside world.
for both sexes freedom meant fulfilling their respective inborn qualities.
men were rational aggressive and domineering while women were nurturing selfless ruled by the emotions and thus less fitted for public life.
if submission to the will of another increasingly seemed inadmissible for free men it remained a condition natural to women and expected of them.
men moved freely between the public and private spheres women were supposed to remain cloistered in the private realm of the family.
women and work prevailing ideas concerning gender bore little relation to the experience of those women who worked for wages at least some time in their lives.
they did so despite severe disadvantages.
women could not compete freely for employment since only low paying jobs were available to them.
married women still could not sign independent contracts or sue in their own name and not until after the civil war did they not their husbands control the wages they earned.
nonetheless for poor city dwellers and farm families the labor of all family members was essential to economic survival.
thousands of poor women found jobs as domestic servants factory workers and seamstresses.
early industrialization enhanced the availability of paid work for northern women as the spread of the putting out system in such indus a woman with a sewing machine in an undated photograph.
it is not clear if she is sewing for herself and family or for income as a seamstress.
an image from a female infants 1830 birth and baptismal certificate depicts a domestic scene with women at work while men relax.
9 the market revolution 1800 1840 the limits of prosperity tries as shoemaking hatmaking and clothing manufacture allowed women laboring at home to contribute to family income even as they retained responsibility for domestic chores.
for the expanding middle class however it became a badge of respectability for wives to remain at home outside the disorderly new market economy while husbands conducted business in their offices shops and factories.
in larger cities where families of different social classes had previously lived alongside one another fashionable middle class neighborhoods populated by merchants factory owners and professionals like lawyers and doctors began to develop.
work in middle class homes was done by domestic servants the largest employment category for women in nineteenth century america.
the freedom of the middle class woman defined in part as freedom from labor rested on the employment of other women within her household.
even though most women were anything but idle in a market economy where labor increasingly meant work that created monetary value it became more and more difficult to think of labor as encompassing anyone but men.
lydia maria child wrote a popular book the frugal housewife published in 1829 that sought to prepare women for the ups and downs of the market revolution one chapter that reduced the supply of money and helped to push down farm prices.
through the farmers alliance the largest citizens movement of the nineteenth century farmers sought to remedy their condition.
founded in texas in the late 1870s the alliance spread to forty three states by 1890 the farmers alternatives said j d fields a texas alliance leader were success and freedom or failure and servitude at first the alliance remained aloof from politics attempting to improve rural conditions by the cooperative financing and marketing of crops.
alliance exchanges would loan money to farmers and sell their produce.
but it soon became clear that farmers on their own could not finance this plan and banks refused to extend loans to the exchanges.
the alliance therefore proposed that the federal government establish warehouses where farmers could store their crops until they were sold.
using the crops as collateral the government would then issue loans to farmers at low interest rates thereby ending their dependence on bankers and merchants.
since it would have to be enacted by congress the subtreasury plan as this proposal was called led the alliance into politics.
the peoples party in the early 1890s the alliance evolved into the peoples party or populists the eras greatest political insurgency.
the party did not just appeal to farmers.
it sought to speak for all the producing classes and achieved some of its greatest successes in states like colorado and idaho where it won the support of miners and industrial workers.
it attracted veterans of the knights of labor by condemning the use of court injunctions and private police forces against strikers.
but its major base lay in the cotton and wheat belts of the south and west.
building on the farmers alliance network of local institutions the populists embarked on a remarkable effort of community organization and education.
to spread their message they published numerous pamphlets on political and economic questions established more than 1 000 local newspapers and sent traveling speakers throughout rural america.
wearing a huge black sombrero and a black prince albert coat texas populist orator cyclone davis traveled the great plains accompanied by the writings of thomas jefferson which he quoted to demonstrate the evils of banks and large corporations.
at great gatherings on the western plains similar in some ways to religious revival meetings and in small town southern country stores one observer wrote people commenced to think w h a t w e r e t h e o r i g i n s a n d t h e s i g n i f i c a n c e o f po p u l i s m.
who had never thought before and people talked who had seldom spoken.
little by little they commenced to theorize upon their condition here was the last great political expression of the nineteenth century vision of america as a commonwealth of small producers whose freedom rested on the ownership of productive property and respect for the dignity of labor.
day by day declared the peoples party paper of georgia in 1893 the power of the individual sinks.
day by day the power of the classes or the corporations rises.
in all essential respects the republic of our fathers is dead but although the populists used the familiar language of nineteenthcentury radicalism they were hardly a backward looking movement.
they embraced the modern technologies that made large scale cooperative enterprise possible the railroad the telegraph and the national market while looking to the federal government to regulate them in the public interest.
they promoted agricultural education and believed farmers should adopt modern scientific methods of cultivation.
they believed the federal government could move beyond partisan conflict to operate in a businesslike manner to promote the public good a vision soon to be associated with the progressive movement and many years later politicians like jimmy carter and barack obama.
the populist platform the populist platform of 1892 adopted at the partys omaha convention remains a classic document of american reform see the appendix for the full text.
written by ignatius donnelly a minnesota editor and former radical republican congressman during reconstruction it spoke of a nation brought to the verge of moral political and material ruin by political corruption and economic inequality.
the fruits of the toil of millions the platform declared are boldly stolen to build up colossal fortunes.
while their possessors despise the republic and endanger liber a group of kansas populists perhaps on their way to a political gathering in a photograph from the 1890s.
17 freedoms boundaries at home and abroad 1890 1900 the populist challenge ty the platform put forth a long list of proposals to restore democracy and economic opportunity many of which would be adopted during the next half century the direct election of u s senators government control of the currency a graduated income tax a system of low cost public financing to enable farmers to market their crops and recognition of the right of workers to form labor unions.
in addition populists called for public ownership of the railroads to guarantee farmers inexpensive access to markets for their crops.
a generation would pass before a major party offered so sweeping a plan for political action to create the social conditions of freedom.
the tom watson the georgia populist leader on the cover of the partys campaign book for 1892 in a cartoon from tom watsons peoples party paper february 25 1892 northern and southern civil war veterans bury their past antagonism and unite in the populist campaign.
populist coalition in some southern states the populists made remarkable efforts to unite black and white small farmers on a common political and economic program.
the obstacles to such an alliance were immense not merely the heritage of racism and the political legacy of the civil war but the fact that many white populists were landowning farmers while most blacks were tenants and agricultural laborers.
unwelcome in the southern branches of the farmers alliance black farmers formed their own organization the colored farmers alliance.
in 1891 it tried to organize a strike of cotton pickers on plantations in south carolina arkansas and texas.
the action was violently suppressed by local authorities and landowners some of them sympathetic to the white alliance but unwilling to pay higher wages to their own laborers.
in general southern white populists racial attitudes did not differ significantly from those of their non populist neighbors.
nonetheless recognizing the need for allies to break the democratic partys stranglehold on power in the south some white populists insisted that black and white w h a t w e r e t h e o r i g i n s a n d t h e s i g n i f i c a n c e o f po p u l i s m.
populist strength washington canada montana oregon idaho wyoming nevada california utah territory colorado new mexico territory populist share of the presidential vote 1892 percentage minnesota south dakota new york wisconsin michigan iowa pennsylvania indiana ohio illinois west virginia kansas virginia missouri kentucky north carolina tennessee oklahoma south territory arkansas carolina nebraska arizona territory over 48 30 48 15 30 5 15 0 5 not voting north dakota new hampshire maine vermont texas alabama georgia mississippi louisiana florida mexico 500 miles 500 kilometers farmers shared common grievances and could unite for common goals.
tom watson georgias leading populist worked the hardest to forge a black white alliance.
you are kept apart he told interracial audiences that you may be separately fleeced of your earnings.
this race antagonism perpetuates a monetary system which beggars both while many blacks refused to abandon the party of lincoln others were attracted by the populist appeal.
in 1894 a coalition of white populists and black republicans won control of north carolina bringing to the state a second reconstruction complete with increased spending on public education and a revival of black officeholding.
in most of the south however democrats fended off the populist challenge by resorting to the tactics they had used to retain power since the 1870s mobilizing whites with warnings about negro supremacy intimidating black voters and stuffing ballot boxes on election day.
the populist movement also engaged the energies of thousands of reform minded women from farm and labor backgrounds.
some like mary elizabeth lease a former homesteader and one of the first female lawyers in kansas became prominent organizers campaigners and strategists.
lease was famous for her speeches urging farmers to raise less corn and more hell although she apparently never actually uttered those exact words which would have been considered inappropriate for a woman in public.
we fought england for our liberty lease declared massachusetts rhode island connecticut new jersey delaware maryland ch.
17 freedoms boundaries at home and abroad 1890 1900 the presidential election of 1892 1 1 1 6 12 9 11 24 15 22 non voting territory party democrat republican populist candidate cleveland harrison weaver electoral vote share 277 62 145 33 22 5 popular vote share 5 556 918 47 5 176 108 44 1 027 329 8 5 the populist challenge and put chains on four million blacks.
we wiped out slavery and.
began a system of white wage slavery worse than the first during the 1890s referendums in colorado and idaho approved extending the vote to women while in kansas and california the proposal went down in defeat.
populists in all these states endorsed womens suffrage.
populist presidential candidate james weaver received more than 1 million votes in 1892 the party carried five western states with twenty two electoral votes and elected three governors and fifteen members of congress.
in his inaugural address in 1893 lorenzo lewelling the new populist governor of kansas anticipated a phrase made famous seventy years later by martin luther king jr i have a dream.
in the beautiful vision of a coming time i behold the abolition of poverty.
a time is foreshadowed when.
liberty equality and justice shall have permanent abiding places in the republic the government and labor were the populists on the verge of replacing one of the two major parties.
the severe depression that began in 1893 led to increased conflict between capital and labor and seemed to create an opportunity for expanding the populist vote.
time and again employers brought state or federal authority to bear to protect their own economic power or put down threats to public order.
even before the economic downturn in 1892 the governor of idaho declared martial law and sent militia units and federal troops into the mining region of coeur dalene to break a strike.
in may 1894 the federal government deployed soldiers to disperse coxeys army a band of several hundred unemployed men led by ohio businessman jacob coxey who marched to washington demanding economic relief.
coxeys army on the march in 1894 w h a t w e r e t h e o r i g i n s a n d t h e s i g n i f i c a n c e o f po p u l i s m.
debs and the pullman strike also in 1894 workers in the company owned town of pullman illinois where railroad sleeping cars were manufactured called a strike to protest a reduction in wages.
the american railway union whose 150 000 members included both skilled and unskilled railroad laborers announced that its members would refuse to handle trains with pullman cars.
when the boycott crippled national rail service president grover clevelands attorney general richard olney himself on the board of several railroad companies obtained a federal court injunction ordering the strikers back to work.
federal troops and u s marshals soon occupied railroad centers like chicago and sacramento.
violent clashes between troops and workers erupted from maine to california leaving thirty four persons dead.
the strike collapsed when the unions leaders including its charismatic president eugene v debs were jailed for contempt of court for violating the judicial order.
in the case of in re debs the supreme court unanimously confirmed the sentences and approved the use of injunctions against striking labor unions.
on his release from prison in november 1895 more than 100 000 persons greeted debs at a chicago railroad depot.
hailing the crowd of well wishers as lovers of liberty debs charged that concentrated economic power now aligned with state and national governments was attempting to wrest from the weak their birthright of freedom.
populism and labor in 1894 populists made determined efforts to appeal to industrial workers.
populist senators supported the demand of coxeys army for federal unemployment relief and governor davis waite of colorado who had edited a labor newspaper before his election sent the militia to protect striking miners against company police.
in the state and congressional elections of that year as the economic depression deepened voters by the millions abandoned the democratic party of president cleveland.
federal troops pose atop a railroad engine after being sent to chicago to help suppress the pullman strike of 1894 ch.
17 freedoms boundaries at home and abroad 1890 1900 the populist challenge in rural areas the populist vote increased in 1894 but urban workers did not rally to the populists whose core issues the subtreasury plan and lower mortgage interest rates had little meaning for them and whose demand for higher prices for farm goods would raise the cost of food and reduce the value of workers wages.
moreover the revivalist atmosphere of many populist gatherings and the biblical cadences of populist speeches were alien to the largely immigrant and catholic industrial working class.
urban workingclass voters in 1894 instead shifted en masse to the republicans who claimed that raising tariff rates which democrats had recently reduced would restore prosperity by protecting manufacturers and industrial workers from the competition of imported goods and cheap foreign labor.
in one of the most decisive shifts in congressional power in american history the republicans gained 117 seats in the house of representatives.
bryan a cartoon from the magazine judge september 14 1896 condemns william jennings bryan and his cross of gold speech for defiling the symbols of christianity.
bryan tramples on the bible while holding his golden cross a vandalized church is visible in the background.
and free s i lv e r in 1896 democrats and populists joined to support william jennings bryan for the presidency.
a thirty six year old congressman from nebraska bryan won the democratic nomination after delivering to the national convention an electrifying speech that crystallized the farmers pride and grievances.
burn down your cities and leave our farms bryan proclaimed and your cities will spring up again as if by magic but destroy our farms and grass will grow in the streets of every city in the country bryan called for the free coinage of silver the unrestricted minting of silver money.
in language ringing with biblical imagery bryan condemned the gold standard you shall not press down upon the brow of labor this crown of thorns.
you shall not crucify mankind upon a cross of gold at various points in the nineteenth century from debates over hard versus soft money in the jacksonian era to the greenback movement after the civil war the money question had played a central role in american politics.
bryans demand for free silver was the latest expression of the view that increasing the amount of currency in circulation would raise the prices farmers received for their crops and make it easier to pay off their debts.
his nomination wrested control of the democratic party from longdominant leaders like president grover cleveland who were closely tied to eastern businessmen.
there was more to bryans appeal however than simply free silver.
a devoutly religious man he was strongly influenced by the social gospel movement discussed in the previous chapter this was a period of sustained development for british north america.
compared to england and scotland united to create great britain by the act of union of 1707 the colonies were growing much more rapidly.
some contemporaries spoke of british america as a rising empire that would one day eclipse the mother country in population and wealth.
it would be wrong however to see the first three quarters of the eighteenth century simply as a prelude to american independence.
as equianos life illustrates the atlantic was more a bridge than a barrier between the old and new worlds.
ideas people and goods flowed back and forth across the ocean.
even as the colonies populations became more diverse they were increasingly integrated into the british empire.
their laws and political institutions were extensions of those of britain their ideas about society and culture reflected british values their how did african slavery differ regionally in eighteenth century north america.
economies were geared to serving the empires needs.
as european powers jockeyed for advantage in north america colonists were drawn into an almost continuous series of wars with france and its indian allies which reinforced their sense of identification with and dependence on great britain.
equianos life also underscores the greatest irony or contradiction in the history of the eighteenth century the simultaneous expansion of freedom and slavery.
this was the era when the idea of the freeborn englishman became powerfully entrenched in the outlook of both colonists and britons.
more than any other principle liberty was seen as what made the british empire distinct.
yet the eighteenth century was also the height of the atlantic slave trade a commerce increasingly dominated by british merchants and ships.
one of the most popular songs of the period included the refrain britons never never never will be slaves but during the eighteenth century more than half the africans shipped to the new world as slaves were carried on british vessels.
most were destined for the plantations of the west indies and brazil but slaves also made up around 280 000 of the 585 000 persons who arrived in britains mainland colonies between 1700 and 1775 although concentrated in the chesapeake and areas farther south slavery existed in every colony of british north america.
and unlike equiano very few slaves were fortunate enough to gain their freedom.
s l av e ry a n d e m p i r e of the estimated 7 7 million africans transported to the new world between 1492 and 1820 more than half arrived between 1700 and 1800 the atlantic slave trade would later be condemned by statesmen and general opinion as a crime against humanity.
but in the eighteenth century it was a regularized business in which european merchants african traders and american planters engaged in complex bargaining over human lives all with the expectation of securing a profit.
the slave trade was a vital part of world commerce.
every european empire in the new world utilized slave labor and battled for control of this lucrative trade.
the asiento an the title page of olaudah equianos account of his life the best known narrative by an eighteenth century slave.
the portrait of equiano in european dress and holding a bible challenges stereotypes of blacks as savages incapable of becoming civilized.
4 slavery freedom and the struggle for empire to 1763 slavery and empire agreement whereby spain subcontracted to a foreign power the right to provide slaves to spanish america was an important diplomatic prize.
britains acquisition of the asiento from the dutch in the treaty of utrecht of 1713 was a major step in its rise to commercial supremacy.
in the british empire of the eighteenth century free laborers working for wages were atypical and slavery was the norm.
slave plantations contributed mightily to english economic development.
the first mass consumer goods in international trade were produced by slaves sugar rice coffee and tobacco.
the rising demand for these products fueled the rapid growth of the atlantic slave trade.
atlantic trade in the eighteenth century the caribbean remained the commercial focus of the british empire and the major producer of revenue for the crown.
but slave grown products from the mainland occupied a larger and larger part of atlantic commerce.
a series of triangular trading routes crisscrossed the atlantic carrying british manufactured goods to africa and the colonies colonial products including tobacco indigo sugar and rice to europe and slaves from africa to the new world.
most colonial vessels however went back and forth between cities like new york charleston and savannah and to ports in the caribbean.
areas where slavery was only a minor institution also profited from slave labor.
merchants in new york massachusetts and rhode island participated actively in the slave trade shipping slaves from africa to the caribbean or southern colonies.
the slave economies of the west indies were the largest market for fish grain livestock and lumber exported from new england and the middle colonies.
in 1720 half the ships entering or leaving new york harbor were engaged in trade with the caribbean.
indeed one historian writes the growth and prosperity of the emerging society of free colonial british a mid eighteenth century image of a woman going to church in lima peru accompanied by two slaves.
slavery existed throughout the western hemisphere.
how did african slavery differ regionally in eighteenth century north america.
atlantic trading routes rses glasgow co tobac tores ds o naval s furs fishanufactured go ds oods o m o g red g d e u r t u c t c a f fa u manuo hides man indig e ic r grain rum fish lum manufactured go ber ods mo t pean euro w e st i n d i es caribbean sea slave s go s ru lave m s lisbon spain cadiz ucts prod manufactured goods ber r lum r a k flou vestoc slaves sug slaves sugar fish li es e ric slav spanish florida wi ne rui s f se las s ah ar a d e s e rt africa ld ivory gold coast coast south america america.
were achieved as a result of slave labor in britain itself the profits from slavery and the slave trade stimulated the rise of ports like liverpool and bristol and the growth of banking shipbuilding and insurance.
they also helped to finance the early industrial revolution.
overall in the eighteenth century atlantic commerce consisted primarily of slaves crops produced by slaves and goods destined for slave societies.
it should not be surprising that for large numbers of free colonists and europeans freedom meant in part the power and right to enslave others.
and as slavery became more and more entrenched so too as the quaker abolitionist john woolman commented in 1762 did the idea of slavery being connected with the black color and liberty with the white africa and the slave europe france portugal boston newport new york philadelphia baltimore british norfolk colonies wilmington charleston savannah london l wine fruit north america ine ns ho a tl anti c o cean england bristol trade a few african societies like benin for a time opted out of the atlantic slave trade hoping to avoid the disruptions it inevitably caused.
but most african slave coast 1 000 miles 500 1 000 kilometers a series of trading routes crisscrossed the atlantic bringing manufactured goods to africa and britains american colonies slaves to the new world and colonial products to europe.
4 slavery freedom and the struggle for empire to 1763 the slave trade in the atlantic world 1460 1770 1 000 miles 500 1 000 kilometers north america england es ni brit ish atlantic ocean spain arab 4 w e st indies berber french caribbean 1 s ah ar a d e s e rt 7 british caribbean 24 s caribbean panish colonies 13 sea central america europe france 3 portugal co lo slavery and empire the mid dle pa africa kaarta ssa ge segu s 7 h colonie dutc ashanti guianas mpire 3 portuguese e hausa kanembornu dahomey oyo benin 2 teke nsundi south america brazil kongo mbundu angola the atlantic slave trade expanded rapidly in the eighteenth century.
the mainland colonies received only a tiny proportion of the africans brought to the new world most of whom were transported to brazil and the west indies.
rulers took part and they proved quite adept at playing the europeans off against one another collecting taxes from foreign merchants and keeping the capture and sale of slaves under their own control.
few europeans ventured inland from the coast.
traders remained in their factories and purchased slaves brought to them by african rulers and dealers.
the transatlantic slave trade made africa a major market for european goods especially textiles and guns.
both disrupted relationships within and among african societies.
cheap imported textiles undermined traditional craft production while guns encouraged the further growth of slavery since the only way to obtain european weapons was to supply slaves.
by the eighteenth century militarized states like ashanti and dahomey would arise in west africa with large armies using european firearms to prey on their neighbors in order to capture slaves.
from a minor institution slavery grew to become more and more central to west african society a source of wealth for african merchants and of power for newly emerging african kingdoms.
the loss every year of tens of thou how did african slavery differ regionally in eighteenth century north america.
sands of men and women in the prime of their lives to the slave trade weakened and distorted west africas society and economy.
the middle passage for slaves the voyage across the atlantic known as the middle passage because it was the second or middle leg in the triangular trading routes linking europe africa and america was a harrowing experience.
since a slave could be sold in america for twenty to thirty times the price in africa men women and children were crammed aboard vessels as tightly as possible to maximize profits.
the height sometimes between decks wrote one slave trader was only eighteen inches so that the unfortunate human beings could not turn around or even on their sides.
and here they are usually chained to the decks by their necks and legs equiano who later described the shrieks of the women and the groans of the dying survived the middle passage but many africans did not.
diseases like measles and smallpox spread rapidly and about one slave in five perished before reaching the new world.
ship captains were known to throw the sick overboard in order to prevent the spread of epidemics.
the crews on slave ships also suffered a high death rate.
only a small proportion less than 5 percent of slaves carried to the new world were destined for mainland north america.
the vast majority landed in brazil or the west indies where the high death rate on the sugar plantations led to a constant demand for new slave imports.
as late as 1700 only about 20 000 africans had been landed in britains colonies in north america.
in the eighteenth century however their numbers increased steadily.
overall the area that was to become the united states imported between 400 000 and 600 000 slaves.
by 1770 due to the natural reproduction of the slave population around one fifth of the estimated 2 3 million persons not including indians living in the english colonies of north america were africans and their descendants.
chesapeake slavery by the mid eighteenth century three distinct slave systems were well entrenched in britains mainland colonies tobacco based plantation slavery in the chesapeake rice based plantation slavery in south carolina and georgia and nonplantation slavery in new england and the middle colonies.
the largest and oldest of these was the tobacco plantation system of the chesapeake where more than 270 000 slaves resided in 1770 nearly half of the regions population.
on the eve of the revolution virginia and maryland were as closely tied to britain as any other an architects plan for a slave ship.
these drawings illustrate the conditions under which slaves endured the middle passage across the atlantic.
4 slavery freedom and the struggle for empire to 1763 slavery and empire benjamin latrobes watercolor an overseer doing his duty was sketched near fredericksburg virginia in 1798 the title is meant to be ironic the welldressed overseer relaxes while two female slaves work in the fields.
a detail from a 1768 map of virginia and maryland illustrates a tobacco wharf.
a planter negotiates with a merchant or sea captain while slaves go about their work.
colonies and their economies were models of mercantilist policy described in chapter 10 to be sure many americans had considered the western hemisphere an american sphere of influence.
there was persistent talk of acquiring cuba and president grant had sought to annex the dominican republic only to see the senate reject the idea.
the last territorial acquisition before the 1890s had been alaska purchased from russia by secretary of state william h seward in 1867 to much derision from those who could not see the purpose of american ownership of sewards icebox seward however was mostly interested in the aleutian islands a part of alaska that stretched much of the way to asia see the map on p 711 and that he believed could be the site of coaling stations for merchant ships plying the pacific.
most americans who looked overseas were interested in expanded trade not territorial possessions.
the countrys agricultural and industrial production could no longer be entirely absorbed at home.
by 1890 companies like singer sewing machines and john d rockefellers standard oil company aggressively marketed their products abroad.
especially during economic downturns business leaders insisted on the necessity of greater access to foreign customers.
the lure of empire one group of americans who spread the nations influence overseas were religious missionaries thousands of whom ventured abroad in the late nineteenth century to spread christianity prepare the world for the second coming of christ and uplift the poor.
inspired by dwight moody a methodist evangelist the student volunteer movement for foreign missions sent more than 8 000 missionaries to bring light to heathen worlds across the globe.
missionary work offered employment to those with few opportunities at home including blacks and women who made up a majority of the total.
a small group of late nineteenth century thinkers actively promoted american expansionism warning that the country must not allow itself to be shut out of the scramble for empire.
in our country 1885 josiah strong a prominent congregationalist clergyman sought to update the idea of manifest destiny.
having demonstrated their special aptitude for liberty and self government on the north american continent strong announced anglo saxons should now spread their institutions and values to inferior races throughout the world.
the economy would benefit he insisted since one means of civilizing savages was to turn them into consumers of american goods.
how did the united states emerge as an imperial power in the 1890s.
naval officer alfred t mahan in the influence of sea power upon history 1890 argued that no nation could prosper without a large fleet of ships engaged in international trade protected by a powerful navy operating from overseas bases.
mahan published his book in the same year that the census bureau announced that there was no longer a clear line separating settled from unsettled land.
thus the frontier no longer existed.
americans wrote mahan must now begin to look outward his arguments influenced the outlook of james g blaine who served as secretary of state during benjamin harrisons presidency 1889 1893.
blaine urged the president to try to acquire hawaii puerto rico and cuba as strategic naval bases.
although independent hawaii was already closely tied to the united states through treaties that exempted imports of its sugar from tariff duties and provided for the establishment of an american naval base at pearl harbor.
hawaiis economy was dominated by american owned sugar plantations that employed a workforce of native islanders and chinese japanese and filipino laborers under long term contracts.
early in 1893 a group of american planters organized a rebellion that overthrew the hawaii government of queen liliuokalani.
on the eve of leaving office harrison submitted a treaty of annexation to the senate.
after determining that a majority of hawaiians did not favor the treaty harrisons successor grover cleveland withdrew it.
in july 1898 in the midst of the spanish american war the united states finally annexed the hawaiian islands.
in 1993 the u s congress passed and president bill clinton signed a resolution expressing regret to native hawaiians for the overthrow of the kingdom of hawaii.
with the participation of agents and citizens of the united states the depression that began in 1893 heightened the belief that a more aggressive foreign policy was necessary to stimulate american exports.
fears of economic and ethnic disunity fueled an assertive nationalism.
in the face of social conflict and the new immigration government and private organizations in the 1890s promoted a unifying patriotism.
these were the years when rituals like the pledge of allegiance and the practice of standing for the playing of the star spangled banner came into existence.
americans had long honored the stars and stripes but the cult of the flag including an official flag day dates to the 1890s.
new mass circulation newspapers also promoted nationalistic sentiments.
by the late 1890s papers like william randolph hearsts new york journal and joseph pulitzers new york world dubbed the yellow press by their critics after the color in which hearst printed a popular comic strip were selling a million copies each day by mixing sensational accounts of crime and political corruption with aggressive appeals to patriotic sentiments.
the splendid little war all these factors contributed to americas emergence as a world power in the spanish american war of 1898 but the immediate origins of the war lay not at home but in the long cuban struggle for independence from spain.
ten years of guerrilla war had followed a cuban revolt in 1868 the movement for independence resumed in 1895 as reports circulated of widespread suffering caused by the spanish policy of rounding up civilians and moving them into detention camps the cuban struggle won growing support in the united states.
a cartoon in puck december 1 1897 imagines the annexation of hawaii by the united states as a shotgun wedding.
the minister president mckinley reads from a book entitled annexation policy.
the hawaiian bride appears to be looking for a way to escape.
most hawaiians did not support annexation.
17 freedoms boundaries at home and abroad 1890 1900 the destruction of the battleship maine in havana harbor later found to have been an accident provided the occasion for patriotic pageants like remember the maine by william h wests big minstrel jubilee.
becoming a world power demands for intervention escalated after february 15 1898 when an explosion probably accidental a later investigation concluded destroyed the american battleship maine in havana harbor with the loss of nearly 270 lives.
the yellow press blamed spain and insisted on retribution.
after spain rejected an american demand for a cease fire on the island and eventual cuban independence president mckinley in april asked congress for a declaration of war.
the purpose declared senator henry teller of colorado was to aid cuban patriots in their struggle for liberty and freedom to underscore the governments humanitarian intentions congress adopted the teller amendment stating that the united states had no intention of annexing or dominating the island.
secretary of state john hay called the spanish american conflict a splendid little war it lasted only four months and resulted in fewer than 400 american combat deaths.
having shown little interest in imperial expansion before 1898 mckinley now embraced the idea.
the wars most decisive engagement in fact took place not in cuba but at manila bay a strategic harbor in the philippine islands in the distant pacific ocean.
here on may 1 the american navy under admiral george dewey defeated a spanish fleet.
soon afterward soldiers went ashore becoming the first american army units to engage in combat outside the western hemisphere.
july witnessed another naval victory off santiago cuba and the landing of american troops on cuba and puerto rico.
r o o s e v e lt at san juan hill the most highly publicized land battle of the war took place in cuba.
this was the charge up san juan hill outside santiago by theodore roosevelts how did the united states emerge as an imperial power in the 1890s.
rough riders.
an ardent expansionist roosevelt had long believed that a war would reinvigorate the nations unity and sense of manhood which had suffered he felt during the 1890s.
a few months shy of his fortieth birthday when war broke out roosevelt resigned his post as assistant secretary of the navy to raise a volunteer cavalry unit which rushed to cuba to participate in the fighting.
roosevelt envisioned his unit as a cross section of american society and enrolled athletes from ivy league colleges western cowboys representatives of various immigrant groups and even some american indians.
but with the army still segregated he excluded blacks from his regiment.
ironically when the rough riders reached the top of san juan hill they found that black units had preceded them a fact roosevelt omitted in his reports of the battle which were widely reproduced in the popular press.
his heroic exploits made roosevelt a national hero.
he was elected governor of new york that fall and in 1900 became mckinleys vice president.
an american empire with the backing of the yellow press the war quickly escalated from a crusade to aid the suffering cubans to an imperial venture that ended with the united states in possession of a small overseas empire.
mckinley became convinced that the united states could neither return the philippines to spain nor grant them independence for which he believed the inhabitants unprepared.
in an interview with a group of methodist ministers the president spoke of receiving a divine revelation that americans had a duty to uplift and civilize the filipino people and to train them for self government.
in the treaty with spain that ended the war the united states acquired the philippines puerto rico and the pacific island of guam.
as for cuba before recognizing its independence mckinley forced the islands new government to approve the platt amendment to the new cuban constitution drafted by senator orville h platt of connecticut which authorized the united states to charge of the rough riders at san juan hill a painting by frederic remington depicts the celebrated unit commanded by theodore roosevelt in action in cuba during the spanishamerican war of 1898 roosevelt on horseback leads the troops.
remington had been sent to the island the previous year by publisher william randolph hearst to provide pictures of spanish atrocities during the cuban war for independence in the hope of boosting the new york journals circulation.
17 freedoms boundaries at home and abroad 1890 1900 intervene militarily whenever it saw fit.
the united states also acquired a permanent lease on naval stations in cuba including what is now the facility at guantnamo bay.
the platt amendment passed the cuban congress by a single vote.
cuban patriots were terribly disappointed.
jos mart had fomented revolution in cuba from exile in the united states and then traveled to the island to take part in the uprising only to be killed in a battle with spanish soldiers in 1895.
to change masters is not to be free mart had written.
and the memory of the betrayal of 1898 would help to inspire another cuban revolution half a century later.
american interest in its new possessions had more to do with trade than gaining wealth from natural resources or large scale american settlement.
puerto rico and cuba were gateways to latin america strategic outposts from which american naval and commercial power could be projected throughout the hemisphere.
the philippines guam and hawaii lay astride shipping routes to the markets of japan and china.
in 1899 soon after the end of the spanish american war secretary of state john hay announced the open door policy demanding that european powers that had recently in both the caribbean and the pacific the united states achieved swift victories over spain in the spanish american war.
the spanish american war the pacific china the spanish american war the caribbean united states formosa taiwan japanese hong kong british pac i f i c oc e an y we de hainan luzon philippine islands u s s.
maine sunk february 1898 haiti sulu sea 400 kilometers puerto rico dominican republic caribbean sea manila surrenders august 13 1898 an 400 miles jamaica british mi n d a n a o ta havana santiago ba netherlands east indies a t l an t i c o c e an bahamas cuba sarawak british san juan hill july 1 1898 spanish fleet destroyed july 3 1898 south china sea british north borneo santiago tampa manila french indochina becoming a world power corregidor dewey manila spanish fleet destroyed may 1 1898 pac i f i c o c e an 400 miles 400 kilometers american victories american forces american naval blockade spanish forces spanish possessions visions of freedom civilization begins at home.
this cartoon from the new york world a democratic newspaper was published in november 1898 not long after the end of the spanish american war.
it depicts a figure representing justice urging president william mckinley to turn his attention from the philippines to domestic problems in the united states.
questions 1 what problems within the united states does the cartoonist draw attention to and what point is he trying to make.
2 what position does the cartoonist appear to take on the question of annexing the philippines.
17 freedoms boundaries at home and abroad 1890 1900 becoming a world power in this cartoon comment on the american effort to suppress the movement for philippine independence uncle sam tries to subdue a knife wielding insurgent.
divided china into commercial spheres of influence grant equal access to american exports.
the open door referred to the free movement of goods and money not people.
even as the united states banned the immigration of chinese into this country it insisted on access to the markets and investment opportunities of asia.
such economic ambitions could easily lead to military intervention.
when chinese nationalists in the 1900 boxer rebellion killed thousands of christian chinese and beseiged foreign embassies in beijing the united states contributed over 3 000 soldiers to the international force that helped to suppress the rebellion.
the emilio aguinaldo leader of the philippine war against american occupation in a more dignified portrayal than in the cartoon above.
philippine war many cubans filipinos and puerto ricans had welcomed american intervention as a way of breaking spains long hold on these colonies.
large planters looked forward to greater access to american markets and local elites hoped that the american presence would fend off radical changes proposed by rebellious nationalist movements.
nationalists and labor leaders admired americas democratic ideals and believed that american participation in the destruction of spanish rule would lead to social reform and political self government.
but the american determination to exercise continued control direct or indirect led to a rapid change in local opinion nowhere more so than in the philippines.
filipinos had been fighting a war against spain since 1896 after deweys victory at manila bay their leader emilio aguinaldo established a provisional government with a constitution modeled on that of the united states.
but once mckinley decided to retain possession of the islands the filipino movement turned against the united states.
the result was a second war far longer it lasted from 1899 to 1903 and bloodier it cost the lives of well more than 100 000 how did the united states emerge as an imperial power in the 1890s.
american empire alaska purchased from russia 1867 russian empire bering strait canada aleutian islands 1867 outer mongolia korea united states japan china midway islands annexed 1867 philippines ceded by spain after spanish american war 1898 hawaiian islands annexed 1898 wake island annexed 1898 guam ceded by spain after spanish american war 1898 mexico atlantic o cean puerto rico ceded by spain 1898 pa ci f i c ocea n american samoa annexed 1899 indian oc e a n 1 000 2 000 miles 1 000 2 000 kilometers filipinos and 4 200 americans than the spanish american conflict.
today this is perhaps the least remembered of all american wars.
at the time however it was closely followed and widely debated in the united states.
press reports of atrocities committed by american troops the burning of villages torture of prisoners of war and rape and execution of civilians tarnished the nations self image as liberators.
we do not intend to free the people of the philippines complained mark twain.
we have gone there to conquer the mckinley administration justified its policies on the grounds that its aim was to uplift and civilize and christianize the filipinos although most residents of the islands were already roman catholics.
william howard taft who became governor general of the philippines in 1901 believed it might take a century to raise filipinos to the condition where they could appreciate what anglo saxon liberty is once in control of the philippines the colonial administration took seriously the idea of modernizing the islands.
it expanded railroads and united states territory as a result of the spanish american war the united states became the ruler of a farflung overseas empire.
recent h1 voices of freedom from inter view with pr e s i d e n t m c k i n l e y 1 8 9 9 in 1899 soon after the end of the spanishamerican war president william mckinley met with a group of methodist church leaders to discuss his decision to annex the philippines.
then luzon then other islands perhaps also.
i walked the floor of the white house night after night until as being in the best interests of americans and midnight and i am not ashamed to tell you gentlemen that i went down on my knees and prayed to almighty god for light and guidance more than one filipinos.
and one night late it came to me this way mckinley offered a defense of american empire before you go i would like to say just a word about the philippine business.
i have been criticized a good deal about the philippines but dont deserve it.
the truth is i didnt want the philippines and when they came to us as a gift from the gods i did not know what to do with them.
when the spanish war broke out admiral dewey was at hong kong and i ordered him to go to manila and to capture or destroy the spanish fleet and he had to because if defeated he had no place to refit on that side of the globe and if the dons spanish were victorious they would likely cross the pacific and ravage our oregon and california coasts.
and so he had to destroy the spanish fleet and did it.
but that was as far as i thought then.
when i next realized that the philippines had dropped into our laps i confess i did not know what to do with them.
i sought counsel from all sides democrats as well as republicans but got little help.
i thought first we would take only manila i dont know how it was but it came 1 that we could not give them back to spain that would be cowardly and dishonorable 2 that we could not turn them over to france and germany our commercial rivals in the orient that would be bad business and discreditable 3 that we could not leave them to themselves they were unfit for self government and they would soon have anarchy and misrule over there worse than spains was and 4 that there was nothing left for us to do but to take them all and to educate the filipinos and uplift and civilize and christianize them and by gods grace do the very best we could by them as our fellow men for whom christ also died.
and then i went to bed and went to sleep and slept soundly and the next morning i sent for the chief engineer of the war department our map maker and i told him to put the philippines on the map of the united states pointing to a large map on the wall of his office and there they are and there they will stay while i am president.
f r o m a g u i n a l d o s c a s e a g a i n s t the united states 1899 emilio aguinaldo who led the filipino armed struggle for independence against spain and then another war against the united states when president mckinley decided to annex the philippines explained his reasons for opposing american imperialism in an article in the widely read magazine the north american review.
he contrasted american traditions of selfgovernment with the refusal to grant this right rebels against the english government if you could govern yourselves.
now the moral of all this obviously is give us the chance treat us exactly as you demanded to be treated at the hands of england when you rebelled against her autocratic methods.
now here is a unique spectacle the filipinos fighting for liberty the american people fighting them to give them liberty.
you entered into an alliance with our chiefs at hong kong and at singapore and you promised us your aid and protection in our attempt to form a government on to the philippines.
the principles and after the model of the government of the united states.
in combination with our forces you compelled spain to surrender.
joy we filipinos have all along believed that if the abounded in every heart and all went well.
the government at washington.
american nation at large knew exactly as we do what is daily happening in the philippine islands they would rise en masse and demand that this barbaric war should stop and.
she would cease to be the laughing stock of other civilized nations as she became when she abandoned her traditions and set up a double standard of government government by consent in america government by force in the philippine islands.
commenc ed by ignoring all promises that had been made and end ed by ignoring the philippine people their personality and rights and treating them as a common enemy.
in the face of the world you emblazon humanity and liberty upon your standard while you cast your political constitution to the winds and attempt to trample down and exterminate a brave people whose only crime is that they are you have been deceived all along the line.
you have been greatly deceived in the personality of my countrymen.
you went to the philippines under the fighting for their liberty.
impression that their inhabitants were ignorant savages.
we have been represented by your popular press as if we were africans or mohawk indians.
you repeat constantly the dictum that we cannot govern ourselves.
with equal reason you might have said the same thing some fifty or sixty years questions ago of japan and little over a hundred years ago it was extremely questionable when you also were 1 how persuasive is mckinleys account of how and why he decided to annex the philippines.
2 why does aguinaldo think that the united states is betraying its own values.
3 how do these documents reflect different definitions of liberty in the wake of the spanish american war.
17 freedoms boundaries at home and abroad 1890 1900 becoming a world power harbors brought in american schoolteachers and public health officials and sought to modernize agriculture although efforts to persuade local farmers to substitute corn for rice ran afoul of filipino climate and cultural traditions.
the united states said president mckinley had an obligation to its little brown brothers yet in all the new possessions american policies tended to serve the interests of land based local elites native born landowners in the philippines american sugar planters in hawaii and puerto rico and such policies bequeathed enduring poverty to the majority of the rural population.
under american rule puerto rico previously an island of diversified small farmers became a low wage plantation economy controlled by absentee corporations.
by the 1920s its residents were among the poorest in the entire caribbean.
citizens william howard taft the rotund american governor general of the philippines astride a local water buffalo.
or subjects.
american rule also brought with it american racial attitudes.
in an 1899 poem the british writer rudyard kipling urged the united states to take up the white mans burden of imperialism.
american proponents of empire agreed that the domination of non white peoples by whites formed part of the progress of civilization.
among the soldiers sent to the philippines to fight aguinaldo were a number of black regiments.
their letters from the front suggested that american atrocities arose from white troops applying to the filipino population the same treatment for colored peoples practiced at home.
is america any better than spain wondered george w prioleau a black cavalryman who had fought at san juan hill.
americas triumphant entry into the ranks of imperial powers sparked an intense debate over the relationship among political democracy race and american citizenship.
the american system of government had no provision for permanent colonies.
the right of every people to self government was one of the main principles of the declaration of independence.
the idea of an empire of liberty assumed that new territories would eventually be admitted as equal states and their residents would be american citizens.
in the aftermath of the spanish american war however nationalism democracy and american freedom emerged more closely identified than ever with notions of anglo saxon superiority.
leaders of both parties while determined to retain the new overseas possessions feared that people of what one congressman called an alien race and foreign tongue could not be incorporated into the union.
the foraker act of 1900 declared puerto rico an insular territory different from previous territories in the west.
its 1 million inhabitants were defined as citizens of puerto rico not the united states and denied a future path to statehood.
filipinos occupied a similar status.
in a series of cases decided between 1901 and 1904 and known collectively as the insular cases the supreme court held that the constitution did not fully apply to the territories recently acquired by the united states a significant limitation of the scope of american freedom.
congress the court how did the united states emerge as an imperial power in the 1890s.
declared must recognize the fundamental personal rights of residents of the philippines and puerto rico.
but otherwise it could govern them as it saw fit for an indefinite period of time.
thus two principles central to american freedom since the war of independence no taxation without representation and government based on the consent of the governed were abandoned when it came to the nations new possessions.
in the twentieth century the territories acquired in 1898 would follow different paths.
hawaii which had a sizable population of american missionaries and planters became a traditional territory.
its population except for asian immigrant laborers became american citizens and it was admitted as a state in 1959 after nearly a half century of american rule the philippines achieved independence in 1946 until 1950 the u s navy administered guam which remains today an unincorporated territory.
as for puerto rico it is sometimes called the worlds oldest colony because ever since the spanish conquered the island in 1493 it has lacked full self government.
congress extended american citizenship to puerto ricans in 1917 puerto rico today remains in a kind of political limbo poised on the brink of statehood or independence.
the island has the status of a commonwealth.
it elects its own government but lacks a voice in congress and in the election of the u s president and key issues such as defense and environmental policy are controlled by the united states.
drawing the global color line just as american ideas about liberty and self government had circulated around the world in the age of revolution american racial attitudes had a global impact in the age of empire.
the turn of the twentieth century was a time of worldwide concern about immigration race relations and the white mans burden all of which inspired a global sense of fraternity some of the 1 200 filipinos exhibited at the 1904 louisiana purchase exposition in st louis.
the federal government displayed the filipinos in a native setting in order to win public support for the annexation of the philippines.
17 freedoms boundaries at home and abroad 1890 1900 school begins an 1899 cartoon from puck suggests doubts about the project of civilizing non whites in new american possessions.
uncle sam lectures four unkempt black children labeled philippines hawaii porto rico and cuba while neatly dressed pupils representing various states study quietly.
in the background an american indian holds a book upside down while a black man washes the window.
a chinese student apparently hoping for instruction waits at the door.
becoming a world power among anglo saxon nations.
chinese exclusion in the united states strongly influenced anti chinese laws adopted in canada and american segregation and disenfranchisement became models for australia and south africa as they formed new governments they read in particular the proceedings of the mississippi constitutional convention of 1890 which pioneered ways to eliminate black voting rights.
one lesson these countries learned from the united states was that the failure of reconstruction demonstrated the impossibility of multiracial democracy.
the extremely hostile account of reconstruction by the british writer james bryce in his widely read book the american commonwealth published in london in 1888 circulated around the world.
bryce called african americans children of nature and insisted that giving them the right to vote had been a terrible mistake which had produced all kinds of corruption and misgovernment.
his book was frequently cited by the founders of the australian commonwealth 1901 to justify their white australia policy which barred the further immigration of asians.
the union of south africa inaugurated in 1911 saw its own policy of racial separation later known as apartheid as following in the footsteps of segregation in the united states.
south africa however went much further enacting laws that limited skilled jobs to whites and dividing the country into areas where black africans could and could not live.
even american proposals that did not become law such as the literacy test for immigrants vetoed by president cleveland influenced measures adopted overseas.
the united states too learned from other countries.
the gentlemans agreement that limited japanese immigration early in the twentieth century see chapter tv avoided controversy and projected a bland image of middle class life.
popular shows of the early 1950s such as the goldbergs with jewish immigrants as the central characters and the honeymooners in which jackie gleason played a bus driver featured working class families living in urban apartments.
by the end of the decade they had been replaced as the dominant programs by quiz shows westerns and comedies set in suburban homes like leave it to beaver and the adventures of ozzie and harriet.
television also became the most effective advertising medium ever invented.
to polish their image large corporations sponsored popular programs the general electric theater hosted for several years by ronald reagan alcoa presents and others.
tv ads aimed primarily at middle class suburban viewers conveyed images of the good life based on endless consumption.
a a 1959 cadillac eldorado biarritz an example of the design excesses of 1950s car makers.
behemoths like this which got less than fifteen miles to a gallon of gasoline depended on the availability of cheap fuel.
when gas prices rose in later decades consumers turned to smaller more fuel efficient foreign cars helping to bring about the decline and fall of the american automobile industry.
the golden age new ford the concept of freedom wrote one commentator in 1959 has become as familiar to us as an old hat or a new ford and a new ford or chrysler or chevrolet now seemed essential to the enjoyment of freedoms benefits.
along with a home and television set the car became part of what sociologists called the standard consumer package of the 1950s.
by 1960 80 percent of american families owned at least one car and 14 percent had two or more nearly all manufactured in the united states.
most were designed to go out of style within a year or two promoting further purchases.
auto manufacturers and oil companies vaulted to the top ranks of corporate america.
detroit and its environs were home to immense auto factories.
the river rouge complex had 62 000 employees willow run 42 000 since the military increasingly needed high technology goods rather than the trucks and tanks that had rolled off assembly lines in world war ii the region around the great lakes lagged in defense contracts.
in the long term the continued funneling of federal dollars from the north and midwest to the sunbelt would prove devastating to the old industrial heartland.
but during the 1950s the booming automobile industry with its demand for steel rubber and other products assured the regions continued prosperity.
what were the main characteristics of the affluent society of the 1950s.
the interstate highway system seattle wa portland or id cheyenne ne salt lake city nv san diego co nm tucson el paso tx san antonio no interstate highways il h2 honolulu 500 miles 500 kilometers 69 75 71 77 ar ok little rock dallas houston ky birmingham 55 59 la savannah montgomery jacksonville fl miami 150 kilometers at charleston tampa 150 miles and nc sc new orleans nj de md 85 26 ga mobile va atlanta al 87 91 tn 75 charlotte ms the automobile the pivot on which suburban life turned transformed the nations daily life just as the interstate highway system discussed later transformed americans travel habits making possible long distance vacationing by car and commuting to work from ever increasing distances.
the result was an altered american landscape leading to the construction of motels drive in movie theaters and roadside eating establishments.
the first mcdonalds fast food restaurant opened in illinois in 1954 within ten years having been franchised by california businessman ray kroc approximately 700 mcdonalds stands had been built which had sold over 400 million hamburgers.
the car symbolized the identification of freedom with individual mobility and private choice.
on the road americans were constantly reminded in advertising television shows and popular songs they truly enjoyed freedom.
they could imagine themselves as modern versions of western pioneers able to leave behind urban crowds and workplace pressures for the open road work in hi h3 at h1 women detroit chicago 94 nashville fort worth ak oklahoma city albuquerque ia vt nh boston ma ny 88 ct ri pa new york mi omaha az wi minneapolis sioux falls ks columbus washington dc indianapolis oh 79 81 mo cincinnati 70 kansas city 70 64 wv louisville st louis los angeles mn ut ca sd wy me nd san francisco billings mt butte home the emergence of suburbia as a chief site of what was increasingly called the american way of life placed pressure on the family and especially women to live up to freedoms promise.
after 1945 women lost most of 500 miles 500 kilometers begun in 1956 and completed in 1993 the interstate highway system dramatically altered the american landscape and americans daily lives.
it made possible more rapid travel by car and stimulated the growth of suburbs along its many routes.
24 an af f luent society 1953 1960 figure 24.
3 the baby boom and its decline number of births per thousand birthrate 1940 1970 1940 1945 1950 1955 1960 1965 1970 year based on estimated total live births per 1 000 population.
jack goulds 1946 photograph of a hospital maternity ward captures the first year of the postwar baby boom.
the golden age the industrial jobs they had performed during the war.
as during most of american history women who worked outside the home remained concentrated in low salary nonunion jobs such as clerical sales and service labor rather than better paying manufacturing positions.
after a sharp postwar drop in female employment the number of women at work soon began to rise.
by 1955 it exceeded the level of world war ii.
but the nature and aims of womens work had changed.
the modern woman said look magazine worked part time to help support the familys middle class lifestyle not to help pull it out of poverty or to pursue personal fulfillment or an independent career.
working women in 1960 earned on average only 60 percent of the income of men.
despite the increasing numbers of wage earning women the suburban familys breadwinner was assumed to be male while the wife remained at home.
films tv shows and advertisements portrayed marriage as the most important goal of american women.
and during the 1950s men and women reaffirmed the virtues of family life.
they married younger at an average age of twenty two for men and twenty for women divorced less frequently than in the past and had more children 3 2 per family.
a baby boom that lasted into the mid 1960s followed the end of the war.
at a time of low immigration the american population rose by nearly 30 million almost 20 percent during the 1950s.
the increase arose mostly from the large number of births but it also reflected the fact that americans now lived longer than in the past thanks to the wide availability of miracle drugs like penicillin that had been developed during world war ii to combat bacterial infections.
the family also became a weapon in the cold war.
the ability of women to remain at home declared a government official separates us from the communist world where a high percentage of women worked.
to be sure what were the main characteristics of the affluent society of the 1950s.
the family life exalted during the 1950s differed from the patriarchal household of old.
it was a modernized relationship in which both partners reconciled family obligations with personal fulfillment through shared consumption leisure activities and sexual pleasure.
thanks to modern conveniences the personal freedom once associated with work could now be found at home.
frozen and prepared meals exulted one writer in 1953 offered housewives freedom from tedium space work and their own inexperience quite a change from the four freedoms of world war ii.
like other forms of dissent feminism seemed to have disappeared from american life or was widely dismissed as evidence of mental disorder.
prominent psychologists insisted that the unhappiness of individual women or even the desire to work for wages stemmed from a failure to accept the maternal instinct the independent woman declared the book modern woman the lost sex 1947 is a contradiction in terms the idea of domestic life as a refuge and of fulltime motherhood as a womans sphere had a long history in the united states.
but in the postwar suburbs where family life was physically separated from work relatives and the web of social organizations typical of cities it came close to realization.
a segregated advertisers during the 1950s sought to convey the idea that women would enjoy their roles as suburban homemakers as in this ad for a vacuum cleaner which equates housework with a game of golf.
landscape for millions of city dwellers the suburban utopia fulfilled the dream postponed by depression and war of home ownership and middle class incomes.
for beneficiaries of postwar prosperity in the words of a boston worker who made heroic sacrifices to move his family to the suburbs the home became the center of freedom the move to the suburbs also promoted americanization cutting residents off from urban ethnic communities and bringing them fully into the world of mass consumption.
but if the suburbs offered a new site for the enjoyment of american freedom they retained at least one familiar characteristic rigid racial boundaries.
suburbia has never been as uniform as either its celebrants or its critics claimed.
there are upper class suburbs working class suburbs industrial suburbs and suburban neighborhoods within city limits.
but if the class uniformity of suburbia has been exaggerated its racial uniformity was all too real.
as late as the 1990s nearly 90 percent of suburban whites lived in communities with non white populations of less than 1 percent the legacy of decisions by government real estate developers banks and residents.
during the postwar suburban boom federal agencies continued to insure mortgages that barred resale of houses to non whites thereby financing housing segregation.
even after the supreme court in 1948 declared such provisions legally unenforceable banks and private developers barred non whites from the suburbs and the government refused to subsidize their mortgages except in segregated enclaves.
in 1960 blacks represented less than 3 percent of the population of chicagos suburbs.
the vast new communities built by william levitt refused to allow blacks elliott erwitts photograph of a young mother in new rochelle a suburb of new york city suggests that life for the suburban woman could be less idyllic than many advertisements implied.
24 an af f luent society 1953 1960 the golden age including army veterans to rent or purchase homes.
if we sell one house to a negro family levitt explained then 90 or 95 percent of our white customers will not buy into the community after a lawsuit levitt finally agreed during the 1960s to sell homes to non whites but at a pace that can only be described as glacial.
in 1990 his long island community with a population of 53 000 included 127 black residents.
public urban suburban builders sometimes openly advertised the fact that their communities excluded minorities.
this photograph was taken in southern california in 1948 an aerial photograph of boulevard houses a low income housing project in brooklyn illustrates how public housing concentrated poor americans in structures separated from surrounding neighborhoods.
housing and renewal a housing act passed by congress in 1949 authorized the construction of more than 800 000 units of public housing in order to provide a decent home for every american family but the law set an extremely low ceiling on the income of residents a rule demanded by private contractors seeking to avoid competition from the government in building homes for the middle class.
this regulation limited housing projects to the very poor.
since white urban and suburban neighborhoods successfully opposed the construction of public housing it was increasingly confined to segregated neighborhoods in inner cities reinforcing the concentration of poverty in urban non white neighborhoods.
at the same time under programs of urban renewal cities demolished poor neighborhoods in city centers that occupied potentially valuable real estate.
in their place developers constructed what were the main characteristics of the affluent society of the 1950s.
retail centers and all white middle income housing complexes and states built urban public universities like wayne state in detroit and the university of illinois at chicago.
los angeles displaced a neighborhood of mixed ethnic groups in chavez ravine in order to build a stadium for the dodgers whose move in 1958 after sixty eight years in brooklyn seemed to symbolize the growing importance of california on the national scene.
white residents displaced by urban renewal often moved to the suburbs.
non whites unable to do so found housing in run down city neighborhoods.
the divided society suburbanization hardened the racial lines of division in american life.
between 1950 and 1970 about 7 million white americans left cities for the suburbs.
meanwhile nearly 3 million blacks moved from the south to the north greatly increasing the size of existing urban ghettos and creating entirely new ones.
and half a million puerto ricans mostly small coffee and tobacco farmers and agricultural laborers forced off the land when american sugar companies expanded their landholdings on the island moved to the mainland.
most ended up in new york citys east harlem until then an italian american community.
although set in a different part of new york the popular broadway musical west side story dramatized the tensions between puerto rican newcomers and longtime urban residents.
by the late 1960s more puerto ricans lived in new york city than san juan the islands capital.
the process of racial exclusion became self reinforcing.
non whites remained concentrated in manual and unskilled jobs the result of employment discrimination and their virtual exclusion from educational opportunities at public and private universities including those outside the south.
in 1950 only 12 percent of employed blacks held white collar positions compared with 45 percent of whites.
as the white population and industrial jobs fled the old city centers for the suburbs poorer blacks and latinos remained trapped in urban ghettos seen by many whites as places of crime poverty and welfare.
suburbanites for whom the home represented not only an emblem of freedom but the familys major investment became increasingly fearful that any non white presence would lower the quality of life and destroy property values.
life magazine quoted a white suburbanite discussing a prospective black neighbor hes probably a nice guy but every time i see him i see 2 000 drop off the value of my house residential segregation was reinforced by blockbusting a tactic of real estate brokers who circulated exaggerated warnings of an impending influx of non whites to persuade alarmed white residents to sell their homes hastily.
because of this practice some allwhite neighborhoods quickly became all minority enclaves rather than places where members of different races lived side by side.
freedom is equal housing too became a slogan in the campaign for residential integration.
but suburban home ownership long remained a white entitlement with the freedom of non whites to rent or purchase a home where they desired overridden by the claims of private property and freedom of association even as the old divisions between white ethnic americans faded in the suburban melting pot racial barriers in housing and therefore in public education and jobs were reinforced.
students at an east harlem elementary school in 1947 most have recently migrated from puerto rico to the mainland with their families although some are probably children of the areas older italian american community.
24 an af f luent society 1953 1960 the end the golden age of ideology cold war affluence coexisted with urban decay and racism the seeds from which protest would soon flower.
yet to many observers in the 1950s it seemed that the ills of american society had been solved.
in contrast to the turmoil of the 1930s and the immediate postwar years the 1950s was a placid time because of both widespread affluence and the narrowing of the boundaries of permissible political debate.
the boom and bust cycles mass unemployment and economic insecurity of the past seemed largely to have disappeared.
scholars celebrated the end of ideology and the triumph of a democratic capitalist consensus in which all americans except the maladjusted and fanatics shared the same liberal values of individualism respect for private property and belief in equal opportunity.
if problems remained their solutions required technical adjustments not structural change or aggressive political intervention.
as for religious differences the source of persistent tension in american history these were absorbed within a common judeo christian heritage a notion that became central to the cultural and political dialogue of the 1950s.
this newly invented tradition sought to demonstrate that catholics protestants and jews shared the same history and values and had all contributed to the evolution of american society.
in the era of mccarthyism ideological differences may have been un american but group pluralism reigned supreme with the free exercise of religion yet another way of differentiating the american way of life from life under communism.
the idea of a unified judeo christian tradition overlooked the long history of hostility among religious denominations.
but it reflected the decline of anti semitism and anti catholicism in the wake of world war ii as well as the ongoing secularization of american life.
during the 1950s a majority of americans the highest proportion in the nations history were affiliated with a church or synagogue.
evangelists like billy graham used radio and television to spread the message of christianity and anticommunism to millions.
but as will herberg argued in his influential book this postage stamp depicts four chaplains who perished during the sinking of an american ship during world war ii.
its original design listed their denominations catholic protestant and jewish.
when the stamp was issued in 1948 these words were omitted in keeping with the emphasis on the newly invented idea of a judeochristian tradition shared by all americans.
what were the main characteristics of the affluent society of the 1950s.
protestant catholic jew 1955 religion now had less to do with spiritual activities or sacred values than with personal identity group assimilation and the promotion of traditional morality.
in an affluent suburban society herberg argued the common religion was the american way of life a marriage of democratic values and economic prosperity in a phrase free enterprise selling free enterprise the economic content of cold war freedom increasingly came to focus on consumer capitalism or as it was now universally known free enterprise more than political democracy or freedom of speech which many allies of the united states outside western europe lacked an economic system resting on private ownership united the nations of the free world.
a week before his truman doctrine speech in a major address on economic policy the president reduced roosevelts four freedoms to three.
freedom of speech and worship remained but freedom from want and fear had been replaced by freedom of enterprise part and parcel said truman of the american way of life.
even more than during world war ii what one historian calls the selling of free enterprise became a major industry involving corporate advertising school programs newspaper editorials and civic activities.
convinced that ads represented a new weapon in the world wide fight for freedom the advertising council invoked cherished symbols like the statue of liberty and the liberty bell in the service of competitive free enterprise to be sure the free enterprise campaigners did not agree on every issue.
some businessmen believed that defending free enterprise required rolling back much of the power that labor unions had gained in the past decade dismantling new deal regulations and restricting the economic role of government.
representing what might be called businesss more liberal wing the advertising council in its american economic system ad campaign of 1949 reaffirmed labors right to collective bargaining and the importance of government business cooperation.
indeed despite talk of the glories of the free market government policies played a crucial role in the postwar boom.
the rapid expansion of the suburban middle class owed much to federal tax subsidies mortgage guarantees for home purchases dam and highway construction military contracts and benefits under the gi bill.
peoples capitalism free enterprise seemed an odd way of describing an economy in which a few large corporations dominated key sectors.
until well into the twentieth century most ordinary americans had been deeply suspicious of big business associating it with images of robber barons who manipulated politics suppressed economic competition and treated their workers unfairly.
americans wrote david lilienthal chairman of the atomic energy commission must abandon their traditional fear that concentrated economic power endangered our very liberties large scale production was not only necessary to fighting the cold war but it enhanced freedom by multiplying consumer goods.
by freedom wrote lilienthal i mean ch.
24 an af f luent society 1953 1960 tv became the most effective advertising medium in history.
here an advertisement for ford one of the largest american corporations is being filmed.
the background evokes the idea of driving on the open road as a form of individual freedom.
the golden age essentially freedom to choose.
it means a maximum range of choice for the consumer when he spends his dollar by the end of the 1950s publicopinion surveys revealed that more than 80 percent of americans believed that our freedom depends on the free enterprise system the united states declared fortune magazine anticipating vice president nixons remark in the 1959 kitchen debate had achieved the marxist goal of a classless society.
a sharp jump in the number of individuals investing in wall street inspired talk of a new peoples capitalism in 1953 4 5 million americans only slightly more than in 1928 owned shares of stock.
by the mid 1960s the number had grown to 25 million.
in the face of widespread abundance who could deny that the capitalist marketplace embodied individual freedom or that poverty would soon be a thing of the past.
it was american freedom proclaimed life magazine by which and through which this amazing achievement of wealth and power was fashioned the libertarian conservatives during the 1950s a group of thinkers began the task of reviving conservatism and reclaiming the idea of freedom from liberals.
although largely ignored outside their own immediate circle they developed ideas that would define conservative thought for the next half century.
one was opposition to a strong national government an outlook that had been given new political life in conservatives bitter reaction against the new deal.
to these libertarian conservatives freedom meant individual autonomy limited government and unregulated capitalism.
these ideas had great appeal to conservative entrepreneurs especially in the rapidly growing south and west.
many businessmen who desired to pursue their economic fortunes free of government regulation high taxes and labor unions found intellectual reinforcement in the writings of the what were the main characteristics of the affluent society of the 1950s.
young economist milton friedman.
in 1962 friedman published capitalism and freedom which identified the free market as the necessary foundation for individual liberty.
this was not an uncommon idea during the cold war but friedman pushed it to extreme conclusions.
he called for turning over to the private sector virtually all government functions and the repeal of minimum wage laws the graduated income tax and the social security system.
friedman extended the idea of unrestricted free choice into virtually every realm of life.
government he insisted should seek to regulate neither the economy nor individual conduct.
the new conservatism friedman was indirectly criticizing not only liberalism but also the new conservatism a second strand of thought that became increasingly prominent in the 1950s.
convinced that the free world needed to arm itself morally and intellectually not just militarily for the battle against communism new conservatives like writers russell kirk and richard weaver insisted that toleration of difference a central belief of modern liberalism offered no substitute for the search for absolute truth.
weavers book ideas have consequences 1948 a rambling philosophical treatise that surprisingly became the most influential statement of this new traditionalism warned that the west was suffering from moral decay and called for a return to a civilization based on values grounded in the christian tradition and in timeless notions of good and evil.
the new conservatives understood freedom as first and foremost a moral condition.
it required a decision by independent men and women to lead virtuous lives or governmental action to force them to do so.
although they wanted government expelled from the economy new conservatives trusted it to regulate personal behavior to restore a christian morality they saw as growing weaker and weaker in american society.
here lay the origins of a division in conservative ranks that would persist into the twenty first century.
unrestrained individual choice and moral virtue are radically different starting points from which to discuss freedom.
was the purpose of conservatism one writer wondered to create the free man or the good man.
libertarian conservatives spoke the language of progress and personal autonomy the new conservatives emphasized tradition community and moral commitment.
the former believed that too many barriers existed to the pursuit of individual liberty.
the latter condemned an excess of individualism and a breakdown of common values.
fortunately for conservatives political unity often depends less on intellectual coherence than on the existence of a common foe.
and two powerful enemies became focal points for the conservative revival the soviet union abroad and the federal government at home.
anticommunism however did not clearly distinguish conservatives from liberals who also supported the cold war.
what made conservatism distinct was its antagonism to big government in america at least so long as it was controlled by liberals who conservatives believed tolerated or encouraged immorality.
republican control of the presidency did not lessen conservatives hostility to the federal government partly because they did not consider president eisenhower one of their own.
24 an af f luent society 1953 1960 the eisenhower era the eisenhower era ike dwight d eisenhowers popularity was evident at this appearance in baltimore during the 1952 presidential campaign.
and nixon dwight d eisenhower or ike as he was affectionately called emerged from world war ii as the military leader with the greatest political appeal partly because his public image of fatherly warmth set him apart from other successful generals like the arrogant douglas macarthur.
eisenhowers party affiliation was unknown.
in 1948 he voted for truman and he accepted trumans invitation to return to europe as supreme commander of nato forces.
both parties wanted him as their candidate in 1952 but eisenhower became convinced that senator robert a taft of ohio a leading contender for the republican nomination would lead the united states back toward isolationism.
eisenhower entered the contest and won the republican nomination.
as his running mate eisenhower chose richard nixon of california a world war ii veteran who had made a name for himself by vigorous anticommunism.
in his first campaign for congress in 1946 nixon attacked his opponent as an advocate of state socialism he gained greater fame by his pursuit of alger hiss while a member of the house un american activities committee.
nixon won election to the u s senate in 1950 in a campaign in which he suggested that the democratic candidate congresswoman helen gahagan douglas had communist sympathies.
these tactics gave nixon a lifelong reputation for opportunism and dishonesty.
but nixon was also a shrewd politician who pioneered efforts to transform the republican partys image from defender of business to champion of the forgotten man the hardworking citizen burdened by heavy taxation and unresponsive government bureaucracies.
freedom for the individual for private enterprise he insisted had made america great.
in using populist language to promote free market economics nixon helped to lay the foundation for the triumph of conservatism a generation later.
the 1952 campaign almost as soon as he won the vice presidential nomination nixon ran into trouble over press reports that wealthy californians had created a private fund for his family.
eisenhower considered dropping him from the ticket.
but in an emotional nationally televised thirty minute address in which he drew attention to his ordinary upbringing war service and close knit family nixon denied the accusations.
the checkers speech named after the family dog the one gift nixon acknowledged receiving but insisted he would not return rescued how were the 1950s a period of consensus in both domestic policies and foreign affairs.
his political career.
it illustrated how television was beginthe presidential ning to transform politics by allowing candidates to bring election of 1952 a carefully crafted image directly into americans living rooms.
the 1952 campaign became the first to make extensive use of tv ads.
parties one observer complained 34 5 were selling the president like toothpaste more important to the elections outcome however was eisenhowers popularity invoked in the republican cam32 paign slogan i like ike and the publics weariness with the 27 13 25 3 16 8 12 korean war.
ikes pledge to go to korea in search of peace signaled his intention to bring the conflict to an end.
he won a resounding victory over the democratic candidate adlai 8 11 12 stevenson.
four years later eisenhower again defeated stevenson by an even wider margin.
his popularity howev10 er did not extend to his party.
republicans won a razor thin majority in congress in 1952 but democrats regained conelectoral vote popular vote trol in 1954 and retained it for the rest of the decade.
in 1956 candidate share share party eisenhower became the first president to be elected without 442 83 33 778 963 55 1 eisenhower republican 89 17 27 314 992 44 4 stevenson democrat his party controlling either house of congress.
during the 1950s voters at home and abroad seemed to find reassurance in selecting familiar elderly leaders to govern them.
at age sixty two eisenhower was one of the oldest men ever elected president.
but he seemed positively youthful compared with winston churchill who returned to office as prime minister of great britain at age seventy seven charles degaulle who assumed the presidency of france at sixty eight and konrad adenauer who served as chancellor of west germany from age seventy three until well into his eighties.
in retrospect eisenhowers presidency seems almost uneventful at least in domestic affairs an interlude between the bitter party battles of the truman administration and the social upheavals of the 1960s.
modern republicanism with a republican serving as president for the first time in twenty years the tone in washington changed.
wealthy businessmen dominated eisenhowers cabinet.
defense secretary charles wilson the former president of general motors made the widely publicized statement what is good for the country is good for general motors and vice versa a champion of the business community and a fiscal conservative ike worked to scale back government spending including the military budget.
but while right wing republicans saw his victory as an invitation to roll back the new deal eisenhower realized that such a course would be disastrous.
should any political party attempt to abolish social security unemployment insurance and eliminate labor laws and farm programs he declared you would not hear of that party again in our political history eisenhower called his domestic agenda modern republicanism.
it aimed to sever his partys identification in the minds of many americans with herbert hoover the great depression and indifference to the economic conditions of ordinary citizens.
the core new deal programs not only remained in place but expanded.
in 1955 millions of agricultural workers became eligible for the first time for social security.
nor did ike ch.
24 an af f luent society 1953 1960 do you call c minus catching up with russia alan dunns cartoon for the new yorker magazine comments on how soviet success in launching an artificial earth satellite spurred a focus on improving scientific education in the united states.
the eisenhower era reduce the size and scope of government.
despite the use of free enterprise as a weapon in the cold war the idea of a mixed economy in which the government played a major role in planning economic activity was widely accepted throughout the western world.
americas european allies like britain and france expanded their welfare states and nationalized key industries like steel shipbuilding and transportation that is the government bought them from private owners and operated and subsidized them.
the united states had a more limited welfare state than western europe and left the main pillars of the economy in private hands.
but it too used government spending to promote productivity and boost employment.
eisenhower presided over the largest public works enterprise in american history the building of the 41 000 mile interstate highway system.
as noted in the previous chapter 17 had begun around 1890 but reached its peak during the progressive era.
between 1901 and the outbreak of world war i in europe in 1914 some 13 million immigrants came to the united states the majority from italy russia and the austro hungarian empire.
in fact progressive era immigration formed part of a larger process of worldwide migration set in motion by industrial expansion and the decline of traditional agriculture.
poles emigrated not only to pittsburgh and chicago but to work in german factories and scottish mines.
italians sought jobs in belgium france and argentina as well as the united states.
as many as 750 000 chinese migrated to other countries each year.
during the years from 1840 to 1914 when immigration to the united states would be virtually cut off first by the outbreak of world war i and then by legislation perhaps 40 million persons emigrated to the united states and another 20 million to other parts of the western hemisphere including canada argentina brazil and the caribbean.
this population flow formed one part of a massive shifting of peoples throughout the world much of which took place in asia.
millions of persons migrated to southeast asia and the south pacific mainly from india and china.
millions more moved from russia and northern asia to manchuria siberia and central asia.
the world on the move st petersburg winnipeg halifax new york europe 4 millio russian empire novosibirsk n lvov n baku tashkent east and vladivostok southeast asia tientsin tianjin 7 million returnees 3 million the four world migration systems 1815 1914 atlantic russo siberian asian contract labor colonial estimated emigration millions population 1900 25 milllion people transportation after 1880 transcontinental railroad suez canal 1869 o sia yokohama s ca e ri shanghai japan am e china new orleans th calcutta burma africa hong kong egypt mexico cuba bombay india puerto rico veracruz yemen siam acapulco pac ific manila dakar jamaica bangkok saigon nigeria oc ean accra lagos georgetown caracas ceylon 5 malaya panama canal 1914 uganda douala mi mogadishu l lio singapore n in belem ter to africa dutch east indies quito ivory nal mombasa gold ly coast batavia jakarta south america coast madagascar 0 75 million to callao lima africa and australia brazil salvador la paz beira pa cific rio de janeiro windhoek mauritius australia brisbane oce a n sao paulo south maputo africa valparaiso in d ia n o c e a n sydney cape town montevideo melbourne buenos aires new argentina zealand 2 5 million los angeles on t rom a chicago lio 35 mil 1815 1914 1m illi llion f seattle united states san francisco st louis 6 million minsk 8m illio n mi vancouver european russia moscow at l ant i c oce an canada migration siberia north sea north america world the century between 1815 when the napoleonic wars in europe and the war of 1812 in the united states ended and the outbreak of world war i in 1914 witnessed a series of massive shifts in the worlds population.
the 35 million people who crossed the atlantic to north america formed the largest migration stream but millions of migrants also moved to south america eastern russia and various parts of asia.
colonial plantation systems foods wheat rice bananas stimulants coffee tea tobacco sugar cocoa opium industrial crops cotton palm oil rubber ch.
18 the progressive era 1900 1916 an illustration in the 1912 publication the new immigration depicts the various types entering the united states.
italian family on ferry boat leaving ellis island a 1905 photograph by lewis hine.
the family of immigrants has just passed through the inspection process at the gateway to the united states.
an urban age and a consumer society numerous causes inspired this massive uprooting of population.
rural southern and eastern europe and large parts of asia were regions marked by widespread poverty and illiteracy burdensome taxation and declining economies.
political turmoil at home like the revolution that engulfed mexico after 1911 also inspired emigration.
not all of these immigrants could be classified as free laborers however.
large numbers of chinese mexican and italian migrants including many who came to the united states were bound to long term labor contracts.
these contracts were signed with labor agents who then provided the workers to american employers.
but all the areas attracting immigrants were frontiers of one kind or another agricultural mining or industrial with expanding job opportunities.
most european immigrants to the united states entered through ellis island.
located in new york harbor this became in 1892 the nations main facility for processing immigrants.
millions of americans today trace their ancestry to an immigrant who passed through ellis island.
the less fortunate who failed a medical examination or were judged to be anarchists prostitutes or in other ways undesirable were sent home.
at the same time an influx of asian and mexican newcomers was taking place in the west.
after the exclusion of immigrants from china in the late nineteenth century a small number of japanese arrived primarily to work as agricultural laborers in californias fruit and vegetable fields and on hawaiis sugar plantations.
by 1910 the population of japanese origin had grown to 72 000 between 1910 and 1940 angel island in san francisco bay the ellis island of the west served as the main entry point for immigrants from asia.
far larger was mexican immigration.
between 1900 and 1930 some 1 million mexicans more than 10 percent of that countrys population why was the city such a central element in progressive america.
entered the united states a number exceeded by only a few european countries.
many mexicans entered through el paso texas the main southern gateway into the united states.
many ended up in the san gabriel valley of california where citrus growers searching for cheap labor had earlier experimented with native american south asian chinese and filipino migrant workers.
by 1910 one seventh of the american population was foreign born the highest percentage in the countrys history.
more than 40 percent of new york citys population had been born abroad.
in chicago and smaller industrial cities like providence milwaukee and san francisco the figure exceeded 30 percent.
although many newcomers moved west to take part in the expansion of farming most clustered in industrial centers.
by 1910 nearly three fifths of the workers in the twenty leading manufacturing and mining industries were foreign born.
the immigrant quest for freedom like their nineteenth century predecessors the new immigrants arrived imagining the united states as a land of freedom where all persons enjoyed equality before the law could worship as they pleased enjoyed economic opportunity and had been emancipated from the oppressive social hierarchies of their homelands.
america is a free country one polish immigrant wrote home.
you dont have to be a serf to anyone agents sent abroad by the american government to investigate the reasons for large scale immigration reported that the main impetus was a desire to share in the freedom and prosperity enjoyed by the people of the united states freedom they added was largely an economic ambition a desire to escape from hopeless poverty and achieve a standard of living impossible at home.
while some of the new immigrants especially jews fleeing religious persecution in the russian empire thought of themselves as permanent emigrants the majority initially planned to earn enough money to return home and purchase land.
groups like mexicans and italians included many birds of passage who remained only temporarily in the united states.
in 1908 a year of economic downturn in the united states more italians left the country than entered.
the new immigrants clustered in close knit ethnic neighborhoods with their own shops theaters and community organizations and often continued to speak their native tongues.
as early as 1900 more than 1 000 foreignlanguage newspapers were published in the united a community settlement map for chicago in 1900 illustrates the immigrant and racial neighborhoods in the nations second largest city.
table 18 2 immigrants and their children as percentage of population ten major cities 1920 city percentage new york city 76 cleveland boston chicago detroit san francisco minneapolis pittsburgh seattle los angeles ch.
18 the progressive era 1900 1916 an immigrant from mexico arriving around 1912 in a cart drawn by a donkey.
an urban age and a consumer society states.
churches were pillars of these immigrant communities.
in new yorks east harlem even anti clerical italian immigrants who resented the close alliance in italy between the catholic church and the oppressive state participated eagerly in the annual festival of the madonna of mt.
after italian americans scattered to the suburbs they continued to return each year to reenact the festival.
although most immigrants earned more than was possible in the impoverished regions from which they came they endured low wages long hours and dangerous working conditions.
in the mines and factories of pennsylvania and the midwest eastern european immigrants performed low wage unskilled labor while native born workers dominated skilled and supervisory jobs.
the vast majority of mexican immigrants became poorly paid agricultural mine and railroad laborers with little prospect of upward economic mobility.
my people are not in america remarked one slavic priest they are under it consumer freedom cities however were also the birthplace of a mass consumption society that added new meaning to american freedom.
there was of course nothing unusual in the idea that the promise of american life lay in part in the enjoyment by the masses of citizens of goods available in other countries only to the well to do.
not until the progressive era however did the advent of large downtown department stores chain stores in urban neighborhoods and retail mail order houses for farmers and small town resi in hester street painted in 1905 george luks a member of the ashcan school of urban artists captures the colorful street life of an immigrant neighborhood in new york city.
visions of freedom movie 5 cents.
in this 1907 painting the artist john sloan depicts the interior of a movie house.
by this time millions of people each week were flocking to see silent motion pictures.
the audience includes different classes and races as well as couples and women attending alone.
questions 1 what does the nature of the audience suggest about movie theaters as places of a new social freedom.
2 does the painting help explain why some critics complained that movies promoted immorality.
18 the progressive era 1900 1916 women at work in a shoe factory 1908 an urban age and a consumer society dents make available to consumers throughout the country the vast array of goods now pouring from the nations factories.
by 1910 americans could purchase among many other items electric sewing machines washing machines vacuum cleaners and record players.
low wages the unequal distribution of income and the souths persistent poverty limited the consumer economy which would not fully come into its own until after world war ii.
but it was in progressive america that the promise of mass consumption became the foundation for a new understanding of freedom as access to the cornucopia of goods made available by modern capitalism.
leisure activities also took on the characteristics of mass consumption.
amusement parks dance halls and theaters attracted large crowds of city dwellers.
the most popular form of mass entertainment at the turn of the century was vaudeville a live theatrical entertainment consisting of numerous short acts typically including song and dance comedy acrobats magicians and trained animals.
in the 1890s brief motion pictures were already being introduced into vaudeville shows.
as the movies became longer and involved more sophisticated plot narratives separate theaters developed.
by 1910 25 million americans per week mostly working class urban residents were attending nickelodeons motion picture theaters whose five cent admission charge was far lower than at vaudeville shows.
the working woman the new visibility of women in urban public places at work as shoppers and in places of entertainment like cinemas and dance halls indicated that traditional gender roles were changing dramatically in progressive america.
as the triangle fire revealed more and more women were working for wages.
black women still worked primarily as domestics or in southern cotton fields.
immigrant women were largely confined to lowpaying factory employment.
but for native born white women the kinds of jobs available expanded enormously.
by 1920 around 25 percent of employed women were office workers or telephone operators and only 15 percent worked in domestic service the largest female job category of the nineteenth century.
female work was no longer confined to young unmarried white women and adult black women.
in 1920 of 8 million women working for wages one quarter were married and living with their husbands.
table 18 3 percentage of women 14 years and older in the labor force year all women married women women as of labor force 20 4 5 6 18 25 2 10 7 23 3 9 0 24 3 11 7 why was the city such a central element in progressive america.
the working woman immigrant and native working class and professional became a symbol of female emancipation.
women faced special limitations on their economic freedom including wage discrimination and exclusion from many jobs.
yet almost in spite of themselves union leader abraham bisno remarked young immigrant working women developed a sense of independence they acquired the right to a personality something alien to the highly patriarchal family structures of the old country.
we enjoy our independence and freedom was the assertive statement of the bachelor girls social club a group of female mail order clerks in new york.
the growing number of younger women who desired a lifelong career wrote charlotte perkins gilman in her influential book women and economics 1898 offered evidence of a spirit of personal independence that pointed to a coming transformation of both economic and family life.
gilmans writings reinforced the claim that the road to womans freedom lay through the workplace.
in the home she argued women experienced not fulfillment but oppression and the housewife was an unproductive parasite little more than a servant to her husband and children.
by condemning women to a life of domestic drudgery prevailing gender norms made them incapable of contributing to society or enjoying freedom in any meaningful sense of the word.
the desire to participate in the consumer society produced remarkably similar battles within immigrant families of all nationalities between parents and their self consciously free children especially daughters.
contemporaries native and immigrant noted how the novelties and frivolities of fashion appealed to young working women who spent part of their meager wages on clothing and makeup and at places of entertainment.
daughters considered parents who tried to impose curfews or to prevent them from going out alone to dances or movies as old fashioned and not sufficiently american immigrant parents found it very difficult to adapt to what one mexican mother called this terrible freedom in this united states the mexican girls she told a sociologist studying immigrant life in los angeles seeing american girls with freedom they want it too the rise of table 18 4 percentage of women workers in various occupations occupation professional technical 8 2 11 7 clerical 4 0 18 7 sales workers 4 3 6 2 unskilled and semiskilled manufacturing 23 7 20 2 household workers 28 7 15 7 fordism if any individual exemplified the new consumer society it was henry ford.
the son of an immigrant irish farmer ford had worked as an apprentice in michigan machine shops and later as an engineer for the edison illuminating company.
ford did not invent the automobile but he developed the techniques of production and marketing that brought it within the reach of ordinary americans.
in 1905 he established the ford motor company one of dozens of small automobile manufacturing firms that emerged in these years.
three years later he introduced the model t a simple light vehicle sturdy enough to navigate the countrys poorly maintained roads.
while early european models like the mercedes aimed at an elite market and were superior in craftsmanship ford concentrated on standardizing output and lowering prices.
in 1913 fords factory in highland park michigan adopted the method of production known as the moving assembly line in which car frames were brought to workers on a continuously moving conveyor belt.
the process enabled ford to expand output by greatly reducing the time it took the return from toil a drawing by john sloan for the radical magazine the masses pictures working women not as downtrodden but as independent minded stylish and self confident.
18 the progressive era 1900 1916 an urban age and a consumer society the assembly line at the ford motor company factory in highland park michigan around 1915 to produce each car.
in 1914 he raised wages at his factory to the unheard of level of five dollars per day more than double the pay of most industrial workers enabling him to attract a steady stream of skilled laborers.
labor conditions in the ford plant were not as appealing as the wages however assembly line work was monotonous the worker repeated the same basic motions for the entire day and ford used spies and armed detectives to prevent unionization.
when other businessmen criticized him for endangering profits by paying high wages ford replied that workers must be able to afford the goods being turned out by american factories.
fords output rose from 34 000 cars priced at 700 each in 1910 to 730 000 model ts that sold at a price of 316 well within the reach of many workers in 1916 the economic system based on mass production and mass consumption came to be called fordism.
table 18 5 sales of passenger cars year number of cars in thousands 4 1 24 2 181 0 895 9 1 905 5 3 735 1 the promise of abundance as economic production shifted from capital goods steel railroad equipment etc.
to consumer products the new advertising industry perfected ways of increasing sales often by linking goods with the idea of freedom.
numerous products took liberty as a brand name or used an image of the statue of liberty as a sales device.
the department store magnate edward filene called consumerism a school of freedom since shoppers made individual choices on basic questions of living.
economic abundance would eventually come to define the american way of life in which personal fulfillment was to be found through acquiring material goods.
the promise of abundance shifted the quest for freedom to the realm of private life but it also inspired political activism.
exclusion from the world of mass consumption would come to seem almost as great a denial of the why was the city such a central element in progressive america.
one days output of model t fords in a 1913 photograph.
the assembly line made mass production like this possible.
rights of citizenship as being barred from voting once had been.
the desire for consumer goods led many workers to join unions and fight for higher wages.
the argument that monopolistic corporations artificially raised prices at the expense of consumers became a weapon against the trusts.
consumers consciousness wrote walter lippmann who emerged in these years as one of the nations most influential social commentators was growing rapidly with the high cost of living as its rallying cry.
an american standard of living the maturation of the consumer economy gave rise to concepts a living wage and an american standard of living that offered a new language for criticizing the inequalities of wealth and power in progressive america.
father john a ryans influential book a living wage 1906 described a decent standard of living one that enabled a person to participate in the consumer economy as a natural and absolute right of citizenship.
ryan had grown up in minnesota in a family sympathetic to henry george the knights of labor and the populists.
his book sought to translate into american terms pope leo xiiis powerful statement of 1894 rerum novarum which criticized the divorce of economic life from ethical considerations endorsed the right of workers to organize unions and repudiated competitive individualism in favor of a more cooperative vision of the good society.
ryans insistence that economic relationships should be governed by moral standards had a powerful influence on social thought among american catholics.
the popularity of the idea of an american standard of living reflected in part the emergence of a mass consumption society during the progressive era.
for the first time in the nations history mass consumption came to occupy a central place in descriptions of american society and its future.
in the one of the numerous advertisements of the early twentieth century that invoked the statue of liberty to market consumer goods in this case a brand of crackers.
18 the progressive era 1900 1916 varieties of progressivism gilded age social theorists like henry george had wondered why economic progress produced both increased wealth and abject misery.
the progressive generation was strongly influenced by the more optimistic writings of simon w patten a prophet of prosperity.
patten announced the end of the reign of want and the advent of a society of abundance and leisure.
in the dawning new civilization he proclaimed americans would enjoy economic equality in a world in which every one is independent and free va r i e t i e s o f p r o g r e s s i v i s m picturesque america a 1909 cartoon by harry grant dart offers a satirical comment on how advertising was threatening to overwhelm public life.
dart also includes a political comment he would rather advertise than be president on senator robert lafollette of wisconsin pictured at the top right delivering a speech.
for most americans however pattens new civilization lay far in the future.
the more immediate task in the progressives view was to humanize industrial capitalism and find common ground in a society still racked by labor conflict and experiencing massive immigration from abroad.
some progressives proposed to return to a competitive marketplace populated by small producers.
others accepted the permanence of the large corporation and looked to the government to reverse the growing concentration of wealth and to ensure social justice.
still others would relocate freedom from the economic and political worlds to a private realm of personal fulfillment and unimpeded self expression.
but nearly all progressives agreed that freedom must be infused with new meaning to deal with the economic and social conditions of the early twentieth century.
the old democracy wrote walter weyl associate editor of the new republic a weekly magazine that became the bible of progressive intellectuals provided no answer to the problems of a world in which the chief restrictions upon liberty were economic not political.
industrial freedom in progressive america complaints of a loss of freedom came not only from the most poorly paid factory workers but from better off employees as well.
large firms in the automobile electrical steel and other industries sought to implement greater control over the work process.
efficiency expert frederick w taylor pioneered what he called scientific management a program that sought to streamline production and boost profits by systematically controlling costs and work practices.
through scientific study the one best way of producing goods could be determined and implemented.
the role of workers was to obey the detailed instructions of supervisors.
not surprisingly many skilled workers saw the erosion of their traditional influence over the work process as a loss of freedom.
men and women complained samuel gompers whose american federation of labor afl represented such skilled workers cannot live during working hours under autocratic conditions and instantly become sons and daughters of freedom as they step outside the shop gates the great increase in the number of white collar workers the army of salespeople bookkeepers salaried professionals and corporate managers how did the labor and womens movements challenge the nineteenth century meanings of american freedom.
that sprang up with the new system of management also undermined the experience of personal autonomy.
for although they enjoyed far higher social status and incomes than manual workers many wrote one commentator were the kind of individuals who under former conditions would have been.
managing their own businesses not working for someone else.
these developments helped to place the ideas of industrial freedom and industrial democracy which had entered the political vocabulary in the gilded age at the center of political discussion during the progressive era.
lack of industrial freedom was widely believed to lie at the root of the much discussed labor problem since in an industrial age the prospect of managing ones own business seemed increasingly remote many progressives believed that the key to increasing industrial freedom lay in empowering workers to participate in economic decision making via strong unions.
louis d brandeis an active ally of the labor movement whom president woodrow wilson appointed to the supreme court in 1916 maintained that unions embodied an essential principle of freedom the right of people to govern themselves.
the contradiction between political liberty and industrial slavery brandeis insisted was americas foremost social problem.
workers deserved a voice not only in establishing wages and working conditions but also in making such managerial decisions as the relocation of factories layoffs and the distribution of profits.
the socialist presence economic freedom was also a rallying cry of american socialism which reached its greatest influence during the progressive era.
founded in 1901 the socialist party brought together surviving late nineteenth century radicals such as populists and followers of edward bellamy with a portion of the labor movement.
the party called for immediate reforms such as free college education legislation to improve the condition of laborers and as an ultimate goal democratic control over the economy through public ownership of railroads and factories.
it was the task of socialism said western labor leader john oneill to gather together the shards of liberty the fragments of the american heritage of freedom scattered by a government controlled by capitalist millionaires.
by 1912 the socialist party claimed 150 000 dues paying members published hundreds of newspapers enjoyed substantial support in the american federation of labor and had elected scores of local officials.
socialism flourished in diverse communities throughout the country.
on the lower east side of new york city it arose from the economic exploitation of immigrant workers and judaisms tradition of social reform.
here a vibrant socialist culture developed complete with yiddish language newspapers and theaters as well as large public meetings and street demonstrations.
in 1914 the district elected socialist meyer london to congress.
another center of socialist strength was milwaukee where victor berger a german born teacher and newspaper editor mobilized local afl unions into a potent political force that elected emil seidel mayor in 1910 seidels administration provided aid to the unemployed forced the police to recognize the rights of strikers and won the respect of middle class residents for its honesty and freedom from machine domination.
socialism also made roller skaters with socialist leaflets during a new york city strike in 1916 a scab is a worker who crosses the picket line during a strike.
voices of freedom from charlotte perkins gilman wo m e n a n d e c o n o m i c s 1 8 9 8 women and economics by the prolific feminist social critic and novelist charlotte perkins gilman influenced the new generation of women aspiring to greater independence.
it inevitable change to our daughters as well as to our sons.
one of its most noticeable features is the their entire lives and that therefore women demand in women not only for their own money but for their own work for the sake of personal expression.
few girls today fail to manifest some must free themselves from the home to achieve signs of this desire for individual expression.
insisted that how people earned a living shaped genuine freedom.
it is not motherhood that keeps the housewife on her feet from dawn till dark it is house service not child service.
women work longer and harder than most men.
a truer spirit is the increasing desire of young girls to be independent to have a career of their own at least for a while and the growing objection of countless wives to the pitiful asking for money to the beggary of their position.
more and more do fathers give their daughters and husbands their wives a definite allowance a separate bank account something.
all their own.
the spirit of personal independence in the women of today is sure proof that a change has come.
the radical change in the economic position of women is advancing upon us.
the growing individualization of democratic life brings economic independence for women necessarily involves a change in the home and family relation.
but if that change is for the advantage of individual and race we need not fear it.
it does not involve a change in the marriage relation except in withdrawing the element of economic dependence nor in the relation of mother to child save to improve it.
but it does involve the exercise of human faculty in women in social service and exchange rather than in domestic service solely.
today when our still developing social needs call for an ever increasing.
freedom the woman in marrying becomes the house servant or at least the housekeeper of the man.
when women stand free as economic agents they will achieve a much better fulfilment of their duties as wives and mothers and contribute to the vast improvement in health and happiness of the human race.
f r o m j o h n m i t c h e l l t h e wo r k i n g m a n s c o n c e p t i o n o f industrial liberty 1910 during the progressive era the idea of industrial liberty moved to the center of political discussion.
progressive reformers and labor leaders like john mitchell head of the united mine workers condemned the prevailing idea of liberty of contract in favor of a broader definition of economic freedom.
practice of paying wages in merchandise.
from time immemorial it had been the custom of coal companies to conduct general supply stores and the workingmen were required as a condition of employment to accept products in lieu of money in return for services rendered.
this system was a great hardship to the workmen.
the question of the constitutionality of this legislation was carried into the courts and by the highest tribunal it was declared to be an invasion of the workmans liberty while the declaration of independence established civil and political liberty it did not as you all know establish industrial liberty.
liberty means more than the right to choose the field of ones employment.
he is not a free man whose family must buy food today with the money that is earned tomorrow.
he is not really free who is forced to work unduly long hours and for wages so low that he can not provide the necessities of life for himself and his family who must live in a crowded tenement and see his children go to work in the mills the mines and the factories before their bodies are developed and their minds trained.
to have freedom a man must be free from the harrowing fear of hunger and want he must be in such a position that by the exercise of reasonable frugality he can provide his family with all of the necessities and the reasonable comforts of life.
he must be able to educate his children and to provide against sickness accident and old age.
a number of years ago the legislatures of several coal producing states enacted laws requiring employers to pay the wages of their workmen in lawful money of the united states and to cease the to deny him the right to accept merchandise in lieu of money as payment of his wages.
this is typical of hundreds of instances in which laws that have been enacted for the protection of the workingmen have been declared by the courts to be unconstitutional on the grounds that they invaded the liberty of the working people.
is it not natural that the workingmen should feel that they are being guaranteed the liberties they do not want and denied the liberty that is of real value to them.
may they not exclaim with madame roland of the french revolution o liberty.
how many crimes are committed in thy name questions 1 what does gilman see as the main obstacles to freedom for women.
2 what does mitchell believe will be necessary to establish industrial liberty.
3 how do the authors differ in their view of the relationship of the family to individual freedom.
18 the progressive era 1900 1916 socialist towns and burlington edmonds tukwila hillyard coeur d alene beatrice camas wa missoula 2 commissioners butte coquille minden mt varieties of progressivism cities 1900 1920 rugby canada hilaire duluth crookston st tenstrike me minot commissioner commissioner laporte cloquet nd pillager brainerd barre harbor springs or sisseton eagle bend wi traverse city gustin vt nh id minneapolis dawson schenectady mn manitowoc s frankfort ma sd eureka buffalo ny wilson w salem sheboygan naugatuck wy milwaukee west allis haledon mi ia davis rockaway ct pa davenport torino stockton murray ne madrid phelps silvis nv mammoth eureka longmont berkeley nj in canton oh ut md daly city nederland lafayette red cloud wymore riverton lincoln clinton de edgewater grand junction thayer il hymera mografton jerseyville wv buena vista ks victor ca cedar city granite city o fallon va arma hillsboro mascoutah co brookneal curranville liberal buckner dorrisville ky girard buffalo az nm watts frontenac mindenmines gibson nc cardwell tn winslow lackawanna ok hartford greenville flint chant sc ny osnaburg antlers ga al ar amsterdam ashtabula mi birmingham conneaut ms union city roulette commissioner kalamazoo mineral ridge winnfield wheatland pa williamsport cleveland commissioner tx lorain salem new castle mckeesport hazeldell la fl shelby massillon controller fostoria mineral city pitcairn broad jenera st mary s toronto canal dover top twp.
gulfport mt.
vernon martins ferry garrett gas city lima linden lake worth byesville star city heights barnhill elwood sugar grove piqua hendricks coshocton adamston hamilton in oh ky wv miami although the socialist party never won more than 6 percent of the vote nationally it gained control of numerous small and medium sized cities between 1900 and 1920 des lacs va ri 500 miles 500 kilometers socialist mayor major municipal officer other than mayor inroads among tenant farmers in old populist areas like oklahoma and in the mining regions of idaho and montana.
the gospel of debs no one was more important in spreading the socialist gospel or linking it to ideals of equality self government and freedom than eugene v debs the railroad union leader who as noted in the previous chapter 8 or to the unsuccessful 1831 rebellion in jamaica that appears to have involved as many as 20 000 slaves.
this does not however mean that slaves in the united states placidly accepted the system under which they were compelled to live.
resistance to slavery took many forms in the old south from individual acts of defiance to occasional uprisings.
these actions posed a constant challenge to the slaveholders self image as benign paternalists and their belief that slaves were obedient subjects grateful for their owners care.
forms of resistance the most widespread expression of hostility to slavery was day to day resistance or silent sabotage doing poor work breaking tools abusing animals and in other ways disrupting the plantation routine.
frederick law olmsted a northerner who toured the south in the 1850s took note of gates left open rails removed from fences by the negroes mules lamed and implements broken a flat boat set adrift in the river men ordered to cart rails for a new fence depositing them so that a double expense of labor would be required to lay them many slaves made believe that they were ill to avoid work although almost no slaves reported themselves sick on sunday their only day of rest.
then there was the theft of food a form of resistance so common that one southern physician diagnosed it as a hereditary disease unique to blacks.
less frequent but more dangerous were serious crimes committed by slaves including arson poisoning and armed assaults against individual whites.
fugitive slaves even more threatening to the stability of the slave system were slaves who ran away.
formidable obstacles confronted the prospective fugitive.
as solomon northup recalled every white mans hand is raised against him the patrollers are watching for him the hounds are ready to follow in his track slaves had little or no knowledge of geography apart from understanding that following the north star led to freedom.
no one knows how many slaves succeeded in reaching the north or canada the most common rough estimate is around 1 000 per year.
not surprisingly most of those who succeeded lived like frederick douglass in the upper south c h.
11 the peculiar institution slave resistance atlantic world in resistance to slavery the new york michigan illinois indiana nineteenth century pennsylvania ohio kentucky tennessee mississippi georgia alabama louisiana 1811 insurrections and major conspiracies rhode island philadelphia baltimore richmond 1800 gabriels rebellion southampton county 1831 nat turners rebellion arkansas newport new haven virginia missouri massachusetts boston new york conecticut new jersey delaware maryland north carolina south wilmington carolina atlan tic o c e an charleston 1822 denmark vesey conspiracy savannah louisiana insurrection aboard the slave ship creole 1841 florida ba ha ma gulf of mexico isl an ds insurrection aboard the slave ship amistad 1839 cuba haiti 1791 1804 haiti jamaica 1831 st.
k i t t s ne v is mexico ant ig ua caribbean sea st.
vince nt barbados 1816 tr inid a d paci f i c oc ea n south america 500 miles 500 kilometers instances of slave resistance occurred throughout the western hemisphere on land and at sea.
this map shows the location of major events in the nineteenth century.
denemarra 1823 especially maryland virginia and kentucky which bordered on the free states.
douglass who escaped at age twenty was also typical in that the large majority of fugitives were young men.
most slave women were not willing to leave children behind and to take them along on the arduous escape journey was nearly impossible.
what were the major forms of resistance to slavery.
in the deep south fugitives tended to head for cities like new orleans or charleston where they hoped to lose themselves in the free black community.
other escapees fled to remote areas like the great dismal swamp of virginia or the florida everglades where the seminole indians offered refuge before they were forced to move west.
even in tennessee a study of newspaper advertisements for runaways finds that around 40 percent were thought to have remained in the local neighborhood 30 percent to have headed to other locations in the south while only 25 percent tried to reach the north.
the underground railroad a loose organization of sympathetic abolitionists who hid fugitives in their homes and sent them on to the next station assisted some runaway slaves.
a few courageous individuals made forays into the south to liberate slaves.
the best known was harriet tubman.
born in maryland in 1820 tubman escaped to philadelphia in 1849 and during the next decade risked her life by making some twenty trips back to her state of birth to lead relatives and other slaves to freedom.
but most who managed to reach the north did so on their own initiative sometimes showing remarkable ingenuity.
william and ellen craft impersonated a sickly owner traveling with her slave.
henry box brown packed himself inside a crate and literally had himself shipped from georgia to freedom in the north.
the amistad in a few instances large groups of slaves collectively seized their freedom.
the most celebrated instance involved fifty three slaves who in 1839 took control of the amistad a ship transporting them from one port in cuba to another and tried to force the navigator to steer it to africa.
the amistad wended its way up the atlantic coast until an american vessel seized it off the coast of long island.
president martin van buren favored returning the slaves to cuba.
but abolitionists brought their case to the supreme court where former president john quincy adams argued that since they had been recently brought from africa in violation of international treaties banning the slave trade the captives should be freed.
the court accepted adamss reasoning and most of the captives made their way back to africa.
the amistad case had no legal bearing on slaves within the united states.
but it may well have inspired a similar uprising in 1841 when 135 slaves being transported by sea from norfolk virginia to new orleans seized control of the ship creole and sailed for nassau in the british bahamas.
their leader had the evocative name madison washington.
to the dismay of the tyler administration the british gave refuge to the creole slaves.
slave r e v o lt s resistance to slavery occasionally moved beyond such individual and group acts of defiance to outright rebellion.
the four largest conspiracies in american history occurred within the space of thirty one years in the early nineteenth century.
the first organized by the virginia slave gabriel in 1800 was discussed in chapter 18 in a 1923 decision overturning a minimum wage law for women in washington d c now that women enjoyed the vote the justices declared they were entitled to the same workplace freedom as men.
this lamented florence kelley is a new dred scott decision which in the name of liberty of contract fills those words with the bitterest and most cruel mockery corruption in government warren g harding took office as president in 1921 promising a return to normalcy after an era of progressive reform and world war.
reflecting the prevailing get rich quick ethos his administration quickly became one of the most corrupt in american history.
a likeable somewhat ineffectual individual he called himself a man of limited talents from a small town harding seemed to have little regard for either governmental issues or the dignity of the presidency.
prohibition did not cause him to curb his appetite for liquor.
he continued a previous illicit affair with a young ohio woman nan britton.
the relationship did not become known until 1927 when britton published the presidents daughter about their child to whom harding had left nothing in his will.
although his cabinet included men of integrity and talent like secretary of state charles evans hughes and secretary of commerce herbert hoover harding also surrounded himself with cronies who used their offices for private gain.
attorney general harry daugherty accepted payments not to prosecute accused criminals.
the head of the veterans bureau charles forbes received kickbacks from the sale of government supplies.
the most notorious scandal involved secretary of the interior albert fall who accepted nearly 500 000 from private businessmen to whom he leased government oil reserves at teapot dome wyoming.
fall became the first cabinet member in history to be convicted of a felony.
this decision affirms your constitutional right to starve a 1923 cartoon criticizes the supreme court decision declaring unconstitutional a washington d c law establishing a minimum wage for women.
justice george sutherland appointed to the court the previous year by president warren g harding wrote the majority decision.
recent h1 voices of freedom from andr siegfried the gulf between atlantic monthly march 1928 the french writer andr siegfried in 1928 commented on the rise of an industrial economy and consumer culture and the changes they produced in american society.
never has europe more eagerly observed studied discussed america and never.
have the two continents been wider apart in their aspirations and ideals.
europe after all is not very different from what it was a generation ago but there has been born since then a new america.
the conquest of the continent has been completed and all recent american historians have noted the significance of the event the western frontier has disappeared the pioneer is no longer needed and with him the mystic dream of the west.
has faded away.
thus came the beginning of the era of organization the new problem was not to conquer adventurously but to produce methodically.
the great man of the new generation was no longer a pioneer like lincoln.
henry ford.
from this time on america has been no more an unlimited prairie with pure and infinite horizons in which free men may sport like wild horses but a huge factory of prodigious efficiency.
in the last twenty five or thirty years america has produced a new civilization.
from a moral point of view it is obvious that americans have come to consider their standard of living as a somewhat sacred acquisition which they will defend at any price.
this means that they would be ready to make many an intellectual or even moral concession in order to maintain that standard.
from a political point of view it seems that the notion of efficiency of production is on the way to taking precedence over the very notion of liberty.
in the name of efficiency one can obtain from the american all sorts of sacrifices in relation to his personal and even to certain of his political liberties.
mass production and mass civilization its natural consequence are the true characteristics of the new american society.
lincoln with his bible and classical tradition was easier for europe to understand than ford with his total absence of tradition and his proud creation of new methods and new standards especially conceived for a world entirely different from our own.
from majority opinion justice james c mcreynolds i n m e y e r v n e b r a s ka 1 9 2 3 a landmark in the development of civil liberties the supreme courts decision in meyer v nebraska rebuked the coercive americanization impulse of world war i overturning a nebraska law that required all school instruction to take place in english.
certain communities commonly use foreign words follow foreign leaders move in a foreign atmosphere and that the children are therefore hindered from becoming citizens of the most useful type and the public safety is impaired.
that the state may do much go very far indeed in order to improve the quality of its citizens physically mentally and morally is clear but the the problem for our determination is whether the individual has certain fundamental rights which must be respected.
the protection of the statute prohibiting instruction in a language other than english as construed and applied unreasonably infringes the liberty guaranteed.
by constitution extends to all to those who speak other languages as well as to those born with english on the tongue.
perhaps it would be highly the fourteenth amendment.
advantageous if all had ready understanding of our the american people have always regarded education and acquisition of knowledge as matters of supreme importance which should be diligently ordinary speech but this cannot be coerced by methods which conflict with the constitution.
no emergency has arisen which rendered promoted.
the calling always has been regarded as useful and honorable essential indeed to the knowledge by a child of some language other than english so clearly harmful as to justify its inhibition public welfare.
mere knowledge of the german language cannot reasonably be regarded as harmful.
heretofore it has been commonly looked upon as helpful and desirable.
meyer taught this language with the consequent infringement of rights long freely enjoyed.
in school as part of his occupation.
his right to teach and the right of parents to engage him so to instruct their children we think are within the liberty of the amendment.
it is said the purpose of the legislation was to promote civil development by inhibiting training and education of the immature in foreign tongues and ideals before they could learn english and acquire american ideals.
it is also affirmed that the foreign born population is very large that questions 1 why does siegfried feel europeans no longer find america understandable.
2 how does the decision in meyer v nebraska expand the definition of liberty protected by the fourteenth amendment.
3 how do the two excerpts reflect the changes american society experienced in the 1910s and 1920s.
20 from business culture to great depression a 1924 cartoon commenting on the scandals of the harding administration.
the white house capitol and washington monument have been sold to the highest bidder.
the election of business and government hardings successor calvin coolidge who as governor of massachusetts had won national fame for using state troops against striking boston policemen in 1919 was a dour man of few words.
but in contrast to his predecessor he seemed to exemplify yankee honesty.
the scandals subsided but otherwise coolidge continued his predecessors policies.
he twice vetoed the mcnary haugen bill the top legislative priority of congressmen from farm states.
this bill sought to have the government purchase agricultural products for sale overseas in order to raise farm prices.
coolidge denounced it as an unwarranted interference with the free market.
in 1924 coolidge was reelected in a landslide defeating john w davis a wall street lawyer nominated on the 103rd ballot by a badly divided democratic convention.
this was when the comedian will rogers made the quip often repeated in future years i am a member of no organized political party i am a democrat one sixth of the electorate in 1924 voted for robert la follette running as the candidate of a new progressive party which called for greater taxation of wealth the conservation of natural resources public ownership of the railroads farm relief and the end of child labor.
although such ideas had been proposed many times before world war i coolidge described the platform as a blueprint for a communistic and socialistic america.
despite endorsements from veteran progressives like jane addams and john dewey and the american federation of labor la follette could raise no more than 250 000 for his campaign.
he carried only his native wisconsin.
but his candidacy demonstrated the survival of some currents of dissent in a highly conservative decade.
in what ways did the government promote business interests in the 1920s.
economic diplomacy foreign affairs also reflected the close working relationship between business and government.
any student of modern diplomacy declared huntington wilson a state department official knows that in these days of competition capital trade agriculture labor and statecraft all go hand in hand if a country is to profit the 1920s marked a retreat from wilsons goal of internationalism in favor of unilateral american actions mainly designed to increase exports and investment opportunities overseas.
indeed what is sometimes called the isolationism of the 1920s represented a reaction against the disappointing results of wilsons military and diplomatic pursuit of freedom and democracy abroad.
the united states did play host to the washington naval arms conference of 1922 that negotiated reductions in the navies of britain france japan italy and the united states.
but the country remained outside the league of nations.
even as american diplomats continued to press for access to markets overseas the fordneymccumber tariff of 1922 raised taxes on imported goods to their highest levels in history a repudiation of wilsons principle of promoting free trade.
much foreign policy was conducted through private economic relationships rather than governmental action.
the united states emerged from world war i as both the worlds foremost center of manufacturing and the major financial power thanks to british and french debts for american loans that had funded their war efforts.
during the 1920s new york bankers sometimes acting on their own and sometimes with the cooperation of the harding and coolidge administrations solidified their international position by extending loans to european and latin american governments.
they advanced billions of dollars to germany to enable the country to meet its world war i reparations payments.
american industrial firms especially in auto agricultural machinery and electrical equipment manufacturing established plants overseas to supply the world market and take advantage of inexpensive labor.
american investors gained control over raw materials such as copper in chile and oil in venezuela.
in 1928 in the so called red line agreement british french and american oil companies divided oil producing regions in the middle east and latin america among themselves.
as before world war i the government dispatched soldiers when a change in government in the caribbean threatened american economic interests.
having been stationed in nicaragua since 1912 american marines withdrew in 1925 but the troops soon returned in an effort to suppress a nationalist revolt headed by general augusto csar sandino.
having created a national guard headed by general anastasio somoza the marines finally departed in 1933 a year later somoza assassinated sandino and seized power.
for the next forty five years he and his family ruled and plundered nicaragua.
somoza was overthrown in 1978 by a popular movement calling itself the sandinistas see.

chapter 1 new world beginnings 33 000 b c e 1769 c e.
cahokia this artists rendering of cahokia based on archaeological excavations shows the huge central square and the imposing monks mound which rivaled in size the pyramids of egypt.
sustain some large settlements after the incorporation of corn planting into their ways of life during the rst millennium c e.
the mississippian settlement at cahokia near present day east st louis was at one time home to as many as twenty ve thousand people.
the anasazis built an elaborate pueblo of more than six hundred interconnected rooms at chaco canyon in modern day new mexico.
but mysteriously perhaps due to prolonged drought all those ancient cultures fell into decline by about 1300 c e.
the cultivation of maize as well as of high yielding strains of beans and squash reached the southeastern atlantic seaboard region of north america about 1000 c e.
these plants made possible three sister farming with beans growing on the trellis of the cornstalks and squash covering the planting mounds to retain moisture in the soil.
the rich diet provided by this environmentally clever farming technique produced some of the highest population densities on the continent among them the creek choctaw and cherokee peoples.
the iroquois in the northeastern woodlands inspired by a legendary leader named hiawatha created in the sixteenth century perhaps the closest north american approximation to the great empires of mexico and peru.
the iroquois confederacy developed the political and orga ni zational skills to sustain a robust military alliance that menaced its neighbors native american and european alike for well over a century see makers of america the iroquois pp.
but for the most part the native peoples of north america were living in small scattered and impermanent settlements on the eve of the europeans arrival.
in more settled agricultural groups women tended the crops while men hunted shed gathered fuel and cleared elds for planting.
this pattern of life frequently conferred substantial authority on women and many north american native peoples including the iroquois developed matrilineal cultures in which power and possessions passed down the female side of the family line.
unlike the europeans who would soon arrive with the presumption that humans had dominion over the earth and with the technologies to alter the very face of the land the native americans had neither the desire nor the means to manipulate nature aggressively.
they revered the physical world and endowed nature with spiritual properties.
yet they did sometimes ignite massive forest res deliberately torching thousands of acres of trees to create better hunting habitats especially for deer.
this practice accounted for the open parklike appearance of the eastern woodlands that so amazed early european explorers.
but in a broad sense the land did not feel the hand of the native americans heavy upon it partly because they were so few in number.
they were so thinly spread early explorers across the continent that vast areas were virtually untouched by a human presence.
in the fateful year 1492 probably no more than 4 million native americans padded through the whispering primeval forests and paddled across the sparkling virgin waters of the continent north of mexico.
they were blissfully unaware that the historic isolation of the americas was about to end forever as the land and the native peoples alike felt the full shock of the european discovery indirect discoverers of the new world europeans for their part were equally unaware of the existence of the americas.
blond bearded norse seafarers from scandinavia had chanced upon the northeastern shoulder of north america about 1000 c e.
they landed at a place near lanse aux meadows in presentday newfoundland that abounded in wild grapes which led them to name the spot vinland.
but no strong nation state yearning to expand supported these venturesome voyagers.
their imsy settlements consequently were soon abandoned and their discovery was forgotten except in scandinavian saga and song.
for several centuries thereafter other restless europeans with the growing power of ambitious governments behind them sought contact with a wider world whether for conquest or trade.
they thus set in motion the chain of events that led to a drive toward asia the penetration of africa and the completely accidental discovery of the new world.
christian crusaders must rank high among americas indirect discoverers.
clad in shining armor tens of thousands of these european warriors tried from the eleventh to the fourteenth century to wrest the holy land from muslim control.
foiled in their military assaults the crusaders nevertheless acquired a taste for the exotic delights of asia.
goods that had been virtually unknown in europe now were craved silk for cloth ing drugs for aching esh perfumes for unbathed bodies colorful draperies for gloomy castles and spices especially sugar a rare luxury in europe before the crusades for preserving and avoring food.
europes developing sweet tooth would have momentous implications for world history.
the luxuries of the east were prohibitively expensive in europe.
they had to be transported enormous distances from the spice islands indonesia china and india in creaking ships and on swaying camel back.
the journey led across the indian ocean the persian gulf and the red sea or along the tortuous caravan routes of asia or the arabian peninsula ending at the ports of the eastern mediterranean see map 1 3.
muslim middlemen exacted a heavy toll en route.
by the time the strange smelling goods reached italian merchants at venice and genoa they were so costly that purchasers and prots alike were narrowly limited.
european consumers and distributors were naturally eager to nd a less expensive route to the riches of asia or to develop alternate sources of supply.
europeans enter africa european appetites were further whetted when footloose marco polo an italian adventurer returned to europe in 1295 and began telling tales of his nearly twenty year sojourn in china.
though he may in fact never have seen china legend to the contrary the hard evidence is sketchy he must be regarded as an indirect discoverer of the new world for his book with its descriptions of rose tinted pearls and golden pagodas stimulated european desires for a cheaper route to the trea sures of the east.
these accumulating pressures eventually brought a breakthrough for european expansion.
before the middle of the fteenth century european sailors refused to sail southward along the coast of west africa because they could not beat their way home against the prevailing northerly winds and south owing currents.
about 1450 portuguese mariners overcame those obstacles.
not only had they developed the caravel a ship that could sail more closely into the wind but they had discovered that they could return to europe by sailing northwesterly from the african coast toward the azores where the prevailing westward breezes would carry them home.
the new world of sub saharan africa now came within the grasp of questing europeans.
the northern shore of africa as part of the mediterranean world had been known to europe since antiquity.
but because sea travel down the african coast had been virtually impossible africa south of the forbidding sahara desert barrier had remained remote and mysterious.
african gold perhaps two thirds of europes supply crossed the sahara on camelback and shadowy tales may have reached europe about the ourishing west african kingdom of mali in the niger river valley with its impressive islamic university at timbuktu.
but europeans chapter 1 new world beginnings 33 000 b c e 1769 c e.
columbus comes upon a new world gore island slave fortress from this holding station off the coast of senegal thousands of african captives passed through the door of no return into a lifetime of slavery in the new world.
the stage was now set for a cataclysmic shift in the course of history the history not only of europe but of all the world.
europeans clamored for more and cheaper products from the lands beyond the mediterranean.
africa had been established as a source of cheap slave labor for plantation agriculture.
the portuguese voyages had demonstrated the feasibility of long range ocean navigation.
in spain a modern national state was taking shape with the unity wealth and power to shoulder the formidable tasks of discovery conquest and colonization.
the dawn of the renaissance in the fourteenth century nurtured an ambitious spirit of optimism and adventure.
printing presses introduced about 1450 facilitated the spread of scientic knowledge.
the mariners compass possibly borrowed from the arabs eliminated some of the uncertainties of sea travel.
meanwhile across the ocean the unsuspecting new world innocently awaited its european discoverers onto this stage stepped christopher columbus.
this skilled italian seafarer persuaded the spanish monarchs to outt him with three tiny but seaworthy ships manned by a motley crew.
daringly he unfurled the sails of his cockleshell craft and headed westward.
his superstitious sailors fearful of venturing into the oceanic unknown grew increasingly mutinous.
after six weeks at sea failure loomed until on october 12 1492 the crew sighted an island in the bahamas.
a new world thus swam within the vision of europeans.
the impact of discovery nished the labor and the new world offered its raw materials especially its precious metals and its soil for the cultivation of sugar cane.
for europeans as well as for africans and native americans the world after 1492 would never be the same for better or worse.
when worlds collide christopher columbus 1451 1506 by ridolfo di domenico ghirlandaio no portrait from life exists of columbus so all likenesses of him including this one are somewhat fanciful.
columbuss sensational achievement obscures the fact that he was one of the most successful failures in history.
seeking a new water route to the fabled indies he in fact had bumped into an enormous land barrier blocking the ocean pathway.
for decades thereafter explorers strove to get through it or around it.
the truth gradually dawned that sprawling new continents had been discovered.
yet columbus was at rst so certain that he had skirted the rim of the indies that he called the native peoples indians a gross geographical misnomer that somehow stuck.
columbuss discovery would eventually convulse four continents europe africa and the two americas.
thanks to his epochal voyage an interdependent global economic system emerged on a scale undreamedof before he set sail.
its workings touched every shore washed by the atlantic ocean.
europe provided the markets the capital and the technology africa fur two ecosystems the fragile naturally evolved networks of relations among organisms in a stable environment commingled and clashed when columbus waded ashore.
the reverberations from that historic encounter often called the columbian exchange see figure 1 1 echoed for centuries after 1492 the ora and fauna of the old and new worlds had been separated for thousands of years.
european explorers marveled at the strange sights that greeted them including exotic beasts such as iguanas and snakes with castanets rattlesnakes.
native new world plants such as tobacco maize beans tomatoes and especially the lowly potato eventually revolutionized the international economy as well as the european diet feeding the rapid population growth of the old world.
these foodstuffs were among the most important indian gifts to the europeans and to the rest of the world.
perhaps three fths of the crops cultivated around the globe today originated in the americas.
ironically the introduction into africa of new world foodstuffs like maize manioc and sweet potatoes may have fed an african population boom that numerically though not morally more than offset the losses inicted by the slave trade.
in exchange the europeans introduced old world crops and animals to the americas.
columbus returned to the caribbean island of hispaniola present day haiti and the dominican republic in 1493 with seventeen ships that unloaded twelve hundred men and a virtual noahs ark of cattle swine and horses.
the horses soon reached the north american mainland through mex ico and in less than two centuries had spread as far as canada.
north american indian tribes like the apaches sioux and blackfeet swiftly adopted the horse transforming their cultures into highly mobile wide ranging hunter societies that roamed the grassy great plains in pursuit of the shaggy buffalo.
columbus also brought seedlings of sugar cane which thrived in the warm car ibbean climate.
a sugar revolution consequently took place in the european diet fueled by the forced migration of millions of africans to work the caneelds and sugar mills of the new world.
chapter 13 the rise of a mass democracy 1824 1840 black hawk and his son whirling thunder by john wesley jarvis 1833 chief black hawk and his son are depicted here in captivity.
after their surrender in the black hawk war of 1832 they were put on public display throughout the united states.
the american eld commander treacherously seized their leader osceola under a ag of truce.
the war dragged on for ve more years but the seminoles were doomed.
some ed deeper into the everglades where their descendants now live but about four fths of them were moved to present day oklahoma where several thousand of the tribe survive.
the bank war president jackson did not hate all banks and all businesses but he distrusted monopolistic banking and overbig businesses as did his followers.
a man of virulent dislikes he came to share the prejudices of his own west against the moneyed monster known as the bank of the united states.
what made the bank a monster in jacksons eyes.
the national government minted gold and silver coins in the mid nineteenth century but did not issue paper money.
paper notes were printed by private banks.
their value uctuated with the health of the bank and the amount of money printed giving private bankers considerable power over the nations economy.
no bank in america had more power than the bank of the united states.
in many ways the bank acted like a branch of government.
it was the principal depository for the funds of the washington government and controlled much of the nations gold and silver.
its notes unlike those of many smaller banks were stable in value.
a source of credit and stability the bank was an important and useful part of the nations expanding economy.
but the bank of the united states was a private institution accountable not to the people but to its elite circle of moneyed investors.
its president the brilliant but arrogant nicholas biddle held an immense and to many unconstitutional amount of power over the nations nancial affairs.
enemies of the bank dubbed him czar nicolas i and called the bank a hydra of corruption a serpent that grew new heads whenever old ones were cut off.
to some the banks very existence seemed to sin against the egalitarian credo of american democracy.
the conviction formed the deepest source of jacksons opposition.
the bank also won no friends in the west by foreclosing on many western farms and draining tribute into eastern coffers.
prot not public ser vice was its rst priority.
the bank war erupted in 1832 when daniel webster and henry clay presented congress with a bill to renew the bank of the united states charter.
the charter was not set to expire until 1836 but clay pushed for renewal four years early to make it an election issue in 1832 as jacksons leading rival for the presidency clay with fateful blindness looked upon the bank issue as a sure re winner.
clays scheme was to ram a recharter bill through congress and then send it on to the white house.
if jackson signed it he would alienate his worshipful western followers.
if he vetoed it as seemed certain he would presumably lose the presidency in the forthcoming election by alienating the wealthy and inuential groups in the east.
clay seems not to have fully realized that the best people were now only a minority and that they generally feared jackson anyhow.
the recharter bill slid through congress on greased skids as planned but was killed by a scorching veto from jackson.
the old hero declared the monopolistic bank to be unconstitutional.
of course the supreme court had earlier declared it constitutional in the case of mcculloch v maryland 1819 but jackson acted as though he regarded the executive branch as superior to the judicial branch.
the old general growled privately the bank.
is trying to kill me but i will kill it beginnings of the bank war in mother banks sickroom pro bank men henry clay daniel webster and john c calhoun consult on the grave illness that is causing mother bank to cough up her deposits.
while nicholas biddle president of the bank of the united states ministers to the patient u s president andrew jackson looks on with pleasure.
jacksons veto message reverberated with constitutional consequences.
it not only squashed the bank bill but vastly amplied the power of the presidency.
all previous vetoes had rested almost exclusively on questions of constitutionality.
but though jackson invoked the constitution in his bank veto message he essentially argued that he was vetoing the bill because he personally found it harmful to the nation.
in effect he was claiming for the president alone a power equivalent to two thirds of the votes in congress.
if the legislative and executive branches were partners in government he implied the president was unmistakably the senior partner.
henry clays political instincts continued to fail him.
delighted with the nancial fallacies of jacksons banker nicholas biddle 1786 1844 wrote to henry clay august 1 1832 expressing his satisfaction i have always deplored making the bank a party question but since the president will have it so he must pay the penalty of his own rashness.
as to the veto message i am delighted with it.
it has all the fury of a chained panther biting the bars of his cage.
it is really a manifesto of anarchy.
and my hope is that it will contribute to relieve the country of the domination of these miserable jackson people.
chapter 41 america confronts the post cold war era 1992 2009 the legacy of impeachment time magazines cartoonist asked how future generations would judge the clinton impeachment episode and how it might be treated in history textbooks.
republican votes for conviction fell far short of the constitutionally required two thirds majority.
the vote on the perjury charge was forty ve guilty fty ve not guilty.
clintons legacy and the 2000 election beyond the obvious stain of impeachment clintons legacy was mixed.
his sound economic policies encouraged growth and trade in a rapidly globalizing post cold war world.
yet as a new democrat and avowed centrist clinton did more to consolidate than to reverse the reagan bush revolution against new deal liberalism that had for half a century provided the compass for the democratic party and the nation.
further by setting such a low standard in his personal conduct he replenished the sad reservoir of public cynicism about politics that vietnam and watergate had created a generation before.
nonetheless as the end of the clinton term and the beginning of the new millennium approached the democrats stayed on their political course and nom the controversial election of 2000 counting chads with bush and gore neckand neck in floridas presidential vote count election ofcials in broward county examined by eye paper ballots disqualied by machine because the punched chads had not fully separated from the ballots.
they hoped that close scrutiny would reveal the voters intentions.
inated loyal vice president albert gore for president.
gore faced the tricky challenge of linking himself to clinton era peace and prosperity while at the same time distancing himself from his bosss personal foibles.
he chose as his running mate connecticut senator joseph lieberman an outspoken clinton critic and the rst jew nominated to a major national ticket.
their republican challenger george w bush won the nomination on the strength of his fathers name and his years as governor of texas.
bush surrounded himself with washington insiders including vice presidential nominee richard cheney and in a clear jab at clinton promised to restore dignity to the white house rosy estimates that the federal budget would produce a surplus of some 2 trillion in the coming decade set the stage for the presidential contest.
echoing the republican creed of smaller government bush argued for returning the budget surplus to the people through massive tax cuts and for promoting privatesector programs such as school vouchers and a reliance on faith based institutions to help the poor.
gore proposed smaller tax cuts targeted at middleand lower class people and strengthening social security.
in an era of peace foreign policy gured hardly at all in the campaign although bush struck a moderate note when he urged that america should act like a humble nation pollsters predicted a close election but none foresaw the epochal cliffhanger that the election would become.
on election day the country split nearly evenly between the two candidates and it was soon clear that floridas electoral votes would determine the winner.
television news programs announced that bush had won the sunshine state and al gore called the texas governor to concede defeat.
yet just an hour later gores camp decided that florida was too close to call and the vice president in perhaps the most awkward phone call in modern politics retracted his concession.
what ensued was a ve week political standoff over how to count the votes in florida.
democrats argued that some ballots were confusing or had been misread by machines and asked for recounts by hand in several counties.
republicans claimed that such recounts would amount to changing the rules in the middle of the game and thus thwart the rule of law.
after weeks of legal bickering with the presidency in the balance the supreme court nally intervened.
by a ve to four vote along partisan lines the court reasoned that since neither floridas legislature nor its courts had established a uniform standard for evaluating disputed ballots the hand counts amounted to an unconstitutional breach of the fourteenth amendments equal protection clause.
that ruling gave bush the white house but cast a dark shadow of illegitimacy over his presidency.
bush ofcially won florida by 537 votes out of 6 million cast and he squeaked by in the electoral college 271 to 266 see maps 41 3 and 41 4.
the national popular vote went decisively to gore 50 999 897 to 50 456 002 for the rst time since 1888 a candidate won the white house with fewer popular votes than his opponent.
calls to abolish the electoral college however were few and muted see art.
v of the constitution.
chapter 22 the ordeal of reconstruction 1865 1877 was the stipulation that they guarantee in their state constitutions full suffrage for their former adult male slaves.
yet the act reecting moderate sentiment stopped short of giving the freedmen land or education at federal expense.
the overriding purpose of the moderates was to create an electorate in southern states that would vote those states back into the union on acceptable terms and thus free the federal government from direct responsibility for the protection of black rights.
as later events would demonstrate this approach proved woefully inadequate to the cause of justice for blacks.
the radical republicans were still worried.
the danger loomed that once the unrepentant states were readmitted they would amend their constitutions so as to withdraw the ballot from blacks.
the only ironclad safeguard was to incorporate black suffrage in the federal constitution.
this goal was nally achieved by the fifteenth amendment passed by congress in 1869 and ratied by the required number of states in 1870 see the appendix.
military reconstruction of the south not only usurped certain functions of the president as commander in chief but set up a martial regime of dubious legality.
the supreme court had already ruled in the at a constitutional convention in alabama freed people afrmed their rights in the following declaration we claim exactly the same rights privileges and immunities as are enjoyed by white men we ask nothing more and will be content with nothing less.
the law no longer knows white nor black but simply men and consequently we are entitled to ride in public conveyances hold ofce sit on juries and do everything else which we have in the past been prevented from doing solely on the ground of color.
case ex parte milligan 1866 that military tribunals could not try civilians even during wartime in areas where the civil courts were open.
peacetime military rule seemed starkly contrary to the spirit of the constitution.
but the circumstances were extraordinary in the republics history and for the time being the supreme court avoided offending the republican congress.
table 22 2 southern reconstruction by state state readmitted to representation in congress home rule democratic or redeemer regime reestablished tennessee july 24 1866 arkansas north carolina alabama florida june 22 1868 june 25 1868 june 25 1868 june 25 1868 louisiana south carolina virginia mississippi texas georgia june 25 1868 june 25 1868 january 26 1870 february 23 1870 march 30 1870 june 25 1868 july 15 1870 comments ratied fourteenth amendment in 1866 and hence avoided military reconstruction federal troops restationed in 1877 as result of hayes tilden electoral bargain same as florida same as florida readmitted june 25 1868 but returned to military control after expulsion of blacks from legislature for many years tennessee was the only state of the secession to observe lincolns birthday as a legal holiday.
many states in the south still observe the birthdays of jefferson davis and robert e lee.
amending the constitution prodded into line by federal bayonets the southern states got on with the task of constitution making.
by 1870 all of them had reorga nized their governments and had been accorded full rights see table 22 2.
the hated bluebellies remained until the new republican regimes usually called radical regimes appeared to be rmly entrenched.
yet when the federal troops nally left a state its government swiftly passed back into the hands of white redeemers or home rule regimes which were inevitably democratic.
finally in 1877 the last federal muskets were removed from state politics and the solid democratic south congealed.
no women voters the passage of the three reconstruction era amendments the thirteenth fourteenth and fifteenth delighted former abolitionists but deeply disappointed advocates of womens rights.
women had played a prominent part in the prewar abolitionist movement and had often pointed out that both women and blacks lacked basic civil rights especially the crucial right to vote.
the struggle for black freedom and the crusade for womens rights therefore were one and the same in the eyes of many women.
yet during the war feminist leaders such as elizabeth cady stanton and susan b anthony had temporarily suspended their own demands and worked wholeheartedly for the cause of black emancipation.
the womans loyal league had gathered nearly 400 000 signatures on petitions asking congress to pass a constitutional amendment prohibiting slavery.
now with the war ended and the thirteenth amendment passed feminist leaders believed that their time had come.
they reeled with shock however the prominent suffragist and abolitionist susan b anthony 1820 1906 was outraged over the proposed exclusion of women from the fourteenth amendment.
in a conversation with her former male allies wendell phillips and theodore tilton she reportedly held out her arm and declared look at this all of you.
and hear me swear that i will cut off this right arm of mine before i will ever work for or demand the ballot for the negro and not the woman.
when the wording of the fourteenth amendment which de ned equal national citizenship for the rst time inserted the word male into the constitution in referring to a citizens right to vote.
both stanton and anthony campaigned actively against the fourteenth amendment despite the pleas of frederick douglass who had long supported woman suffrage but believed that this was the negros hour when the fifteenth amendment proposed to prohibit denial of the vote on the basis of race color or previous condition of servitude stanton and anthony wanted the word sex added to the list.
they lost this battle too.
fifty years would pass before the constitution granted women the right to vote.
the realities of radical reconstruction in the south blacks now had freedom of a sort.
their friends in congress had only haltingly and somewhat belatedly secured the franchise for them.
both presidents lincoln and johnson had proposed to give the ballot gradually to selected blacks who qualied for it through education property ownership or military ser vice.
moderate republicans and even many radicals at rst hesitated to bestow suffrage on the freedmen.
the fourteenth amendment in many ways the heart of the republican program for reconstruction had fallen short of guaranteeing the right to vote.
it envisioned for blacks the same status as that of women citizenship without voting rights.
but by 1867 hesitation had given way to a hard determination to enfranchise the former slaves wholesale and immediately while thousands of white southerners were being denied the vote.
by glaring contrast most of the northern states before ratication of the fifteenth amendment in 1870 withheld the ballot from their tiny black minorities.
white southerners naturally concluded that the republicans were hypocritical in insisting that blacks in the south be allowed to vote.
having gained their right to suffrage southern black men seized the initiative and began to organize politically.
their primary vehicle became the union league originally a pro union orga ni zation based in the north.
assisted by northern blacks freedmen turned the league into a network of political clubs that educated members in their civic duties and campaigned for republican candidates.
the leagues mission soon expanded to include building black churches and schools representing black grievances before local chapter 13 the rise of a mass democracy 1824 1840 william henry harrison campaign in philadelphia 1840 the parties of democratic incumbent martin van buren and his whig challenger the hero of tippecanoe took their electoral rivalry into the streets of cities like philadelphia launching modern style popular politics.
harrison won but a mere month after delivering the longest inaugural address ever two hours he succumbed to pneumonia and died.
he served the shortest term of any president thirty one days.
one of his forty eight grandchildren benjamin harrison became the twenty third president of the united states.
politics for the people the election of 1840 conclusively demonstrated two major changes in american politics since the era of good feelings.
the rst was the triumph of a populist democratic style.
democracy had been something of a taint in the days of the lordly federalists.
martha washington the rst first lady was shocked after a presidential reception to nd a greasy smear on the wallpaper left there she was sure by an uninvited lthy democrat the county election by george caleb bingham 1851 1852 the artist here gently satirizes the drinking and wheeling and dealing that sometimes marred the electoral process in the boisterous age of jacksonian politics.
but by the 1840s aristocracy was the taint and democracy was respectable.
politicians were now forced to curry favor with the voting masses.
lucky indeed was the aspiring ofce seeker who could boast of birth in a log cabin.
in 1840 daniel webster publicly apologized for not being able to claim so humble a birthplace though he quickly added that his brothers could.
hopelessly handicapped was the candidate who appeared to be too clean too well dressed too grammatical too highbrowishly intellectual.
in truth most high political ofces continued to be lled by leading citizens but now these wealthy and prominent men had to forsake all social pretensions and cultivate the common touch if they hoped to win elections.
snobbish bigwigs unhappy over the change sneered at coonskin congressmen and at the newly enfranchised bipeds of the forest to them the tyranny of king numbers was no less offensive than that the two party system of king george.
but these critics protested in vain.
the common man was at last moving to the center of the national political stage the sturdy american who donned coarse trousers rather than buff breeches who sported a coonskin cap rather than a silk top hat and who wore no mans collar often not even one of his own.
instead of the old divine right of kings america was now bowing to the divine right of the people.
the two party system the second dramatic change resulting from the 1840 election was the formation of a vigorous and durable two party system.
the jeffersonians of an earlier day had been so successful in absorbing the programs of their federalist opponents that a full blown two party system had never truly emerged in the subsequent era of good feelings.
the idea had prevailed that parties of any sort smacked of conspiracy and faction and were injurious to the health of the body politic in a virtuous republic.
by 1840 political parties had fully come of age a lasting legacy of andrew jacksons and martin van burens tenaciousness.
both national parties the democrats and the whigs grew out of the rich soil of jeffersonian republicanism and each laid claim to different aspects of the republican inheritance.
jacksonian democrats gloried the liberty of the individual and were ercely on guard against the inroads of privilege into government.
whigs trumpeted the natural harmony of society and the value of community and were willing to use government to realize their objectives.
whigs also berated those leaders and they considered jackson to be one whose appeals to self interest fostered con ict among individuals classes or sections.
democrats clung to states rights and federal restraint in social and economic affairs as their basic doctrines.
whigs tended to favor a renewed national bank protective tariffs internal improvements public schools and increasingly moral reforms such as the prohibition of liquor and eventually the abolition of slavery.
president andrew jackson advised a supporter in 1835 on how to tell the difference between democrats and whigs nullies and blue light federalists in doing so he neatly summarized the jacksonian philosophy the people ought to inquire of political candidates are you opposed to a national bank are you in favor of a strict construction of the federal and state constitutions are you in favor of rotation in ofce do you subscribe to the republican rule that the people are the sovereign power the ofcers their agents and that upon all national or general subjects as well as local they have a right to instruct their agents and representatives and they are bound to obey or resign in short are they true republicans agreeable to the true jeffersonian creed.
the two parties were thus separated by real differences of philosophy and policy.
but they also had much in common.
both were mass based catchall parties that tried deliberately to mobilize as many voters as possible for their cause.
although it is true that democrats tended to be more humble folk and whigs more prosperous both parties nevertheless commanded the loyalties of all kinds of americans from all social classes and in all sections.
the social diversity of the two parties had important implications.
it fostered horse trading compromises within each party that prevented either from assuming extreme or radical positions.
by the same token the geographical diversity of the two parties retarded the emergence of purely sectional political parties temporarily suppressing through compromise the ultimately uncompromisable issue of slavery.
when the two party system began to creak in the 1850s the union was mortally imperiled.
chapter 23 political paralysis in the gilded age 1869 1896 society.
these differences in temperament and religious values often produced raucous political contests at the local level where issues like prohibition and education loomed large.
democrats had a solid electoral base in the south and in the northern industrial cities teeming with immigrants and controlled by well oiled political machines.
republican strength lay largely in the midwest and the rural and small town northeast.
grateful freedmen in the south continued to vote republican in signicant numbers.
another important bloc of republican ballots came from the members of the grand army of the republic gar a politically potent fraternal orga ni zation of several hundred thousand union veterans of the civil war.
the lifeblood of both parties was patronage disbursing jobs by the bucketful in return for votes kickbacks and party ser vice.
boisterous inghting over patronage beset the republican party in the 1870s and 1880s.
a stalwart faction led by the handsome and imperious roscoe lord roscoe conkling u s senator from new york unblushingly embraced the timehonored system of swapping civil ser vice jobs for votes.
paper broadsides for the 1876 election then as now the parties printed voting instructions to encourage citizens to vote the straight party line.
opposed to the conklingites were the so called halfbreeds who irted coyly with civil ser vice reform but whose real quarrel with the stalwarts was over who should grasp the ladle that dished out the spoils.
the champion of the half breeds was james g blaine of maine a radiantly personable congressman with an elastic conscience.
but despite the color of their personalities conkling and blaine succeeded only in stalemating each other and deadlocking their party.
the hayes tilden standoff 1876 hangers on around grant like eas urging their ailing dog to live begged the old man to try for a third term in 1876 the general blind to his own ineptitudes showed a disquieting willingness.
but the house by a lopsided bipartisan vote of 233 to 18 derailed the third term bandwagon.
it passed a resolution that sternly reminded the country and grant of the antidictator implications of the two term tradition.
the compromise of 1877 with grant out of the running and with the conklingites and blaineites neutralizing each other the republicans turned to a compromise candidate rutherford b hayes who was obscure enough to be dubbed the great unknown his foremost qualication was the fact that he hailed from the electorally doubtful but potent state of ohio where he had served three terms as governor.
so crucial were the swing votes of ohio in the cliffhanging presidential contests of the day that the state produced more than its share of presidential candidates.
a political saying of the 1870s paraphrased shakespeare some are born great some achieve greatness and some are born in ohio.
pitted against the humdrum hayes was the democratic nominee samuel j tilden who had risen to fame as the man who bagged boss tweed in new york.
campaigning against republican scandal tilden racked up 184 electoral votes of the needed 185 with 20 votes in or r 2 c 1 vt nh me 5 5 7 montana terr.
idaho terr.
nv dakota terr.
arizona terr.
co ks indian terr.
new mexico terr.
wi ia ne utah terr.
ca mn wyoming terr.
tx il mo oh ky tn ar la in ms al ma ny mi ga pa wv va 5 11 nc sc ri nj ct 4 9 6 de md fl popular vote hayes republican uncontested electoral electoral vote vote 185 50 tilden democrat 4 288 546 51 0 candidate party 184 50 four states three of them in the south doubtful because of irregular returns see map 23 1.
surely tilden could pick up at least one of these especially in view of the fact that he had polled 247 448 more popular votes than hayes 4 284 020 to 4 036 572 both parties scurried to send visiting statesmen to the contested southern states of louisiana south carolina and florida.
all three disputed states submitted two sets of returns one democratic and one republican.
as the weeks drifted by the paralysis tightened generating a dramatic constitutional crisis.
the constitution merely species that the electoral returns from the states shall be sent to congress and in the presence of the house and senate they shall be opened by the president of the senate see the twelfth amendment in the appendix.
but who should count them.
on this point the constitution was silent.
if counted by the president of the senate a republican the republican returns would be selected.
if counted by the speaker of the house a democrat the democratic returns would be chosen.
how could the impasse be resolved.
the compromise of 1877 and the end of reconstruction wash terr.
4 034 311 48 0 contested territories map 23 1 hayes tilden disputed election of 1876 with electoral vote by state nineteen of the twenty disputed votes composed the total electoral count of louisiana south carolina and florida.
the twentieth was one of oregons three votes cast by an elector who turned out to be ineligible because he was a federal ofceholder a postmaster contrary to the constitution see art.
interactive map clash or compromise was the stark choice.
the danger loomed that there would be no president on inauguration day march 4 1877.
tilden or blood cried democratic hotheads and some of their minute men began to drill with arms.
but behind the scenes frantically laboring statesmen gradually hammered out an agreement in the henry clay tradition the compromise of 1877 the election deadlock itself was to be broken by the electoral count act which congress passed early in 1877 it set up an electoral commission consisting of fteen men selected from the senate the house and the supreme court see table 23 1.
in february 1877 about a month before inauguration day the senate and house met together in an electric at mosphere to settle the dispute.
the roll of the states was tolled off alphabetically.
when florida was reached the rst of the three southern states with two sets of returns the disputed documents were referred to the electoral commission which sat in a nearby chamber.
after prolonged discussion the members agreed by the partisan vote of eight republicans to seven democrats to accept the republican returns.
outraged democrats in congress smelling defeat undertook to launch a libuster until hell froze over chapter 14 forging the national economy 1790 1860 whitney ends the fiber famine samuel slater has been acclaimed the father of the factory system in america and seldom can the paternity of a movement more properly be ascribed to one person.
a skilled british mechanic of twenty one he was attracted by bounties being offered to british workers familiar with the textile machines.
after memorizing the plans for the machinery he escaped in disguise to america where he won the backing of moses brown a quaker capitalist in rhode island.
laboriously reconstructing the essential apparatus with the aid of a blacksmith and a carpenter he put into operation in 1791 the rst efcient american machinery for spinning cotton thread.
the ravenous mechanism was now ready but where was the cotton ber.
handpicking one pound of lint from three pounds of seed was a full days work for one slave and this process was so expensive that american made cotton cloth was relatively rare.
another mechanical genius massachusetts born eli whitney now made his mark.
after graduating from yale he journeyed to georgia to serve as a private tutor while preparing for the law.
there he was told that the poverty of the south would be relieved if someone could only invent a workable device for separating the seed from the short staple cotton ber.
within ten days in 1793 he built a crude machine called the cotton gin short for engine that was fty times more effective than the handpicking process.
few machines have ever wrought so wondrous a change.
the gin affected not only the history of america but that of the world.
almost overnight the raising of cotton became highly protable and the south was tied hand and foot to the throne of king cotton.
human bondage had been dying out but the insatiable demand for cotton reriveted the chains on the limbs of the downtrodden southern blacks.
south and north both prospered.
slave driv ing planters cleared more acres for cotton pushing the cotton kingdom westward off the depleted tidewater plains over the piedmont and onto the black loam bottomlands of alabama and mississippi.
humming gins poured out avalanches of snowy ber for the spindles of the yankee machines though for decades to come the mills of britain bought the lions share of southern cotton.
the american phase of the industrial revolution which rst blossomed in cotton textiles was well on its way.
factories at rst ourished most actively in new eng land though they branched out into the more populous areas of new york new jersey and pennsylvania.
the south increasingly wedded to the production of francis cabot lowells mill waltham massachusetts 1826 and cotton industry carding drawing and roving engraving 1835 built in 1814 lowells mill left was a marvel of manufacturing efciency.
it combined all phases of production including spinning and weaving under one roof.
the mills labor force right was composed primarily of young women from the local farming communities.
the upsurge of manufacturing a pioneer woman batting cotton making cotton batts from the raw ber was the rst step in making homespun cloth.
mechanical looms and sewing machines would soon make this traditional womens work obsolete.
cotton could boast of comparatively little manufacturing.
its capital was bound up in slaves its local consumers for the most part were desperately poor.
new eng land was singularly favored as an industrial center for several reasons.
its narrow belt of stony soil made farming difcult and hence made manufacturing attractive.
a relatively dense population provided labor and accessible markets shipping brought in capital and snug seaports made easy the import of raw materials and the export of the nished products.
finally the rapid rivers notably the merrimack in massachusetts provided abundant water power to turn the cogs of the machines.
by 1860 more than 400 million pounds of southern cotton poured annually into the gaping maws of over a thousand mills mostly in new eng land.
marvels in manufacturing americas factories spread slowly until about 1807 when there began the fateful sequence of the embargo nonintercourse and the war of 1812 stern necessity dictated the manufacture of substitutes for normal imports while the stoppage of european commerce was temporarily ruinous to yankee shipping.
both capital and labor were driven from the waves onto the factory oor as new eng land in the striking phrase of john eli whitneys cotton gin whitneys revolutionary little machine was artfully simple.
wire hooks on a rotating cylinder pulled the cotton bers through slots too narrow to allow seeds to pass.
a set of brushes then removed the bers.
whitneys gin made possible the mass cultivation of upland or short staple cotton which was unprotable to raise when its seeds had to be laboriously removed by hand.
before whitneys invention cotton growing had been largely conned to long staple or sea island cotton which could grow only in hot humid coastal areas.
with the advent of the cotton gin short staple cotton cultivation spread across the southern interior and so did slavery.
chapter 23 political paralysis in the gilded age 1869 1896 the populist movement in america 1976.
goodwyn depicted the populists as reasonable radicals who were justiably resentful of their eclipse by urban industrialism and nance capitalism.
he also portrayed populism as the last gasp of popular political participation a democratic moment in american history that expired with the populists absorption into the democratic party.
two subsequent works edward l ayerss promise of the new south 1992 and robert c mcmaths american populism 1993 synthesized many of the older perspectives and presented a balanced view of the populists as radical in many ways but also limited by their nostalgia for a lost agrarian past.
recently eric rauchways blessed among nations 2006 argued that populism was a reaction to americas increased reliance on foreign investment.
farmers in southern and western states resented control by foreign capitalists particularly the british.
although hofstadter made a similar point fty years earlier the impact of the international economy on domestic politics is reemerging as a direction for new research.
to learn more william gillette retreat from reconstruction 1869 1879 1979 steven hahn a nation under our feet black political struggles in the rural south from slavery to the great migration 2003 paul krause the battle for homestead 1880 1892 politics culture and steel 1992 roy morris jr fraud of the century rutherford b hayes samuel tilden and the stolen election of 1876 2003 heather cox richardson the death of reconstruction race labor and politics in the post civil war north 1865 1901 2001 mark w summers the era of good stealings 1993 alan trachtenberg the incorporation of america culture and society in the gilded age 1982 robert wiebe the search for order 1877 1920 1967 c vann woodward origins of the new south 1877 1913 1951 the strange career of jim crow rev.
ed 1974 a complete annotated bibliography for this chapter along with brief descriptions of the people to know and additional review materials may be found at industry comes of age 1865 1900 the wealthy class is becoming more wealthy but the poorer class is becoming more dependent.
the gulf between the employed and the employer is growing wider social contrasts are becoming sharper as liveried carriages appear so do barefooted children.
a s the nineteenth century drew to a close observers were asking why are the best men not in politics one answer was that they were being lured away from public life by the lusty attractions of the booming private economy.
as americas industrial revolution slipped into high gear talented men ached for prots not the presidency.
they dreamed of controlling corporations not the congress.
what the nation lost in civic leadership it gained in an astounding surge of economic growth.
as late as 1870 agriculture was the nations biggest business.
by 1900 its share of the economy was half that.
until the end of the civil war the united states imported more merchandise than it exported.
by 1900 it annually delivered more than 600 million worth of manufactured goods to the worlds marketplace.
americans did not achieve this economic transformation all by themselves.
foreign investment labor trade and technology made it possible.
although in many ways still a political dwarf the united states was about to stand up before the world as an industrial colossus and the lives of millions of working americans would be transformed in the process.
the iron colt becomes an iron horse the government business entanglements that increasingly shaped politics after the civil war also undergirded the industrial development of the nation.
the unparalleled outburst of railroad construction was a crucial case.
when lincoln was shot in 1865 there were only 35 000 miles of steam railways in the united states mostly east of the mississippi.
by 1900 the gure had this icon will direct you to interactive activities and study materials on the american pageant website chapter 14 forging the national economy 1790 1860 the master craftsman dignity and pride of workmanship are evident in this tidy wheelwrights shop.
smallscale intimate workplaces like this were eventually overshadowed by the mass production impersonal factory system as in the illustrations on pages 325 and 327 clearly the early factory system did not shower its benets evenly on all.
while many owners grew plump workingpeople often wasted away at their workbenches.
hours were long wages were low and meals were skimpy and hastily gulped.
workers were forced to toil in unsanitary buildings that were poorly ventilated lighted and heated.
they were forbidden by law to form labor unions to raise wages for such cooperative activity was regarded as a criminal conspiracy.
not surprisingly only twenty four recorded strikes occurred before 1835 especially vulnerable to exploitation were child workers.
in 1820 a signicant portion of the nations industrial toilers were children under ten years of age.
victims of factory labor many children were mentally blighted emotionally starved physically stunted and even brutally whipped in special whipping rooms in samuel slaters mill of 1791 the rst machine tenders were seven boys and two girls all under twelve years of age.
by contrast the lot of most adult wage workers improved markedly in the 1820s and 1830s.
in the full ush of jacksonian democracy many of the states granted the laboring man the vote.
brandishing the ballot he rst strove to lighten his burden through workingmens parties.
eventually many workers gave their loyalty to the democratic party of andrew jackson whose attack on the bank of the united states and against all forms of privilege reected their anxieties about the emerging capitalist economy.
in addition to such goals as the ten hour day higher wages and tolerable working conditions they demanded public educa one observer in 1836 published a newspaper account of conditions in some of the new england factories the operatives work thirteen hours a day in the summer time and from daylight to dark in the winter.
at half past four in the morning the factory bell rings and at ve the girls must be in the mills.
so fatigued.
are numbers of girls that they go to bed soon after receiving their evening meal and endeavor by a comparatively long sleep to resuscitate their weakened frames for the toil of the coming day.
examining the evidence the invention of the sewing machine istorians of technology examine not only the documentary evidence of plans and patents left behind by inventors but surviving machines themselves.
in 1845 elias howe a twenty six yearold apprentice to a boston watchmaker invented a sewing machine that could make 250 stitches a minute ve times what the swiftest hand sewer could do.
a year later howe received a patent for his invention but because the hand cranked machine could only stitch straight seams for a short distance before requiring resetting it had limited commercial appeal.
howe took his sewing machine abroad where he worked with british manufacturers to improve it and then returned to america and combined his patent with those of other inventors including isaac m singer.
hundreds of thousands of sewing machines h were produced beginning in the 1850s for the commercial manufacture of clothing books shoes and many other products and also for home use.
the sewing machine became the rst widely advertised consumer product.
due to its high cost the singer company introduced an installment buying plan which helped place sewing machines in most middleclass households.
why was the sewing machine able to nd eager customers in commercial workshops and home sewing rooms alike.
how might the sewing machine have changed other aspects of american life such as work patterns clothing styles and retail selling.
what other advances in technology might have been necessary for the invention of the sewing machine.
chapter 24 industry comes of age 1865 1900 bypassed often withered away and became ghost towns little wonder that communities fought one another for the privilege of playing host to the railroads.
ambitious towns customarily held out monetary and other attractions to the builders who sometimes blackmailed them into contributing more generously.
spanning the continent with rails deadlock in the 1850s over the proposed transcontinental railroad was broken when the south seceded leaving the eld to the north.
in 1862 the year after the guns rst spoke at fort sumter congress made provision for starting the long awaited line.
one weighty argument for action was the urgency of bolstering the union already disrupted by binding the pacic coast especially gold rich cal i fornia more securely to the rest of the republic.
the union pacic railroad note the word union was thus commissioned by congress to thrust westward from omaha nebraska.
for each mile of track constructed the company was granted 20 square miles of land alternating in 640 acre sections on either side of the track.
for each mile the builders were also to receive a generous federal loan ranging from 16 000 on snow sheds on the central pacic railroad in the sierra nevada mountains by joseph h becker ca.
1869 formidable obstacles of climate and terrain confronted the builders of the central pacic railroad in the mountainous heights of california.
note the chinese laborers in the foreground.
the at prairie land to 48 000 for mountainous country.
the laying of rails began in earnest after the civil war ended in 1865 and with juicy loans and land grants available the groundhog promoters made all possible haste.
insiders of the crdit mobilier construction company reaped fabulous prots.
they slyly pocketed 73 million for some 50 million worth of breakneck construction spending small change to bribe congressmen to look the other way.
sweaty construction gangs containing many irish paddies patricks who had fought in the union armies worked at a frantic pace.
on one record breaking day a sledge and shovel army of some ve thousand men laid ten miles of track.
a favorite song went like this then drill my paddies drill drill my heroes drill drill all day no sugar in your tay tea workin on the u p.
when hostile indians attacked in futile efforts to protect what once rightfully had been their land the laborers would drop their picks and seize their ries.
scores of people railroad workers and indians lost their lives as the rails stretched ever westward.
at rails end workers tried their best to nd relaxation and conviviality in railroads span the nation promoting the union pacic railroad 1869 their tented towns known as hells on wheels often teeming with as many as ten thousand men and a sprinkling of painted prostitutes and performers.
rail laying at the cal i fornia end was undertaken by the central pacic railroad.
this line pushed boldly eastward from boomtown sacramento over and through the towering snow clogged sierra nevada.
four farseeing men the so called big four were the chief nancial backers of the enterprise.
the quartet included the heavyset enterprising ex governor leland stanford of cal i fornia who had useful political connections and the burly energetic collis p huntington an adept lobbyist.
the big four cleverly operated through two construction companies and although they walked away with tens of millions in prots they kept their hands relatively clean by not becoming involved in the bribing of congressmen.
the central pacic which was granted the same princely subsidies as the union pacic had the same incentive to haste.
some ten thousand chinese laborers sweating from dawn to dusk under their basket hats proved to be cheap efcient and expendable hundreds lost their lives in premature explosions and other mishaps.
the towering sierra nevada presented a formidable barrier and the nerves of the big four were strained when their workers could chip only a few inches a day tunneling through solid rock while the union pacic was sledgehammering westward across the open plains.
a wedding of the rails was nally consummated near ogden utah in 1869 as two locomotives facing on a single track half a world behind each back gently kissed cowcatchers.
the colorful ceremony included the breaking of champagne bottles and the driv ing of a last ceremonial golden spike with ex governor stanford clumsily wielding a silver maul.
in all the union pacic built 1 086 miles the central pacic 689 miles.
completion of the transcontinental line a magnicent engineering feat for that day was one of americas most impressive peacetime undertakings.
it welded the west coast more rmly to the union and facilitated a ourishing trade with asia.
it penetrated the arid barrier of the deserts paving the way for the phenomenal growth of the great west.
americans compared this electrifying achievement with the declaration of independence and the emancipation of the slaves jubilant philadelphians again rang the cracked bell of independence hall.
binding the country with railroad ties with the westward trail now blazed four other transcontinental lines were completed before the centurys end.
none of them secured monetary loans from the federal government as did the union pacic and the central pacic.
but all of them except the great northern received generous grants of land.
the northern pacic railroad stretching from lake superior to puget sound reached its terminus in 1883 the atchison topeka and santa fe stretching through the southwestern deserts to cal i fornia was completed in 1884 the southern pacic ribboned from new orleans to san francisco and was consolidated in the same year.
the last spike of the last of the ve transcontinental railroads of the nineteenth century was hammered home in 1893 the great northern which ran from chapter 33 the great depression and the new deal 1933 1939 tens of thousands of jobless were employed at leaf raking and other make work tasks which were dubbed boondoggling as this kind of labor put a premium on shovel leaning slow motion the scheme was widely criticized.
the only thing we have to fear scoffers remarked is work itself a day for every demagogue direct relief from washington to needy families helped pull the nation through the ghastly winter of 1933 1934 but the disheartening persistence of unemployment and suffering demonstrated that emergency relief mea sures had to be not only continued but supplemented.
one danger signal was the appearance of various demagogues notably a magnetic microphone messiah father charles coughlin a catholic priest in michigan who began broadcasting in 1930 and whose slogan was social justice his anti new deal harangues to some 40 million radio fans nally became so anti semitic fascistic and demagogic that he was silenced in 1942 by his ecclesiastical superiors.
also notorious among the new brood of agitators were those who capitalized on popular discontent to make pie in the sky promises.
most conspicuous of these individuals were dr francis e townsend a retired cal i fornia physician who promised everyone over sixty 200 a month and senator huey p kingsh long of louisiana who was said to have more brass than a government mule.
he used his abundant rabble rousing talents to publicize his share our wealth program which promised to make every man a king every family was to receive 5 000 supposedly at the expense of the prosperous.
h l mencken called longs chief lieutenant former clergyman gerald l k smith the gutsiest goriest loudest and lustiest the deadliest and damndest orator ever heard on this or any other earth the champion boob bumper of all time fear of longs becoming a fascist dictator ended when he was shot by an assassin in the louisiana state capitol in 1935 father coughlin and huey long frightened many americans because they raised troubling questions about the link between fascism and economic crisis.
danger seemed to be lurking ominously in many corners of the world.
authoritarian rule was strengthening in japan while adolf hitler was acquiring absolute in 1935 father charles coughlin 1891 1979 singlehandedly defeated president roosevelts effort to win senate ratication of a treaty providing for american membership in the world court a judicial body of limited authority established by the league of nations.
what fdr saw as a symbolic embrace of international responsibility coughlin convinced his radio listeners was a conspiracy of international moneyed interests against american sovereignty our thanks are due to almighty god in that america retains her sovereignty.
congratulations to the aroused people of the united states who by more than 200 000 telegrams containing at least 1 000 000 names demanded that the principles established by washington and jefferson shall keep us clear from foreign entanglements and european hatreds.
huey long 1893 1935 long pursued progressive policies as governor of louisiana even while he ruled the state with a dictatorial hand.
a amboyant and unpredictable populist he set the orthodox political establishment on its ear especially after he became a u s senator in 1930 longs admirers called him the kingsh franklin roosevelt called him one of the two most dangerous men in the country the other said roosevelt was general douglas macarthur.
father coughlin and senator long wpa mural by victor arnautoff 1896 1979 1934 the pedestrian scene painted on a wall of coit tower in san francisco was one of a series of murals commissioned by the federal government to employ artists during the great depression.
authority in germany.
some even worried that franklin roosevelt himself would turn into a dictator.
partly to quiet the groundswell of unrest that might lead to a political explosion congress authorized the works progress administration wpa in 1935 the objective was employment on useful projects.
launched under the supervision of the ailing but energetic hopkins this remarkable agency ultimately spent about 11 billion on thousands of public buildings bridges and hard surfaced roads.
not every wpa project strengthened the infrastructure for instance one controlled crickets in wyoming while another built a monkey pen in oklahoma city.
john steinbeck future nobel prize novelist counted dogs in his cal i fornia county.
one of the most well loved wpa programs was the federal art project which hired artists to create posters and murals many still adorning post ofce walls.
critics sneered that wpa meant we provide alms but the fact is that over a period of eight years nearly 9 million people were given jobs not handouts.
the wpa nourished much precious talent preserved self respect and fostered the creation of more than a million pieces of art many of them publicly displayed.
new visibility for women just over a decade after the ratication of the nineteenth amendment american women began to carve a larger space for themselves in the nations political and intellectual life.
first lady eleanor roosevelt may have been the most visible woman in the roosevelt white house but she was hardly the only female voice.
secretary of labor frances perkins 1880 1965 burst through the gender barrier when she became americas rst woman cabinet member.
mary mcleod bethune chapter 42 the american people face a new century their children.
as social scientists increasingly emphasized the importance of the home environment for success in school it became clear that many fatherless impoverished african american children seemed consigned to suffer from educational handicaps that were difcult to overcome.
some segments of the african american community did prosper in the wake of the civil rights gains of the 1950s and 1960s although they still had a long hill to climb before reaching full equality.
by 2006 43 percent of all black families compared to 61 percent of all white families had incomes of at least 50 000 qualifying them barely as middle class.
blacks continued to make headway in political life.
the number of black elected ofcials had risen above the nine thousand mark including more than three dozen members of congress and the mayors of several large cities.
voting tallies demonstrated that successful black politicians were moving beyond isolated racial constituencies and into the political mainstream by appealing to a wide variety of voters.
in 1989 virginians only 15 percent of whom were black chose l douglas wilder as the rst african american elected to serve as a state governor.
in 1994 voters in illinois made carol moseley braun the rst african american woman elected to the u s senate.
in 2001 president george w bush appointed colin powell and condoleezza rice to top cabinet level posts in his administration as secretary of state and national security adviser respectively.
rice succeeded powell as secretary of state in the second bush administration.
and in the 2008 election senator barack obama whose father was kenyan mounted the most successful campaign for president of any black american to date.
record turnouts gave him a decisive victory.
by the early twenty rst century blacks had also dramatically advanced into higher education though the educational gap between blacks and whites stubbornly persisted.
in 2006 12 6 percent of blacks over age twenty ve had a bachelors degree compared to 18 6 percent of whites or 20 2 percent of non hispanic whites.
the political assault against af rmative action in cal i fornia and elsewhere in the 1990s only compounded the obstacles to advanced training for many young african americans.
but defenders of af rmative action chalked up a major victory in 2003 when the supreme court in a key case involving the university of michigan af rmed that achieving racial diversity on college campuses was a legitimate means to secure a more equitable society.
the court preserved af rmative action in university admissions as long as schools avoided using quotas point systems or other mechanistic ways of diversifying their student bodies though it remained uneasy about letting such programs endure indenitely.
justice sandra day oconnor said we expect that 25 years from now the use of racial preferences will no longer be necessary e pluribus plures controversial issues of color and culture also pervaded the realm of ideas in the late twentieth century.
echoing early twentieth century cultural pluralists like horace kallen and randolph bourne many intellectuals after 1970 embraced the creed of multiculturalism the new mantra stressed the need to preserve and promote rather than squash a variety of distinct ethnic and racial cultures in the united states.
the nations classrooms became battlegrounds for the debate over americas commitment to pluralism.
multiculturalists attacked the traditional curriculum as eurocentric and advocated greater focus on the achievements of african americans latinos asian americans and native americans.
in response critics charged that too much stress on ethnic difference would come at the expense of national cohesion and an appreciation of common american values.
the census bureau further enlivened the debate when in 2000 it allowed respondents to identify themselves with more than one of the six standard racial categories black white latino american indian asian and native hawaiian or other pacic islander.
signifying a mounting revolution in attitudes toward race nearly 7 million americans chose to describe them in 1990 the african american intellectual shelby steele b.
1946 declared in his provocative book the content of our character what is needed now is a new spirit of pragmatism in racial matters where blacks are seen simply as american citizens who deserve complete fairness and in some cases developmental assistance but in no case special entitlements based on color.
we need deracinated social policies that attack poverty rather than black poverty and that instill those values that make for self reliance.
literary currents selves as biracial or multiracial.
as recently as the 1960s interracial marriage was still illegal in sixteen states.
but by the early twenty rst century many americans including such celebrities as golfer tiger woods actress rosario dawson and senator barack obama were proclaiming their mixed heritage as a point of pride.
the life of the mind despite the mind sapping chatter of the boob tube americans in the early twenty rst century read more listened to more music and were better educated than ever before.
colleges awarded some 2 5 million degrees annually and more than one person in ve in the twenty ve to thirty four year old age group boasted a college bachelors degree in 2006.
nearly one in three had an associates degree.
this expanding mass of educated people lifted the economy to more advanced levels while creating consumers of high culture each year americans made millions of visits to museums and patronized thousands of opera companies and symphony orchestras as well as countless popular music groups.
what americans read said much about the state of american society in the new century.
among the most striking development in american letters was the rise of authors from ethnic groups now coming into their own.
african american authors and artists also increasingly made their mark.
playwright august wilson retold the history of black americans in the twentieth century with special emphasis on the psychic costs of the northward migration fences 1985 joe turners come and gone 1988 jitney 1998.
alice walker gave ctional voice to the experiences of black women in her hugely popular the color purple 1982.
toni morrison wove a bewitching portrait of maternal affection in beloved 1987 and in 1993 became the rst african american woman to win the nobel prize for literature.
edward p jones inventively rendered the life of a slaveowning black family in his pulitzer prize winning the known world 2003.
native americans too achieved literary recognition.
kiowa author n scott momaday won a pulitzer prize for his portrayal of indian life in house made of dawn 1968.
james welch wrote movingly about his blackfoot ancestors in fools crow 1986.
asian american authors also ourished among them playwright david hwang novelist amy tan and essayist maxine hong kingston whose woman warrior 1976 and china men 1980 imaginatively reconstructed the obscure lives of the earliest chinese immigrants.
in mona in the promised land 1996 gish pulitzer prize winning authors edward p jones left and jhumpa lahiri chapter 42 the american people face a new century jen guided her readers into the poignant comedy of suburban family relationships that was not uncommon for second generation asian americans.
jhumpa lahiris interpreter of maladies 1999 explored the sometimes painful relationship between immigrant indian parents and their american born children.
latino writers made their mark as well.
sandra cisneros drew on her own life as a mexican american child to evoke latino life in working class chicago in the house on mango street 1984.
women writers and womens themes forged to the ctional forefront as the feminist movement advanced.
jane smiley modeled her touching narrative of a midwestern farm family a thousand acres 1991 on shakespeares king lear and followed up with a hilarious spoof of university life in moo 1995.
e annie proulx won widespread acclaim with her comical yet tender portrayal of a struggling family in the shipping news 1993 as well as with her moving tale of homoerotic love between two cowboys in brokeback mountain 1997.
the rising interest in feminist and african american themes revived the popularity of a 1930s writer zora neale hurston especially her naturalistic novel their eyes were watching god rst published in 1937 new york became the art capital of the world after world war ii as well heeled americans supported a in her touching novel the joy luck club amy tan b.
1952 explored the complex dilemmas of growing up as a chinese american a girl is like a young tree my mother said.
you must stand tall and listen to your mother standing next to you.
that is the only way to grow strong and straight.
but if you bend to listen to other people you will grow crooked and weak.
over the years i learned to choose from the best opinions.
chinese people had chinese opinions.
american people had american opinions.
and in almost every case the american version was much better.
it was only later that i discovered there was a serious aw with the american version.
there were too many choices so it was easy to get confused and pick the wrong thing.
large number of painters and sculptors.
the open and tradition free american environment seemed especially congenial to the experimental mood of much modern art.
jackson pollock pioneered abstract expressionism in the 1940s and 1950s inging paint on huge ats stretched on his studio oor.
realistic representation went out the window as artists like pollock and willem de kooning strove to create action paintings that expressed the painters individuality and made the viewer a creative participant in dening the paintings meaning.
pop artists in the 1960s notably andy warhol canonized on canvas everyday items of consumer culture such as soup cans.
claes oldenburg tried to stun viewers into a new visual awareness with unfamiliar versions of familiar objects such as giant plastic sculptures of pillow soft telephones.
on the stage playwright david mamet analyzed the barbarity of american capitalism in plays like glengarry glen ross and american buffalo in which he crafted a kind of poetry from the sludge of american slang.
eve ensler took a feminist commitment into new territory that blended comic intimacy and searing social commentary with her vagina monologues.
the aids epidemic inspired tony kushners sensationally inventive angels in america a broad ranging commentary alternately hilarious and touching about the condition of american life at the twentieth centurys end.
cuban american nilo cruz won a pulitzer prize in 2003 for anna in the tropics his evocative play about immigrant cigar makers in 1930 tampa.
film the most characteristic american art form continued to ourish especially as a wave of younger lmmakers like george lucas steven spielberg spike lee quentin tarantino and the coen brothers as well as the innovative documentary artist ken burns made their inuence felt.
architecture also beneted from the building boom of the postwar era.
old master frank lloyd wright produced strikingly original designs as in the roundwalled guggenheim museum in new york.
louis kahn employed stark geometric forms and basic building materials like brick and concrete to make beautiful simple buildings.
eero saarinen the son of a finnish immigrant contributed a number of imaginative structures including two yale university residential colleges that evoked the at mosphere of an italian hill town.
chinese born i m pei designed numerous graceful buildings on several college campuses as well as the john f kennedy library in boston.
postmodernists such as robert venturi and michael graves inspired by the decorative details of earlier historical artistic achievements mecha mural by student artists directed by sergio ocadiz 1974 people have scribbled on walls since time immemorial but in the 1960s and 1970s mural painting emerged as a new form of american folk art.
drab buildings and bare fences often in minority inner city neighborhoods were turned into huge canvases.
this mural incorporates many mexican american and mexican themes including the united farm workers bird symbol and a skeleton a frequent motif in mexican art.
styles rejected the spare functionalism that had dominated modern architecture for much of the century.
the ight from stark modernism took fanciful forms in frank gehrys use of luminous undulating sheets of metallic skin in the widely hailed guggenheim museum in bilbao spain and the walt disney concert hall in los angeles.
the new media by the early twenty rst century the internet had dramatically transformed daily life for most americans.
first created by the government for cold war intelligence sharing the world wide web spread like wild re through american homes schools and ofces during the mid 1990s.
the percentage of households with internet access skyrocketed from 18 percent in 1997 to over 70 percent in 2007 in rapidly increasing numbers americans turned to the internet to communicate shop and even work.
the dot com explosion drove the tremendous economic boom of the late 1990s.
dot com refers to the uniform resource locater or url suf x used for commercial web sites.
even as the dot com bubble began to deate the internet demonstrated its staying power.
many online start up companies failed but those that survived often became giants in retail information gathering google and even nance e trade.
the internet reshaped the traditional corporate world as well.
by the end of the 1990s almost every business group or organization from used car dealers to sports teams to college arts groups had its own web site.
ful lling the promises of its early boosters the internet seemed to have a democratizing effect spreading power and information among more and more chapter 24 industry comes of age 1865 1900 newly rich had pulled themselves up by their own bootstraps hence they concluded that those who stayed poor must be lazy and lacking in enterprise.
the reverend russell conwell of philadelphia became rich by delivering his lecture acres of diamonds thousands of times.
in it he charged there is not a poor person in the united states who was not made poor by his own shortcomings such attitudes were a formidable roadblock to social reform.
plutocracy like the earlier slavocracy took its stand rmly on the constitution.
the clause that gave congress sole jurisdiction over interstate commerce was a godsend to the monopolists their high priced lawyers used it time and again to thwart controls by the state legislatures.
giant trusts likewise sought refuge behind the fourteenth amendment which had been originally designed to protect the rights of the ex slaves as persons.
the courts ingeniously interpreted a corporation to be a legal person and decreed that as such it could not be deprived of its property by a state without due process of law see amendment xiv para.
1 in the appendix.
there is some questionable evidence that slippery corporation lawyers deliberately inserted this loophole when the fourteenth amendment was being fashioned in 1866 great industrialists likewise sought to incorporate in easy states like new jersey where the restrictions on big business were mild or nonexistent.
for example the southern pacic railroad with much of its trackage in cal i fornia was incorporated in kentucky.
government tackles the trust evil at long last the masses of the people began to mobilize against monopoly.
they rst tried to control the trusts through state legislation as they had earlier attempted to curb the railroads.
failing here as before they were forced to appeal to congress.
after prolonged pulling and hauling the sherman anti trust act of 1890 was nally signed into law.
the sherman act atly forbade combinations in restraint of trade without any distinction between good trusts and bad trusts.
bigness not badness was the sin.
the law proved ineffective largely because it had only baby teeth or no teeth at all and because it contained legal loopholes through which clever corporation lawyers could wriggle.
but it was unexpectedly effective in one respect.
contrary to its original intent the new rich and the new immigrants a well to do family plays chess at its parlor table left while a tenement family does piecework around its kitchen table shelling nuts for commercial use right.
the young working girl seems to be snitching some nuts for herself.
the apparently growing gulf between the rich and the poor deeply worried reformers in the late nineteenth century.
they feared that democracy could not survive in the face of such gross inequality.
industry in the south industrial millionaires were condemned in the populist platform of 1892 the fruits of the toil of millions are boldly stolen to build up colossal fortunes for a few.
and the possessors of these in turn despise the republic and endanger liberty.
from the same prolic womb of governmental injustice we breed the two great classes tramps and millionaires.
it was used to curb labor unions or labor combinations that were deemed to be restraining trade.
early prosecutions of the trusts by the justice department under the sherman act of 1890 as it turned out were neither vigorous nor successful.
the decisions in seven of the rst eight cases presented by the attorney general were adverse to the government.
more new trusts were formed in the 1890s under president mckinley than during any other like period.
not until 1914 were the paper jaws of the sherman act tted with reasonably sharp teeth.
until then there was some question whether the government would control the trusts or the trusts the government.
but the iron grip of monopolistic corporations was being threatened.
a revolutionary new principle had been written into the law books by the sherman antitrust act of 1890 as well as by the interstate commerce act of 1887 private greed should henceforth be subordinated to public need.
the south in the age of industry the industrial tidal wave that washed over the north after the civil war caused only feeble ripples in the backwater of the south.
as late as 1900 the south still produced a smaller percentage of the nations manufactured goods than it had before the civil war.
the plantation system had degenerated into a pattern of absentee landownership.
white and black sharecroppers now tilled the soil for a share of the crop or they became tenants in bondage to their landlords who controlled needed credit and supplies.
southern agriculture received a welcome boost in the 1880s when machine made cigarettes replaced the roll your own variety and tobacco consumption shot up.
james buchanan duke took full advantage of the new technology to mass produce the dainty cof n nails in 1890 in what was becoming a familiar pattern he absorbed his main competitors into the american tobacco company.
the cigarette czar later showed a virginia tobacco factory ca.
1880 the employment of women and children was a common practice in latenineteenth century american industry north as well as south.
chapter 4 american life in the seventeenth century 1607 1692 the distant eng lish king could scarcely imagine the depths of passion and fear that bacons rebellion excited in virginia.
bacon had ignited the smoldering resentments of landless former servants and he had pitted the hardscrabble backcountry frontiersmen against the haughty gentry of the tidewater plantations.
the rebellion was now suppressed but these tensions remained.
lordly planters surrounded by a still seething sea of malcontents anxiously looked about for less troublesome laborers to toil in the restless tobacco kingdom.
their eyes soon lit on africa.
colonial slavery more than 7 million africans were carried in chains to the new world in the three centuries or so following columbuss landing see thinking globally the atlantic slave trade 1500 1860 pp.
only about 400 000 of them ended up in north america the great majority arriving after 1700 most of the early human cargoes were hauled to spanish and portuguese south america or to the sugar rich west indies.
africans had been brought to jamestown as early as 1619 but as late as 1670 they numbered only about 2 000 in virginia out of a total population of some 35 000 persons and about 7 percent of the 50 000 people in the southern plantation colonies as a whole.
hard pinched white colonists struggling to stay alive and to hack crude clearings out of the forests could not afford to pay high prices for slaves who might die soon after arrival.
white servants might die too but they were far less costly.
the mennonites of germantown pennsylvania recorded the earliest known protest against slavery in america in 1688 there is a saying that we should do to all men like as we will be done ourselves.
but to bring men hither or to rob and sell them against their will we stand against.
pray what thing in the world can be done worse towards us than if men should rob or steal us away and sell us for slaves to strange countries separating husbands from their wives and children.
drastic change came in the 1680s.
rising wages in eng land shrank the pool of penniless folk willing to gamble on a new life or an early death as indentured servants in america.
at the same time the large planters were growing increasingly fearful of the multitudes of potentially mutinous former servants in their midst.
by the mid 1680s for the rst time black slaves outnumbered white servants among the plantation colonies new arrivals.
in 1698 the royal african company rst chartered in 1672 lost its crown granted monopoly on carrying slaves to the colonies.
enterprising americans especially rhode islanders rushed to cash in on the lucrative slave trade and the supply of slaves rose steeply.
more than ten thousand africans were pushed ashore in america in the decade after 1700 and tens of thousands more in the next half century.
blacks accounted for nearly half the population of virginia by 1750 in south carolina they outnumbered whites two to one.
most of the slaves who reached north america came from the west coast of africa especially the area stretching from present day senegal to angola.
they were originally captured by african coastal tribes who traded them in crude markets on the shimmering tropical beaches to itinerant european and american esh merchants.
usually branded and bound the captives were herded aboard sweltering ships for the gruesome middle passage on which death rates ran as high as 20 percent.
terried survivors were eventually shoved onto auction blocks in new world ports like newport rhode island or charleston south carolina where a giant slave market traded in human misery for more than a century.
a few of the earliest african immigrants gained their freedom and some even became slaveowners themselves.
but as the number of africans in their midst increased dramatically toward the end of the seventeenth century white colonists reacted remorselessly to this supposed racial threat.
earlier in the century the legal difference between a slave and a servant was unclear.
but now the law began to make sharp distinctions between the two largely on the basis of race.
beginning in virginia in 1662 statutes appeared that formally decreed the iron conditions of slavery for blacks.
these earliest slave codes made blacks and their children the property or chattels for life of their white masters.
some colonies made it a crime to teach a slave to read or write.
not even conversion to christianity could qualify a slave for freedom.
thus did the god fearing whites put the fear of god into their hapless black laborers.
slavery might have begun in america for economic reasons the origins of american slavery the slave ship albatross 1846 this eyewitness painting captures the dankness gloom and despair that reigned in the slavers cargo hold.
but by the end of the seventeenth century it was clear that racial discrimination also powerfully molded the american slave system.
africans in america in the deepest south slave life was especially severe.
the climate was hostile to health and the labor was life draining.
the widely scattered south carolina rice and indigo plantations were lonely hells on earth where gangs of mostly male africans toiled and perished.
only fresh imports could sustain the slave population under these loathsome conditions.
blacks in the tobacco growing chesapeake region had a somewhat easier lot.
tobacco was a less physically demanding crop than those of the deeper south.
tobacco plantations were larger and closer to one another than rice plantations.
the size and proximity of these plantations permitted the slaves more frequent contact with friends and relatives.
by about 1720 the proportion of females in the chesapeake slave population had begun to rise making family life possible.
the captive black population of the chesapeake area soon began to grow not only through new imports but also through its own fertility making it one of the few slave societies in history to perpetuate itself by its own natural reproduction.
native born african americans contributed to the growth of a stable and distinctive slave culture a mixture of african and american elements of speech religion and folkways see makers of america from african to african american pp.
on the sea islands off south carolinas coast blacks evolved a unique language gullah probably a corruption of angola the african region from which many of them had come.
it blended eng lish with several african languages including yoruba igbo and hausa.
through it many african words have passed into american speech such as goober peanut gumbo okra and voodoo witchcraft.
the ringshout a west african religious dance performed by shuf ing in a circle while answering a preachers shouts was brought to colonial america by slaves and eventually contributed to the development of jazz.
the banjo and the bongo drum were other african contributions to american culture.
slaves also helped mightily to build the country with their labor.
a few became skilled artisans carpenters bricklayers and tanners.
but chiey they performed the sweaty toil of clearing swamps grubbing chapter 34 franklin d roosevelt and the shadow of war 1933 1941 sacrice the possibility of domestic recovery for the sake of international cooperation.
while vacationing on a yacht along the new eng land coast he dashed off a radio message to london scolding the conference for attempting to stabilize currencies and essentially declaring americas withdrawal from the negotiations.
roosevelts bombshell announcement yanked the rug from under the london conference.
the delegates adjourned empty handed amid cries of american bad faith.
whether the conference could have arrested the worldwide economic slide is debatable but roosevelts every man for himself attitude plunged the planet even deeper into economic crisis.
the collapse of the london conference also strengthened the global trend toward extreme nationalism making international cooperation ever more difcult as the dangerous decade of the 1930s unfolded.
reecting the powerful persistence of american isolationism roosevelts action played directly into the hands of the power mad dictators who were determined to shatter the peace of the world.
americans themselves would eventually pay a high price for the narrow minded belief that the united states could go it alone in the modern world.
freedom for from.
the filipinos and recognition for the rus sians roosevelt matched isolationism from europe with withdrawal from asia.
the great depression burst the fragile bubble of president mckinleys imperialistic dream in the far east.
with the descent into hard times american taxpayers were eager to throw overboard their expensive tropical liability in the philippine islands.
organized labor demanded the exclusion of low wage filipino workers and american sugar producers clamored for the elimination of philippine competition.
remembering its earlier promises of freedom for the philippines congress passed the tydings mcdufe act in 1934 the act provided for the independence of the philippines after a twelve year period of economic and political tutelage that is by 1946 the united states agreed to relinquish its army bases but naval bases were reserved for future discussion and retention.
in truth the american people were not so much giving freedom to the philippines as they were freeing themselves from the philippines.
with a selsh eye to their own welfare and with apparent disregard for the political situation in asia they proposed to leave the just another customer 1933 the united states recognizes the soviet union.
philippines to their fate while imposing upon the filipinos economic terms so ungenerous as to threaten the islands with economic prostration.
once again american isolationists rejoiced.
yet in tokyo japa nese militarists were calculating that they had little to fear from an inward looking america that was abandoning its principal possession in asia.
at the same time roosevelt made at least one internationalist gesture when he formally recognized the soviet union in 1933 over the noisy protests of anticommunist conser vatives as well as roman catholics offended by the kremlins antireligious policies roosevelt extended the hand of diplomatic recognition to the sixteen year old bolshevik regime.
he was motivated in part by the hope for trade with soviet russia as well as by the desire to bolster the soviet union as a friendly counterweight to the possible threat of german power in europe and japa nese power in asia.
roosevelt s early foreign policies becoming a good neighbor closer to home roosevelt inaugurated a refreshing new era in relations with latin america.
he proclaimed in his inaugural address i would dedicate this nation to the policy of the good neighbor taken together roosevelts noninvolvement in europe and withdrawal from asia along with this brotherly embrace of his new world neighbors suggested that the united states was giving up its ambition to be a world power and would content itself instead with being merely a regional power its interests and activities con ned exclusively to the western hemisphere.
old fashioned intervention by bayonet in the caribbean had not paid off except in an evil harvest of resentment suspicion and fear.
the great depression had cooled off yankee economic aggressiveness as thousands of investors in latin american securities became sackholders rather than stockholders.
there were now fewer dollars to be protected by the ries of the hated marines.
with war thirsty dictators seizing power in europe and asia roosevelt was eager to line up the latin americans to help defend the western hemisphere.
embittered neighbors would be potential tools of transoceanic aggressors.
president roosevelt made clear at the outset that he was going to renounce armed intervention particularly the vexatious corollary to the monroe doctrine devised by his cousin theodore roosevelt.
late in 1933 at the seventh pan american conference in montevideo uruguay the u s delegation formally endorsed nonintervention.
deeds followed words.
the last marines departed from haiti in 1934 the same year after military strongman fulgencio batista had come to power restive cuba was released from the worst hobbles of the platt amendment under which america had been free to intervene although the united states retained its naval base at guantnamo see p 684.
the tiny country of panama received a similar uplift in 1936 when washington partially relaxed its grip on the isthmus nation.
the hope inspiring good neighbor policy with the accent on consultation and nonintervention received its acid test in mexico.
when the mexican government seized yankee oil properties in 1938 american investors vehemently demanded armed intervention to repossess their conscated businesses.
but roosevelt successfully resisted the badgering and a settlement was nally threshed out in 1941 even though the oil companies lost much of their original stake.
spectacular success crowned roosevelts good neighbor policy.
his earnest attempts to usher in a new era of friendliness though hurting some u s bondholders paid rich dividends in goodwill among the peoples to the south.
no other citizen of the united states has ever been held in such high esteem in latin america during his lifetime.
roosevelt was cheered with tumultuous enthusiasm when as a traveling salesman for peace he journeyed to the special interamerican conference at buenos aires argentina in 1936 the colossus of the north now seemed less a vulture and more an eagle.
secretary hulls reciprocal trade agreements intimately associated with good neighborism and also popular in latin america was the reciprocal trade policy of the new dealers.
its chief architect was idealistic secretary of state hull a high minded tennessean of the low tariff school.
like roosevelt he believed that trade was a two way street that a nation can sell abroad only as it buys abroad that tariff barriers choke off foreign trade and that trade wars beget shooting wars.
responding to the hull roosevelt leadership congress passed the reciprocal trade agreements act in 1934 designed in part to lift american export trade from the depression doldrums this enlightened mea sure was aimed at both relief and recovery.
at the same time it activated the low tariff policies of the new dealers.
see the tariff chart in the appendix.
the reciprocal trade agreements act avoided the dangerous uncertainties of a wholesale tariff revision it merely whittled down the most objectionable schedules of the hawley smoot law by amending them.
roosevelt was empowered to lower existing rates by as much as 50 percent provided that the other country involved was willing to respond with similar reductions.
the resulting pacts moreover were to become effective without the formal approval of the senate.
this novel feature not only ensured speedier action but sidestepped the twin evils of high stakes logrolling and high pressure lobbying in congress.
secretary hull whose zeal for reciprocity was unagging succeeded in negotiating pacts with twentyone countries by the end of 1939 during these same years u s foreign trade increased appreciably presumably in part as a result of the hull roosevelt policies.
trade agreements undoubtedly bettered economic chapter 15 the ferment of reform and culture 1790 1860 transcendental abandon of his love for the masses he caught the exuberant enthusiasm of an expanding amer ica that had turned its back on the old world all the past we leave behind we debouch upon a newer mightier world varied world fresh and strong the world we seize world of labor and the march pioneers.
o pioneers.
here at last was the native art for which critics had been crying.
glowing literary lights certain other literary giants were not actively associated with the transcendentalist movement though not completely immune to its inuences.
professor henry wadsworth longfellow 1807 1882 who for many years taught modern languages at harvard college was one of the most popular poets ever produced in america.
handsome and urbane he lived a generally serene life except for the tragic deaths of two wives the second of whom perished before his eyes when her dress caught re.
writing for the genteel classes he was adopted by the less cultured masses.
his wide knowledge of european literature supplied him with many themes but some of his most admired poems evangeline the song of hiawatha and the courtship of miles standish were based on american traditions.
immensely popular in europe longfellow was the only american ever to be honored with a bust in the poets corner of westminster abbey.
a ghting quaker john greenleaf whittier 1807 1892 with piercing dark eyes and swarthy complexion was the uncrowned poet laureate of the antislavery crusade.
less talented as a writer than longfellow he was vastly more important in inuencing social action.
his poems cried aloud against inhumanity injustice and intolerance against the outworn rite the old abuse the pious fraud transparent grown.
undeterred by insults and the stoning of mobs whittier helped arouse a callous america on the slavery issue.
a supreme conscience rather than a sterling poet or intellect whittier was one of the moving forces of his generation whether moral humanitarian or spiritual.
gentle and lovable he was preeminently the poet of human freedom.
many sided professor james russell lowell 1819 1891 who succeeded professor longfellow at harvard ranks as one of americas better poets.
he was also a distinguished essayist literary critic editor and diplomat a diffusion of talents that hampered his poetical output.
lowell is remembered as a political satirist in his biglow papers especially those of 1846 dealing with the mexican war.
written partly as poetry in the yankee dialect the papers condemned in blistering terms the alleged slavery expansion designs of the polk administration.
the scholarly dr oliver wendell holmes 1809 1894 who taught anatomy with a sparkle at harvard medical school was a prominent poet essayist novelist lecturer and wit.
a nonconformist and a fascinating conversationalist he shone among a group of literary lights who regarded boston as the hub of the universe his poem the last leaf in honor of the last white indian of the boston tea party came to apply to himself.
dying at the age of eighty ve he was the last leaf among his distinguished contemporaries.
two women writers whose work remains enormously popular today were also tied to this new england literary world.
louisa may alcott 1832 1888 grew up in concord massachusetts in the bosom of transcendentalism alongside neighbors emerson thoreau and fuller.
her philosopher father bronson alcott occupied himself more devotedly to ideas than earning a living leaving his daughter to write little women 1868 and other books to support her mother and sisters.
not far away in amherst massachusetts poet emily dickinson 1830 1886 lived as a recluse but created her own original world through precious gems of poetry.
in deceptively spare language and simple rhyme schemes she explored universal themes of nature love death and immortality.
although she refused during her lifetime to publish any of her poems when she died nearly two thousand of them were found among her papers and eventually made their way into print.
the most noteworthy literary gure produced by the south before the civil war unless edgar allan poe is regarded as a southerner was novelist william gilmore simms 1806 1870.
quantitatively at least he was great eighty two books owed from his ever moist pen winning for him the title the cooper of the south his themes dealt with the southern frontier in colonial oliver wendell holmes had a son with the same name who became a distinguished justice of the supreme court 1902 1932 and who lived to be ninety four less two days.
a literary renaissance louisa may alcott 1832 1888 1856 in search of independence for herself and nancial security for her family alcott worked as a seamstress governess teacher and housemaid until her writing nally brought her success.
her much loved largely autobiographical novel little women has remained in print continuously from 1868 until our own day.
days and with the south during the revolutionary war.
but he was neglected by his own section even though he married into the socially elite and became a slaveowner.
the high toned planter aristocracy would never accept the son of a poor charleston storekeeper.
literary individualists and dissenters not all writers in these years believed so keenly in human goodness and social progress.
edgar allan poe 1809 1849 who spent much of his youth in virginia was an eccentric genius.
orphaned at an early age cursed with ill health and married to a child wife of thirteen who fell fatally ill of tuberculosis he suffered hunger cold poverty and debt.
failing at suicide he took refuge in the bottle and dissipated his talent early.
poe was a gifted lyric poet as the raven attests.
a master stylist he also excelled in the short story espe cially of the horror type in which he shared his alcoholic nightmares with fascinated readers.
if he did not invent the modern detective novel he at least set new high standards in tales like the gold bug poe was fascinated by the ghostly and ghastly as in the fall of the house of usher and other stories.
he reected a morbid sensibility distinctly at odds with the usually optimistic tone of american culture.
partly for this reason poe has perhaps been even more prized by europeans than by americans.
his brilliant career was cut short when he was found drunk in a baltimore gutter and shortly thereafter died.
two other writers reected the continuing calvinist obsession with original sin and with the neverending struggle between good and evil.
in somber salem massachusetts writer nathaniel hawthorne 1804 1864 grew up in an at mosphere heavy with the memories of his puritan forebears and the tragedy of his fathers premature death on an ocean voyage.
his masterpiece was the scarlet letter 1850 which describes the puritan practice of forcing an adulteress to wear a scarlet a on her clothing.
the tragic tale chronicles the psychological effects of sin on the guilty heroine and her secret lover the father of her baby a minister of the gospel in puritan boston.
in the marble faun 1860 hawthorne dealt with a group of young american artists who witness a mysterious murder in rome.
the book explores the concepts of the omnipresence of evil and the dead hand of the past weighing upon the present.
herman melville 1819 1891 an orphaned and illeducated new yorker went to sea as a youth and served eighteen adventuresome months on a whaler.
a whale ship was my yale college and my harvard he wrote.
jumping ship in the south seas he lived among cannibals from whom he providently escaped uneaten.
his fresh and charming tales of the south seas were immediately popular but his masterpiece moby dick 1851 was not.
this epic novel is a complex allegory of good and evil told in terms of the con ict between a whaling captain ahab and a giant white whale moby dick.
captain ahab having lost a leg to the marine monster lives only for revenge.
his pursuit nally ends when moby dick rams and sinks ahabs ship leaving only one survivor.
the whales exact identity and ahabs motives remain obscure.
in the end the sea like the terrifyingly impersonal and unknowable universe of melvilles imagination simply rolls on.
moby dick was widely ignored at the time of its publication people were accustomed to more straightforward and upbeat prose.
a disheartened melville chapter 15 the ferment of reform and culture 1790 1860 capturing a sperm whale painted by william page from a sketch by c b hulsart 1835 this painting and melvilles moby dick vividly portray the hazards of whaling.
despite the dangers it proved to be an important industry from colonial times to the end of the nineteenth century continued to write unprotably for some years part of the time eking out a living as a customs inspector and then died in relative obscurity and poverty.
ironically his brooding masterpiece about the mysterious white whale had to wait until the more jaded twentieth century for readers and for proper recognition.
portrayers of the past a distinguished group of american historians was emerging at the same time that other writers were winning distinction.
energetic george bancroft 1800 1891 who as secretary of the navy helped found the naval academy at annapolis in 1845 has deservedly received the title father of american history he published a spirited superpatriotic history of the united states to 1789 in six originally ten volumes 1834 1876 a work that grew out of his vast researches in dusty archives in europe and america.
two other historians are read with greater plea sure and prot today.
william h prescott 1796 1859 who accidentally lost the sight of an eye while in college conserved his remaining weak vision and published classic accounts of the conquest of mexico 1843 and peru 1847.
francis parkman 1823 1893 whose eyes were so defective that he wrote in darkness with the aid of a guiding machine penned a brilliant series of volumes beginning in 1851 in epic style he chronicled the struggle between france and britain in colonial times for the mastery of north america.
early american historians of prominence were almost without exception new eng landers largely because the boston area provided well stocked libraries and a stimulating literary tradition.
these writers numbered abolitionists among their relatives and friends and hence were disposed to view unsympathetically the slavery cursed south.
this made in new eng land interpretation dominated the writing of american history until the close of the nineteenth century when pressure for national reconciliation overcame regional bias.
the history of the united states has been written by boston one pro southern historian bitterly complained and largely written wrong key terms chronology shaker movement founded in manchester eng land 1770s first shaker communities established in new york thomas paine publishes the age of reason university of north carolina founded second great awakening begins jefferson founds university of virginia cooper publishes the spy his rst successful novel emma willard establishes troy new york female seminary new harmony commune established american temperance society founded noah webster publishes dictionary american peace society founded 1830 joseph smith founds mormon church godeys ladys book rst published lyceum movement ourishes oberlin college admits female students mary lyon establishes mount holyoke seminary emerson delivers the american scholar address london antislavery convention refuses to recognize female delegates brook farm commune established dorothea dix petitions massachusetts legislature on behalf of the insane 1846 mormon migration to utah seneca falls womans rights convention held oneida community established hawthorne publishes the scarlet letter melville publishes moby dick maine passes rst law prohibiting liquor whitman publishes leaves of grass finney conducts revivals in eastern cities key terms the age of reason 341 deism 341 unitarians 341 second great awakening 341 burned over district 343 mormons 343 lyceum 347 american temperance society 350 maine law of 1851 351 people to know womans rights convention at seneca falls 352 new harmony 354 brook farm 354 oneida community 354 shakers 354 hudson river school 359 minstrel shows 360 transcendentalism 361 the american scholar 362 peter cartwright charles grandison finney joseph smith brigham young horace mann dorothea dix neal s dow lucretia mott elizabeth cady stanton susan b anthony lucy stone amelia bloomer robert owen john j audubon stephen c foster james fenimore cooper ralph waldo emerson henry david thoreau walt whitman henry wadsworth longfellow louisa may alcott emily dickinson nathaniel hawthorne herman melville francis parkman chapter along with brief descriptions of the people to know and additional review materials may be found at part three testing the new nation 1820 1877 t he civil war of 1861 to 1865 was the awesome trial by re of american nationhood and of the american soul.
all americans knew said abraham lincoln that slavery was somehow the cause of this war the war tested in lincolns ringing phrase at gettysburg whether any nation dedicated to the proposition that all men are created equal.
can long endure how did this great and bloody con ict come about.
and what were its results.
american slavery was by any measure a peculiar institution slavery was rooted in both racism and economic exploitation and depended for its survival on brutal repression.
yet the american slave population was the only enslaved population in history that grew by means of its own biological reproduction a fact that suggests to many historians that conditions under slavery in the united states were somehow less punitive than those in other slave societies.
indeed a distinctive and durable african american culture managed to ourish under slavery further suggesting that the slave regime provided some space for african american cultural development.
but however benignly it might be painted slavery still remained a cancer in the heart of american democracy a moral outrage that mocked the nations claim to be a model of social and returning from the cotton fields in south carolina african american slaves planted and picked virtually all the cotton that formed the foundation of the nineteenth century southern economy.
the white south ferociously defended its peculiar institution of slavery which ended at last only in the res of the civil war.
testing the new nation the 1st virginia regiment these virginia militiamen were photographed in 1859 while attending the trial of the abolitionist john brown for treason against the state of virginia.
two years later their regiment formed part of the confederate army that struck for southern independence.
political enlightenment.
as time went on more and more voices called more and more stridently for its abolition.
the nation lived uneasily with slavery from the outset.
thomas jefferson was only one among many in the founding generation who felt acutely the con ict between the high principle of equality and the ugly reality of slavery.
the federal government in the early republic took several steps to check the growth of slavery.
it banned slavery in the old northwest in 1787 prohibited the further importation of slaves after 1808 and declared in the missouri compromise of 1820 that the vast western territories secured in the louisiana purchase were forever closed to slavery north of the state of missouri.
antislavery sentiment even abounded in the south in the immediate post revolutionary years.
but as time progressed and especially after eli whitneys invention of the cotton gin in the 1790s the southern planter class became increasingly dependent on slave labor to wring prots from the sprawling plantations that carpeted the south.
as cotton cultivation spread westward the souths stake in slavery grew deeper and the abolitionist outcry grew louder.
the controversy over slavery signicantly intensied following the war with mexico in the 1840s.
mexico will poison us predicted the philosopher ralph waldo emerson and he proved to be distressingly prophetic.
the lands acquired from mexico most of the present day american southwest from texas to cal i fornia reopened the question of extending slavery into the western territories.
the decade and a half that followed the mexican war from 1846 to 1861 witnessed a series of ultimately ineffective efforts to come to grips with that question including the ill starred compromise of 1850 the con ict breeding kansas nebraska act of 1854 and the supreme courts inammatory decision in the dred scott case of 1857 ultimately the slavery question was settled by force of arms in the civil war itself.
the civil war as lincoln observed was assuredly about slavery.
but as lincoln also repeatedly insisted the war was about the viability of the union as well and about the strength of democracy itself.
could a democratic government built on the principle of popular consent rightfully deny some of its citizens the same right to independence that the american revolutionaries had exercised in seceding from the british empire in 1776.
southern rebels calling the con ict the war for southern independence asked that question forcefully but ultimately it too was answered not in the law courts or in the legislative halls but on the battleeld.
the civil war unarguably established the supremacy of the union and it ended slavery as well.
but as the victorious union set about the task of reconstruction after the wars end in 1865 a combination of weak northern will and residual southern power frustrated the goal of making the emancipated blacks full edged american citizens.
the civil war in the end brought nothing but freedom but over time freedom proved a powerful tool indeed.
the south and the slavery controversy 1793 1860 those who deny freedom to others deserve it not for themselves and under a just god cannot long retain it.
abraham lincoln 1859 a t the dawn of the republic slavery faced an uncertain future.
touched by revolutionary idealism some southern leaders including thomas jefferson were talking openly of freeing their slaves.
others predicted that the iron logic of economics would eventually expose slaverys unprotability speeding its demise.
but the introduction of eli whitneys cotton gin in 1793 scrambled all those predictions.
whitneys invention made possible the wide scale cultivation of short staple cotton.
the white ber rapidly became the dominant southern crop eclipsing tobacco rice and sugar.
the explosion of cotton cultivation created an insatiable demand for labor chaining the slave to the gin and the planter to the slave.
as the nineteenth century opened the reinvigoration of southern slavery carried fateful implications for blacks and whites alike and threatened the survival of the nation itself.
cotton is king as time passed the cotton kingdom developed into a huge agricultural factory pouring out avalanches of the uffy ber.
quick prots drew planters to the loamy bottomlands of the gulf states.
as long as the soil was still vigorous the yield was bountiful and the rewards were high.
caught up in an economic spiral the planters bought more slaves and land to grow more cotton so as to buy still more slaves and land.
northern shippers reaped a large part of the prots from the cotton trade.
they would load bulging bales of cotton at southern ports transport them to eng land sell their eecy cargo for pounds sterling and buy needed manufactured goods for sale in the united states.
to a large degree the prosperity of both north and south and of eng land too rested on the bent backs of enslaved bondsmen.
this icon will direct you to interactive activities and study materials on the american pageant website the cotton empire so did the young nations growing wealth.
cotton accounted for half the value of all american exports after 1840 and export earnings provided much of the capital that stoked the republics economic growth.
the south produced more than half of the entire worlds supply of cotton a fact that held foreign nations in partial bondage.
britain was then the leading industrial power.
its most important single manufacture in the 1850s was cotton cloth from which about one fth of its population directly or indirectly drew its livelihood.
about 75 percent of this precious supply of ber came from the white carpeted acres of the south.
southern leaders were fully aware that britain was tied to them by cotton threads and this dependence gave them a heady sense of power.
in their eyes cotton was king the gin was his throne and the black bondsmen were his henchmen.
if war should ever break out between north and south northern warships would presumably cut off the outow of cotton.
fiberfamished british factories would then close their gates starving mobs would force the london government to break the blockade and the south would triumph.
cotton was a powerful monarch indeed.
the planter aristocracy before the civil war the south was in some respects not so much a democracy as an oligarchy or a government by the few in this case heavily inuenced by a planter aristocracy.
in 1850 only 1 733 families owned more than 100 slaves each and this select group provided the cream of the political and social leadership of the section and nation.
here was the mint julep south of the tall columned and white painted plantation mansion the big house where dwelt the cottonocracy the planter aristocrats with their blooded horses and chippendale chairs enjoyed a lions share of southern wealth.
they could educate their children in the nest schools often in the north or abroad.
their money provided the leisure for study reection and statecraft as was notably true of men like john c calhoun a yale graduate and jefferson davis a west point graduate.
they felt a keen sense of obligation to serve the public.
it was no accident that virginia and the other southern states produced a higher proportion of front rank statesmen before 1860 than the dollar grubbing north.
but even in its best light dominance by a favored aristocracy was basically undemocratic.
it widened the gap between rich and poor.
it hampered tax supported public education because the rich planters could and did send their children to private institutions.
a favorite author of elite southerners was sir walter scott whose manors and castles graced by brave ivanhoes and fair rowenas helped them idealize a feudal society even when many of their economic activities were undeniably capitalistic.
southern aristocrats who sometimes staged jousting tournaments strove to interior of the cotton bureau in new orleans by edgar degas 1873 although this painting dates from 1873 french impressionist painter edgar degas 1834 1917 captured the insouciant self condence of cotton traders in the pre civil war era.
as cotton cultivation spread into the new states of the trans appalachian southwest the entire cotton kingdom paid tribute to new orleans queen city of the south and the port through which millions of cotton bales owed out to british textile mills.
chapter 16 the south and the slavery controversy 1793 1860 spare them the lash thus fostering the myth of black laziness in the minds of whites.
they lched food from the big house and pilfered other goods that had been produced or purchased by their labor.
they sabotaged expensive equipment stopping the work routine altogether until repairs were accomplished.
occasionally they even poisoned their masters food.
the slaves also universally pined for freedom.
many took to their heels as runaways frequently in search of a separated family member.
a black girl asked if her mother was dead replied yessir master she is dead but shes free others rebelled though never successfully.
in 1800 an armed insurrection led by a slave named gabriel in richmond virginia was foiled by informers and its leaders were hanged.
denmark vesey a free black led another ill fated rebellion in charleston south carolina in 1822 also betrayed by informers vesey and more than thirty followers were publicly strung from the gallows.
in 1831 the semiliterate nat turner a visionary black preacher led an uprising that slaughtered about sixty virginians mostly women and children.
reprisals were swift and bloody and nat turners rebellion was soon extinguished.
an especially dramatic episode involved the enslaved africans who rebelled aboard the spanish slave ship amistad in 1839 they seized command of the vessel off the coast of cuba and attempted to sail back to africa but were driven ashore on long island.
after two years of imprisonment and several trials former president john quincy adams nally secured their freedom in a brilliant moving argument before the 90w u s supreme court in 1841 and the africans returned to the british colony of sierra leone in west africa.
the dark taint of slavery also left its mark on whites.
it fostered the brutality of the whip the bloodhound and the branding iron.
white southerners increasingly lived in a state of imagined siege surrounded by potentially rebellious blacks inamed by abolitionist propaganda from the north.
their fears bolstered an intoxicating theory of biological racial superiority and turned the south into a reactionary backwater in an era of progress one of the last bastions of slavery in the western world.
the defenders of slavery were forced to degrade themselves along with their victims.
as booker t washington a distinguished black leader and former slave later observed whites could not hold blacks in a ditch without getting down there with them.
early abolitionism the inhumanity of the peculiar institution gradually caused antislavery societies to sprout forth.
abolitionist sentiment rst stirred at the time of the revolution especially among quakers see map 16 3.
because of the widespread loathing of blacks some of the earliest abolitionist efforts focused on transporting blacks bodily back to africa.
the american colonization society was founded for this purpose in 1817 and in 1822 the republic of liberia on the fever stricken west african coast was established for former slaves.
its capital monrovia was named after president monroe.
80w superior lake 70w 400 km.
british north america canada 40n lake michi the louisiana purchase 1803 on hu r 100w by state statutes in force gradual emancipation tario n y l on rie l e old northwest by state constitution vt e g an la k slavery prohibited by ordinance of 1787 slave states maine mass.
pa n n h mass.
1780 n j r i conn at l a n t i c ocean map 16 3 early emancipation in the north interactive map bellegrove plantation donaldsville louisiana built 1857 he sugar growing bellegrove plantation on the banks of the mississippi river ninety ve miles north of new orleans was laid out on a grander scale than many southern plantations.
in this rendering from an advertisement for bellegroves sale in 1867 the planter john orrs home was identied as a mansion and quarters for his eld hands proved extensive twenty double cabins built for slaves now for negroes and a dormitory described in the ad but not pictured here housing 150 laborers.
because of the unhealthy work involved in cultivating sugar cane such as the constant digging of drainage canals to keep the cane from rotting in standing water many planters hired immigrant usually irish labor to keep their valuable slaves out of physical danger.
the presence of a hospital between the slave cabins and the mansion indicates the very real threat to health.
the layout of bellegrove reects the organi t zation of production as well as the social relations on a sugar plantation.
the storehouse where preserved sugar awaited shipping stood closest to the mississippi river the principal transportation route whereas the sugar house the most important building on the plantation with its mill boilers and cooking vats for converting syrup into sugar dominated the caneelds.
although the big house and slave quarters stood in close proximity hedges surrounding the planters home shut out views of both sugar production and labor.
within the slave quarters the overseers larger house signied his superior status while the arrangement of cabins ensured his supervision of domestic as well as work life.
what else does the physical layout of the plantation reveal about settlement patterns sugar cultivation and social relationships along the mississippi.
chapter 16 the south and the slavery controversy 1793 1860 in defense of slavery this pair of illustrations contrasts the supposedly benevolent slave regime of the south with the harshness of working life in england where starvation wages and unemployment blighted workers lives.
apologists for slavery frequently invoked this comparison between allegedly paternalistic slavemasters and the uncaring capitalists who captained the industrial revolution.
ofce and burned a pile of abolitionist propaganda.
capitulating to southern pressures the washington government in 1835 ordered southern postmasters to destroy abolitionist material and called on southern state ofcials to arrest federal postmasters who did not comply.
such was freedom of the press as guaranteed by the constitution.
the abolitionist impact in the north abolitionists especially the extreme garrisonians were for a long time unpopular in many parts of the north.
northerners had been brought up to revere the constitution and to regard the clauses on slavery as a lasting bargain.
the ideal of union hammered home by the thundering eloquence of daniel webster and others had taken deep root and garrisons wild talk of secession grated harshly on northern ears.
the north also had a heavy economic stake in dixieland.
by the late 1850s southern planters owed northern bankers and other creditors about 300 million and much of this immense sum would be lost as in fact it later was should the union dissolve.
new england textile mills were fed with cotton raised by the slaves and a disrupted labor system might cut off this vital supply and bring unemployment.
the union during these critical years was partly bound together with cotton threads tied by lords of the loom in collaboration with the so called lords of the lash.
it was not surprising that strong hostility developed in the north against the boat rocking tactics of the radical antislaveryites.
repeated tongue lashings by the extreme abolitionists provoked many mob outbursts in the north some led by respectable gentlemen.
a gang of young toughs broke into lewis tappans new york house in 1834 and demolished its interior while a crowd in the street cheered.
in 1835 garrison with a rope tied around him chronology was dragged through the streets of boston by the socalled broadcloth mob but escaped almost miraculously.
reverend elijah p lovejoy of alton illinois not content to assail slavery impugned the chastity of catholic women.
his printing press was destroyed four times and in 1837 he was killed by a mob and became the martyr abolitionist so unpopular were the antislavery zealots that ambitious politicians like lincoln usually avoided the taint of garrisonian abolition like the plague.
yet by the 1850s the abolitionist outcry had made a deep dent in the northern mind.
many citizens had come to see the south as the land of the unfree and the home of a hateful institution.
few northerners were prepared to abolish slavery outright but a growing number including lincoln opposed extending it to the western territories.
people of this stamp commonly called free soilers swelled their ranks as the civil war approached.
chronology whitneys cotton gin transforms southern economy british abolish slavery in west indies american anti slavery society founded gabriel slave rebellion in virginia abolitionist students expelled from lane theological seminary britain abolishes slave trade congress outlaws slave trade royal navy forms west africa squadron u s post ofce orders destruction of abolitionist mail broadcloth mob attacks garrison american colonization society formed house of representatives passes gag resolution missouri compromise mob kills abolitionist lovejoy in alton illinois vesey slave rebellion in charleston south carolina republic of liberia established in africa weld publishes american slavery as it is slave revolt aboard amistad walker publishes appeal to the colored citizens of the world douglass publishes narrative of the life of frederick douglass nat turner slave rebellion in virginia garrison begins publishing the liberator free soil party orga nized 1831 virginia legislature debates slavery and emancipation chapter 6 the duel for north america 1608 1763 though slight and sickly wolfe combined a mixture of dash with painstaking attention to detail.
the british attackers were making woeful progress when wolfe in a daring night move sent a detachment up a poorly guarded part of the rocky eminence protecting qubec.
this vanguard scaled the cliff pulling itself upward by the bushes and showing the way for the others.
in the morning the two armies faced each other on the plains of abraham on the outskirts of qubec the british under wolfe and the french under the marquis de montcalm.
both commanders fell fatally wounded but the french were defeated and the city surrendered.
the battle of qubec in 1759 ranks as one of the most signicant engagements in british and american history.
when montral fell in 1760 the french ag had uttered in canada for the last time.
by the peace settlement at paris 1763 french power was thrown completely off the continent of north america leaving behind a fertile french population that is to this day a strong minority in canada.
this bitter pill was sweet ened somewhat when the french were allowed to retain several small but valuable sugar islands in the west indies and two never to be fortied islets in the gulf of st lawrence for shing stations.
a nal blow came when the french to compensate their luckless spanish ally for its losses ceded to spain all transmississippi louisiana plus the outlet of new orleans.
spain for its part turned florida over to britain in return for cuba where havana had fallen to british arms see map 6 7.
great britain thus emerged as the dominant power in north america while taking its place as the leading naval power of the world.
restless colonists britains colonists baptized by re emerged with increased condence in their military strength.
they had borne the brunt of battle at rst they had fought bravely 180 20w 160w 140w 120w n 140w 120w 100w 40w 60w 80w 160w 100w 20w 40w 60w 80w n 180 hudson bay hudson bay n r n m pi r do o ra col.
r io oh atlantic ocean territorial claims n 20 new york philadelphia richmond territorial claims at l a n t i c ocean savannah san new orleans antonio g ul f of me x i co saintdomingue n 20 car i bbe an sea french mexico city br.
c a rib b e a n honduras sea spanish french russian io oh r british br.
honduras british st louis santa f e nd nd e gul f of mexi co spanish pac i f ic ocean r rio gra ra ri o g pacific ocean r n boston.
pi r ip iss iss c ol do ora qubec montral missouri r.
n ip iss is s m a missouri r.
columbi 500 1000 km.
map 6 7 north america before 1754 russian proclamation line of 1763 500 1000 km.
north america after 1763 after french losses interactive map impact of the global struggle alongside the crack british regulars and they had gained valuable experience ofcers and men alike.
in the closing days of the con ict some twenty thousand american recruits were under arms.
the french and indian war while bolstering colonial self esteem simultaneously shattered the myth of british invincibility.
on braddocks bloody eld the buckskin militia had seen the demoralized regulars huddling helplessly together or eeing their unseen enemy.
ominously friction had developed during the war between arrogant british ofcers and the raw colonial boors displaying the contempt of the professional soldier for amateurs the british refused to recognize any american militia commission above the rank of captain a demotion humiliating to colonel george washington.
they also showed the usual condescension of snobs from the civilized old country toward the scum who had confessed failure by eeing to the outhouses of civilization general wolfe referred to the colonial militia with exaggeration as in general the dirtiest most contemptible cowardly dogs that you can conceive energetic and hard working american settlers in contrast believed themselves to be the cutting edge of british civilization.
they felt that they deserved credit rather than contempt for risking their lives to secure a new world empire.
british ofcials were further distressed by the reluctance of the colonists to support the common cause wholeheartedly.
american shippers using fraudulent papers developed a golden trafc with the enemy ports of the spanish and french west indies.
this treason the reverend andrew burnaby an observant church of england clergyman who visited the colonies in the closing months of the seven years war scoffed at any possibility of unication 1760.
for re and water are not more heterogeneous than the different colonies in north america.
nothing can exceed the jealousy and emulation which they possess in regard to each other.
were they left to themselves there would soon be a civil war from one end of the continent to the other while the indians and negros would.
impatiently watch the opportunity of exterminating them all together.
able trade in foodstuffs actually kept some of the hostile islands from starving at the very time when the british navy was trying to subdue them.
in the nal year of the war the british authorities forced to resort to drastic mea sures forbade the export of all supplies from new eng land and the middle colonies.
other colonists self centered and alienated by distance from the war refused to provide troops and money for the con ict.
they demanded the rights and privileges of eng lishmen without the duties and responsibilities of eng lishmen.
not until pitt had offered to reimburse the colonies for a substantial part of their expenditures some 900 000 did they move with some enthusiasm.
if the americans had to be bribed to defend themselves against a relentless and savage foe would they ever unite to strike the mother country.
the curse of intercolonial disunity present from early days had continued throughout the recent hostilities.
it had been caused mainly by enormous distances by geographical barriers like rivers by con icting religions from catholic to quaker by varied nationalities from german to irish by differing types of colonial governments by many boundary disputes and by the resentment of the crude backcountry settlers against the aristocratic bigwigs.
yet unity received some encouragement during the french and indian war.
when soldiers and statesmen from widely separated colonies met around common camp res and council tables they were often agreeably surprised by what they found.
despite deep seated jealousy and suspicion they discovered that they were all fellow americans who generally spoke the same language and shared common ideals.
barriers of disunity began to melt although a long and rugged road lay ahead before a coherent nation would emerge.
wars fateful aftermath the removal of the french menace in canada profoundly affected american attitudes.
while the french hawk had been hovering in the north and west the colonial chicks had been forced to cling close to the wings of their british mother hen.
now that the hawk was killed they could range far aeld with a new spirit of independence.
the french humiliated by the british and saddened by the fate of canada consoled themselves with one wishful thought.
perhaps the loss of their american empire would one day result in britains loss of its american empire.
in a sense the history of the united chapter 35 america in world war ii 1941 1945 for a second front to divert the german strength westward.
many americans including fdr were eager to begin a diversionary invasion of france in 1942 or 1943 they feared that the soviets unable to hold out forever against germany might make a separate peace as they had in 1918 and leave the western allies to face hitlers fury alone.
roosevelt rashly promised the soviets in early 1942 that he would open a second front on the european continent by the end of the year a promise that proved utterly impossible to keep.
british military planners remembering their appalling losses in 1914 1918 were not enthusiastic about a frontal assault on german held france.
it might end in disaster.
they preferred to attack hitlers fortress europe through the soft underbelly of the mediterranean.
faced with british boot dragging and a woeful lack of resources the americans reluctantly agreed to postpone a massive invasion of europe.
an assault on french held north africa was a compromise second front and a far cry from what the badly battered soviets were demanding.
the highly secret women at war members of the womens army corps disembark in north africa in 1944.
note auxillary was dropped from the name in 1943 attack launched in november 1942 was headed by a gifted and easy smiling american general dwight d ike eisenhower a master of orga ni zation and conciliation.
as a joint allied operation ultimately involving some 400 000 men british canadian french and chiey american and about 850 ships the invasion was the mightiest waterborne effort up to that time in history.
after savage ghting the remnants of the german italian army were nally trapped in tu nisia and surrendered in may 1943 new blows were now planned by the allies.
at casablanca in newly occupied french morocco president roosevelt who had boldly own the atlantic met in a historic conference with winston churchill in january 1943 the big two agreed to step up the pacic war invade sicily increase pressure on italy and insist upon an unconditional surrender of the enemy a phrase earlier popularized by general ulysses s grant during the civil war.
such an unyielding policy would presumably hearten the ultrasuspicious soviets who professed to fear separate allied peace negotiations.
it would also forestall charges of broken armistice terms such as had come after 1918 paradoxically the tough sounding unconditional surrender declaration was an admission of the weakness of the western allies.
still unable in 1943 to mount the kind of second front their soviet partner desperately demanded the british and the americans had little but words to offer stalin.
unconditional surrender proved to be one of the most controversial moves of the war.
the main criticism was that it steeled the enemy to ght to a lastbunker resistance while discouraging antiwar groups in germany from revolting.
although there was some truth in these charges no one can prove that unconditional surrender either shortened or lengthened the war.
but this is known by helping to destroy the german government utterly the harsh policy forced a thorough postwar reconstruction.
the allied forces victorious in africa now turned against the not so soft underbelly of europe.
sicily fell in august 1943 after sporadic but sometimes bitter resistance.
shortly before the conquest of the island mussolini was deposed and italy surrendered unconditionally soon thereafter in september 1943 president roosevelt referring to the three original axis countries germany italy and japan joked grimly that it was now one down and two to go.
but if italy dropped out of the war the germans did not drop out of italy.
hitlers well trained troops stubbornly resisted the allied invaders now pouring the road to d day sand axis troops in italy laid down their arms and became prisoners of war.
while the italian second front opened the mediterranean and diverted some german divisions from the blazing soviet and french battle lines it also may have delayed the main allied invasion of europe from eng land across the eng lish channel to france by many months allowing more time for the soviet army to advance into eastern europe.
d day june 6 1944 the big two british prime minister winston churchill and u s president franklin d roosevelt meet at the casablanca conference in morocco january 1943 into the toe of the italian boot.
they also unleashed their fury against the italians who had turned their coats and declared war on germany in october 1943.
sunny italy proceeded to belie its name for in the snow covered and mud caked mountains of its elongated peninsula occurred some of the lthiest bloodiest and most frustrating ghting of the war.
for many months italy appeared to be a dead end as the allied advance was halted by a seemingly impregnable german defense centered on the ancient monastery of monte cassino.
after a touch and go assault on the anzio beachhead rome was nally taken on june 4 1944 the tremendous cross channel invasion of france begun two days later turned italy into a kind of sideshow but the allies limited in manpower continued to ght their way slowly and painfully into northern italy.
on may 2 1945 only ve days before germanys ofcial surrender several hundred thou the soviets had never ceased their clamor for an allout second front and the time rapidly approached for churchill roosevelt and stalin to meet in person to coordinate the promised effort.
marshal joseph stalin with a careful eye on soviet military operations balked at leaving moscow.
president roosevelt who jauntily remarked in private i can handle that old buzzard was eager to confer with him.
the president seemed condent that rooseveltian charm could woo the hardened conspirator of the kremlin from his nasty communist ways.
tehran the capital of iran persia was nally chosen as the meeting place.
to this ancient city roosevelt riskily ew after a stopover conference in cairo with britains churchill and chinas jiang jieshi regarding the war against japan.
at tehran the discussions among stalin roosevelt and churchill from november 28 to december 1 1943 progressed smoothly.
perhaps the most important achievement was agreement on broad plans especially those for launching soviet attacks on germany from the east simultaneously with the prospective allied assault from the west.
preparations for the cross channel invasion of france were gigantic.
britains fast anchored isle virtually groaned with munitions supplies and troops as nearly 3 million ghting men were readied.
because the united states was to provide most of the allied warriors the overall command was entrusted to an american general eisenhower.
he had already distinguished himself in the north african and mediterranean campaigns not only for his military capacity but also for his gifts as a conciliator of clashing allied interests.
french normandy less heavily defended than other parts of the european coast was pinpointed for the invasion assault.
on d day june 6 1944 the enormous operation which involved some forty six hundred vessels unwound.
stiff resistance was encountered from chapter 26 the great west and the agricultural revolution 1865 1896 in the 1860s the federal government intensied this policy and herded the indians into still smaller connes principally the great sioux reservation in dakota territory and indian territory in present day oklahoma into which dozens of southern plains tribes were forced.
the indians surrendered their ancestral lands only when they had received solemn promises from washington that they would be left alone and provided with food clothing and other supplies.
regrettably the federal indian agents were often corrupt.
they palmed off moth eaten blankets spoiled beef and other defective provisions on the friendless indians.
one of these cheating ofcials on an annual salary of 1 500 re turned home after four years with an estimated savings of 50 000.
for more than a decade after the civil war erce warfare between indians and the u s army raged in various parts of the west see map 26 1.
army troops many of them recent immigrants who had ironically ed europe to avoid military ser vice met formidable adversaries in the plains indians whose superb horsemanship gave them baf ing mobility.
fully one fth of all u s army personnel on the frontier were african american dubbed buffalo soldiers by the indians supposedly because of the resemblance of their hair to the bisons furry coat.
map 26 1 indian wars 1860 1890 surrendering in 1877 chief joseph of the nez perce declared our chiefs are killed.
the old men are all dead.
the little children are freezing to death.
i want to have time to look for my children.
hear me my chiefs.
my heart is sick and sad.
from where the sun now stands i will ght no more forever c a n a da ft colville ft townsend battle of bear paw mountain 1877 seattle portland ft harney ak er ft reno.
ft hall santa fe ra d ft craig camp grant massacre 1871 r ft sumner 120w canyon de los embudos 1886 geronimo escapes.
major indian battle 110w ft reno arkansas red r miss.
fort worth texas ri o tenn jacksboro skeleton canyon 1886 geronimo surrenders.
n ky arkansas r red river war 1874 1875 m e x ico la.
30n austin 90w san antonio 100w ala waco ft quitman de fort bisbee indian terr.
an gr chief josephs route kiowa comanche ft crittenden missouri r arapaho pi ft garland ind.
ill southern cheyenne arizona terr.
new mexico terr.
amarillo gila m is ft riley massacre kansas topeka ft larned dodge city wichita ft lyon ft crawford canyon de chelly salt river canyon 1872 phoenix 40n lincoln sip san diego navajo iowa sis los angeles lo co r r i r s ou mis california las vegas o.
platte r ft kearney colorado city mich ft randall s cedar city cheyenne wisconsin colorado denver sand creek ft cameron nevada san jose ft ridgely wounded ft niobrara knee 1890 nebraska in utah terr.
arapaho ta salt lake city ft churchill sonoma austin sacramento paiute san francisco esmeralda ft laramie un ft halleck carson city cheyenne ft bridger mcdermit minn ft sully b lac k h i lls wyoming bannock shoshone ft ft bidwell ft abercrombie s dak.
ft meade mo coast modoc little bighorn idaho sn ft klamath bismarck sioux ft yates y nez perce oregon n dak.
montana ck ran ft berthold ft lapwaj columbia r ro ges washington pacific ocean interactive map g ulf of mexico 300 km.
the indian wars receding native population a young lieutenant told colonel chivington that to attack the indians would be a violation of pledges the indian wars in the west were often savage clashes.
aggressive whites sometimes shot peaceful indians on sight just to make sure they would give no trouble.
at sand creek colorado in 1864 colonel j m chivingtons militia massacred in cold blood some four hundred indians who apparently thought they had been promised immunity.
women were shot praying for mercy children had their brains dashed out and braves were tortured scalped and unspeakably mutilated.
cruelty begot cruelty.
in 1866 a sioux war party attempting to block construction of the bozeman trail to the montana goldelds ambushed captain william j fettermans command of eighty one soldiers and civilians in wyomings bighorn mountains.
the indians left not a single survivor and grotesquely mutilated the corpses.
one troopers face was spitted with 105 arrows.
george armstrong custer the buckskin clad boy general of civil war fame now demoted to colonel and turned indian ghter wrote that fettermans annihilation awakened a bitter feeling toward the savage perpetrators the cycle of ferocious warfare intensied.
his reply was bringing his st down close to my face damn any man who sympathizes with indians i told him what pledges were given the indians.
he replied that he had come to kill indians and believed it to be honorable to kill indians under any and all circumstances the fetterman massacre led to one of the few though short lived indian triumphs in the plains wars the battle of the little bighorn.
in another treaty of fort laramie signed in 1868 the government abandoned the bozeman trail.
the sprawling great sioux reservation was guaranteed to the sioux tribes.
but in 1874 a new round of warfare with the plains indians began when custer led a scientic expedition into the black hills of south dakota part of the sioux reservation and announced that he had discovered gold.
hordes of greedy gold seekers swarmed into the sioux battle of the little big horn by amos bad heart bull this depiction of the battle by an oglala sioux tribal historian and artist shows crazy horse in spotted war paint center ring on a trooper of custers 7th cavalry.
the ground is littered with the bodies of dead soldiers.
chapter 17 manifest destiny and its legacy 1841 1848 pundt and koenigs general store omaha city nebraska 1858 settlers bound for colorado and california stopped here for provisions before venturing farther west across the open plains.
americans for their part could also point pridefully to exploration and occupation.
captain robert gray in 1792 had stumbled upon the majestic columbia river which he named after his ship and the famed lewis and clark expedition of 1804 1806 had ranged overland through the oregon country to the pacic.
this shaky american toehold was ultimately strength in winning oregon the americans had great faith in their procreative powers.
boasted one congressman in 1846 our people are spreading out with the aid of the american multiplication table.
go to the west and see a young man with his mate of eighteen after the lapse of thirty years visit him again and instead of two you will nd twenty two.
that is what i call the american multiplication table.
ened by the presence of missionaries and other settlers a sprinkling of whom reached the grassy willamette river valley south of the columbia in the 1830s.
these men and women of god in saving the soul of the indian were instrumental in saving the soil of oregon for the united states.
they stimulated interest in a faraway domain that countless americans had earlier assumed would not be settled for centuries.
scattered american and british pioneers in oregon continued to live peacefully side by side.
at the time of negotiating the anglo american convention of 1818 see pp.
265 266 the united states had sought to divide the vast domain at the forty ninth parallel.
but the british who regarded the columbia river as the st lawrence of the west were unwilling to yield this vital artery.
a scheme for peaceful joint occupation was thereupon adopted pending future settlement.
the handful of americans in the willamette valley was suddenly multiplied in the early 1840s when oregon fever seized hundreds of restless pioneers.
in increasing numbers their creaking covered wagons jolted over the two thousand mile oregon trail as the the oregon controversy human rivulet widened into a stream.
by 1846 about ve thousand americans had settled south of the columbia river some of them tough border rufans expert with bowie knife and revolving pistol the british in the face of this rising torrent of humanity could muster only seven hundred or so subjects north of the columbia.
losing out lopsidedly in the population race they were beginning to see the wisdom of arriving at a peaceful settlement before being engulfed by their neighbors.
a curious fact is that only a relatively small segment of the oregon country was in actual controversy by 1845 the area in dispute consisted of the rough quadrangle between the columbia river on the south and east the forty ninth parallel on the north and the pacic ocean on the west.
britain had repeatedly offered the line of the columbia america had repeatedly offered the forty ninth parallel.
the whole fateful issue was now tossed into the presidential election of 1844 where it was largely overshadowed by the question of annexing texas.
for manifest destiny the two major parties nominated their presidential standard bearers in may 1844 ambitious but often frustrated henry clay easily the most popular man in the country was enthusiastically chosen by the whigs at baltimore.
the democrats meeting there later seemed hopelessly deadlocked.
van burens opposition to annexing texas ensured his defeat given domination of the party by southern expansionists.
finally party delegates trotted out and nominated james k polk of tennessee americas rst dark horse or surprise presidential candidate.
polk may have been a dark horse but he was hardly an unknown or decrepit nag.
speaker of the house of representatives for four years and governor of tennessee for two terms he was a determined industrious ruthless and intelligent public servant.
sponsored by andrew jackson his friend and neighbor he was rather implausibly touted by democrats as yet another young hickory whigs attempted to jeer him into oblivion the average rate of progress in covered wagons was one to two miles an hour.
this amounted to about one hundred miles a week or about ve months for the entire journey.
thousands of humans in addition to horses and oxen died en route.
one estimate is seventeen deaths a mile for men women and children.
manifest destiny a caricature the spirit of manifest destiny swept the nation in the 1840s and threatened to sweep it to extremes.
this cartoon from 1848 lampoons proslavery democratic presidential candidate lewis cass as a veritable war machine bent on the conquest of territory ranging from new mexico to cuba and even peru.
with the taunt who is james k polk they soon found out.
the campaign of 1844 was in part an expression of the mighty emotional upsurge known as manifest destiny.
countless citizens in the 1840s and 1850s feeling a sense of mission believed that almighty god had manifestly destined the american people for a hemispheric career.
they would irresistibly spread their uplifting and ennobling democratic institutions over at least the entire continent and possibly over south america as well.
land greed and ideals empire and liberty were thus conveniently conjoined.
expansionist democrats were strongly swayed by the intoxicating spell of manifest destiny.
they came out at footedly in their platform for the reannexation of texas and the reoccupation of oregon all the way to 54 40.
outbellowing the whig logcabinites in the game of slogans they shouted all of oregon or none the slogan fifty four forty or ght was not coined until two years later in 1846.
they also condemned clay as a corrupt bargainer a dissolute the united states had given up its claims to texas in the so called florida purchase treaty adams ons treaty with spain in 1819 see p 267.
chapter 17 manifest destiny and its legacy 1841 1848 fort vancouver oregon country ca.
1846 fort vancouver on the columbia river near its conuence with the willamette river was the economic hub of the oregon country during the early years of settlement.
founded as a hudsons bay company fur trading outpost the fort was handed over to the americans when britain ceded the oregon country to the united states in 1846 of texas but not all of oregon.
because retorted the expansionist senator benton of missouri great britain is powerful and mexico is weak so polk despite all the campaign bluster got neither fty four forty nor a ght.
but he did get something that in the long run was better a reasonable compromise without a rie being raised.
misunderstandings with mexico faraway california was another worry of polks.
he and other disciples of manifest destiny had long coveted its verdant valleys and especially the spacious bay of san francisco.
this splendid harbor was widely regarded as americas future gateway to the pacic ocean.
the population of cal i fornia in 1845 was curiously mixed.
it consisted of perhaps thirteen thousand sunblessed spanish mexicans and as many as seventy ve thousand dispirited indians.
there were fewer than a thousand foreigners mostly americans some of whom had left their consciences behind them as they rounded cape horn.
given time these transplanted yankees might yet bring cal i fornia into the union by playing the texas game polk was eager to buy cal i fornia from mexico but relations with mexico city were dangerously embittered.
among other friction points the united states had claims against the mexicans for some 3 million in damages to american citizens and their property.
the revolution riddled regime in mexico had formally agreed to assume most of this debt but had been forced to default on its payments.
causes of the mexican war the landowner and his foreman by julio michard 1839 this california rancheros way of life was soon to be extinguished when california became part of the united states in 1848 and thousands of american gold seekers rushed into the state the following year.
a more serious bone of contention was texas.
the mexican government after threatening war if the united states should acquire the lone star republic had recalled its minister from washington following annexation.
diplomatic relations were completely severed.
deadlock with mexico over texas was further tightened by a question of boundaries.
during the long era of spanish mexican occupation the southwestern boundary of texas had been the nueces river.
but the expansive texans on rather far fetched grounds were claiming the more southerly rio grande instead.
polk for his part felt a strong moral obligation to defend texas in its claim once it was annexed.
the mexicans were far less concerned about this boundary quibble than was the united states.
in their eyes all of texas was still theirs although temporarily in revolt and a dispute over the two rivers seemed pointless.
yet polk was careful to keep american troops out of virtually all of the explosive no mans land between the nueces and the rio grande as long as there was any real prospect of peaceful adjustment.
the golden prize of cal i fornia continued to cause polk much anxiety.
disquieting rumors now known to have been ill founded were circulating that britain was about to buy or seize cal i fornia a grab that americans could not tolerate under the monroe doctrine.
in a last desperate throw of the dice polk dispatched john slidell to mexico city as minister late in 1845 the new envoy among other alternatives was instructed to offer a maximum of 25 million for cal i fornia and territory to the east.
but the proud mexican people would not even permit slidell to present his insulting proposition.
american blood on american.
soil a frustrated polk was now prepared to force a showdown.
on january 13 1846 he ordered four thousand men under general zachary taylor to march from the nueces river to the rio grande provocatively near mexican forces.
polks presidential diary reveals that he expected at any moment to hear of a clash.
when none occurred after an anxious wait he informed his cabinet on may 9 1846 that he proposed to ask congress to declare war on the basis of 1 unpaid claims and 2 slidells rejection.
these at best were rather imsy pretexts.
two cabinet members spoke up and said that they would feel better satised if mexican troops should re rst.
that very evening as fate would have it news of bloodshed arrived.
on april 25 1846 mexican troops had crossed the rio grande and attacked general taylors command with a loss of sixteen americans killed or wounded.
chapter 35 america in world war ii 1941 1945 american military leadership proved to be of the highest order.
a new crop of war heroes emerged in brilliant generals like eisenhower macarthur and marshall chief of staff and in imaginative admirals like nimitz and spruance.
president roosevelt and prime minister churchill as kindred spirits collaborated closely in planning strategy.
it is fun to be in the same decade with you fdr once cabled churchill.
industrial leaders were no less skilled for marvels of production were performed almost daily.
assembly lines proved as important as battle lines and victory went again to the side with the most smokestacks.
the enemy was almost literally smothered by bayonets bullets bazookas and bombs.
hitler and his axis coconspirators had chosen to make war with machines and the ingenious yankees could ask for nothing bet ter.
they demonstrated again as they had in world war i that the american way of war was simply more more men more weapons more machines more technology and more money than any enemy could hope to match.
from 1940 to 1945 the output of american factories was simply phenomenal.
as winston churchill remarked nothing succeeds like excess hermann goering a nazi leader had sneered the americans cant build planes only electric iceboxes and razor blades democracy had given its answer as the dictators despite long preparation were overthrown and discredited.
it is true that an unusual amount of direct control was exercised over the individual by the washington authorities during the war emergency.
but the american people preserved their precious liberties without serious impairment.
chronology united states declares war on japan germany declares war on united states randolph plans black march on washington fair employment practices commission fepc established roosevelt delivers four freedoms speech japa nese americans sent to internment camps japan conquers the philippines battle of the coral sea battle of midway united states invades north africa congress of racial equality core founded allies hold casablanca conference allies invade italy smith connally anti strike act zoot suit riots in los angeles race riot in detroit japa nese driven from guadalcanal tehran conference korematsu v u s d day invasion of france battle of the marianas roosevelt defeats dewey for presidency 1944 battle of the bulge roosevelt dies truman assumes presidency germany surrenders battles of iwo jima and okinawa potsdam conference atomic bombs dropped on hiroshima and nagasaki yalta conference japan surrenders varying viewpoints key terms abc 1 agreement 875 executive order no.
9066 876 war production board wpb 877 ofce of price administration opa 880 national war labor board nwlb 880 smith connally antistrike act 880 waacs womens army auxiliary corps 881 waves women accepted for volunteer emergency service 881 spars u s coast guard womens reserve 881 people to know bracero program 881 fair employment practices commission fepc 883 congress of racial equality core 884 navajo code talkers 884 midway battle of 887 d day 891 v e victory in europe day 897 potsdam conference 899 manhattan project 900 v j victory in japan day 901 douglas macarthur chester nimitz dwight d ike eisenhower harry s truman albert einstein the atomic bombs were they justied.
n o episode of the world war ii era has provoked sharper controversy than the atomic bombings of japan in august 1945 lingering moral misgivings about the nuclear incineration of hiroshima and nagasaki have long threatened to tarnish americas crown of military victory.
some critics have accused the united states of racist motives because the bombs were dropped on a nonwhite people.
other commentators note that the japa nese were already reeling on the verge of collapse by 1945 and therefore historys most awful weapons especially the second bomb on nagasaki were unnecessary to bring the war to a conclusion.
still other scholars notably gar alperovitz have further charged that the atomic attacks on hiroshima and nagasaki were not the last shots of world war ii but the rst salvos in the emerging cold war.
alperovitz argues that president truman willfully ignored tokyos attempts to negotiate a surrender in the summer of 1945 and rejected all alternatives to dropping the bomb because he wanted to intimidate and isolate the soviet union.
he unleashed his horrible new weapons so this argument goes not simply to defeat japan but to end the far eastern con ict before the soviets could enter it and thereby freeze them out of any role in formulating postwar reconstruction policy in asia.
each of these accusations has been vigorously rebutted.
richard rhodess exhaustive history of the chapter 17 manifest destiny and its legacy 1841 1848 numbers of troops by expiring enlistments by a more numerous enemy by mountainous terrain by disease and by political backbiting at home.
yet he succeeded in battling his way up to mexico city by september 1847 in one of the most brilliant campaigns in american military annals.
he proved to be the most distinguished general produced by his country between the revolution and the civil war.
fighting mexico for peace polk was anxious to end the shooting as soon as he could secure his territorial goals.
accordingly he sent along with scotts invading army the chief clerk of the state department nicholas p trist who among other weaknesses was af icted with an overuid pen.
trist and scott arranged for an armistice with santa anna at a cost of 10 000.
the wily dictator pocketed the bribe and then used the time to bolster his defenses.
war news from mexico by richard caton woodville the newfangled telegraph kept the nation closely informed of events in far off mexico.
negotiating a treaty with a sword in one hand and a pen in the other was ticklish business.
polk disgusted with his blundering envoy abruptly recalled trist.
the wordy diplomat then dashed off a sixty ve page letter explaining why he was not coming home.
the president was furious.
but trist grasping a eeting opportunity to negotiate signed the treaty of guadalupe hidalgo on february 2 1848 and forwarded it to washington.
the terms of the treaty were breathtaking.
they con rmed the american title to texas and yielded the enormous area stretching westward to oregon and the ocean and embracing coveted cal i fornia.
this total expanse including texas was about one half of mexico.
the united states agreed to pay 15 million for the land and to assume the claims of its citizens against mexico in the amount of 3 250 000 see makers of america the californios pp.
polk submitted the treaty to the senate.
although trist had proved highly annoying he had generally the peace settlement with mexico followed his original instructions.
and speed was imperative.
the antislavery whigs in congress dubbed mexican whigs or conscience whigs were denouncing this damnable war with increasing heat.
having secured control of the house in 1847 they were even threatening to vote down supplies for the armies in the eld.
if they had done so scott probably would have been forced to retreat and the fruits of victory might have been tossed away.
another peril impended.
a swelling group of expansionists intoxicated by manifest destiny was clamoring for all of mexico.
if america had seized it the nation would have been saddled with an expensive and vexatious policing problem.
farseeing southerners like calhoun alarmed by the mounting anger of antislavery agitators realized that the south would do well not to be too greedy.
the treaty was nally approved by the senate 38 to 14 oddly enough it was condemned both by those opponents who wanted all of mexico and by opponents who wanted none of it.
victors rarely pay an indemnity especially after a costly con ict has been forced on them.
yet polk who had planned to offer 25 million before ghting the war arranged to pay 18 250 000 after winning it.
cynics have charged that the americans were pricked by guilty consciences apologists have pointed proudly to the anglo saxon spirit of fair play a decisive factor was the need for haste while there was still a responsible mexican government to carry out the treaty and before political foes in the united states notably the antislavery zealots sabotaged polks expansionist program.
early in 1848 the new york evening post demanded now we ask whether any man can coolly contemplate the idea of recalling our troops from the mexican territory we at present occupy.
resign this beautiful country to the custody of the ignorant cowards and proigate rufans who have ruled it for the last twenty ve years.
why humanity cries out against it.
civilization and christianity protest against this reux of the tide of barbarism and anarchy.
such was one phase of manifest destiny.
prot and loss in mexico as wars go the mexican war was a small one.
it cost some thirteen thousand american lives most of them taken by disease.
but the fruits of the ghting were enormous.
americas total expanse already vast was increased by about one third counting texas an addition even greater than that of the louisiana purchase.
a sharp stimulus was given to the spirit of manifest destiny for as the proverb has it the appetite comes with eating.
the mexican war proved to be the blood spattered schoolroom of the civil war.
the campaigns provided priceless eld experience for most of the ofcers destined to become leading generals in the forthcoming con ict including captain robert e lee and lieutenant ulysses s grant.
the military academy at west point founded in 1802 fully justied its existence through the well trained ofcers.
useful also was the navy which did valuable work in throwing a crippling blockade around mexican ports.
a new academy at annapolis had just been established by navy secretary and historian george bancroft in 1845 the marine corps in existence since 1798 won new laurels and to this day sings in its stirring hymn about the halls of montezuma the army waged war without defeat and without a major blunder despite formidable obstacles and a half dozen or so achingly long marches.
chagrined british critics as well as other foreign skeptics reluctantly revised upward their estimate of yankee military prowess.
opposing armies moreover emerged with increased respect for each other.
the mexicans though poorly led fought heroically.
at chapultepec near mexico city the teenage lads of the military academy there los nios perished to a boy.
long memoried mexicans have never forgotten that their northern enemy tore away about half of their country.
the argument that they were lucky not to lose all of it and that they had been paid something for their land has scarcely lessened their bitterness.
the war also marked an ugly turning point in relations between the united states and latin america as a whole.
hitherto uncle sam had been regarded with some complacency even friendliness.
henceforth he was increasingly feared as the colossus of the north suspicious neighbors to the south condemned him as a greedy and untrustworthy bully who might next despoil them of their soil.
makers of america theafricanthe great californios american migration i n 1848 the united states swollen with the spoils of war reckoned the costs and benets of the con ict with mexico.
thousands of americans had fallen in battle and millions of dollars had been invested in a war machine.
for this expenditure of blood and money the nation was repaid with ample land and with people the former citizens of mexico who now became whether willingly or not americans.
the largest single addition to american territory in history the mexican cession stretched the united states from sea to shining sea.
it secured texas brought in vast tracts of the desert southwest and included the great prize the fruited valleys and port cities of cal i fornia.
there at the conclusion of the mexican war dwelled some thirteen thousand californios descendants of the spanish and mexican conquerors who had once ruled cal i fornia.
the spanish had rst arrived in cal i fornia in 1769 extending their new world empire and outracing russian traders to bountiful san francisco bay.
father junipero serra an enterprising franciscan friar soon mission san gabriel founded in 1771 established twenty one missions along the coast see map 17 4.
indians in the iron grip of the missions were encouraged to adopt christianity and were often forced to toil endlessly as farmers and herders in the process suffering disease and degradation.
these frequently maltreated mission indians occupied the lowest rungs on the ladder of spanish colonial society.
upon the loftiest rungs perched the californios.
pioneers from the mexican heartland of new spain they had trailed serra to cal i fornia claiming land and civil ofces in their new home.
yet even the proud californios had deferred to the all powerful franciscan missionaries until mexico threw off the spanish colonial yoke in 1821 whereupon the infant mexican government turned an anxious eye toward its frontier outpost.
mexico now emptied its jails to send settlers to the sparsely populated north built and garrisoned fortresses and most important transferred authority from the missions to secular that is governmental authorities.
this secularization program attacked and 38 n san rafael san francisco e s i san francisco solano san francisco de ass r r san jos a santa clara santa cruz san juan bautista san carlos borromeo soledad d a v a n e 36 n monterey san antonio de padua san miguel pac i f ic ocean mission presidio fort san luis obispo california indians dancing at the mission in san jos by sykes 1806 eroded the immense power of the missions and of their franciscan masters with their bawling herds of cattle debased indian workers millions of acres of land and lucrative foreign trade.
the frocked friars had commanded their efdoms so self condently that earlier reform efforts had dared to go no further than levying a paltry tax on the missions and politely requesting that the missionaries limit their oggings of indians to fteen lashes per week.
but during the 1830s the power of the missions weakened and much of their land and their assets were conscated by the californios.
vast ranchos ranches formed and from those citadels the californios ruled in their turn until the mexican war.
the californios glory faded in the wake of the american victory even though in some isolated places they clung to their political ofces for a decade or two.
overwhelmed by the inrush of anglo gold diggers some eighty seven thousand after the discovery at sutters mill in 1848 and undone by the waning of the pastoral economy the californios saw their recently acquired lands and their recently established political power slip through their ngers.
when the civil war broke out in 1861 so harshly did the word yankee ring in their ears that many californios supported the south.
by 1870 the californios brief ascendancy had utterly vanished a short and sad tale of riches to rags in la pursima concepcin 34 n santa ynez santa barbara el camino ral royal road san buenaventura san fernando rey 60 km.
san gabriel 60 mi.
122w n san juan capistrano san luis rey san diego de alcal 120w map 17 4 spanish missions and presidios interactive map the face of the anglo onslaught.
half a century later beginning in 1910 hundreds of thousands of young mexicans would ock into cal i fornia and the southwest.
they would enter a region liberally endowed with spanish architecture and artifacts bearing the names of spanish missions and californio ranchos.
but they would nd it a land dominated by anglos a place far different from that which their californio ancestors had settled so hopefully in earlier days.
chapter 7 the road to revolution 1763 1775 the boston tea party december 16 1773 crying boston harbor a teapot this night sons of liberty disguised as indians hurled chests of tea into the sea to protest the tax on tea and to make sure that its cheap price did not prove an invincible temptation to the people.
reactions varied.
all up and down the eastern seaboard sympathetic colonists applauded.
referring to tea as a badge of slavery they burned the hated leaves in solidarity with boston.
but conser vatives complained that the destruction of private property violated the law and threatened anarchy and the breakdown of civil decorum.
hutchinson chastened and disgusted with the colonies retreated to britain never to return.
the british authorities meanwhile saw little alternative to whipping the upstart colonists into shape.
the granting of some mea sure of home rule to the americans might at this stage still have prevented rebellion but few british politicians were willing to swallow their pride and take the high road.
the perilous path they chose instead led only to reprisals bitterness and escalating con ict.
parliament passes the intolerable acts an irate parliament responded speedily to the boston tea party with mea sures that brewed a revolution.
by huge majorities in 1774 it passed a series of acts designed to chastise boston in particular massachusetts in general.
they were branded in america as the massacre of american liberty most drastic of all was the boston port act.
it closed the tea stained harbor until damages were paid and order could be ensured.
by other intolerable acts as they were called in america many of the chartered rights of colonial massachusetts were swept away.
re strictions were likewise placed on the precious town meetings.
contrary to previous practice enforcing ofcials who killed colonists in the line of duty could now be sent to britain for trial.
there suspicious americans assumed they would be likely to get off scotfree.
particularly intolerable to bostonians was a new quartering act which gave local authorities the power to lodge british soldiers anywhere even in private homes.
by a fateful coincidence the intolerable acts were accompanied in 1774 by the quebec act.
passed at the same time it was erroneously regarded in eng lishspeaking america as part of the british reaction to the turbulence in boston.
actually the quebec act was a good law in bad company.
for many years the british government had debated how it should administer the sixty thousand or so conquered french subjects in canada and it had nally framed this farsighted and statesmanlike mea sure.
the french were guaranteed their catholic religion.
they were also permitted to retain many of their old customs and institutions which did not include a representative assembly or trial by jury in civil cases.
in addition the old boundaries of the province of qubec were now extended southward all the way to the ohio river.
the quebec act from the viewpoint of the french canadians was a shrewd and conciliatory mea sure.
if britain had only shown as much foresight in dealing with its eng lish speaking colonies it might not have lost them.
but from the viewpoint of the american colonists as a whole the quebec act was especially noxious.
all the eve of rebellion 100w 90w 80w 70w 60w 60n 50w hu d s o n bay n n hudsons bay company nova scotia qubec me.
montral m iss n y ip iss pi m penn.
n j r ouri iss r va r.
map 7 1 qubec before and after 1774 young alexander hamilton voiced the fears of many colonists when he warned that the quebec act of 1774 would introduce priestly tyranny into canada making that country another spain or portugal.
does not your blood run cold he asked to think that an english parliament should pass an act for the establishment of arbitrary power and popery in such a country louisiana n h mass.
io oh r i conn n atlantic ocean del.
qubec before 1774 n c qubec after 1774 as envisioned by the quebec act s c ga west florida proclamation line of 1763 30n britains thirteen colonies indian reserve gu l f o f m e x i c o east florida other british territory spanish territory interactive map the other intolerable acts slapped directly at massachusetts but this one had a much wider range.
by sustaining unrepresentative assemblies and denials of jury trials it seemed to set a dangerous precedent in america.
it alarmed land speculators who were distressed to see the huge trans allegheny area snatched from their grasp see map 7 1.
it aroused anti catholics who were shocked by the extension of roman catholic jurisdiction southward into a huge region that had once been earmarked for protestantism a region about as large as the thirteen original colonies.
one angry protestant cried that there ought to be a jubilee in hell over this enormous gain for popery bloodshed american dissenters responded sympathetically to the plight of massachusetts.
it had put itself in the wrong by the violent destruction of the tea cargoes now britain had put itself in the wrong by brutal punishment that seemed far too cruel for the crime.
flags were own at half mast throughout the colonies on the day that the boston port act went into effect and sister colonies rallied to send food to the stricken city.
rice was shipped even from faraway south carolina.
most memorable of the responses to the intolerable acts was the summoning of the first continental congress in 1774 it was to meet in philadelphia to consider ways of redressing colonial grievances.
twelve of the thirteen colonies with georgia alone missing sent fty ve well respected men among them samuel adams john adams george washington and patrick henry.
intercolonial frictions were partially melted away by social activity after working hours in fty four days george washington dined at his own lodgings only nine times.
the first continental congress deliberated for seven weeks from september 5 to october 26 1774 it was not a legislative but a consultative body a convention rather than a congress.
john adams played a stellar role.
eloquently swaying his colleagues to a chapter in that saga and retains even to this day much of its uniqueness.
there the native american peoples waged their last and most desperate struggle against colonization and there most native americans live today.
there anglo culture collided most directly with hispanic culture the historic rival of the anglo americans for dominance in the new world and the southwest remains the most hispanicized region in america.
there america faced across the pacic to asia and there most asian americans dwell today.
there the scale and severity of the environment posed their largest challenges to human ambitions and there the environment with its aridity and stillmagical emptiness continues to mold social and political life and the american imagination as in no other part of the nation.
and in no other region has the federal government with its vast landholdings its subsidies to the railroads and its massive irrigation projects played so conspicuous a role in economic and social development.
the westward moving pioneers and the country they confronted have assumed mythic proportions in the american mind.
they have been immortalized by such writers as bret harte mark twain helen hunt jackson and francis parkman and by such painters as george catlin frederic remington and albert bier harvesting in washington state this turn of the century scene.
for better or worse those pioneers planted the seeds of american civilization in the immense western wilderness.
the life we live they dreamed of the life they lived we can only dream.
the farm becomes a factory the situation of american farmers once jacks andjills of all trades was rapidly changing.
they had raised their own food fashioned their own clothing and bartered for other necessities with neighbors.
now high prices persuaded farmers to concentrate on growing single cash crops such as wheat or corn and use their prots to buy foodstuffs at the general store and manufactured goods in town or by mail order.
the chicago rm of aaron montgomery ward sent out its rst catalogue a single sheet in 1872 farmers were becoming both consumers and producers in the world economy as their crops journeyed by rail and ship to distant parts of the globe.
large scale farmers especially in the immense grain producing areas of the mississippi valley were now both specialists and businesspeople.
as cogs in the vast industrial machine these farmers were intimately tied to banking railroading and manufacturing.
they had to buy expensive machinery in order to plant and harvest their crops.
a powerful steam engine could drag behind it simultaneously the plow seeder and harrow.
the speed of harvesting wheat was dramatically increased in the 1870s by the invention of the humans horses and machines join forces in thinking globally the great frontier t he american pioneers who surged westward in the nineteenth century were part of a great global land grab that changed lives and landscapes on several continents.
from the australian outback to the canadian prairies from the argentine pampas to the russian steppes and the african savannas millions of mostly white settlers poured into vast new territories and claimed them as their own.
everywhere the settlers encountered indigenous peoples who had lived on those lands since time immemorial.
with their superiority in weaponry transportation and political organization every where the newcomers prevailed.
by the centurys close they had displaced or destroyed countless native peoples and extended their dominion over parts of the planet once considered too remote or rugged to be habitable.
the american frontier soon became the stuff of legend and even the subject of a scholarly explanation of american uniqueness frederick jackson turners fabled frontier thesis which hailed the grit and gumption of the pioneers and commended them as the agents of civilization and democracy.
yet far from being unique those westering americans had much in common with settlers in sister societies abroad.
argentina had its cowboys gauchos and australia had its colorful backcountry outlaws such as ned kelly whose exploits rivaled those of billy the kid.
the russians and south africans had their own versions of manifest destiny and like the americans they often cloaked them in the language of racial superiority.
the worlds various frontiers also reected the particularities of geography and history.
australians soon conceded that much of their continent the worlds driest was too arid for traditional farming.
most of the outback proved suitable only for enormous sheep stations sometimes measuring tens of thousands of acres.
consequently small farm homesteading of the american and canadian type never took root nor did cities of any consequence emerge in the parched australian interior.
canadas westward movement came later than that in the united states and proceeded more peaceably.
only after the ottawa government promised in 1871 to build a transcontinental railroad connecting eastern canada to its western provinces did settlement begin in earnest.
and unlike in america where restless pioneers typically struck out on their own and made much mischief among themselves and with the indians they encountered in canada settlers were generally preceded by government authori north west mounted police ca.
1890 empowered by an act of parliament in 1873 to establish canadian authority and order in the northwest territories this force made frontier settlement somewhat more peaceful in canada than in the united states.
in 1920 the north west mounted police absorbed the dominion police and became the famed royal canadian mounted police or mounties russian peasants in siberia 1910 ties usually the red jacketed north west mounted police or mounties who established at least a semblance of order before large numbers of pioneers appeared on the scene.
as a result canadas frontier was markedly less violent than americas.
canada then and now a more lawabiding society than the united states never had a wild west like that of its southern neighbor.
in argentina and russia inherited patterns of landholding and politics shaped their nineteenth century frontiers.
when argentinas general julio roca vanquished the native araucanians in 1879 he ung open the horizonless pampas to white settlement.
but he also retained the venerable custom handed down from spanish colonial times of apportioning the land in gigantic estancias ranches to a few favored fellow soldiers and friends.
these lordly landowners then employed wage workers mostly italian immigrants who turned the fertile argentine interior into a beef bowl and breadbasket to the world.
the immigrants themselves however had little hope of ever possessing land of their own.
russias frontier lay to the east and long felt the heavy hand of the tsar.
for centuries autocratic rulers had strongarmed landowning nobles to move their serfs onto the virgin lands beyond the settled edge of european russia.
by the nineteenth century imperial russia had pushed its frontier onto the rolling steppes of central asia home to tartars kalmyks kazakhs and myriad other indigenous peoples.
only military conquest and a strengthened state bureaucracy made possible european settlement in those regions.
between 1867 and 1897 more than a million of the tsars subjects left for the hinterland.
as elsewhere the railroad proved essential to the growth of the tsarist empire especially after the government began construction of the trans siberian line in 1891 the dutch descended afrikaners or boers in southern africa found their frontier to the north and unlike their american counterparts they made scant claim to be spreading democracy.
rather they sought to escape british rule in the cape colony in particular to escape from the threat of racial equality for blacks after britain abolished slavery in the 1830s.
the afrikaners great trek took them into the land of the zulus who ferociously resisted the oncoming boers but eventually like indigenous peoples every where were forced to submit to white rule.
in the americas australia asia and africa the great frontier of the nineteenth century was the companion of conquest.
the frontier brought opportunity to some and oppression to others.
in many places it nurtured democracy elsewhere it invigorated autocracy.
and every where it expanded the domains of european civilization for better or worse.
chapter 18 renewing the sectional struggle 1848 1854 protesting the fugitive slave law 1850 the cartoonist makes bitter sport of the hated law and heaps scorn on daniel webster on his hands and knees at the right who voted for the law as part of the compromise of 1850 the outspoken abolitionist william lloyd garrison is depicted much more favorably on the left.
liable to heavy nes and jail sentences.
they might even be ordered to join the slave catchers and this possibility rubbed salt into old sores.
so abhorrent was this man stealing law that it touched off an explosive chain reaction in the north.
many shocked moderates hitherto passive were driven into the swelling ranks of the antislaveryites.
when a runaway slave from virginia was captured in boston in 1854 he had to be removed from the city under heavy federal guard through streets lined with sullen yankees and shadowed by black draped buildings festooned with ags ying upside down.
one prominent bostonian who witnessed this grim spectacle wrote that we went to bed one night old fashioned conser vative compromise union whigs and waked up stark mad abolitionists the underground railroad stepped up its timetable and infuriated northern mobs rescued slaves from their pursuers.
massachusetts in a move toward nullication suggestive of south carolina in 1832 made it a penal offense for any state ofcial to enforce the new federal statute.
other states passed personal liberty laws which denied local jails to federal ofcials and otherwise hampered enforcement.
the abolitionists rent the heavens with their protests against the manstealing statute.
a meeting presided over by william lloyd garrison in 1851 declared we execrate it we spit upon it we trample it under our feet beyond question the fugitive slave law was an appalling blunder on the part of the south.
no single irritant of the 1850s was more persistently galling to both sides and none did more to awaken in the north a spirit of antagonism against the south.
the southerners in turn were embittered because the northerners would not in good faith execute the law the one real and immediate southern gain from the great compromise.
slave catchers with some success redoubled their efforts.
should the shooting showdown have come in 1850.
from the standpoint of the secessionists yes from the standpoint of the unionists no.
time was ghting for the north.
with every passing decade this huge section was forging further ahead in population and wealth in crops factories foundries ships and railroads.
delay also added immensely to the moral strength of the north to its will to ght for the union.
in 1850 countless thousands of northern moderates were unwilling to pin the south to the rest of the nation with the election of 1852 defeat and doom for the whigs meeting in baltimore the democratic nominating convention of 1852 startled the nation.
hopelessly deadlocked it nally stampeded to the second dark horse candidate in american history an unrenowned lawyerpolitician franklin pierce from the hills of new hampshire.
the whigs tried to jeer him back into obscurity with the cry who is frank pierce democrats replied the young hickory of the granite hills pierce was a weak and indecisive gure.
youngish handsome militarily erect smiling and convivial he had served without real distinction in the mexican war.
as a result of a painful groin injury that caused him to fall off a horse he was known as the fainting general though scandalmongers pointed to a fondness for alcohol.
but he was enemyless because he had been inconspicuous and as a prosouthern northerner he was acceptable to the slavery wing of the democratic party.
his platform revived the democrats commitment to territorial expansion as pursued by president polk and emphatically endorsed the compromise of 1850 fugitive slave law and all.
the whigs also convening in baltimore missed a splendid opportunity to capitalize on their record in statecraft.
able to boast of a praiseworthy achievement in the compromise of 1850 they might logically have nominated president fillmore or senator webster both of whom were associated with it.
but having won in the past only with military heroes they turned map 18 4 the legal status of slavery from the revolution to the civil war 120w 110w 100w 90w 80w n ea oc open to slavery by act of annexation to n m terr.
pennsylvania 1780 1850 arkansas o south carolina georgia la.
florida free state by admission to union free state by gradual abolition g ul f of m ex i c o free territory by act of congress slave state by admission to union territory open to slavery by act of congress 1803 date of abolition by state constitution ti c north carolina alabama texas mexico r i 1784 conn 1842 n j 1784 1804 1848 1846 del.
virginia tennessee miss.
1780 n indian territory unorganized new york 1799 1827 la public land n h 1783 t new mexico territory open to slavery by compromise of 1850 maine 1780 vt 1777 a f ic pac i unorganized terr.
minnesota free by territory oregon nebraska missouri free by 1859 territory compromise missouri free by free by compromise oregon act 1848 free by missouri compromise oregon act wisconsin 1848 open to slavery michigan by kansas nebraska iowa 1846 1837 act 1854 free by missouri ohio compromise utah territory illinois indiana 1803 open to slavery by 1818 1816 compromise of 1850 free by northwest ordinance kansas territory free by missouri compromise 1820 free by act california annexing texas 1845 open to slavery by kansas nebraska act 1854 free by territorial constitution 1859 1850 missouri kentucky 30n 70w british north america canada washington territory 40n interactive map 400 km.
ce an bayonets.
but the inammatory events of the 1850s did much to bolster the yankee will to resist secession whatever the cost.
this one feverish decade gave the north time to accumulate the material and moral strength that provided the margin of victory.
thus the compromise of 1850 from one point of view won the civil war for the union see map 18 4.
n chapter 26 the great west and the agricultural revolution 1865 1896 nancial conservatism.
bryans defeat marked the last serious effort to win the white house with mostly agrarian votes.
the future of presidential politics lay not on the farms with their dwindling population but in the mushrooming cities with their growing hordes of freshly arriving immigrants.
the grand old partys smashing victory of 1896 also heralded a republican grip on the white house for sixteen consecutive years indeed for all but eight of the next thirty six years.
mckinleys election thus imparted a new character to the american political system.
the long reign of republican political dominance that it ushered in was accompanied by diminishing voter participation in elections the weakening of party orga ni zations and the fading away of issues like the money question and civil ser vice reform which came to be replaced by concern for industrial regulation and the welfare of labor.
scholars have dubbed this new political era the period of the fourth party system signaling a break with the previous third party system in place since 1860 and characterized by remarkably high voter turnouts and close contests between democrats and republicans.
the sacrilegious candidate a hostile cartoonist makes sport of bryans notorious cross of gold speech in 1896 campaign gimcracks 1896 these mechanical cards predicted republican prosperity with mckinley and economic ruin with bryan.
the election of 1896 republican stand pattism enthroned an eminently safe mckinley took the inaugural oath in 1897 with his impeccable white vest he seemed never to perspire even in oppressively muggy washington.
though a man of considerable ability he was an ear tothe ground politician who seldom got far out of line with majority opinion.
his cautious conser vative nature caused him to shy away from the aming banner of reform.
business was given a free rein and the trusts which had trusted him in 1896 were allowed to develop more mighty muscles without serious restraints.
almost as soon as mckinley took ofce the tariff issue which had played second ddle to silver in the battle of 96 quickly forced itself to the fore.
the current wilson gorman law was not raising enough revenue to cover the annual treasury decits and the republican trusts thought that they had purchased the right to additional tariff protection by their lush contributions to hannas war chest.
in due course the dingley tariff bill was jammed through the house in 1897 under the pounding gavel of the rethroned czar reed.
the proposed new rates were high but not high enough to satisfy the paunchy lobbyists who once again descended upon the senate.
over 850 amendments were tacked onto the overburdened bill.
the resulting piece of patchwork nally established the average rates at 46 5 percent substantially higher than the democratic wilson gorman act of 1894 and in some categories even higher than the mckinley act of 1890.
see the chart in the appendix.
prosperity long lurking around the corner began to return with a rush in 1897 the rst year of mckinleys term.
the depression of 1893 had run its course and farm prices rose.
paint thirsty midwestern barns blossomed in new colors and the wheels of industry resumed their hum.
republican politicians like crowing roosters believing they caused the sun to rise claimed credit for attracting the sunlight of prosperity.
with the return of prosperity the money issue that had overshadowed politics since the civil war gradually faded away.
the gold standard act of 1900 passed over last ditch silverite opposition provided that the paper currency be redeemed freely in gold.
nature and science gradually provided an ination that the gold bug east had fought so frantically to prevent.
electrifying discoveries of new gold deposits in canadas fabled klondike as well as in alaska south africa and australia brought huge quantities of gold onto world markets as did the perfecting of the cheap cyanide process for extracting gold from low grade ore moderate ination thus took care of the currency needs of an explosively expanding nation as its circulatory system greatly improved.
the tide of silver heresy rapidly receded and the popocratic sh were left gasping high and dry on a golden sanded beach.
chapter along with brief descriptions of the people to know and additional review materials may be found at drifting toward disunion 1854 1861 a house divided against itself cannot stand.
i believe this government cannot endure permanently half slave and half free.
t he slavery question continued to churn the cauldron of controversy throughout the 1850s.
as moral temperatures rose prospects for a peaceful political solution to the slavery issue simply evaporated.
kansas territory erupted in violence between proslavery and antislavery factions in 1855 two years later the supreme courts incendiary dred scott decision extended formal protection to slavery in all the territories of the west.
attitudes on both sides progressively hardened.
when in 1860 the newly formed republican party nominated for president abraham lincoln an outspoken opponent of the further expansion of slavery the stage was set for all out civil war.
stowe and helper literary incendiaries sectional tensions were further strained in 1852 and later by an inky phenomenon.
harriet beecher stowe a wisp of a woman and the mother of a half dozen chil dren published her heartrending novel uncle toms cabin.
dismayed by the passage of the fugitive slave law she was determined to awaken the north to the wickedness of slavery by laying bare its terrible inhumanity especially the cruel splitting of families.
her wildly popular book relied on powerful imagery and touching pathos.
god wrote it she explained in later years a reminder that the deeper sources of her antislavery sentiments lay in the evangelical religious crusades of the second great awakening.
the success of the novel at home and abroad was sensational.
several hundred thousand copies were published in the rst year and the totals soon ran into the millions as the tale was translated into more than a score of languages.
it was also put on the stage in tom shows for lengthy runs.
no other novel in american history perhaps in all history can be compared with it as a political force.
to millions of people it made slavery appear almost as evil as it really was.
when mrs stowe was introduced to president lincoln in 1862 he reportedly remarked with twinkling this icon will direct you to interactive activities and study materials on the american pageant website chapter 8 america secedes from the empire 1775 1783 whose revolution.
h istorians once assumed that the revolution was just another chapter 27 empire and expansion 1890 1909 whoever controlled cuba said lodge controls the gulf of mexico much was riding on the outcome of events in troubled cuba.
fuel was added to the cuban conagration in 1896 with the arrival of the spanish general butcher weyler.
he undertook to crush the rebellion by herding many civilians into barbed wire reconcentration camps where they could not give assistance to the armed insurrectos.
lacking proper sanitation these enclosures turned into deadly pestholes the victims died like dogs.
atrocities in cuba were red meat for the sensational new yellow journalism of william randolph hearst and joseph pulitzer.
engaged in a titanic duel for circulation each attempted to outdo the other with screeching headlines and hair raising scoops where atrocity stories did not exist they were invented.
hearst sent the gifted artist frederic remington to cuba to draw sketches allegedly with the pointed admonition you furnish the pictures and ill furnish the war among other outrages remington depicted spanish customs ofcials brutally disrobing and searching an american woman.
most readers of hearsts journal their indignation soaring had no way of knowing that such tasks were performed by female attendants.
hearst also sensationally publicized a private letter from the spanish minister in washington dupuy de lme.
the indiscreet epistle stolen from the mails described president mckinley in decidedly unattering terms.
the resulting uproar forced dupuy de lmes resignation and further infuriated the american public.
then early in 1898 washington sent the battleship maine to cuba ostensibly for a friendly visit but actually to protect and evacuate americans if a dangerous are up should occur and to demonstrate washingtons concern for the islands stability.
tragedy struck on february 15 1898 when the maine mysteriously blew up in havana harbor with a loss of 260 sailors.
two investigations of the iron cof n ensued one by u s naval ofcers and the other by spanish ofcials.
the explosion of the maine february 15 1898 encouraged and amplied by the yellow press the outcry over the tragedy of the maine helped drive the country into an impulsive war against spain.
the spanish american war cuba libre by captain fritz w guerin of st louis 1898 this elaborately staged tableau depicts confederate and union ofcers reconciled three decades after the civil war as they join hands to liberate innocent cuba from her chains of bondage to spain.
whelming evidence that the initial explosion had resulted from spontaneous combustion in one of the coal bunkers adjacent to a powder magazine.
but americans in 1898 now mad for war blindly embraced the less likely explanation.
lashed to fury by the yellow press they leapt to the inaccurate conclusion that the spanish government had been guilty of intolerable treachery.
the battle cry of the hour became remember the maine.
to hell with spain.
the spaniards concluded that the explosion had been internal and presumably accidental the americans argued that the blast had been caused by a submarine mine.
not until 1976 did u s navy admiral h g rickover con rm the original spanish nding with over many spaniards felt that accusations about their blowing up the maine reected on spanish honor.
one madrid newspaper spoke up the american jingoes.
imagine us capable of the most foul villainies and cowardly actions.
scoundrels by nature the american jingoes believe that all men are made like themselves.
what do they know about noble and generous feelings.
we should not in any way heed the jingoes they are not even worth our contempt or the saliva with which we might honor them in spitting at their faces.
nothing would do but to hurl the dirty spanish ag from the hemisphere.
the national war fever burned ever higher even though american diplomats had already gained madrids agreement to washingtons two basic demands an end to the reconcentration camps and an armistice with cuban rebels.
the cautious mckinley found himself in a jam.
he did not want hostilities but neither did he want spain to remain in possession of cuba.
nor for that matter did he want a fully independent cuba over which the united states could exercise no control.
more impetuous souls denounced the circumspect president as wobbly willie mckinley.
fight hungry theodore roosevelt reportedly snarled that the white livered occupant of the white house did not have the backbone of a chocolate clair the president whose shaken nerves required sleeping pills was even being hanged in efgy.
mckinley recognizing the inevitable eventually yielded and gave the people what they wanted.
but public pressure did not fully explain mckinleys course.
he had little faith in spains oft broken promises.
he worried about democratic reprisals in the upcoming presidential election of 1900 if he continued to appear indecisive in a time of crisis.
he also acknowledged americas commercial and strategic interests in cuba.
on april 11 1898 mckinley sent his war message to congress urging armed intervention to free the oppressed cubans.
the legislators responded uproariously with what was essentially a declaration of war.
in a burst of self righteousness they likewise adopted chapter 19 drifting toward disunion 1854 1861 the decision of chief justice roger b taney 1777 1864 in the case of dred scott referred to the status of slaves when the constitution was adopted they had for more than a century before been regarded as beings of an inferior order and altogether unt to associate with the white race either in social or political relations and so far inferior that they had no rights which the white man was bound to respect.
this opinion was at that time xed and universal in the civilized portion of the white race.
taneys statement accurately described historical attitudes but it deeply offended antislaveryites when applied to conditions in 1857 dred scott with his wife and daughters 1857 this slaves long legal battle for his freedom culminating in the supreme courts dred scott decision in 1857 helped to ignite the civil war.
widespread publicity about the fate of scott and his family strengthened antislavery sentiment in the north.
articles like this one in frank leslies illustrated newspaper appealed to the same sentimental regard for the idealized family that harriet beecher stowe so artfully mobilized in uncle toms cabin see examining the evidence harriet beecher stowe uncle toms cabin p 439.
the northern and southern wings of the once united democratic party.
foes of slavery extension especially the republicans were infuriated by the dred scott setback.
their chief rallying cry had been the banishing of bondage from the territories.
they now insisted that the ruling of the court was merely an opinion not a decision and no more binding than the views of a southern debating society republican deance of the exalted tribunal was intensied by an awareness that a majority of its members were southerners and by the conviction that it had debased itself sullied the ermine by wallowing in the gutter of politics.
southerners in turn were inamed by all this deance.
they began to wonder anew how much longer they could remain joined to a section that refused to honor the supreme court to say nothing of the constitutional compact that had established it.
the financial crash of 1857 bitterness caused by the dred scott decision was deepened by hard times which dampened a period of feverish prosperity.
then the panic of 1857 burst about buchanans harassed head.
the storm was not so bad economically as the panic of 1837 but psychologically it was probably the worst of the nineteenth century.
what caused the crash.
inpouring cal i fornia gold played its part by helping to inate the currency.
the demands of the crimean war in russia 1853 1856 had overstimulated the growing of grain while frenzied speculation in land and railroads had further ripped the economic fabric.
when the collapse came over ve thousand businesses failed within a year.
unemployment accompanied by hunger meetings in urban areas was widespread.
bread or death stated one desperate slogan.
the north including its grain growers was hardest hit.
the south enjoying favorable cotton prices abroad the panic of 1857 south.
in 1860 after years of debate congress nally passed a homestead act one that made public lands available at a nominal sum of twenty ve cents an acre.
but the homestead act was stabbed to death by the veto pen of president buchanan near whose elbow sat leading southern sympathizers.
the panic of 1857 also created a clamor for higher tariff rates.
several months before the crash congress embarrassed by a large treasury surplus had enacted the tariff of 1857 the new law responding to pressures from the south reduced duties to about 20 percent on dutiable goods the lowest point since the war of 1812 hardly had the revised rates been placed on the books when nancial misery descended like a black pall.
northern manufacturers many of them republicans noisily blamed their misfortunes on the low tariff.
as the surplus melted away in the treasury industrialists in the north pointed to the need for higher duties.
but what really concerned them was their desire for increased protection.
thus the panic of 1857 gave the republicans two sure re economic issues for the election of 1860 protection for the unprotected and farms for the farmless.
panic on wall street 1857 the panic of 1857 further burdened president buchanan already reeling from the armed clashes in kansas and the controversy over the dred scott decision.
rode out the storm with ying colors.
panic conditions seemed further proof that cotton was king and that its economic kingdom was stronger than that of the north.
this fatal delusion helped drive the overcondent southerners closer to a shooting showdown.
financial distress in the north especially in agriculture gave a new vigor to the demand for free farms of 160 acres from the public domain.
for several decades interested groups had been urging the federal government to abandon its ancient policy of selling the land for revenue.
instead the argument ran acreage should be given outright to the sturdy pioneers as a reward for risking health and life to develop it.
a scheme to make outright gifts of homesteads encountered two pronged opposition.
eastern industrialists had long been unfriendly to free land some of them feared that their underpaid workers would be drained off to the west.
the south was even more bitterly opposed partly because gang labor slavery could not ourish on a mere 160 acres.
free farms would merely ll up the territories more rapidly with freesoilers and further tip the political balance against the an illinois rail splitter emerges the illinois senatorial election of 1858 now claimed the national spotlight.
senator stephen a douglass term was about to expire and the republicans decided to run against him a rustic springeld lawyer one abraham lincoln.
the republican candidate 6 feet 4 inches in height and 180 pounds in weight presented an awkward but arresting gure.
lincolns legs arms and neck were abnormally long his head was crowned by coarse black and unruly hair and his face was sad sunken and weather beaten.
lincoln was no silver spoon child of the elite.
born in 1809 in a kentucky log cabin to impoverished parents he attended a frontier school for not more than a year being an avid reader he was mainly self educated.
all his life he said git thar and heered although narrow chested and somewhat stoop shouldered he shone in his frontier community as a wrestler and weight lifter and spent some time among other pioneering pursuits as a splitter of logs for fence rails.
a superb teller of earthy and amusing stories he would oddly enough plunge into protracted periods of melancholy.
lincolns private and professional lives were not especially noteworthy.
he married above himself chapter 27 empire and expansion 1890 1909 the hand tying teller amendment.
this proviso proclaimed to the world that when the united states had overthrown spanish misrule it would give the cubans their freedom a declaration that caused imperialistic europeans to smile skeptically.
deweys may day victory at manila yet dewey was in a perilous position.
he had destroyed the enemy eet but he could not storm the 120e hong kong gr.
formosa taiwan pac i f ic ocean 20n japan hainan n y we de oh dewy was the morning upon the rst of may and dewey was the admiral down in manila bay.
and dewy were the spaniards eyes them orbs of black and blue and dew we feel discouraged.
i dew not think we dew.
110e c h in a south china french sea indochina an ta ba the american people plunged into the war lightheartedly like schoolchildren off to a picnic.
bands blared incessantly therell be a hot time in the old town tonight and hail hail the gangs all here leading some foreigners to believe that those were national anthems.
the war got off to a giddy start for american forces.
even before the declaration of war on february 25 1898 while navy secretary john d long was away from the ofce his hot blooded assistant secretary theodore roosevelt took matters into his own hands.
roosevelt cabled commodore george dewey commanding the american asiatic squadron at hong kong to descend upon spains philippines in the event of war.
the very devil seemed to possess him long later wrote of roosevelts actions.
but president mckinley subsequently con rmed roosevelts instructions even though an attack in the distant far east seemed like a strange way to free nearby cuba.
dewey carried out his orders magnicently on may 1 1898 see map 27 2.
sailing boldly with his six warships at night into the fortied harbor of manila he trained his guns the next morning on the moldy ten ship spanish eet.
the entire collection of antiquated and overmatched vessels was quickly destroyed with a loss of nearly four hundred spaniards killed and wounded and without the loss of a single american life.
taciturn george dewey became a national hero overnight.
an amateur poet blossomed forth with this forts of manila with his sailors.
his nerves frayed he was forced to wait in the sweltering bay while troop reinforcements were slowly assembled in america.
the appearance of german warships in manila harbor deepened the tension.
long awaited american troops nally arriving in force captured manila on august 13 1898 in collaboration with filipino insurgents commanded by their well educated part chinese leader emilio aguinaldo.
dewey to his later regret had brought this shrewd and magnetic revolutionary from exile in asia so that he might weaken spanish resistance.
these thrilling events in the philippines had meanwhile focused attention on hawaii.
an impression spread that america needed the archipelago as a coaling and provisioning way station in order to send supplies and reinforcements to dewey.
mckinley also worried that japan might grab the hawaiian islands while america was distracted elsewhere.
a joint resolution of annexation was rushed through congress and approved by mckinley on july 7 1898 it granted ha luzon south manila surrenders aug china 13 1898 manila sea bay manila philippine sea manila philippine islands corregidor dewey spanish fleet destroyed may 1 1898 10n sulu sea mindanao britis h north borneo sarawak gr.
east indies 400 km.
american forces american victory spanish possessions map 27 2 deweys route in the philippines 1898 interactive map victory over spain emilio aguinaldo ca.
1869 1964 and followers 1900 aguinaldo had a colorfully checkered career.
exiled from the philippines by the spanish in 1897 he was brought back in 1898 to assist the american invasion.
a year later he led the filipino insurrection against the new american rulers.
captured in 1901 he declared his loyalty to the united states.
during world war ii he collaborated with the japanese when they occupied the philippines.
after a lifetime of political intrigue and armed struggle aguinaldo died peacefully in manila in 1964 in his ninety fth year.
waiian residents u s citizenship hawaii received full territorial status in 1900 the confused invasion of cuba shortly after the outbreak of war the spanish government ordered a eet of decrepit warships to cuba.
panic seized the eastern seaboard of the united states.
american vacationers abandoned their seashore cottages while ner vous investors moved their securities to inland depositories.
the spanish armada eventually wheezed into bottle shaped santiago harbor cuba where it was easily blockaded by the much more powerful american eet.
sound strategy seemed to dictate that an american army be sent in from the rear to drive out the spanish ships.
leading the invading force was the grossly overweight general william r shafter a would be warrior so blubbery and gout stricken that he had to be carried about on a door.
his troops were woefully unequipped for war in the tropics they had been amply provided with heavy woolen underwear and uniforms designed for subzero operations against the indians.
the rough riders a part of the invading army now charged onto the stage of history.
this colorful regiment of volunteers short on discipline but long on dash consisted largely of western cowboys and other hardy characters with a sprinkling of ex polo players and ex convicts.
commanded by colonel leonard wood the group was orga nized principally by the glory chasing theodore roosevelt who had resigned from the navy department to serve as lieutenant colonel.
he was so nearsighted that as a safeguard he took along a dozen pairs of spectacles cached in handy spots on his person or nearby.
about the middle of june a bewildered american army of seventeen thousand men nally embarked at congested tampa florida amid scenes of indescribable confusion.
shafters landing near santiago thanks to the diversionary tactics of cuban insurrectos met little opposition.
brisk ghting broke out on july 1 at el caney and kettle hill up which colonel roosevelt and his horseless rough riders charged with strong support from two crack black regiments.
they suffered heavy casualties but the colorful colonel having the time of his life shot a spaniard with his revolver and with a mixture of modesty and immodesty colonel theodore roosevelt 1858 1919 wrote privately in 1903 of his rough riders in my regiment nine tenths of the men were better horsemen than i was and probably two thirds of them better shots than i was while on the average they were certainly hardier and more enduring.
yet after i had had them a very short while they all knew and i knew too that nobody else could command them as i could.
chapter 9 the confederation and the constitution 1776 1790 supplication was lucky if in any year it received onefourth of its requests.
the feeble national government in philadelphia could advise and advocate and appeal.
but in dealing with the independent states it could not command or coerce or control.
it could not act directly upon the individual citizens of a sovereign state it could not even protect itself against gross indignities.
in 1783 a group of mutinous pennsylvania soldiers whose pay was in arrears marched to philadelphia and made a threatening demonstration in front of independence hall.
after congress appealed in vain to the state for protection its members ed to safety at princeton college in new jersey.
the new congress with all its paper powers was even less effective than the old continental congress which had wielded no constitutional powers at all.
yet the articles of confederation weak though they were proved to be a landmark in government.
they were for those days a model of what a loose confederation could be.
thomas jefferson enthusiastically hailed the new structure as the best one existing or that ever did exist to compare it with the european governments he thought was like comparing heaven and hell but although the confederation was praiseworthy as confederations went the troubled times demanded not a loosely woven confederation but a tightly knit federation.
this involved the yielding by the states of their sovereignty to a completely recast federal government which in turn would leave them free to control their local affairs.
in spite of their defects the anemic articles of confederation were a signicant steppingstone toward the present constitution.
they clearly outlined the general powers that were to be exercised by the central government such as making treaties and establishing a postal ser vice.
as the rst written constitution of the republic the articles kept alive the ickering ideal of union and held the states together until such time as they were ripe for the establishment of a strong constitution by peaceful evolutionary methods.
without this intermediary jump the states probably would never have consented to the breathtaking leap from the old boycott association of 1774 to the constitution of the united states.
landmarks in land laws handcuffed though the congress of the confederation was it succeeded in passing supremely farsighted pieces of legislation.
these related to an immense part of the public domain recently acquired from the states and commonly known as the old northwest.
this area of land lay northwest of the ohio river east of the mississippi river and south of the great lakes.
the rst of these red letter laws was the land ordinance of 1785 see map 9 2.
it provided that the acreage of the old northwest should be sold and that the proceeds should be used to help pay off the national debt.
the vast area was to be surveyed before sale and settlement thus forestalling endless confusion and lawsuits.
it was to be divided into townships six miles square each of which in turn was to be split into thirtysix sections of one square mile each.
the sixteenth section of each township was set aside to be sold for the benet of the public schools a priceless gift to education in the northwest.
the orderly settlement of the northwest territory where the land was methodically surveyed and titles duly recorded contrasted sharply with the chaos south of the ohio river where uncertain ownership was the norm and fraud was rampant.
even more noteworthy was the northwest ordinance of 1787 which related to the governing of the old northwest.
this law came to grips with the problem of how a nation should deal with its colonies the same problem that had bedeviled the king and parliament in london.
the solution provided by the northwest ordinance was a judicious compromise temporary tutelage then permanent equality.
first there would be two evolutionary territorial stages during which the area would be subordinate to the federal government.
then when a territory could boast sixty thousand inhabitants it might be admitted by congress as a state with all the privileges of the thirteen charter members.
this is precisely what the continental congress had promised the states when they surrendered their lands in 1781.
the ordinance also forbade slavery in the old northwest a path breaking step though it exempted slaves already present.
the wisdom of congress in handling this explosive problem deserves warm praise.
if it had attempted to chain the new territories in permanent subordination a second american revolution almost certainly would have erupted in later years fought this time by the west against the east.
congress thus neatly solved the seemingly insoluble problem of empire.
the scheme worked so well that its basic principles were ultimately carried over from the old northwest to other frontier areas.
troubled foreign relations 90w 50n 80w section 16 reserved for school funds northwest territory boundaries indefinite present state boundary lak e superio r n british north america canada the seven ranges first area surveyed 36 km.
6 miles a township l ak an r 200 km.
lak 200 mi.
10 11 12 18 17 16 15 14 13 19 20 21 22 23 24 30 29 28 27 26 25 e e pennsylvania ania a pi lake michi g ip ron i ss u e h m iss rie spanish louisiana p pa pa 31 32 33 34 35 36 640 acres half section 320 acres oh io r 1 mile 40n virginia marietta tennessee o kentucky hi o r quarter section 160 acres half quarter section 80 acres virginia quarter quarter section 40 acres n c map 9 2 surveying the old northwest under the land ordinance of 1785 sections of a township under the land ordinance of 1785 interactive map the worlds ugly duckling foreign relations especially with london remained troubled during these anxious years of the confederation.
britain resented the stab in the back from its rebellious offspring and for eight years refused to send a minister to americas backwoods capital.
london suggested with barbed irony that if it sent one it would have to send thirteen.
britain atly declined to make a commercial treaty or to repeal its ancient navigation laws.
lord shefeld whose ungenerous views prevailed argued persuasively in a widely sold pamphlet that britain would win back americas trade anyhow.
commerce he insisted would naturally follow old channels.
so why go to the americans hat in hand.
the british also ofcially closed their protable west indies trade to the united states though the yankees with their time tested skill in smuggling illegally partook nonetheless.
scheming british agents were also active along the far ung northern frontier.
they intrigued with the disgruntled allen brothers of vermont and sought to annex that rebellious area to britain.
along the northern border the redcoats continued to hold a chain of trading posts on u s soil and there they maintained their fur trade with the indians.
one plausible excuse for remaining was the failure of the american states to honor the treaty of peace in regard to debts and loyalists.
but the main purpose of britain in hanging on was probably to curry favor with the indians and keep their tomahawks lined up on the side of the king as a barrier against future american attacks on canada.
all these grievances against britain were maddening to patriotic americans.
some citizens demanded with more heat than wisdom that the united states force the british into line by imposing restrictions on their imports to america.
but congress could not control commerce and the states refused to adopt a uniform tariff policy.
some easy states deliberately lowered their tariffs in order to attract an unfair share of trade.
chapter 9 the confederation and the constitution 1776 1790 richard henry lee 1732 1794 a prominent antifederalist attacked the proposed constitution in 1788 tis really astonishing that the same people who have just emerged from a long and cruel war in defense of liberty should now agree to x an elective despotism upon themselves and their posterity.
the same year prominent patriot patrick henry 1736 1799 agreed that the proposed constitution endangered everything the revolution had sought to protect this constitution is said to have beautiful features but when i come to examine these features sir they appear to me horridly frightful among other deformities it has an awful squinting it squints towards monarchy and does not this raise indignation in the breast of every american.
your president may easily become king your senate is so imperfectly constructed that your dearest rights may be sacriced by what may be a small minority.
where are your checks in this government.
debts and at full value.
large numbers of antifederalists saw in the constitution a plot by the upper crust to steal power back from the common folk.
silver buckled federalists had power and inuence on their side.
they enjoyed the support of such commanding gures as george washington and benjamin franklin.
most of them lived in the settled areas along the seaboard not in the raw backcountry.
overall they were wealthier than the antifederalists more educated and better orga nized.
they also controlled the press.
more than a hundred newspapers were published in america in the 1780s only a dozen supported the antifederalist cause.
antifederalists voiced vehement objections to the gilded trap known as the constitution.
they cried with much truth that it had been drawn up by the aristocratic elements and hence was antidemocratic.
they likewise charged that the sovereignty of the states was being submerged and that the freedoms of the indi vidual were jeopardized by the absence of a bill of rights.
they decried the dropping of annual elections for congressional representatives the erecting of a federal stronghold ten miles square later the district of columbia the creation of a standing army the omission of any reference to god and the highly questionable procedure of ratifying with only two thirds of the states.
a philadelphia newspaper added that benjamin franklin was a fool from age and george washington a fool from nature the great debate in the states special elections some apathetic but others hotly contested were held in the various states for members of the ratifying conventions see table 9 3.
the candidates federalist or antifederalist were elected on the basis of their pledges for or against the constitution.
with the ink barely dry on the parchment four small states quickly accepted the constitution for they had come off much better than they expected.
pennsylvania number two on the list of ratiers was the rst large state to act but not until high handed irregularities had been employed by the federalist legislature in calling a convention.
these included the forcible seating of two antifederalist members their clothes torn and their faces red with rage in order to complete a quorum.
massachusetts the second most populous state provided an acid test.
if the constitution had failed in massachusetts the entire movement might easily have bogged down.
the boston ratifying convention at rst contained an antifederalist majority.
it included grudging shaysites and the aging samuel adams as suspicious of government power in 1787 as he had been in 1776 the assembly buzzed with dismaying talk of summoning another constitutional convention as though the nation had not already shot its bolt.
clearly the choice was not between this constitution and a better one but between this constitution and the creaking articles of confederation.
the absence of a bill of rights alarmed the antifederalists.
but the federalists gave them solemn assurances that the rst congress would add such a safeguard by amendment and ratication was then secured in massachusetts by the rather narrow margin of 187 to 168 three more states fell into line.
the last of these was new hampshire whose convention at rst had contained a strong antifederalist majority.
the federal ratifying the constitution table 9 3 ratication of the constitution state date vote in convention rank in population population 1.
6 dec 7 1787 dec 12 1787 dec 18 1787 jan 2 1788 jan 9 1788 feb 7 1788 unanimous 46 to 23 unanimous unanimous 128 to 40 187 to 168 59 096 433 611 184 139 82 548 237 655 475 199 apr.
28 1788 may 23 1788 june 21 1788 june 26 1788 july 26 1788 nov 21 1789 may 29 1790 63 to 11 149 to 73 57 to 46 89 to 79 30 to 27 195 to 77 34 to 32 319 728 249 073 141 899 747 610 340 241 395 005 69 112 7.
13 delaware pennsylvania new jersey georgia connecticut massachusetts incl.
maine maryland south carolina new hampshire virginia new york north carolina rhode island ists cleverly arranged a prompt adjournment and then won over enough waverers to secure ratication.
nine states all but virginia new york north carolina and rhode island had now taken shelter under the new federal roof and the document was ofcially adopted on june 21 1788 francis hopkinson exulted in his song the new roof huzza.
my brave boys our work is complete the world shall admire columbias fair seat.
but such rejoicing was premature so long as the four dissenters conspicuously new york and virginia dug in their heels.
the four laggard states proud virginia the biggest and most populous state provided erce antifederalist opposition.
there the college bred federalist orators for once encountered worthy antagonists including the ery patrick henry.
he professed to see in the fearsome document the death warrant of liberty.
george washington james madison and john marshall on the federalist side lent inuential support.
with new hampshire about to ratify the new union was going to be formed anyhow and virginia could not very well continue comfortably as an independent state.
after exciting debate in the state convention ratication carried 89 to 79 new york also experienced an uphill struggle burdened as it was with its own heavily antifederalist state convention.
alexander hamilton at heart favored a much stronger central government than that under debate but he contributed his sparkling personality and persuasive eloquence to whipping up support for federalism as framed.
he also joined john jay and james madison in penning a masterly series of articles for the new york newspapers.
though designed as propaganda these essays remain the most penetrating commentary ever written on the constitution and are still widely sold in book form as the federalist.
probably the most famous of these is madisons federalist no.
10 which brilliantly refuted the conventional wisdom of the day that it was impossible to extend a republican form of government over a large territory.
new york nally yielded.
realizing that the state could not prosper apart from the union the convention ratied the document by the close count of 30 to 27 at the same time it approved thirty two proposed amendments and vain hope issued a call for yet another convention to modify the constitution.
last ditch dissent developed in only two states.
a hostile convention met in north carolina then adjourned without taking a vote.
rhode island did not even summon a ratifying convention rejecting the constitution by popular referendum.
the two most ruggedly individualist centers of the colonial era homes of the otherwise minded thus ran true to chapter 20 girding for war the north and the south 1861 1865 booth at the sanitary fair in chicago 1863 the chicago sanitary fair was the rst of many such fairs throughout the nation to raise funds for soldier relief efforts.
mainly organized by women the fair sold captured confederate ags battle relics handicrafts like these potholders right and donated items including president lincolns original draft of the emancipation proclamation which garnered 3 000 in auction.
when the fair closed the chicago headquarters of the u s sanitary commission had raised 100 000 and its female managers had gained organizational experience that many would put to work in the postwar movement for womens rights.
the truth that some gluttony and greed always mar the devotion and self sacrice called forth by war.
the story of speculators and peculators was roughly the same in both camps.
but graft was more agrant in the north than in the south partly because there was more to steal.
yankee sharpness appeared at its worst.
dishonest agents putting prots above patriotism palmed off aged and blind horses on government purchasers.
unscrupulous northern manufacturers supplied shoes with cardboard soles and fast disintegrating uniforms of reprocessed or shoddy wool rather than virgin wool.
hence the reproachful term shoddy millionaires was doubly fair.
one proteer reluctantly admitted that his prots were painfully large newly invented laborsaving machinery enabled the north to expand economically even though the cream of its manpower was being drained off to the ghting front.
the sewing machine wrought wonders in fabricating uniforms and military footwear.
the marriage of military need and innovative machinery largely ended the production of customtailored clothing.
graduated standard mea surements were introduced creating sizes that were widely used in the civilian garment industry forever after.
clattering mechanical reapers which numbered about 250 000 by 1865 proved hardly less potent than thundering guns.
they not only released tens of thousands of farm boys for the army but fed them their eld rations.
they produced vast surpluses of grain that when sent abroad helped dethrone king cotton.
they provided prots with which the north was able to buy munitions and supplies from abroad.
they contributed to the feverish prosperity of the north a prosperity that enabled the union to weather the war with ying colors.
wartime transformations other industries were humming.
the discovery of petroleum gushers in 1859 had led to a rush of fiftyniners to pennsylvania.
the result was the birth of a new industry with its petroleum plutocracy and coal oil johnnies pioneers continued to push westward during the war altogether an estimated 300 000 people.
major magnets were free gold nuggets and free land under the homestead act of 1862 strong propellants were the federal draft agents.
the only major northern industry to suffer a crippling setback was the ocean carrying trade which fell prey to the alabama and other raiders.
the civil war was a womens war too.
the protracted con ict opened new opportunities for women.
when men departed in uniform women often took their jobs.
in washington d c ve hundred women clerks government girls became government workers with over one hundred in the treasury department alone.
the booming military demand for shoes and clothing combined with technological marvels like the sewing machine likewise drew countless women into industrial employment.
before the war one industrial worker in four had been female during the war the ratio rose to one in three.
other women on both sides stepped up to the ghting front or close behind it.
more than four hundred women accompanied husbands and sweethearts into battle by posing as male soldiers.
other women took on dangerous spy missions.
one woman was executed for smuggling gold to the confederacy.
dr elizabeth blackwell americas rst female physician helped organize the u s sanitary commission to assist the union armies in the eld.
the commission trained nurses collected medical supplies and equipped hospitals.
commission work helped many women to acquire the orga ni zational skills and the self condence that would propel the womens movement forward after the war.
heroically energetic clara barton and dedicated dorothea dix superintendent of nurses for the union army helped transform nursing from a lowly service into a respected profession and in the process opened up another major sphere of employment for women in the postwar era.
equally renowned in the south was sally tompkins who ran a richmond in rmary for wounded confederate soldiers and was awarded the rank of captain by confederate president jefferson davis.
still other women north as well as south orga nized bazaars and fairs that raised millions of dollars for the relief of widows orphans and disabled soldiers.
a crushed cotton kingdom the south fought to the point of exhaustion.
the suffocation caused by the blockade together with the destruction wrought by invaders took a terrible toll.
possessing 30 percent of the national wealth in 1860 the south claimed only 12 percent in 1870 before the war the average per capita income of southerners including slaves was about two thirds that of northerners.
the civil war squeezed the average southern income to two fths of the northern level where it remained for the rest of the century.
the souths bid for independence exacted a cruel and devastating cost.
transportation collapsed.
the south was even driven to the economic cannibalism of pulling up rails from the less used lines to repair the main ones.
window weights were melted down into bullets gourds replaced dishes pins became so scarce that they were loaned with reluctance.
to the brutal end the south mustered remarkable resourcefulness and spirit.
women buoyed up their menfolk many of whom had seen enough of war at rst hand to be heartily sick of it.
a proposal was made by a number of women that they cut off their long hair and sell it abroad.
but the project was not adopted partly because of the blockade.
the self sacricing women took pride in denying themselves the silks and satins of their northern sisters.
the chorus of a song the southern girl touched a cheerful note so hurrah.
for southern rights hurrah.
for the homespun dress the southern ladies wear.
at wars end the northern captains of industry had conquered the southern lords of the manor.
a crippled south left the capitalistic north free to work its own way with high tariffs and other benets.
the manufacturing moguls of the north ushering in the full edged industrial revolution were headed for increased dominance over american economic and political life.
hitherto the agrarian slavocracy of the south had partially checked the ambitions of the rising plutocracy of the north.
now cotton capitalism had lost out to industrial capitalism.
the south of 1865 was to be rich in little but amputees war heroes ruins and memories.
chapter 38 the stormy sixties 1960 1968 had created in 1961 to enforce the law.
when conser vatives tried to derail the legislation by adding a prohibition on sexual as well as racial discrimination the tactic back red.
the bills opponents cynically calculated that liberals would not be able to support a bill that threatened to wipe out laws that singled out women for special protection because of their sex.
but the acts title vii passed with the sexual clause intact.
it soon proved to be a powerful instrument of federally enforced gender equality as well as racial equality.
johnson struck another blow for women and minorities in 1965 when he issued an executive order requiring all federal contractors to take afrmative action against discrimination.
johnson also rammed kennedys stalled tax bill through congress and added proposals of his own for a billion dollar war on poverty johnson voiced special concern for appalachia where the sickness of the soft coal industry had left tens of thousands of mountain folk on the human slag heap.
johnson dubbed his domestic program the great society a sweeping set of new dealish economic and welfare mea sures aimed at transforming the american way of life.
public support for lbjs antipoverty war was aroused by michael harringtons the other america 1962 which revealed that in afuent america 20 percent of the population and over 40 percent of the black population suffered in poverty.
president lyndon baines johnson 1908 1973 dedicated and hard working johnson saw his presidency shattered by the trauma of vietnam.
by the end of his term he was so unpopular that he could nd nonheckling audiences only on military bases or navy ships.
honor president kennedys memory than the earliest possible passage of the civil rights bill for which he fought so long after a lengthy conser vative libuster congress at last passed the landmark civil rights act of 1964 the act banned racial discrimination in most private facilities open to the public including theaters hospitals and restaurants.
it strengthened the federal governments power to end segregation in schools and other public places.
title vii of the act barred employers from discriminating based on race or national origin in hiring and empowered the equal employment opportunity commission eeoc a body kennedy johnson battles goldwater in 1964 johnsons nomination by the democrats in 1964 was a foregone conclusion he was chosen by acclamation in atlantic city as his birthday present.
thanks to the tall texan the democrats stood foursquare on their most liberal platform since trumans fair deal days.
the republicans convening in san franciscos cow palace nominated box jawed senator barry goldwater of arizona a bronzed and bespectacled champion of rock ribbed conservatism.
the american stage was thus set for a historic clash of political principles.
goldwaters forces had galloped out of the southwest to ride roughshod over the moderate republican eastern establishment insisting that the gop offer a choice not an echo goldwater attacked the federal income tax the social security system the tennessee valley authority civil rights legislation the nuclear test ban treaty and most loudly the great johnson reelected negative campaigning this infamous attack ad was televised only once as a paid political advertisement but it signaled the emergence of a newly noxious style of political campaigning.
the ad showed a child dreamily pulling petals from a ower.
suddenly her voice gave way to that of a man reciting an ominous countdown followed by an exploding nuclear bomb and a throaty voice warning vote for president johnson on november 3 the stakes are too high for you to stay home the ad implied that a goldwater presidency would risk nuclear armageddon.
controversy forced the ads sponsors to take it off the air but it was repeatedly reshown in news coverage of the controversy itself raising serious questions about the very denition of news society.
his ercely dedicated followers proclaimed in your heart you know hes right which prompted the democratic response in your guts you know hes nuts goldwater warmed right wing hearts when he proclaimed that extremism in the defense of liberty is no vice.
moderation in the pursuit of justice is no virtue democrats gleefully exploited the image of goldwater as a trigger happy cowboy who would barry us in the debris of world war iii.
johnson cultivated the contrasting image of a resolute statesman by seizing upon the tonkin gulf episode early in august 1964 unbeknownst to the american public or congress u s navy ships had been cooperating with south vietnamese gunboats in provocative raids along the coast of north vietnam.
two of these american destroyers were allegedly red upon by the north vietnamese on august 2 and 4 although exactly what happened still remains unclear.
later investigations strongly suggested that the north vietnamese red in self defense on august 2 and that the attack of august 4 never happened.
johnson later reportedly wisecracked for all i know the navy was shooting at whales out there johnson nevertheless promptly called the attack unprovoked and moved swiftly to make political hay out of this episode.
he ordered a limited retaliatory air raid against the north vietnamese bases loudly proclaiming that he sought no wider war thus implying that the truculent goldwater did.
johnson also used the incident to spur congressional passage of the all purpose tonkin gulf resolution.
with only two dissenting votes in both houses the lawmakers virtually abdicated their war declaring powers and handed the president a blank check to use further force in southeast asia.
the tonkin gulf resolution johnson boasted was like grandmas nightshirt it covered every thing the towering texan rode to a spectacular victory in november 1964 the voters were herded into johnsons column by fondness for the kennedy legacy faith in great society promises and fear of goldwater.
a stampede of 43 129 566 johnson votes trampled the republican ticket with its 27 178 188 supporters.
the tally in the electoral college was 486 to 52 see map 38 2.
goldwater carried only his native arizona and ve other states all of them signicantly in the traditionally democratic but now racially restless south.
johnsons record breaking 61 percent of the popular vote swept lopsided democratic majorities into both houses of congress.
chapter along with brief descriptions of the people to know and additional review materials may be found at the furnace of civil war 1861 1865 my paramount object in this struggle is to save the union and is not either to save or to destroy slavery.
w hen president lincoln issued his call to the states for seventy ve thousand militiamen on april 15 1861 he envisioned them serving for only ninety days.
reaf rming his limited war aims he declared that he had no purpose directly or indirectly to interfere with slavery in the states where it exists with a swift ourish of federal force he hoped to show the folly of secession and rapidly return the rebellious states to the union.
but the war was to be neither brief nor limited.
when the guns fell silent four years later hundreds of thousands of soldiers on both sides lay dead slavery was ended forever and the nation faced the challenge of reintegrating the defeated but still recalcitrant south into the union.
bull run ends the ninety day war northern newspapers at rst sharing lincolns expectation of a quick victory raised the cry on to rich mond in this yeasty at mosphere a union army of some thirty thousand men drilled near washington in the summer of 1861 it was ill prepared for battle but the press and the public clamored for action.
lincoln eventually concluded that an attack on a smaller confederate force at bull run manassas junction some thirty miles southwest of washington might be worth a try.
if successful it would demonstrate the superiority of union arms.
it might even lead to the capture of the confederate capital at richmond one hundred miles to the south.
if richmond fell secession would be thoroughly discredited and the union could be restored without damage to the economic and social system of the south.
raw yankee recruits swaggered out of washington toward bull run on july 21 1861 as if they were headed for a sporting event.
congressmen and spectators trailed along with their lunch baskets to witness the fun.
at rst the battle went well for the yankees.
but thomas j.
stonewall jacksons gray clad warriors stood like a stone wall here he won his nickname and this icon will direct you to interactive activities and study materials on the american pageant website chapter 10 launching the new ship of state 1789 1800 although thomas jefferson 1743 1826 and john adams hardly saw eye to eye jefferson displayed grudging respect for adams in a piece of private correspondence in 1787 he is vain irritable and a bad calculator of the force and probable effect of the motives which govern men.
this is all the ill which can possibly be said of him.
he is as disinterested as the being who made him.
john adams by john singleton copley 1783 when he entered harvard college in 1751 adams intended to prepare for the ministry but four absorbing years of study excited him about other intellectual and career possibilities i was a mighty metaphysician at least i thought myself such adams also tried his hand at being a mighty scientist doctor and orator.
upon graduation he became a schoolmaster but soon decided to take up the law.
washington had hitherto imposed some restraints now the lid was off.
cultured federalists like fisher ames referred to the jeffersonians as re eating salamanders poison sucking toads federalists and democratic republicans even drank their ale in separate taverns.
the issues of the campaign as it turned out focused heavily on personalities.
but the jeffersonians again assailed the too forceful crushing of the whiskey rebellion and above all the negotiation of jays hated treaty.
john adams with most of his support in new england squeezed through by the narrow margin of 71 votes to 68 in the electoral college.
jefferson as runnerup became vice president.
one of the ablest statesmen of his day adams at sixty two was a stuffy gure.
sharp featured bald relatively short ve feet seven inches and thickset his rotundity he impressed observers as a man of stern principles who did his duty with stubborn devotion.
although learned and upright he was a tactless and prickly intellectual aristocrat with no appeal to the masses and with no desire to cultivate any.
many citizens regarded him with respectful irritation the crusty new eng lander suffered from other handicaps.
he had stepped into washingtons shoes which no successor could hope to ll.
in addition adams was hated by hamilton who had resigned from the treasury in 1795 and who now headed the war faction of the federalist party known as the high federalists the famed nancier even secretly plotted with cer tain members of the cabinet against the president who had a conspiracy rather than a cabinet on his hands.
adams regarded hamilton as the most ruthless impatient artful indefatigable and unprincipled intriguer in the united states if not in the world most ominous of all adams inherited a violent quarrel with france a quarrel whose gunpowder lacked only a spark.
the possibility of such an inharmonious two party combination in the future was removed by the twelfth amendment to the constitution in 1804.
see the appendix.
the french crisis the xyz affair when president adamss envoys to paris were asked to pay a huge bribe as the price of doing diplomatic business humiliated americans rose up in wrath against france.
here an innocent young america is being plundered by frenchmen as john bull looks on in amusement from across the english channel.
unofcial fighting with france the french were infuriated by jays treaty.
they condemned it as the initial step toward an alliance with britain their perpetual foe.
they further assailed the pact as a agrant violation of the franco american treaty of 1778 french warships in retaliation began to seize defenseless american merchant vessels altogether about three hundred by mid 1797.
adding insult to outrage the paris regime haughtily refused to receive americas newly appointed envoy and even threatened him with arrest.
president adams kept his head temporarily even though the nation was mightily aroused.
true to washingtons policy of steering clear of war at all costs he tried again to reach an agreement with the french and appointed a diplomatic commission of three men including john marshall the future chief justice.
adamss envoys reaching paris in 1797 hoped to meet with charles maurice de talleyrand the crafty french foreign minister.
they were secretly approached by three go betweens later referred to as x y and z in the published dispatches.
the french spokesmen among other concessions demanded an unneutral loan of 32 million orins plus what amounted to a bribe of 250 000 for the privilege of merely talking with talleyrand.
these terms were intolerable.
the american trio knew that bribes were standard diplomatic devices in europe but they gagged at paying a quarter of a million dollars for mere talk without any assurances of a settlement.
negotiations quickly broke down and john marshall on reaching new york in 1798 was hailed as a conquering hero for his steadfastness.
the xyz affair sent a wave of war hysteria sweeping through the united states catching up even president adams.
the slogan of the hour became millions for defense but not one cent for tribute the federalists were delighted at this unexpected turn of affairs whereas all except the most rabid jeffersonians hung their heads in shame over the misbehavior of their french friends.
war preparations in the united states were pushed along at a feverish pace despite considerable jeffersonian opposition in congress.
the navy department chapter 10 launching the new ship of state 1789 1800 preparation for war to defend commerce the building of the frigate philadelphia in 1803 this frigate ran onto the rocks near tripoli harbor and about three hundred ofcers and men were imprisoned by the tripolitans see map 11 2 on p 233.
the ship was reoated for service against the americans but stephen decatur led a party of men that set it are.
was created the three ship navy was expanded the united states marine corps was reestablished originally created in 1775 the marine corps had been disbanded at the end of the revolutionary war.
a new army of ten thousand men was authorized but not fully raised.
bloodshed was con ned to the sea and principally to the west indies.
in two and a half years of undeclared hostilities 1798 1800 american privateers and menof war of the new navy captured over eighty armed vessels ying the french colors though several hundred yankee merchant ships were lost to the enemy.
only a slight push it seemed might plunge both nations into a full dress war.
americans would send a new minister he would be received with proper respect.
this french furor brought to adams a degree of personal acclaim that he had never known before and was never to know again.
he doubtless perceived that a full edged war crowned by the conquest of the floridas and louisiana would bring new plaudits to the federalist party and perhaps a second term to himself.
but the heady wine of popularity did not sway his nal judgment.
he like other founding fathers realized full well that war must be avoided while the country was relatively weak.
adams unexpectedly exploded a bombshell when early in 1799 he submitted to the senate the name of a new minister to france.
hamilton and his war hawk adams puts patriotism above party embattled france its hands full in europe wanted no war.
an outwitted talleyrand realized that to ght the united states would merely add one more foe to his enemy roster.
the british who were lending the americans cannon and other war supplies were actually driven closer to their wayward cousins than they were to be again for many years.
talleyrand therefore let it be known through roundabout channels that if the the rmness of president john adams 1735 1826 was revealed in his message to congress june 1798 i will never send another minister to france without assurances that he will be received respected and honored as the representative of a great free powerful and independent nation.
the alien and sedition hysteria faction were enraged.
but public opinion jeffersonian and reasonable federalist alike was favorable to one last try for peace.
americas envoys now three found the political skies brightening when they reached paris early in 1800 the ambitious little corporal the corsican napoleon bonaparte had recently seized dictatorial power.
he was eager to free his hands of the american squabble so that he might continue to redraw the map of europe and perhaps create a new world empire in louisiana.
the af ictions and ambitions of the old world were again working to americas advantage.
after a great deal of haggling a memorable treaty known as the convention of 1800 was signed in paris.
france agreed to annul the twenty two year old marriage of in convenience but as a kind of alimony the united states agreed to pay the damage claims of american shippers.
so ended the nations only peacetime military alliance for a century and a half.
its troubled history does much to explain the traditional antipathy of the american people to foreign entanglements.
john adams inty to the end deserves immense credit for his belated push for peace even though he was moved in part by jealousy of hamilton.
adams not only avoided the hazards of war but also unwittingly smoothed the path for the peaceful purchase of louisiana three years later.
he should indeed rank high among the forgotten purchasers of this vast domain.
if america had drifted into a full blown war with france in 1800 napoleon would not have sold louisiana to jefferson on any terms in 1803 president adams the bubble of his popularity pricked by peace was aware of his signal contribution to the nation.
he later suggested as the epitaph for his tombstone not used here lies john adams who took upon himself the responsibility of peace with france in the year 1800 the federalist witch hunt exulting federalists had meanwhile capitalized on the anti french frenzy to drive through congress in 1798 a sheaf of laws designed to mufe or minimize their jeffersonian foes.
the rst of these oppressive laws was aimed at supposedly pro jeffersonian aliens most european immigrants lacking wealth were scorned by the aristocratic federalist party.
but they were welcomed as voters by the less prosperous and more democratic jeffersonians.
the federalist congress hoping to dis courage the dregs of europe erected a disheartening barrier.
they raised the residence requirements for aliens who desired to become citizens from a tolerable ve years to an intolerable fourteen.
this drastic new law violated the traditional american policy of opendoor hospitality and speedy assimilation.
two additional alien laws struck heavily at undesirable immigrants.
the president was empowered to deport dangerous foreigners in time of peace and to deport or imprison them in time of hostilities.
though defensible as a war mea sure and an ofcially declared war with france seemed imminent this was an arbitrary grant of executive power contrary to american tradition and to the spirit of the constitution even though the stringent alien laws were never enforced.
the lockjaw sedition act the last mea sure of the federalist clampdown was a direct slap at two priceless freedoms guaranteed in the constitution by the bill of rights freedom of speech and freedom of the press first amendment.
this law provided that anyone who impeded the policies of the government or falsely defamed its ofcials including the president would be liable to a heavy ne and imprisonment.
severe though the mea sure was the federalists believed that it was justied.
the verbal violence of the day was unrestrained and foul penned editors some of them exiled aliens vilied adamss anti french policy in vicious terms.
many outspoken jeffersonian editors were indicted under the sedition act and ten were brought to trial.
all of them were convicted often by packed juries swayed by prejudiced federalist judges.
some of the victims were harmless partisans who should have been spared the notoriety of martyrdom.
among them was congressman matthew lyon the spitting lion who had earlier gained fame by spitting in the face of a federalist.
he was sentenced to four months in jail for writing of president adamss unbounded thirst for ridiculous pomp foolish adulation and selsh avarice another culprit was lucky to get off with a ne of 100 after he had expressed the wish that the wad of a cannon red in honor of adams had landed in the seat of the presidents breeches.
the sedition act seemed to be in direct con ict with the constitution.
but the supreme court dominated by federalists was of no mind to declare this federalist law unconstitutional.
the federalists intentionally wrote the law to expire in 1801 so that it could not be used against them if they lost the next election.
this attempt by the federalists to crush free speech and silence the opposition party high handed chapter 38 the stormy sixties 1960 1968 wa mt or id nv ca nd wy ut az mn sd ne co wi ia ks ok nm il mi in mo la oh wv ky tn ar tx me vt 3 nh ma ny 4 14 ri pa nj ct 4 17 8 ms al ga va nc r 12 ai 1 sc de md dc fl ak hi candidate party electoral vote popular vote nixon republican 56 1 31 785 480 humphrey democrat 35 5 31 275 166 42 7 8 4 9 906 473 13 5 wallace american independent 43 4 map 38 3 presidential election of 1968 with electoral vote by state george wallace won in ve states and he denied a clear majority to either of the two major party candidates in twenty ve other states.
a shift of some fty thousand votes might well have thrown the election into the house of representatives giving wallace the strategic bargaining position he sought.
interactive map as for wallace he won an impressive 9 906 473 popular votes and 46 electoral votes all from ve states of the deep south four of which the republican goldwater had carried in 1964 wallace remained a formidable force for he had amassed the largest third party popular vote in american history to that point and was the last third party candidate to win any electoral votes.
in 1992 ross perot enjoyed a greater popularvote margin but won no states see p.
wallace had also resoundingly demonstrated the continuing power of populist politics which appealed to voters fears and resentments rather than to the better angels of their nature.
his candidacy foreshadowed a coarsening of american political life that would take deep root in the ensuing decades.
the obituary of lyndon johnson talented but tragedy struck lyndon johnson returned to his texas ranch in january 1969 and died there four years later.
his party was defeated and his me too hubert humphrey was repudiated.
yet johnsons legislative leadership for a time had been remarkable.
no president since lincoln had worked harder or done more for civil rights.
none had shown more compassion for the poor blacks and the ill educated.
but by 1966 johnson was already sinking into the vietnam quicksands.
great society programs began to wither on the vine as soaring war costs sucked tax dollars into the military machine.
his effort to provide both guns and butter prevented him from delivering either in sufcient quantity.
the war on poverty met resistance that was as stubborn as the viet cong and eventually went down to defeat.
great want persisted alongside great wealth.
johnson had crucied himself on the cross of vietnam.
the southeast asian quagmire engulfed his noblest intentions.
committed to some degree by his two predecessors he had chosen to defend the american foothold and enlarge the con ict rather than be run out.
he was evidently persuaded by his brightest advisers both civilian and military that massive aerial bombing and limited troop commitments would make a cheap victory possible.
his decision not to escalate the ghting further offended the hawks and his refusal to back off altogether antagonized the doves like the calvinists of colonial days luckless lyndon johnson was damned if he did and damned if he did not.
the cultural upheaval of the 1960s the struggles of the 1960s against racism poverty and the war in vietnam had momentous cultural consequences.
the decade came to be seen as a watershed dividing two distinct eras in terms of values morals and behavior.
everywhere in 1960s america a newly negative attitude toward all kinds of authority took hold.
disillusioned by the discovery that american society was not free of racism sexism imperialism and oppression many young people lost their traditional moral rudders.
neither families nor churches nor schools seemed to be able to de ne values and shape behavior with the certainty of shared purpose that many people believed had once existed.
the nations mainline protestant denominations which had dominated american religious life for centuries lost their grip in the 1960s as weekly churchgoing declined from 48 per the counterculture of the 1960s cent in the late 1950s to 41 percent in the early 1970s.
the liberal protestant churches suffered the most.
they increasingly ceded religious authority to conservative evangelicals while surrendering cultural authority to secular professionals and academic social scientists.
a new cultural divide began to take shape as educated americans became increasingly secular and the less educated became more religious.
religious upheaval even churned the tradition bound roman catholic church among the worlds oldest and most conser vative institutions.
clerics abandoned their roman collars and latin lingo folk songs replaced gregorian chants and meatless fridays became ancient history.
no matter what the topic conventional wisdom and inherited ideas came under re.
trust no one over thirty was a popular sneer of rebellious youth.
skepticism about authority had deep historical roots in american culture and it had even bloomed in the supposedly complacent and conformist 1950s.
beat poets like allen ginsberg and iconoclastic novelists like jack kerouac had voiced dark disillusion with the materialistic pursuits and establishment arrogance of the eisenhower era.
in movies like rebel without a cause 1955 the attractive young actor james dean expressed the restless frustration of many young people.
the disaffection of the young reached crisis proportions in the tumultuous 1960s.
one of the rst organized protests against established authority broke out at the university of cal i fornia at berkeley in 1964 in the aptly named free speech movement.
students objected to an administrative ban on the use of campus space for political debate.
during months of protest they accused the cold war megaversity of promoting corporate interests rather than humane values.
but in only a few years the clean cut berkeley activists and their sober minded sit ins would seem downright quaint.
fired by outrage against the war in vietnam some sons and daughters of the middle class became radical political rebels.
others turned to mind bending drugs tuned in to acid rock and dropped out of straight society.
still others did their own thing in communes or alternative institutions.
patriotism became a dirty word.
beowered women in trousers and long haired men with earrings heralded the rise of a self conscious counterculture stridently opposed to traditional american ways.
social upheaval in the 1960s was far from an american only phenomenon.
as people born in the wake of world war ii came of age across the world they questioned established authority every where.
waves of the free speech movement berkeley california 1964 the free speech movement on the campus of the university of california at berkeley marked the rst of the large scale student mobilizations that rocked campuses across the country throughout the rest of the 1960s.
here a student schooled in passive resistance is dragged by police to a waiting bus.
protests and calls for individual rights and political freedom spread like wild re.
the year 1968 was so stormy that it became synonymous with un rest in many languages.
in may of that year leftist french students organized city crippling strikes against their countrys antiquated university system.
joined by millions of workers they nearly toppled the government.
the global spirit of protest against the vietnam war racial injustice and the strictures of bourgeois society spread from berkeley cal i fornia to columbia university in chapter 21 the furnace of civil war 1861 1865 88w corinth memphis i r pp ss i er r land tennessee t en n es s e e chattanooga r nov 25 1863 mi ssi n kentucky fort donelson feb 16 1862 nt gra 3 arkansas fort henry feb 6 1862 shiloh april 6 7 o ohi r grant 1862 36n cairo b illinois mo.
86w cu m 90w gra nt 34n ga mississippi alabama vicksburg july 4 1863 montgomery 32n louisiana port hudson may 27 1863 30n mobile 50 100 km.
f 86 arrag 2 u t new orleans florida mississippi r gulf of mexico union confederate union advance union victory in the southern tier of ohio indiana and illinois sympathy for the south combined with hostility to the northeast to stimulate talk of a northwest confederacy that would itself secede from the union and make a separate peace with the confederacy.
these sentiments were fueled by economic grievances stemming from the closure of the mississippi river to trade and they gained strength after lincolns emancipation proclamation.
warned one ohio congressman in january 1863 if you of the east who have found this war against the south and for the negro gratifying to your hate or protable to your purse will continue it.
be prepared for eternal divorce between the west and the east another ohio congressman giving great urgency to the union effort to reopen the mississippi river declared the erection of the states watered by the mississippi and its tributaries into an dependent republic is the talk of every other western man.
map 21 5 the mississippi river and tennessee 1862 1863 interactive map and other provisions from louisiana and texas.
the fortress of vicksburg located on a hairpin turn of the mississippi was the souths sentinel protecting the lifeline to the western sources of supply.
general grant was now given command of the union forces attacking vicksburg and in the teeth of grave difculties displayed rare skill and daring.
the siege of vicksburg was his best fought campaign of the war.
the beleaguered city at length surrendered on july 4 1863 with the garrison reduced to eating mules and rats.
five days later came the fall of port hudson the last southern bastion on the mississippi.
the spinal cord of the confederacy was now severed and in lincolns quaint phrase the father of waters at last owed unvexed to the sea the union victory at vicksburg came the day after the confederate defeat at gettysburg.
the political sig nicance of these back to back military successes was monumental.
reopening the mississippi helped to quell the northern peace agitation in the butternut area of the ohio river valley.
confederate control of the mississippi had cut off that regions usual trade routes down the ohio mississippi river system to new orleans thus adding economic pain to that border sections already shaky support for the abolition war the twin victories also conclusively tipped the diplomatic scales in favor of the north as britain stopped delivery of the laird rams to the confederates see p 473 and as france killed a deal for the sale of six naval vessels to the richmond government.
by the end of 1863 all confederate hopes for foreign help were irretrievably lost.
sherman scorches georgia general grant the victor of vicksburg was now transferred to the east tennessee theater where confeder sherman s march to the sea ates had driven union forces from the battleeld at chickamauga into the city of chattanooga to which they then laid siege.
grant won a series of desperate engagements in november 1863 in the vicinity of besieged chattanooga including missionary ridge and lookout mountain the battle above the clouds.
chattanooga was liberated the state was cleared of confederates and the way was thus opened for an invasion of georgia.
grant was rewarded by being made general in chief.
georgias conquest was entrusted to general william tecumseh sherman.
red haired and red bearded grim faced and ruthless he captured atlanta in september 1864 and burned the city in november of that year.
he then daringly left his supply base lived off the country for some 250 miles and weeks later emerged at savannah on the sea.
a rousing northern song marching through georgia said shermans dashing yankee boys will never reach the coast so the saucy rebels said and t was a handsome boast.
but shermans hated blue bellies sixty thousand strong cut a sixty mile swath of destruction through georgia.
they burned buildings leaving only the blackened chimneys shermans sentinels.
they tore up railroad rails heated them red hot and twisted them into iron doughnuts and shermans hairpins they bayoneted family portraits and ran off with valuable souvenirs war.
is all hell admitted sherman later and he proved it by his efforts to make georgia howl one of the major purposes of shermans march was to destroy supplies destined for the confederate army and to weaken the morale of the men at the front by waging war on their homes see map 21 6.
raleigh johnston surrenders april 18 1865 tennessee bentonville mar.
19 1865 north carolina 35n fayetteville chattanooga nov 23 1863 dalton wilmington kennesaw mt.
june 27 1864 columbia feb 17 1865 atlanta occupied by sherman sept 2 1864 burned nov 16 1864 south carolina at l a n t i c o c e a n milledgeville macon charleston georgia union advance n savannah dec 21 1864 100 km.
union victory 100 mi.
80w map 21 6 shermans march 1864 1865 interactive map chapter 11 the triumphs and travails of the jeffersonian republic 1800 1812 mrs benjamin tallmadge and son henry floyd and daughter maria jones colonel benjamin tallmadge and son william tallmadge by ralph earl 1790 the tallmadges were among the leading citizens of litcheld a federalist stronghold in the heavily federalist state of connecticut.
colonel benjamin tallmadge served with distinction in the revolutionary war became a wealthy merchant and banker and represented his state in congress from 1801 to 1817 mary floyd tallmadge like her husband came from a prominent long island family.
the opulence of the tallmadges clothing and surroundings in these paintings abundantly testies to the wealth and the social pretensions of the federalist elite.
note the toy carriage near the feet of the tallmadge daughter a replica of the actual and elegant carriage owned by the tallmadge family.
a philadelphia woman wrote her sister in law about the pride she felt on the occasion of thomas jeffersons inauguration as third president of the united states in 1801 i have this morning witnessed one of the most interesting scenes a free people can ever witness.
the changes of administration which in every government and in every age have most generally been epochs of confusion villainy and bloodshed in this our happy country take place without any species of distraction or disorder.
als of 1776 and 1787 jeffersons mission as he saw it was to restore the republican experiment to check the growth of government power and to halt the decay of virtue that had set in under federalist rule.
no less revolutionary was the peaceful and orderly transfer of power on the basis of an election whose results all parties accepted.
this was a remarkable achievement for a raw young nation especially after all the partisan bitterness that had agitated the country during adamss presidency.
it was particularly remarkable in that age comparable successions would not take place in britain for another generation.
after a decade of division and doubt americans could take justiable pride in the vigor of their experiment in democracy.
jefferson as president responsibility breeds moderation long tom jefferson was inaugurated president on march 4 1801 in the swampy village of washington the crude new national capital.
tall six feet two and a half inches with large hands and feet red hair the red fox and prominent cheekbones and chin he was an arresting gure.
having spent ve years as u s minister to france 1784 1789 he was uent in french and a sophisticated cosmopolitan citizen of the world yet he never lost the common touch.
believing that the customary pomp did not bet his democratic ideals he spurned a horse drawn coach and strode by foot to the capitol from his boardinghouse.
jeffersons inaugural address beautifully phrased was a classic statement of democratic principles.
the will of the majority is in all cases to prevail jefferson declared.
but he added that will to be rightful must be reasonable the minority possess their equal rights which equal law must protect and to violate would be oppression seeking to allay federalist fears of a bullin the china closet overturn jefferson ingratiatingly intoned we are all republicans we are all federalists as for foreign affairs he pledged honest friendship with all nations entangling alliances with none with its rustic setting washington lent itself admirably to the simplicity and frugality of the jeffersonian republicans.
in this respect it contrasted sharply with the elegant at mosphere of federalist philadelphia the former temporary capital.
extending democratic principles to etiquette jefferson established the rule of pell mell at ofcial dinners that is seating without regard to rank.
the resplendent british minister who had enjoyed precedence among the pro british federalists was insulted.
as president jefferson could be shockingly unconventional.
he would receive callers in sloppy attire once in a dressing gown and heel less slippers.
he president john f kennedy 1917 1963 once greeted a large group of nobel prize winners as the most extraordinary collection of talent of human knowledge that has ever been gathered together at the white house with the possible exception of when thomas jefferson dined alone.
started the precedent unbroken until woodrow wilsons presidency 112 years later of sending messages to congress to be read by a clerk.
personal appearances in the federalist manner suggested too strongly a monarchical speech from the throne.
besides jefferson was painfully conscious of his weak voice and unimpressive platform presence.
as if compelled by an evil twin jefferson was forced to reverse many of the political principles he had so vigorously championed.
there were in fact two thomas jeffersons.
one was the scholarly private citizen who philosophized in his study.
the other was the harassed public ofcial who made the disturbing discovery that bookish theories worked out differently in the noisy arena of practical politics.
the open minded virginian was therefore consistently inconsistent it is easy to quote one jefferson to refute the other.
jefferson inaugural pitcher 1801 this memento from the election of 1800 immortalized president thomas jeffersons words we are all republicans we are all federalists which turned out to be more hopeful than true.
jefferson was portrayed in the plain attire he favored shunning the sartorial pretensions affected by many federalists such as the elegantly dressed tallmadges shown on p 228 chapter 29 wilsonian progressivism at home and abroad 1912 1916 chronology wilson defeats taft and roosevelt for presidency underwood tariff act sixteenth amendment income tax federal reserve act huerta takes power in mexico seventeenth amendment direct election of senators clayton anti trust act federal trade commission established u s seizes port of veracruz mexico world war i begins in europe sussex ultimatum and pledge u s exports to european belligerents skyrocket workingmens compensation act federal farm loan act warehouse act adamson act pancho villa raids new mexico brandeis appointed to supreme court jones act u s marines sent to dominican republic wilson defeats hughes for presidency united states buys virgin islands from denmark la follette seamans act lusitania torpedoed and sunk by german u boat u s marines sent to haiti germany declares submarine war area around british isles key terms new freedom 729 new nationalism 729 underwood tariff 732 federal reserve act 733 federal trade commission act 733 clayton anti trust act 733 holding companies 733 people to know workingmens compensation act 734 adamson act 734 jones act 734 tampico incident 737 central powers 738 allies 738 u boats 740 lusitania 740 herbert croly louis d brandeis victoriano huerta venustiano carranza francisco pancho villa john black jack pershing charles evans hughes who were the progressives.
d ebate about progressivism has revolved mainly around a question that is simple to ask but devilishly difcult to answer who were the progressives.
it was once taken for granted that progressive reformers were simply the heirs of the jeffersonian jacksonianpopulist reform crusades they were the oppressed and downtrodden common folk who nally erupted in wrath and demanded their due.
but in his inuential age of reform 1955 richard hofstadter astutely challenged that view.
progressive leaders he argued were not drawn from the ranks of societys poor and marginalized.
rather they were to learn more middle class people threatened from above by the emerging power of new corporate elites and from below by a restless working class.
it was not economic deprivation but status anxiety hofstadter insisted that prompted these people to become reformers.
their psychological motivation hofstadter concluded rendered many of their reform efforts quirky and ineffectual.
by contrast new left historians notably gabriel kolko argued that progressivism was dominated by established business leaders who successfully directed reform to their own conser vative ends.
in this view government regulation as embodied in new agencies like the federal reserve board and the federal tariff commission and in legislation like the meat inspection act simply accomplished what two generations of private efforts had failed to do dampen cutthroat competition stabilize markets and make america safe for monopoly capitalism.
still other scholars notably robert h wiebe and samuel p hays argued that the progressives were neither the psychologically or economically disadvantaged nor the old capitalist elite but were rather members of a rapidly emerging self condent social class possessed of the new techniques of scientic management technological ex per tise and orga ni zational know how.
this orga ni zational school of historians did not see progressivism as a struggle of the people against the interests as a confused and nostalgic campaign by status threatened reformers or as a conser vative coup dtat.
the progressive movement in this view was by and large an effort to rationalize and modernize many social institutions by introducing the wise and impartial hand of government regulation.
this view had much to recommend it.
yet despite its widespread acceptance among historians it could not adequately account for the titanic political struggles of the progressive era over the very reforms that the orga ni zational school regarded as simple adjustments to modernity.
it also brushed over the deep philosophical differences that divided progressives themselves such as between roosevelts new nationalism and wilsons new freedom.
in addition the orga ni zational approach did not account for the important role of women in advocating progressive reforms as demonstrated by robyn muncy linda gordon and theda skocpol.
building the american welfare state in the early twentieth century they have argued was fundamentally a gendered activity inspired by a female dominion of social workers and social feminists scholars such as daniel t rodgers have added that essential inspiration also came from across the atlantic.
in european countries vibrant labor movements sought a welfare state to benet the working class whereas in the united states the strength of female reformers promoted welfare programs aimed at protecting women and children.
all the same american programs frequently were modeled after policies adopted in london paris and berlin.
to learn more michael c adams the great adventure male desire and the coming of world war i 1990 john w chambers the tyranny of change america in the progressive era 1900 1917 rev.
ed 2000 john m cooper the warrior and the priest woodrow wilson and theodore roosevelt 1983 alexander l george and juliette l george woodrow wilson and colonel house 1956 henry may the end of american innocence a study of the first years of our time 1959 frank a ninkovich the wilsonian century u s foreign policy since 1900 1999 mary renda taking haiti military occupation and the culture of u s imperialism 1915 1940 2001 edward stettner shaping modern liberalism herbert croly and progressive thought 1993 philippa strum brandeis justice for the people 1985 eileen welsome the general and the jaguar pershings hunt for pancho villa 2006 a complete annotated bibliography for this chapter 21 the furnace of civil war 1861 1865 the burning of richmond april 1865 the proud confederate capital after holding out against repeated union assaults was evacuated and burned in the nal days of the war.
the elated union soldiers cheered but they were silenced by grants stern admonition the war is over the rebels are our countrymen again lincoln traveled to conquered richmond and sat in jefferson daviss evacuated ofce just forty hours after the confederate president had left it.
thank god i have lived to see this he said.
with a small escort of sailors he walked the blasted streets of the city.
freed slaves began to recognize him and crowds gathered to see and touch father abraham one black man fell to his knees before the emancipator who said to him dont kneel to me.
this is not right.
you must kneel to god only and thank him for the liberty you will enjoy hereafter sadly as many freed slaves were to discover the hereafter of their full liberty was a long time coming.
the martyrdom of lincoln on the night of april 14 1865 good friday only ve days after lees surrender fords theater in washington witnessed its most sensational drama.
a halfcrazed fanatically pro southern actor john wilkes booth slipped behind lincoln as he sat in his box and shot him in the head.
after lying unconscious all night the great emancipator died the following morning.
now he belongs to the ages remarked the oncecritical secretary stanton probably the nest words he ever spoke.
lincoln expired in the arms of victory at the very pinnacle of his fame.
from the standpoint of his reputation his death could not have been better timed if he had hired the assassin.
a large number of his countrymen had not suspected his greatness and many the death of lincoln new york mourns lincolns death april 25 1865 lincolns body traveled by train to lie in state in fourteen cities before arriving at his nal resting place of springeld illinois.
in new york city 160 000 mourners accompanied the hearse as the funeral procession slowly made its way down broadway.
scalpers sold choice window seats for four dollars and up.
blacks were barred from participating until the mayor changed his mind at the last minute but only if they marched at the rear.
this souvenir stereo view bringing the scene to three dimensional life when seen through the popular device of a hand held stereopticon allowed many more americans to observe the funeral than could be there in person.
others had even doubted his ability.
but his dramatic death helped to erase the memory of his shortcomings and caused his nobler qualities to stand out in clearer relief.
the full impact of lincolns death was not at once apparent to the south.
hundreds of bedraggled exconfederate soldiers cheered as did some southern civilians and northern copperheads when they learned of the assassination.
this reaction was only natural because lincoln had kept the war grinding on to the bitter end.
if he had only been willing to stop the shooting the south would have won.
as time wore on increasing numbers of southerners perceived that lincolns death was a calamity for them.
belatedly they recognized that his kindliness and moderation would have been the most effective the new york herald editorialized on april 16 1865 that the south had the most to lose from lincolns assassination in the death of president lincoln we feel the pressure of a heavy national calamity but the great and irrevocable decree of the loyal states that union must and shall be preserved will lose nothing of its force but will be immensely if not terribly strengthened.
in striking abraham lincoln and his kindly disposed secretary of state the assassins struck at the best friends in the government to the prostrate rebels of the south.
thinking globally the era of nationalism t he american civil war was rooted in americas peculiar institution of slavery as well as uniquely american controversies about westward expansion.
but it was also part of a wider phenomenon that transformed many parts of the world in the mid nineteenth century nationalism.
to be sure some ancient societies such as the greeks and the hebrews had a sense of themselves as distinct peoples who shared a common culture and history.
but the creation of robust nation states with strong central governments ruling over large populations that considered themselves part of an enduring community was of decidedly modern origin.
nationalism was anchored in the french and american revolutions with their emphasis on popular sovereignty and on a government that expressed the will of a population that saw itself not just as a random assembly of persons but as a distinctive and coherent people often bonded by religion and language.
nationalism also owed much to modern technologies like the steamship railroad and telegraph which extended both the emotional range of fellow feeling and the geographical reach of centralized authority.
the convergence of these several nineteenth century developments intellectual as well as material made possible the creation of the virtual communities called nations.
count camillo di cavour 1810 1861 in the early nineteenth century only britain and france could claim to be nation states in the modern sense.
central europe remained a patchwork of major and minor principalities.
italy in the words of the austrian diplomat klemens von metternich was merely a geographic expression as several small duchies and overgrown city states uneasily coexisted on the italian peninsula.
canada a scattering of disconnected provinces was more a map makers convention than a functioning political entity.
both spain and japan looked united on the map but both notoriously lacked internal cohesion.
and in the united states sectional and state loyalties continued to compete with notions of a national identity.
but within just a dozen years between 1859 and 1871 prince otto von bismarck created modern germany count camillo di cavour united italy we have made italy now we must make italians quipped one italian wit a new meiji emperor launched japan on a dramatic program of rapid modernization the british north america act of 1867 forged a unied canada and the american civil war in abraham lincolns words gave the united states a new birth of freedom as a unied country as well as a signicantly invigorated federal government.
before the civil war prince otto von bismark 1815 1898 it was said the united states were after the civil war the united states was.
these several consolidations created the model for modern states that has prevailed ever since.
the rise of nationalism fostered the growth of unprecedentedly powerful governments able to command deep loyalty from millions of people and consequently to marshal enormous economic and military resources for good or ill nationalism was every where accompanied by some degree of political democratization and the expansion of public ser vices as freshly created or reinvigorated central governments sought to secure the loyalty of peoples newly brought under their sway.
bismarck for example supported universal suffrage and social insurance for german workers establishing precedents that would much later be adopted in the united states.
the new italy and meiji japan adopted fairly liberal voting laws and programs for universal education.
britains reform bill of 1867 enfranchised 1 5 million adult male urban householders effectively doubling the british electorate.
in the united states civil war era constitutional amendments at least nominally guaranteed the right to vote to adult african american males while the federal government adopted ambitious plans to facilitate the construction of transcontinental railroads distribute public lands under the homestead act and support higher education under the morrill land grant college act.
the civil war dened a historic pivot in the role of federal power.
of the twelve amendments to the constitution passed before 1865 eleven were designed to limit the authority of the federal government.
of the fteen amendments passed since the civil war nine contain the phrase congress shall have the power to enforce this article by appropriate legislation the words nation and native derive from the same latin root denoting birth or birthplace.
nationalism is at bottom a sentiment of common feeling or shared identity generally among people born in the same place.
it therefore implies boundaries territorial as well as psychological.
it denes who is included as well as who is excluded.
no nation imagines itself coterminous with mankind writes one scholar of nationalism.
it can breed exclusionary and nativist pathologies as well as chauvinism jingoism and imperialism.
the united states was no exception to these patterns.
nativists mounted increasingly effective antiimmigrant campaigns in the post civil war era beginning with the chinese exclusion act of 1882 and culminating in the highly restrictionist national origins act of 1924 as germany and italy acquired colonies in africa and japan tightened its grip on taiwan korea and parts of manchuria the united states also joined the imperial scramble annexing the philippines puerto rico guam and samoa before the centurys end.
three nation builders count camillo di cavour 1810 1861 prince otto von bismarck 1815 1898 and abraham lincoln 1809 1865 while the two european aristocrats cavour and bismarck were creating the new nations of italy and germany respectively the lowborn lincoln was preserving american nationhood.
abraham lincoln 1809 1865 chapter along with brief descriptions of the people to know and additional review materials may be found at the second war for independence and the upsurge of nationalism 1812 1824 the american continents.
are henceforth not to be considered as subjects for future colonization by any european powers.
t he war of 1812 was an especially divisive and illfought war.
there was no burning national anger as there had been in 1807 following the chesapeake outrage.
the supreme lesson of the con ict was the folly of leading a divided and apathetic people into war.
and yet despite the unimpressive military outcome and even less decisive negotiated peace americans came out of the war with a renewed sense of nationhood.
for the next dozen years an awakened spirit of nationalism would inspire activities ranging from protecting manufacturing to building roads to defending the authority of the federal government over the states.
on to canada over land and lakes on the eve of the war of 1812 the regular army was ill trained ill disciplined and widely scattered.
it had to be supplemented by the even more poorly trained militias which were sometimes distinguished by their speed of foot in leaving the battleeld.
some of the ranking generals were semisenile heirlooms from the revolutionary war rusting on their laurels and lacking in vigor and vision.
this icon will direct you to interactive activities and study materials on the american pageant website the contest over canada constitution and guerrire 1812 the guerrire was heavily outweighed and outgunned yet its british captain eagerly and foolishly sought combat.
his ship was destroyed.
historian henry adams later concluded that this duel raised the united states in one half hour to the rank of a rst class power in the world the buckler on the sword from the uss constitution commemorates the famous battle.
today the constitution berthed in boston harbor remains the oldest actively commissioned ship in the u s navy.
canada became an important battleground in the war of 1812 because british forces were weakest there see map 12 1.
a successful american offensive might have quashed british inuence among the indians and garnered new land for settlers.
but the americans offensive strategy was poorly conceived.
had the americans captured montreal the center of population and transportation every thing to the west might have died just as the leaves of a tree wither when the trunk is girdled.
but instead of laying ax to the trunk the americans frittered away their strength in the three pronged invasion of 1812 the trio of invading forces that set out from detroit niagara and lake champlain were all beaten back shortly after they had crossed the canadian border.
by contrast the british and canadians displayed energy from the outset.
early in the war they captured the american fort of michilimackinac which commanded the upper great lakes and the indianinhabited area to the south and west.
their brilliant defensive operations were led by the inspired british general isaac brock and assisted in the american camp by general mud and general confusion when several american land invasions of canada were again hurled back in 1813 americans looked for success on the water.
man for man and ship for ship the american navy did much better than the army.
in comparison to british ships american craft on the whole were more skillfully handled had better gunners and were manned by non press gang crews who were burning to avenge numerous indignities.
similarly the american frigates notably the constitution old ironsides had thicker sides heavier repower and larger crews of which one sailor in six was a free black.
control of the great lakes was vital and an energetic american naval ofcer oliver hazard perry managed to build a eet of green timbered ships on the shores of lake erie manned by even greener seamen.
when he captured a british eet in a furious engagement on the lake he reported to his superior we have met the enemy and they are ours perrys victory and his slogan infused new life into the drooping american cause.
forced to withdraw from detroit and fort malden the retreating redcoats were overtaken by general harrisons army and beaten at the battle of the thames in october 1813 despite these successes the americans by late 1814 far from invading canada were grimly defending their own soil against the invading british.
napoleons chapter 30 the war to end war 1917 1918 buried at arlington.
for more than seven months he did not meet with his cabinet.
defeat through deadlock senator lodge coldly calculating was now at the helm.
after failing to amend the treaty outright he nally came up with fourteen formal reservations to it a sardonic slap at wilsons fourteen points.
these safeguards reserved the rights of the united states under the monroe doctrine and the constitution and otherwise sought to protect american sovereignty.
senator lodge and other critics were especially alarmed by article x of the league because it morally bound the united states to aid any member victimized by external aggression.
a jealous congress wanted to reserve for itself the constitutional war declaring power.
wilson hating lodge saw red at the mere suggestion of the lodge reservations.
he was quite willing to accept somewhat similar reservations sponsored by his faithful democratic followers but he insisted that the lodge reservations emasculated the entire pact.
although too feeble to lead wilson was still strong enough to obstruct.
when the day nally came for the voting in the senate he sent word to all true democrats to vote against the treaty with the odious lodge reservations attached.
wilson hoped that when these were cleared away the path would be open for ratication without reservations or with only some mild democratic ones.
loyal democrats in the senate on november 19 1919 blindly did wilsons bidding.
combining with the irreconcilables mostly republicans they rejected the treaty with the lodge reservations appended 55 to 39 the nation was too deeply shocked to accept the verdict as nal.
about four fths of the senators professed to favor the treaty with or without reservations yet a simple majority could not agree on a single proposition.
so strong was public indignation that the senate was forced to act a second time.
in march 1920 the treaty was brought up again with the lodge reservations tacked on.
there was only one possible path to success.
unless the senate approved the pact with the reservations the entire document would be rejected.
but the sickly wilson still sheltered behind drawn curtains and blind to disagreeable realities again sent word to all loyal democrats to vote down the treaty with the obnoxious reservations.
he thus signed the death warrant of the treaty as far as america was concerned.
on march 19 1920 the treaty netted a simple majority but failed to get the necessary two thirds majority by a count of 49 yeas to 35 nays.
who defeated the treaty.
the lodge wilson personal feud traditionalism isolationism disillusionment and partisanship all contributed to the confused picture.
but wilson himself must bear a substantial share of the responsibility.
he asked for all or nothing and got nothing.
one democratic senator angrily charged that the president had strangled his own brainchild with his own palsied hands rather than let the senate straighten its crooked limbs.
the solemn referendum of 1920 wilson had his own pet solution for the deadlock and this partly explains why he refused to compromise on lodges terms.
he proposed to settle the treaty issue in the forthcoming presidential campaign of 1920 by appealing to the people for a solemn referendum this was sheer folly for a true mandate on the league in the noisy arena of politics was clearly an impossibility.
jubilant republicans gathered in chicago in june 1920 with wayward bull moosers back in the corral after theodore roosevelts death in 1919 and the senatorial old guard back in the saddle.
the convention devised a masterfully ambiguous platform that could appeal to both pro league and anti league sentiment in the party.
the nominee would run on a teeter totter rather than a platform.
as the leading presidential contestants jousted with one another the political weathervane began to veer toward genial senator warren g harding of ohio.
a group of senate bosses meeting rather casually in the historic smoke lled room 404 of the hotel blackstone informally decided on the affable and malleable ohioan.
their fair haired boy was a prosperous backslapping small town newspaper editor of the folksy type quite the opposite of wilson who had earlier noted the senators disturbingly dull mind.
for vice president the party nominated frugal grimfaced governor calvin silent cal coolidge of massachusetts who had attracted conser vative support by breaking a police strike in boston.
meeting in san francisco democrats nominated earnest governor james m cox of ohio who strongly a crippled league of nations supported the league.
his running mate was assistant navy secretary franklin d roosevelt a young handsome vibrant new yorker.
democratic attempts to make the campaign a referendum on the league were thwarted by senator harding who issued muddled and contradictory statements on the issue from his front porch.
pro league and anti league republicans both claimed that hardings election would advance their cause while the candidate suggested that if elected he would work for a vague association of nations a league but not the league.
with newly enfranchised women swelling the vote totals harding was swept into power with a prodigious plurality of over 7 million votes 16 143 407 to 9 130 328 for cox the largest victory margin to that date in a presidential election.
the electoral count was 404 to 127 eugene v debs federal prisoner number 9653 at the atlanta penitentiary rolled up the largest vote ever for the left wing socialist party 919 799.
public desire for a change found vent in a resounding repudiation of high and mighty wilsonism.
people were tired of professional highbrowism star reaching idealism bothersome do goodism moral overstrain and constant self sacrice.
eager to lapse back into normalcy they were willing to accept a second rate president and they got a third rate one.
although the election could not be considered a true referendum republican isolationists successfully turned hardings victory into a death sentence for the league.
politicians increasingly shunned the league as they would a leper.
when the legendary wilson died in 1924 admirers knelt in the snow outside his washington home.
his great vision of a league for peace had perished long before.
the betrayal of great expectations americas spurning of the league was tragically shortsighted.
the republic had helped to win a costly war but it foolishly kicked the fruits of victory under the table.
whether a strong international orga ni zation would have averted world war ii in 1939 will always be a matter of dispute.
but there can be no doubt that the orphaned league of nations was undercut at the start by the refusal of the mightiest power on the globe to join it.
the allies themselves were largely to blame for the new world conagration that ared up in 1939 but they found a convenient justication for their own shortcomings by pointing an accusing nger at uncle sam.
the ultimate collapse of the treaty of versailles must be laid at least in some degree at americas doorstep.
this complicated pact tied in with the four other peace treaties through the league covenant was a top heavy structure designed to rest on a four legged table.
the fourth leg the united states was never put into place.
this rickety structure teetered for over a decade and then crashed in ruins a debacle that played into the hands of the german demagogue adolf hitler.
no less ominous events were set in motion when the senate spurned the security treaty with france.
the french fearing that a new generation of germans would follow in their fathers goose steps undertook to build up a powerful military force.
predictably resenting the presence of strong french armies germany began to rearm illegally.
the seething cauldron of uncertainty and suspicion brewed an intoxicant that helped iname the fanatical following of hitler.
the united states as the tragic sequel proved hurt its own cause when it buried its head in the sand.
granted that the conduct of its allies had been disillusioning it had its own ends to serve by carrying through the wilsonian program.
it would have been well advised if it had forthrightly assumed its warborn responsibilities and had resolutely embraced the role of global leader proffered by the hand of destiny.
in the interests of its own security if for no other reason the united states should have used its enormous strength to shape world shaking events.
instead it permitted itself blithely to drift toward the abyss of a second and even more bloody international disaster.
chapter 22 the ordeal of reconstruction 1865 1877 congress outraged by this night riding lawlessness passed the harsh force acts of 1870 and 1871 federal troops were able to stamp out much of the lash law but by this time the invisible empire had already done its work of intimidation.
many of the outlawed groups continued their tactics in the guise of dancing clubs missionary societies and rie clubs white resistance undermined attempts to empower blacks politically.
the white south for many decades openly outed the fourteenth and fifteenth amendments.
wholesale disfranchisement of blacks starting conspicuously about 1890 was achieved by the following excerpt is part of a heartrending appeal to congress in 1871 by a group of kentucky blacks we believe you are not familiar with the description of the ku klux klans riding nightly over the country going from county to county and in the county towns spreading terror wherever they go by robbing whipping ravishing and killing our people without provocation compelling colored people to break the ice and bathe in the chilly waters of the kentucky river.
the state legislature has adjourned.
they refused to enact any laws to suppress ku klux disorder.
we regard them the kukluxers as now being licensed to continue their dark and bloody deeds under cover of the dark night.
they refuse to allow us to testify in the state courts where a white man is concerned.
we nd their deeds are perpetrated only upon colored men and white republicans.
we also nd that for our services to the government and our race we have become the special object of hatred and persecution at the hands of the democratic party.
our people are driven from their homes in great numbers having no redress only except the united states court which is in many cases unable to reach them.
the ku klux klan tennessee 1868 this night riding terrorist has even masked the identity of his horse.
intimidation fraud and trickery.
among various underhanded schemes were literacy tests unfairly administered by whites to the advantage of illiterate whites.
in the eyes of white southerners the goal of white supremacy fully justied these dishonorable devices.
a black leader protested to whites in 1868 it is extraordinary that a race such as yours professing gallantry chivalry education and superiority living in a land where ringing chimes call child and sire to the gospel of god that with all these advantages on your side you can make war upon the poor defenseless black man.
the impeachment crisis impeachment drama the impeachment proceedings against president andrew johnson among the most severe constitutional crises in the republics history were high political theater and tickets were in sharp demand.
johnson walks the impeachment plank radicals meanwhile had been sharpening their hatchets for president johnson.
annoyed by the obstruction of the drunken tailor in the white house they falsely accused him of maintaining there a harem of dissolute women not content with curbing his authority they decided to remove him altogether by constitutional processes.
as an initial step congress in 1867 passed the tenure of ofce act as usual over johnsons veto.
contrary to precedent the new law required the president to secure the consent of the senate before he could remove his appointees once they had been approved by that body.
one purpose was to freeze into the cabinet the secretary of war edwin m stanton a holdover from the lincoln administration.
although outwardly loyal to johnson he was secretly serving as a spy and informer for the radicals.
johnson provided the radicals with a pretext to begin impeachment proceedings when he abruptly dismissed stanton early in 1868 the house of representatives immediately voted 126 to 47 to impeach for impeachment see art.
iv in the appendix.
johnson for high crimes and misdemeanors as required by the constitution charging him with various violations of the tenure of ofce act.
two additional articles related to johnsons verbal assaults on the congress involving disgrace ridicule hatred contempt and reproach a not guilty verdict for johnson with evident zeal the radical led senate now sat as a court to try johnson on the dubious impeachment charges.
the house conducted the prosecution.
the trial aroused intense public interest and with one thousand tickets printed proved to be the biggest show of 1868 johnson kept his dignity and sobriety and maintained a discreet silence.
his battery of attorneys argued that the president convinced that the tenure of ofce act was unconstitutional had red stanton merely to put a test case before the supreme court.
that slow moving tribunal nally ruled indirectly in johnsons favor fty eight years later.
house prosecutors including oily tongued benjamin f butler and embittered thaddeus stevens had a harder time building a compelling case for impeachment.
on may 16 1868 the day for the rst voting in the senate the tension was electric and heavy breathing could be heard in the galleries.
by a margin of only one.

chapter 15 laboring over laundry one of the most common occupations of women recently emancipated from slavery was taking in laundry from white families who no longer had enslaved servants.
this photograph illustrates how arduous a task laundry was.
the library of congress the grant administration american voters in 1868 yearned for a strong stable figure to guide them through the troubled years of reconstruction.
they turned trustingly to general ulysses s grant.
the soldier president grant could have had the nomination of either party in 1868 but believing that republican reconstruction policies were more popular in the north he accepted the republican nomination.
the democrats nominated former governor horatio seymour of new york.
grant elected the campaign was a bitter one and grants triumph was surprisingly narrow.
without the 500 000 new black republican voters in the south he would have had a minority of the popular vote.
grant entered the white house with no political experience and his performance was clumsy and ineffectual from the start.
except for hamilton fish whom grant appointed secretary of state most members of the cabinet were ill equipped for their tasks.
grant relied chiefly on established party leaders the group most ardently devoted to patronage and his administration used the spoils system even more blatantly than most of its predecessors.
grant also alienated the many northerners who were growing disillusioned with the radical reconstruction policies which the president continued to support.
some reconstruction and the new south 367 republicans suspected correctly that there was also corruption in the grant administration itself.
by the end of grants first term therefore members of a substantial faction of the party who referred to themselves as liberal republicans had come to oppose what they called grantism in 1872 hoping to prevent grants reelection they bolted the party and nominated their own presidential candidate horace greeley opposition from liberal republicans veteran editor and publisher of the new york tribune.
the democrats somewhat reluctantly named greeley their candidate as well hoping that the alliance with the liberals would enable them to defeat grant.
but the effort was in vain.
grant won a substantial victory polling 286 electoral votes to greeleys 66 the grant scandals during the 1872 campaign the first of a series of political scandals came to light that would plague grant and the republicans for the next four years.
it involved the frenchowned crdit mobilier construction company which had helped build the union pacific railroad.
the heads of crdit mobilier had used their positions as union pacific stockholders to steer large fraudulent contracts to their construction company thus bilking the union pacific of millions.
to prevent investigations the directors had given crdit mobilier stock to key members of congress.
but in 1872 congress conducted an investigation which revealed that some highly placed republicans including schuyler colfax now grants vice president had accepted stock.
one dreary episode followed another in grants second term.
benjamin h bristow grants third treasury secretary discovered that some of his officials and a group of distillers operating as a whiskey ring were cheating the government the whiskey ring out of taxes by filing false reports.
then a house investigation revealed that william w belknap secretary of war had accepted bribes to retain an indian post trader in office the so called indian ring.
other lesser scandals also added to the growing impression that grantism had brought rampant corruption to government.
the greenback question compounding grants problems was a financial crisis known as the panic of 1873 it began with the failure of a leading investment banking firm jay cooke the panic of 1873 and company which had invested too heavily in postwar railroad building.
there had been panics before in 1819 1837 and 1857 but this was the worst one yet.
debtors now pressured the government to redeem federal war bonds with greenbacks which would increase the amount of money in circulation.
but grant and most republicans wanted a sound currency based solidly on gold reserves which would favor the interests of banks and other creditors.
there was approximately 356 million in paper currency issued during the civil war that was still in circulation.
in 1873 the treasury issued more in response to the panic.
but in 1875 republican leaders in congress passed the specie resumption act which provided that after january 1 1879 greenback dollars would be redeemed by the government and replaced with new certificates firmly pegged to the price of gold.
the law satisfied creditors who had worried that debts would be repaid in paper currency of uncertain value.
but resumption made things more difficult for debtors because the gold based money supply could not easily expand.
368 chapter 2 john white created this illustration of life among the eastern woodland indians in coastal north carolina.
it shows the diversified agriculture practiced by the natives squash tobacco and three varieties of corn.
the hunters shown in nearby woods suggest another element of the native economy.
at bottom right indians perform a religious ritual which white described as strange gestures and songs private collection bridgeman images the indian village of secoton ca.
1585 by john white the tiny english populations had no choice but to learn from the indians.
they recognized the value of corn which was easy to cultivate and produced large yields.
the english also learned the advantages of growing beans alongside corn to enrich the soil.
like the natives the english quickly learned to combine the foods they grew and foods they hunted and fished.
they built canoes like the indians and gained the ability to navigate the local streams.
they learned from the indians how to build canoes by hollowing out a single log dugouts or sewing birchbark around a simple frame sealing it with resin.
without what they learned from the natives the early settlers would not have survived.
a few months after the first colonists arrived in virginia additional ships appeared with more men and supplies.
by then of the 144 men who had sailed to america only 38 were still alive the rest killed by diseases and famine.
jamestown survived largely because of two important events.
one was what they learned from the local indians.
the john smith other was the leadership of captain john smith who at age twenty seven was already a famous world traveler.
he imposed work and order on the community created transplantations and borderlands 27 a shaky relationship with the natives sometimes negotiating with the indians and at other times stealing food and kidnapping them.
jamestown was a tiny colony for more than a decade.
the natives were far more powerful than the english for years.
coastal virginia had numerous tribes the algonquians the sioux and the iroquois.
they had drawn together as part of the powhatan powhatan confederacy confederacy named after the great chief who controlled a large area near the coasts.
what the english called virginia the natives called tsenacommacah.
reorganization and expansion as jamestown struggled to survive the london company now renamed the virginia company was already dreaming of bigger things.
in 1609 it obtained a new charter from the king which increased its power and enlarged its territory.
it offered stock in the company to planters who were willing to migrate at their own expense.
and it provided free passage to virginia for poorer people who would agree to serve the company for seven years.
in the spring of 1609 two years after the first arrival of the english a fleet of nine vessels was dispatched to jamestown with approximately 600 people including some women and children.
nevertheless disaster followed.
one of the virginia bound ships was lost at sea in a hurricane.
another ran aground in the bermuda islands and was unable to sail for months.
many of the new settlers succumbed to fevers before winter came.
and the winter of 1609 1610 was especially severe a period known as starving time by then the the starving time natives realized that the colonists were a threat to their civilization and they blocked the english from moving inland.
barricaded in the small palisade unable to hunt or cultivate food the settlers lived on what they could find dogs cats rats snakes toadstools horsehides and even the corpses of dead men as one survivor recalled.
when the migrants who had run aground in bermuda finally arrived in jamestown the following may they found only about 60 emaciated people still alive.
the new arrivals took the survivors onto their ship and sailed for england.
but as the refugees proceeded down the james they met an english ship coming up the river part of a fleet bringing supplies and the colonys first governor lord de la warr.
the departing settlers agreed to return to jamestown.
new relief expeditions soon began to arrive and the effort to turn a profit in jamestown resumed.
new settlements began lining the river above and below jamestown.
the immigrants discovered a newly found crop tobacco which was already popular among the spanish colonies to the south.
it was already being imported to europe.
in 1612 the jamestown planter john rolfe began trying to cultivate the crop in virginia.
other planters followed suit up and down the james river.
tobacco became the first profitable crop in the new colony and its success encouraged tobacco planters to move deeper the tobacco economy inland intruding more and more into the native farmlands.
the emerging tobacco economy soon created a heavy demand for labor.
to entice new workers to the colony the virginia company established what it called the headright system headrights were fifty acre grants of land.
those who already the headright system lived in the colony received two headrights 100 acres apiece.
each new settler received a single headright for himself or herself.
this system encouraged family groups to migrate together since the more family members who traveled to america the more land the family would receive.
in addition anyone who paid for the passage of immigrants to virginia would receive an extra headright for each arrival.
as a result some colonists were quickly able to assemble large plantations.
28 chapter 15 in 1875 the greenbackers formed their own political organization the national greenback party.
it failed to gain widespread support but the money issue was to remain one of the most controversial and enduring issues in late nineteenth century american politics.
national greenback party republican diplomacy the johnson and grant administrations achieved their greatest successes in foreign affairs as a result of the work not of the presidents themselves but of two outstanding secretaries of state william h seward and hamilton fish.
an ardent expansionist seward acted with as much daring as the demands of reconstruction politics and the republican hatred of president johnson would permit.
he accepted a russian offer to buy alaska for 7 2 million despite criticism from sewards purchase of alaska many who derided the purchase as sewards folly in 1867 seward also engineered the american annexation of the tiny midway islands west of hawaii.
hamilton fishs first major challenge was resolving the long standing controversy over the american claims that britain had violated neutrality laws during the civil war by permitting english shipyards to build ships among them the alabama for the confederacy.
american demands that england pay for the damage these vessels had caused became hamilton fish and the alabama claims known as the alabama claims in 1871 after a number of failed efforts fish forged an agreement the treaty of washington which provided for international arbitration.
the abandonment of reconstruction as the north grew increasingly preoccupied with its own political and economic problems interest in reconstruction began to wane.
by the time grant left office democrats had taken back seven of the governments of the former confederate states.
for three other states south carolina louisiana and florida the end of reconstruction had to wait for the withdrawal of the last federal troops in 1877 the southern states redeemed in the states where whites constituted a majority the states of the upper south overthrowing republican control was relatively simple.
by 1872 all but a handful of southern whites had regained suffrage.
now a clear majority they needed only to organize and elect their candidates.
in other states where blacks were a majority or where the populations of the two races were almost equal whites used outright intimidation and violence to undermine the ku klux klan reconstruction regimes.
secret societies the ku klux klan the knights of the white camellia and others used terrorism to frighten or physically bar blacks from voting.
paramilitary organizations the red shirts and white leagues armed themselves to police elections and worked to force all white males to join the democratic party.
strongest of all however was the simple weapon of economic pressure.
some planters refused to rent land to republican blacks storekeepers refused to extend them credit employers refused to give them work.
reconstruction and the new south 369 the republican congress responded to this wave of repression with the enforcement acts of 1870 and 1871 better known as the ku klux klan acts which enforcement acts prohibited states from discriminating against voters on the basis of race and gave the national government the authority to prosecute crimes by individuals under federal law.
the laws also authorized the president to use federal troops to protect civil rights a provision president grant used in 1871 in nine counties of south carolina.
the enforcement acts although seldom enforced discouraged klan violence which declined by 1872 waning northern commitment but this northern commitment to civil rights did not last long.
after the adoption of the fifteenth amendment in 1870 some reformers convinced themselves that their long campaign on behalf of black people was now over that with the flagging interest in civil rights vote blacks ought to be able to take care of themselves.
former radical leaders such as charles sumner and horace greeley now began calling themselves liberals cooperating with the democrats and even denouncing what they viewed as black and carpetbag misgovernment.
within the south itself many white republicans now moved into the democratic party as voters threw out republican politicians whom they blamed for the financial crisis.
the panic of 1873 further undermined support for reconstruction.
in the congressional elections of 1874 the democrats won control of the house of representatives for the first time since 1861 to appeal to southern white voters grant even reduced the use of military force to prop up the republican regimes in the south.
the compromise of 1877 grant had hoped to run for another term in 1876 but most republican leaders shaken by recent democratic successes and scandals by the white house resisted.
instead they settled on rutherford b hayes three time governor of ohio and a champion of civil service reform.
the democrats united behind samuel j tilden the reform governor of new york who had been instrumental in overthrowing the corrupt tweed ring of new york citys tammany hall.
although the campaign was a bitter one few differences of principle distinguished the candidates from one another.
the election produced an apparent democratic victory.
tilden carried the south and several large northern states and his popular disputed election margin over hayes was nearly 300 000 votes.
but disputed returns from louisiana south carolina florida and oregon whose electoral votes totaled 20 threw the election in doubt.
hayes could still win if he managed to receive all 20 disputed votes.
the constitution had established no method to determine the validity of disputed returns.
the decision clearly lay with congress but it was not obvious with which house or through what method.
the senate was republican and the house was victory for hayes democratic.
members of each party naturally supported a solution that would yield them the victory.
finally late in january 1877 congress tried to break the deadlock by creating a special electoral commission composed of five senators five representatives and five justices of the supreme court.
the congressional delegation consisted of five republicans and five democrats.
the court delegation would include two republicans two democrats and the only independent justice david davis.
but when the illinois legislature elected davis to the united states senate the justice resigned from the 370 chapter 16 battle of the little bighorn an indian view this 1898 watercolor by one of the sioux participants portrays the aftermath of the battle.
the corpses of custer at left in a yellow buckskin and his men cover the ground.
standing at center are sitting bull rain in the face crazy horse and kicking bear the artist.
at lower right indian women begin preparations for a ceremony to honor the returning warriors shown on horseback.
granger nyc all rights reserved.
california civilians killed close to 5 000 indians between 1850 and 1880 one of many factors disease and poverty being the more important that reduced the indian population of the state from 150 000 before the civil war to 30 000 in 1870 the treaties negotiated in 1867 brought a temporary lull to many of the conflicts.
but new forces soon shattered the peace again.
in the early 1870s more waves of white settlers mostly miners began to penetrate the lands in dakota territory supposedly guaranteed to the tribes in 1867 indian resistance flared anew.
in the northern plains the sioux rose up in 1875 and left their reservation.
when white officials ordered them to return bands of warriors gathered in montana and united under two great leaders crazy horse and sitting bull.
three army columns set out to round them up and force them back onto the reservation.
with the expedition as colonel of the famous seventh cavalry was the colorful and controversial george a custer.
at the battle of the little bighorn battle of the little bighorn in southern montana in 1876 an unprecedentedly large army perhaps 2 500 tribal warriors surprised custer and part of his regiment surrounded them and killed every soldier.
but the indians did not have the political organization or the supplies to keep their troops united.
soon the warriors drifted off in bands to elude pursuit or search for food and the army ran them down and returned them to dakota.
the power of the sioux quickly collapsed.
they accepted defeat and life on reservations.
one of the most dramatic episodes in indian history occurred in idaho in 1877 the nez perc were a small and relatively peaceful tribe some of whose members had managed to live unmolested in oregon into the 1870s without ever signing a treaty with the united states.
but under pressure from white settlers the u s government forced them to move onto a reservation.
with no realistic prospect of resisting the indians began the journey to the reservation but on the way several younger indians drunk and angry killed four white settlers.
the conquest of the far west 397 the leader of the band chief joseph persuaded his followers to flee from the inevitable retribution.
american troops pursued and attacked them only to be chief joseph driven off in a battle at white bird canyon.
after that the nez perc scattered in several directions and became part of a remarkable chase.
joseph moved with 200 warriors and 350 women children and old people in an effort to reach canada.
pursued by four columns of american soldiers the indians covered 1 321 miles in seventy five days repelling or evading the army time and again.
they were finally caught just short of the canadian boundary.
some escaped and slipped across the border but joseph and most of his followers weary and discouraged finally gave up.
hear me my chiefs joseph said after meeting with the american general nelson miles i am tired.
my heart is sick and sad.
from where the sun now stands i will fight no more forever the last indians to maintain organized resistance against the whites were the chiricahua apache.
the two ablest chiefs of this fierce tribe were mangas colorados and cochise.
mangas was murdered during the civil war by white soldiers who tricked him into surrendering.
in 1872 cochise agreed to peace in exchange for a reservation that included some of the tribes traditional land.
but cochise died in 1874 and his successor geronimo geronimo fought on for more than a decade longer establishing bases in the mountains of arizona and mexico and leading warriors in intermittent raids against white outposts.
with each raid however the number of warring apache dwindled as some warriors died and others drifted away to the reservation.
by 1886 geronimos band consisted of only about 30 people including women and children while his white pursuers numbered perhaps 10 000 geronimo recognized the odds and surrendered.
the apache wars the most violent of all the indian conflicts produced brutality on both sides.
but it was the whites who committed the most flagrant atrocities.
that did not end with the conclusion of the apache wars.
another tragic encounter occurred in 1890 as a result of a religious revival among the sioux a revival that itself symbolized the catastrophic effects of the white assaults on indian civilization.
as other tribes had done in trying times in the past many of these indians turned to a prophet who led them in a religious revival.
this time the prophet was wovoka a paiute who inspired a fervent spiritual awakening that began in nevada and spread quickly to the plains.
wovoka predicted the imminent coming of a messiah.
the new revivals most conspicuous feature was a mass emotional ghost dance which inspired ecstatic mystical visions including images ghost dance of the retreat of white people from the plains and a restoration of the great buffalo herds.
white agents on the sioux reservation bewildered and fearful warned the army that dances might be the prelude to hostilities.
on december 29 1890 the seventh cavalry tried to round up a group of about 350 cold and starving sioux at wounded knee south dakota.
fighting broke out in which about 40 white soldiers and up to 200 indians died.
an indian may wounded knee massacre have fired the first shot but the battle soon turned into a one sided massacre as the white soldiers turned their new machine guns on the indians and mowed them down in the snow.
the dawes act even before the ghost dance and the wounded knee tragedies the federal government had moved to destroy forever the tribal structure that was the cornerstone of indian culture.
reversing its policy of nearly fifty years congress abolished the practice by which tribes owned reservation lands communally.
the new policy required indians to 398 chapter 17 as the movement toward consolidation accelerated new vehicles emerged to facilitate it.
the railroads began with so called pool arrangements informal agreements among various companies to stabilize rates and divide markets arrangements that would in later years be known as cartels.
but the pool arrangements were too weak and could not ensure cost stability.
the failure of the pools led to new techniques of consolidation.
the next effort to trusts stabilize prices was the creation of the trust pioneered by standard oil in the early 1880s and the banker j p morgan.
under a trust agreement stockholders in individual corporations transferred their stocks to a small group of trustees in exchange for shares in the trust itself.
owners of trust certificates often had no direct control over the decisions of the trustees they simply received a share of the profits of the combination.
the trustees themselves on the other hand might literally own only a few companies but could exercise effective control over many.
in 1889 the state of new jersey helped produce a third form of consolidation by changing its laws of incorporation to permit companies to buy up rivals.
other states soon followed.
once actual corporate mergers were permitted the original trusts became unnecessary.
rockefeller for example quickly relocated standard oil to new jersey and created what became known as a holding company a central corporate body holding companies that would buy up the stock of various members of the standard oil trust and establish direct formal ownership of them.
by the end of the nineteenth century 1 percent of the corporations in america were able to control more than 33 percent of the manufacturing.
a system of economic organization was emerging that lodged enormous power in the hands of concentration of power very few men the great bankers of new york such as morgan industrial titans such as rockefeller who himself gained control of a major bank and others.
the industrial giants of the era clearly contributed to substantial economic growth.
they were also creating the basis for one of the greatest public controversies of their era a raging debate over concentrated economic and political power that continued well into the twentieth century.
capitalist conservatism and its critics the inequality of the roaring capitalism of the late nineteenth century was not without its critics.
farmers workers middle class businessmen and many others considered the new capitalism to be a threat to their own destinies.
but the industrial titans built a powerful defense for the new corporate economy.
survival of the fittest the new rationale for capitalism was based on the belief of individualism an ideology that would remain at the heart of american conservatism for many decades.
wealthy capitalists defended their wealth by saying that they had earned their wealth and power through their own hard work and their acquisitiveness and thrift.
those who failed had only themselves to blame a result of ignorance stupidity or laziness.
conservative social theories helped support the belief that through survival of the fittest wealthy capitalists deserved their success.
among them was the theory of social darwinism.
darwins theories argued that the fittest forms of life survived over thousands ideology of individualism industrial supremacy 413 of years because of their biological fitness.
social darwinism argued that individuals rose or fell in society because of their innate fitness darwin himself along with most scientists debunked social darwinism but many americans embraced it nevertheless.
the english philosopher and biologist herbert spencer introduced the theory of social darwinism in his book principles of biology 1864.
society he argued benefited from the elimination of the unfit and the survival of the strong and talented.
william graham sumner a sociologist at yale borrowed from spencers theory and created a theory of his own in his famous 1906 book folkways.
those who failed he argued in a 1913 essay were unfit for success before the tribunal of nature a man has no more right to life than a rattlesnake he has no more right to liberty than any wild beast his right to pursuit of happiness is nothing but a license to maintain the struggle for existence wealthy corporate leaders were attracted to the ideas of spencer and sumner.
their success confirmed their own virtues and fitness capitalists argued that they earned their wealth through the honest all american virtues of competition and the free market.
but critics of the industrial and financial titans claimed that they earned their wealth not because of the innate fitness of those who succeeded but because they replaced the natural workings of the marketplace by building great monopolies that would protect them from competition.
the gospel of wealth some businessmen attempted to temper the harsh philosophy of social darwinism with a gentler if in some ways equally self serving idea the gospel of wealth people of great wealth they argued had not only great power but also a great responsibility to use their riches to advance social progress.
elaborating on this creed in his 1889 article the gospel of wealth and elaborated on in the 1901 book of the same title andrew carnegie wrote that people of wealth should consider all revenues in excess of their own needs to be trust funds used for the good of the community.
see consider the source andrew carnegie explains the gospel of wealth carnegie was only one of many industrialists who devoted large parts of their fortunes to philanthropic works.
the idea of private wealth as a public blessing existed alongside another popular concept the notion of great wealth as something available to all.
russell h conwell a baptist minister became one of the most prominent spokesmen for the idea by delivering one lecture acres of diamonds more than 6 000 times between 1880 and 1900 conwell told a series of stories which he claimed were true of individuals who had found opportunities for extraordinary wealth in their own backyards.
one such story involved a modest farmer who discovered a vast diamond mine in his own fields.
most of the millionaires in the country conwell claimed inaccurately had begun on the lowest rung of the economic ladder and had worked their way to success.
but the most famous promoter of the success story was horatio alger.
he was originally a minister in a small town in massachusetts but was driven from his horatio alger pulpit as a result of sexual scandals.
he moved to new york where he wrote over 100 celebrated novels all of them tributes to social mobility and the ability of americans to rise from rags to riches see patterns of popular culture the novels of horatio alger if algers rags to riches tales captured the aspiration of many men louisa may alcotts enormously popular novels helped give voice to the often unstated louisa may alcott ambitions of many women.
alcott was the daughter of a noted new england reformer co ns ider t he s o urc e andrew carnegie explains the gospel of wealth 1889 writing for a general audience in the literary and culture magazine the north american review billionaire andrew carnegie made one of the industrial ages most famous arguments about the inherent justness of the unequal distribution of economic power and wealth.
the problem of our age is the proper administration of wealth that the ties of brotherhood may still bind together the rich and poor in harmonious relationship.
the conditions of human life have not only been changed but revolutionized within the past few hundred years.
in former days there was little difference between the dwelling dress food and environment of the chief and those of his retainers.
the indians are today where civilized man then was.
the contrast between the palace of the millionaire and the cottage of the laborer with us to day measures the change which has come with civilization.
this change however is not to be deplored but welcomed as highly beneficial.
it is well nay essential for the progress of the race that the houses of some should be homes for all that is highest and best in literature and the arts and for all the refinements of civilization rather than that none should be so.
much better this great irregularity than universal squalor.
the good old times were not good old times.
neither master nor servant was as well situated then as to day.
a relapse to old conditions would be disastrous to both not the least so to him who serves and would sweep away civilization with it.
but whether the change be for good or ill it is upon us beyond our power to alter and therefore to be accepted and made the best of.
it is a waste of time to criticize the inevitable.
it is easy to see how the change has come.
in the manufacture of products we have the whole story.
to day the world 414 obtains commodities of excellent quality at prices which even the preceding generation would have deemed incredible.
the poor enjoy what the rich could not before afford.
what were the luxuries have become the necessaries of life.
the laborer has now more comforts than the farmer had a few generations ago.
the farmer has more luxuries than the landlord had and is more richly clad and better housed.
the landlord has books and pictures rarer and appointments more artistic than the king could then obtain.
the price we pay for this salutary change is no doubt great.
under the law of competition the employer of thousands is forced into the strictest economies among which the rates paid to labor figure prominently and often there is friction between the employer and the employed between capital and labor between rich and poor.
human society loses homogeneity.
the price which society pays for the law of competition like the price it pays for cheap comforts and luxuries is also great but the advantages of this law are also greater still than its cost for it is to this law that we owe our wonderful material development which brings improved conditions in its train.
but whether the law be benign or not we must say of it as we say of the change in the conditions of men to which we have referred it is here we cannot evade it no substitutes for it have been found and while the law may be sometimes hard for the individual it is best for the race because it insures the survival of the fittest in every department.
what is the proper mode of administering wealth after the laws upon which civilization is founded have thrown it into the hands of the few.
there remains.
only one mode of using great fortunes in this we have the true antidote for the temporary unequal distribution of wealth the reconciliation of the rich and the poor a reign of harmony.
it is founded upon the present most intense individualism and the race is prepared to put it in practice by degrees whenever it pleases.
under its sway we shall have an ideal state in which the surplus wealth of the few will become in the best sense the property of the many because administered for the common good and this wealth passing through the hands of the few can be made a much more potent force for the elevation of our race than if distributed in small sums to the people themselves.
even the poorest can be made to see this and to agree that great sums gathered by some of their fellow citizens and spent for public purposes from which the masses reap the principal benefit are more valuable to them than if scattered among themselves in trifling amounts through the course of many years.
poor and restricted are our opportunities in this life narrow our horizon our best work most imperfect but rich men should be thankful for one inestimable boon.
they have it in their power during their lives to busy themselves in organizing benefactions from which the masses of their fellows will derive lasting advantage and thus dignify their own lives.
the highest life is probably to be reached not by such imitation of the life of christ as count tolstoi gives us but while animated by christs spirit by recognizing the changed conditions of this age and adopting modes of expressing this spirit suitable to the changed conditions under which we live still laboring for the good of our fellows which was the essence of his life and teaching but laboring in a different manner.
this then is held to be the duty of the man of wealth to set an example of modest unostentatious living shunning display or extravagance to provide moderately for the legitimate wants of those dependent upon him and after doing so to consider all surplus revenues which come to him simply as trust funds which he is called upon to administer and strictly bound as a matter of duty to administer in the manner which in his judgment is best calculated to produce the most beneficial results for the community the man of wealth thus becoming the mere trustee and agent for his poorer brethren bringing to their service his superior wisdom experience and ability to administer doing for them better than they would or could do for themselves.
t he best means of benefiting the community is to place within its reach the ladders upon which the aspiring can rise free libraries parks and means of recreation by which men are helped in body and mind works of art certain to give pleasure and improve the public taste and public institutions of various kinds which will improve the general condition of the people in this manner returning their surplus wealth to the mass of their fellows in the forms best calculated to do them lasting good.
thus is the problem of rich and poor to be solved.
the laws of accumulation will be left free the laws of distribution free.
individualism will continue but the millionaire will be but a trustee for the poor intrusted for a season with a great part of the increased wealth of the community but administering it for the community far better than it could or would have done for itself.
such in my opinion is the true gospel concerning wealth obedience to which is destined some day to solve the problem of the rich and the poor and to bring peace on earth among men good will understand analyze evaluate 1 what did carnegie think of the inequal ity of wealth in industrial america.
what were the wealthy supposed to do in this inequality of wealth and what role did andrew carnegie envision for the poor.
2 what was the price of this new inequality.
source andrew carnegie wealth north american review 1889 located in michael p johnson reading the american past selected historical documents vol.
2 from 1865 5th ed.
boston bedford st martins 2012 pp.
415 patterns of popular culture the novels of horatio alger a young boy perhaps an orphan makes his way through life on the rough streets of the city by selling newspapers or peddling matches.
one day his energy and determination catch the eye of a wealthy man who gives him a chance to improve himself.
through honesty charm hard work and aggressiveness the boy rises in the world to become a successful man.
that in a nutshell is the story that horatio alger presented to his vast public in novel after novel over 100 of them in all for over forty years.
during his lifetime americans bought millions of copies of his novels.
after his death in 1899 his books and others written in his name continued to sell at an astonishing rate.
even today when the books themselves are largely forgotten the name horatio alger has come to represent the idea of individual advancement through in a phrase alger coined pluck and luck alger was born in 1832 into a middleclass new england family attended harvard and spent a short time as a unitarian minister.
in the mid 1850s he turned to writing stories and books and he continued to do so for the rest of his life.
his most famous novel ragged dick was published in 1868 almost all of his books were fables of a young mans rise from rags to riches the purpose of his writing he claimed was twofold.
he wanted to exert a salutary influence upon the class of whom he was writing by setting before them inspiring examples of what energy ambition and an honest purpose may achieve he also wanted to show his largely middle class readers the life and experiences of the friendless and vagrant children to be found in all our cities 416 most americans of the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries were attracted to algers stories because the stories helped them believe in one of the most cherished national myths that with willpower and hard work individuals could rise in the world.
that belief was all the more important in the late nineteenth century when large scale corporate industrialization was making it increasingly difficult for individuals to control their own fates.
a newsboys story algers novels were even more popular after his death in 1899 than they had been in his lifetime.
this reprint of one of his many rags to riches stories about a new york newsboys rise to wealth and success was typical of his work.
granger nyc all rights reserved.
alger placed great emphasis on the moral qualities of his heroes their success was a reward for their virtue.
but many of his readers ignored the moral message and clung simply to the image of sudden and dramatic success.
after the authors death his publishers abridged many of algers works eliminating the parts of his stories where the heroes do good deeds and focusing solely on the success of algers heroes in rising in the world.
alger himself had very mixed feelings about the new industrial order he described.
his books were meant to reveal not just the opportunities for advancement it sometimes created but also its cruelty.
that was one reason that in almost all his books his heroes triumphed not just because of their own virtues or efforts but because of some amazing stroke of luck.
to alger at least the modern age did not guarantee success through hard work alone there had to be some providential assistance as well.
over time however algers admirers ignored his own m isgivings about industrialism and portrayed his books purely as celebrations of and justifications for laissez faire capitalism and the accumulation of wealth.
an example of the transformation of alger into a symbol of individual achievement is the horatio alger award established in 1947 by the american schools and colleges association to honor living individuals who by their own efforts have pulled themselves up by their bootstraps in the american tradition among its recipients have been presidents dwight d eisenhower and ronald reagan evangelist billy graham and supreme court justice clarence thomas.
understand analyze evaluate 1 how do algers novels both defend in dustrial capitalism and criticize it.
2 according to the essay alger placed great emphasis on the moral qualities of his heroes but his publishers later eliminated that aspect of the novels.
but her family nevertheless experienced considerable hardship.
after serving as a nurse in the civil war and writing a series of popular adventure novels under a pen name a m barnard that disguised her gender she became a major literary figure with the publication of little women in 1869 and two sequels over the next twenty years.
the main character in these novels jo march struggles to build a life for herself that is not defined by conventional womens roles and ambitions.
she spurns a conventional marriage and eventually weds a professor who appears to support her literary ambitions.
girls write to ask who the little women marry as if that was the only end and aim of a womans life alcott wrote a friend.
i wont marry jo to laurie the attractive wealthy neighbor who proposes to her to please any one alcotts female characters in some ways like algers male ones are remarkable for their independence and drive.
jo march is willful rebellious stubborn ambitious and often selfish far from the posed romantic submissive women in most popular sentimental novels of alcotts time aimed at female audiences.
alternative visions alongside the celebrations of competition and the justifications for great wealth stood a group of alternative philosophies challenging the corporate ethos and at times capitalism itself.
one such philosophy came from the sociologist lester frank ward.
in dynamic sociology 1883 and other books he argued that civilization was not governed by n atural selection but by human intelligence which could shape society as it wished.
in contrast to 417 418 chapters throughout the northeast and midwest.
that same year five harvard alumni in boston founded a more genteel organization the immigration attempts to limit immigration restriction league.
they proposed screening immigrants through literacy tests and other standards to separate the desirable from the undesirable the government responded to popular concern about immigration even earlier.
in 1882 congress excluded the chinese denied entry to undesirables convicts paupers the mentally incompetent and placed a tax of 50 cents on each person admitted.
later legislation of the 1890s enlarged the list of those barred from immigrating.
but these laws kept out only a small number of aliens and more ambitious restriction proposals made little progress in congress for immigration provided a cheap and plentiful labor supply to the rapidly growing economy.
many argued that americas industrial and indeed agricultural development would be impossible without it.
america in the world global migrations the great waves of immigration that transformed american society in the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries were not unique to the united states.
they were part of a great global movement of peoples unprecedented in history that affected every continent in the world and that has continued to this day.
these great migrations were the product of two related forces population growth and industrialization.
the population of europe grew faster in the second half of the nineteenth century than ever before and ever since almost doubling between 1850 and the beginning of world war i the population growth was a result of growing economies able to support more people and of more efficient and productive agriculture that helped end debilitating famines.
but the rapid growth nevertheless strained the resources of many parts of europe and affected in particular rural people who were now too numerous to live off the available land.
many decided to move to other parts of the world where land was more plentiful.
at the same time industrialization drew millions of people out of the countryside and into cities sometimes into cities in their own countries but often to industrial cities in other more economically advanced nations.
historians of migration speak of push factors pressures on people to leave their homes and pull factors the lure of new lands in explaining population movements.
the push for many nineteenth century m igrants was poverty and inadequate land at home for others it was political and religious oppression.
the pull was the availability of land or industrial jobs in other regions or lands and for some the prospect of greater freedom abroad.
faster cheaper 432 and easier transportation railroads steamships and much later airplanes also aided large scale immigration.
from 1800 to the start of world war i 50 million europeans migrated to new lands overseas people from almost all areas of europe but in the later years of the century when migration reached its peak mostly from poor rural areas in southern and eastern europe.
italy russia and poland were among the biggest sources of late nineteenthcentury migrants.
almost two thirds of these immigrants came to the united states.
but nearly 20 million europeans m igrated to other lands.
migrants from england and private collection peter newark american pictures bridgeman images ireland among others moved in large numbers to those areas of the british empire with vast seemingly open lands canada australia new zealand and south africa.
large numbers of italians moved to argentina and other parts of south america.
many migrants moved to open land in these countries and established themselves as farmers using the new mechanical farming devices made possible by industrialization.
in many places australia new zealand argentina south africa and the united states immigrants evicted the native residents of their territories and created societies of their own.
many others settled in the industrial cities that were growing up in all these regions and formed distinctive ethnic and national communities within them.
but it was not only europeans who were transplanting themselves in these years.
tremendous numbers of poor people left asia africa and the pacific islands in search of better lives.
most of them could not afford the journey abroad on their own.
they moved instead as indentured servants in much the same way many english migrants moved to america in the seventeenth century agreeing to a term of servitude in their new land in exchange for food shelter and transportation.
recruiters of indentured servants fanned out across china japan areas of africa and the pacific islands and above all india.
french and british recruiters brought hundreds of thousands of indian migrants to work in plantations in their own asian and african colonies.
chinese laborers were recruited to work on plantations in cuba and hawaii mines in malaya peru south africa and australia and railroad projects in canada peru and the united states.
african indentured servants moved in large numbers to the caribbean and pacific islanders tended to move to other islands or to australia.
the immigration of european peoples to new lands was largely voluntary and brought most migrants to the united states where indentured servitude was illegal although sometimes imposed on workers through labor contracts.
but the migration of non european peoples often involved an important element of coercion and brought relatively small numbers of people to the united states.
this non european migration was a function of the growth of european empires and it was made possible by the imperial system by its labor recruiters by its naval resources by its law and by its economic needs.
together these various forms of migration produced one of the greatest population movements in the history of the world and transformed not just the united states but much of the globe.
understand analyze evaluate 1 what were some of the push and pull factors that motivated the migration of both europeans and non europeans.
2 why did more europeans than noneuropeans migrate to the united states.
the urban landscape the city was a place of remarkable contrasts.
it had homes of almost unimaginable size and grandeur and hovels of indescribable squalor.
it had conveniences unknown to earlier generations and problems that seemed beyond the capacity of society to solve.
433 434 chapter 18 the creation of public space there were a few early american cities that were planned from the beginning philadelphia and washington most prominently.
by the mid nineteenth century reformers planners architects and others began to call for more ordered visions of many other cities.
among the most important urban innovations of the mid nineteenth century were great city parks which reflected the desire of urban leaders to provide an antidote to the congestion of the city landscape.
parks they argued would allow city residents a healthy restorative escape from the strains of urban life by reacquainting them with the natural world.
this notion of the park as refuge was most effectively promoted by the landscape designers frederick law olmsted and calvert vaux who together in the late 1850s central park designed new yorks central park.
they deliberately created a public space that would look as little like the city as possible.
instead of the ordered formal spaces common in some european cities they created a space that seemed entirely natural.
central park was from the start one of the most popular and admired public spaces in the world.
at the same time that cities were creating great parks they were also creating great public buildings libraries art galleries natural history museums theaters and concert and opera halls.
new yorks metropolitan museum of art was the largest and best known of many great museums taking shape in the late nineteenth century but giant museums grew up quickly in boston philadelphia chicago and other places.
in one city after another new and lavish public libraries appeared as if to confirm the citys role as a center of learning and knowledge.
wealthy residents were the principal force behind the creation of the great art museums concert halls opera houses and at times even parks.
as their own material and social aspirations grew they wanted the public life of the city to provide them with amenities to match their expectations.
becoming an important patron of a major cultural institution was an especially effective route to social distinction.
as both the size and aspirations of great cities increased urban leaders launched monumental projects to remake them.
some cities began to clear away older neighborhoods and streets and create grand monumental avenues lined with new and more impressive buildings.
a particularly important event in inspiring such efforts was the 1893 columbian exposition in chicago a worlds fair constructed to honor the 400th anniversary of columbuss first voyage to america.
at the center of the wildly popular exposition was a cluster of neoclassical buildings the great white city arranged symmetrically around a formal lagoon.
city beautiful movement it became the inspiration for the city beautiful movement led by the architect of the great white city daniel burnham.
the movement strove to impose a similar order and symmetry on the disordered life of cities around the country.
only rarely however were planners able to overcome the obstacles of private landowners and complicated urban politics to realize more than a small portion of their dreams.
the effort to remake the city did not focus only on redesigning existing landscapes.
it occasionally led to the creation of entirely new ones.
in one of the largest public works projects ever undertaken in america to that point the city of boston gradually filled in a large area of marshy tidal land in the late 1880s to create the neighborhood known as back back bay bay boston was not alone.
chicago reclaimed large areas from lake michigan and at one point raised the street level for the entire city to help avoid the problems the marshy land created.
in new york and other cities the response to limited space was not so much to create new land as to annex adjacent territory.
a great wave of annexations expanded the boundaries of many american cities in the 1890s and beyond most notably new york citys 1898 annexation of brooklyn which was itself a large and important city.
the age of the city 435 this woman shown here with some of her children was typical of many workingclass mothers who found income producing activities they could pursue in the home in this case laundry.
bettmann corbis a tenement laundry the search for housing one of the greatest urban problems was to provide housing for the thousands of new residents pouring into the cities every day.
for the prosperous housing was seldom a worry.
the availability of cheap labor reduced the cost of building and permitted anyone with even a moderate income to afford a house.
some of the richest urban residents lived in palatial mansions located in exclusive neighborhoods in the heart of the city fifth avenue in new york back bay and beacon hill in boston society hill in philadelphia lake shore drive in chicago nob hill in san francisco and many others.
many of the moderately well to do city dwellers took advantage of less expensive land on the edges of cities and settled in new suburbs linked to the downtowns by new suburbs trains or streetcars.
chicago in the 1870s for example connected nearly 100 residential suburbs to the downtown by railroad.
real estate developers worked to create suburban communities that would appeal to many city dwellers nostalgia for the countryside promoting them with lawns trees and houses designed to look manorial.
most urban residents however could not afford either to own a house in the city or to move to the suburbs.
instead they stayed in the city centers and rented.
landlords tried to squeeze as many rent paying residents as possible into the smallest available space.
in manhattan for example the average population density in 1894 was 143 people per acre a rate far higher than that of any other american or european city then or since.
in the cities of the south charleston new orleans richmond poor african americans lived in crumbling former slave quarters.
in boston immigrants moved into cheap three story wooden 436 chapter 4 peace of paris by which the french ceded to great britain some of their west indian islands most of their colonies in india and canada and all other french territory in north america east of the mississippi.
the french then ceded new orleans and their claims west of the mississippi to spain surrendering all title to the mainland of north america.
the french and indian war greatly expanded englands territorial claims in the new world.
at the same time the cost of the war greatly enlarged britains debt and substantially increased effects of the conflict british resentment of the americans.
english leaders were contemptuous of the colonists for what they considered american military ineptitude during the war they were angry that the colonists had made so few financial contributions to a struggle waged they believed largely for american benefit they were particularly bitter that colonial merchants had been selling food and other goods to the french in the west indies throughout the conflict.
all these factors combined to persuade many english leaders that a major reorganization of the empire would be necessary.
london wanted increased authority over the colonies.
the war had an equally profound effect on the american colonists.
it was an experience that forced them for the first time to act in concert against a common foe.
the 1758 return of authority to the colonial assemblies seemed to many americans to confirm the illegitimacy of english interference in local affairs.
for the indians of the ohio valley the british victory was disastrous.
those tribes that had allied themselves with the french had earned the enmity of the victorious english.
the iroquois confederacy which had not allied with the french fared only slightly better.
consequences for native americans english officials saw the passivity of the iroquois during the war as evidence of duplicity.
in the aftermath of the peace settlement the fragile iroquois alliance with the british quickly unraveled.
the tribes would continue to contest the english for control of the ohio valley for another fifty years but were increasingly divided and increasingly outnumbered.
they would seldom again be in a position to deal with their european rivals on terms of military or political equality.
the new imperialism with the treaty of 1763 england found itself truly at peace for the first time in more than fifty years.
as a result the british government could now turn its attention to the organization of its empire.
saddled with enormous debts from the many years of war england was desperately in need of new revenues.
responsible for vast holdings in the new world the imperial government believed it must increase its administrative capacities in america.
the result was a dramatic and for england disastrous redefinition of the colonial relationship.
burdens of empire the experience of the french and indian war should have suggested that increasing imperial control over the colonies would not be easy.
not only had the resistance of the colonists forced pitt to relax his policies in 1758 but the colonial assemblies continued to defy imperial trade regulations and other british demands.
but the most immediate britains staggering war debt problem for london was its staggering war debt.
landlords and merchants in england were objecting strenuously to any further tax increases and the colonial assemblies had repeatedly demonstrated their unwillingness to pay for the war effort.
many officials in england believed that only by taxing the americans directly could the empire effectively meet its financial needs.
the empire in transition 91 at this crucial moment in anglo american relations the government of england was thrown into turmoil by the 1760 accession to the throne of george iii.
he george the third brought two particularly unfortunate qualities to the position.
first he was determined to reassert the authority of the monarchy.
he removed from power the relatively stable coalition of whigs that had governed for much of the century and replaced it with a new and very unstable coalition of his own.
the weak new ministries that emerged as a result each lasted in office an average of only about two years.
second the king had serious intellectual and psychological limitations.
he suffered apparently from a rare mental disease that produced intermittent bouts of insanity.
indeed in the last years of his long reign he was according to most accounts unable to perform any official hudsons bay company quebec quebec.
er nc re maine mass.
st la w superio lake r montreal y r ny e eri kingston poughkeepsie.
pennsylvania a r ta r n ia h c a l c a p p a cu m plymouth providence newport r i new jersey atlantic ocean es jam r richmond williamsburg mis fayetteville norfolk north carolina.
ten n pi r.
conn delaware petersburg roa no ke r.
rr spanish louisiana mass.
hartford burlington new castle po baltimore tom dover.
annapolis ea ef ap siss ip bennington virginia and r r see es falmouth portsmouth gloucester boston n shena n do m o ah u r ohio r vincennes l ber n h new haven southampton new york perth amboy trenton r st louis philadelphia.
ac wabash r ill in ois fort duquesne n reading i st joseph susq n s ueh an e lak r albany fort niagara he s h t i i fort detroit b r lake champlain fort frontenac io fort m ontar ohawk r lake stanwix all eg lake mic h igan ro n hu e t i o connecticut e ak la baye r r t hudson r l r delaware r fort michimilimackinac edenton non indian settlement greenville new bern portsmouth before 1700 wilmington south carolina disputed territory claimed by spain and britain camden columbia sant ee r.
r ah nn augusta sa ashley va r georgia frontier line proclamation line of 1763 fort cooper r charles town.
al 1700 1763 kingston tam ah a savannah r 250 mi 500 km provincial capital this map shows the thirteen colonies at the end of the seven years war.
it shows the line of settlement established by the proclamation of 1763 the red line as well as the extent of actual settlement in that year the blue line.
note that in the middle colonies north carolina virginia maryland and southern pennsylvania settlement had already reached the red line and in one small area of western pennsylvania moved beyond it by the time of the proclamation of 1763 note also the string of forts established beyond the proclamation line.
how do the forts help explain the efforts of the british to restrict settlement.
and how does the extent of actual settlement help explain why it was so difficult for the british to enforce their restrictions.
the thirteen colonies in 1763 92 chapter 4 in massachusetts at about the same time james otis persuaded his fellow members of the colonial assembly to call an intercolonial congress to take action against the new tax.
and in october 1765 the stamp act congress as it was called met in new york with delegates from nine colonies.
in a petition to the british government the congress denied that the colonies could rightfully be taxed except through their own provincial assemblies.
across the ocean colonial agent benjamin franklin articulated such grievances before parliament.
see consider the source testimony against the stamp act meanwhile in the summer of 1765 mobs were rising up in several colonial cities against the stamp act.
the largest was in boston where men belonging to the newly organized sons of liberty terrorized stamp agents and burned stamps.
the mob also attacked such supposedly pro british aristocrats as the lieutenant governor thomas hutchinson who had privately opposed passage of the stamp act but who felt obliged to support it once it became law.
hutchinsons elegant house was pillaged and virtually destroyed.
the crisis finally subsided largely because england backed down.
the authorities in london were less affected by the political protests than by economic pressure.
many new stamp act repealed englanders had stopped buying english goods to protest the sugar act of 1764 and the stamp act caused the boycott to spread.
with pressure from english merchants parliament under a new prime minister the marquis of rockingham repealed the unpopular law on march 18 1766 to satisfy his strong and vociferous opponents rockingham also pushed through the declaratory act which confirmed parliamentary authority over the colonies in all cases whatsoever but in their rejoicing over the stamp act repeal most americans paid little attention to this sweeping declaration of power.
internal rebellions the conflicts with britain were not the only uprisings emerging in the turbulent years of the 1760s.
in addition to the stamp act crisis and other challenges to london there were internal rebellions that had their roots in the class system in new york and new england.
in the hudson valley in new york great estates had grown up in which owners had rented out their land to small farmers.
the revolutionary fervor of the time led many of these tenants to demand ownership of the land they worked.
to emphasize their determination they stopped paying rents.
the rebellion soon failed but other challenges continued.
in vermont which still was governed by new york insurgent farmers challenged landowners many of them the same owners whom tenants had challenged on the hudson by taking up arms and demanding ownership of the land they worked.
ethan allen later a hero of the revolutionary war and himself a land speculator took up the cause of the green mountain farmers and accused the landowners of trying to enslave a free people allen eventually succeeded in making vermont into a separate state which broke up some of the large estates.
the townshend program when the rockingham governments policy of appeasement met substantial opposition in england the king dismissed the ministry and replaced it with a new government led by the aging but still powerful william pitt who was now lord chatham.
chatham had in the past been sympathetic toward american interests.
once in office however he was at times so incapacitated by mental illness that leadership of his administration fell to the chancellor of the exchequer charles townshend.
the empire in transition 97 with the stamp act repealed the greatest remaining american grievance involved the mutiny or quartering act of 1765 which required colonists to shelter and supply british troops.
the colonists objected not so much to the actual burden as to being required by london to do so.
the massachusetts and new york assemblies went so far as to refuse to grant the mandated supplies to the troops.
townshend responded in 1767 by disbanding the new york assembly until the colonists agreed to obey the mutiny act.
by singling out new york he believed he would avoid antagonizing all the colonies at once.
he also imposed new taxes known as the townshend duties on various goods imported to the colonies from england lead paint townshend duties paper and tea.
townshend assumed that since these were taxes purely on external transactions imports from overseas as opposed to the internal transactions the stamp act had taxed the colonists would not object.
but all the colonies resented the suspension of the new york assembly believing it to be a threat to every colonial government.
and all the colonies rejected townshends careful distinction between external and internal taxation.
townshend also established a board of customs commissioners in america.
the new commissioners established their headquarters in boston.
they virtually ended smuggling in boston although smugglers continued to carry on a busy trade in other colonial seaports.
the boston merchants angry that the new commission was diverting the lucrative smuggling trade elsewhere helped organize a boycott of british goods that were subject to the townshend duties.
merchants in philadelphia and new york joined them in a nonimportation agreement in 1768 and later some southern nonimportation agreement merchants and planters also agreed to cooperate.
throughout the colonies american homespun and other domestic products became suddenly fashionable.
late in 1767 charles townshend died.
in march 1770 the new prime minister lord north hoping to end the american boycott repealed all the townshend duties except the tea tax.
the boston massacre before news of the repeal reached america an event in massachusetts inflamed colonial opinion.
the harassment of the new customs commissioners in boston had grown so intense that the british government had placed four regiments of regular troops in the city.
many of the poorly paid british soldiers looked for jobs in their off duty hours and thus competed with local workers.
clashes between the two groups were frequent.
on the night of march 5 1770 a mob of dockworkers liberty boys and others began pelting the sentries at the customs house with rocks and snowballs.
hastily captain thomas preston of the british regiment lined up several of his men in front of the building to protect it.
there was some scuffling one of the soldiers was knocked down and in the midst of it all apparently several british soldiers fired into the crowd killing five people.
this murky incident almost certainly the result of panic and confusion was quickly transformed by local resistance leaders into the boston the boston massacre in popular culture massacre it became the subject of such lurid and inaccurate accounts as the widely circulated pamphlet innocent blood crying to god from the streets of boston.
a famous engraving by paul revere portrayed the massacre as a calculated assault on a peaceful crowd.
the british soldiers tried before a jury of bostonians were found guilty only of manslaughter and given token punishment.
but colonial pamphlets and newspapers convinced many americans that the soldiers were guilty of official murder.
the leading figure in fomenting public outrage over the boston massacre was samuel adams.
england he argued had become a morass of sin and corruption only 98 chapter 18 american popular entertainment was transformed with the emergence of motion picture shows.
thomas edison and others had created the technology underpinning the motion picture in the 1880s.
soon after that short films became available to individual viewers watching peepshows in pool halls penny arcades and amusement parks.
soon larger projectors made it possible to display the images on big screens which permitted substantial audiences to see films in theaters.
by 1900 americans were becoming attracted silent films in large numbers to these early movies usually plotless films of trains or waterfalls or other spectacles.
the director d w griffith carried the motion picture into a new era with his silent epics the birth of a nation 1915 intolerance 1916 and others which introduced serious if notoriously racist plots and elaborate productions to filmmaking.
motion pictures were the first truly mass entertainment medium.
patterns of public and private leisure particularly striking about popular entertainment in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries was its public quality.
many americans spent their leisure time in places where they would find not only entertainment but also other people.
thousands of working class new yorkers spent evenings in dance halls vaudeville houses and concert halls.
more affluent new yorkers enjoyed afternoons in central park where a principal attraction was seeing other people and being seen by them.
moviegoers were attracted not just by the movies themselves but also by the energy of the audiences at lavish new movie palaces just as sports fans were drawn by the crowds as well as by the games.
perhaps the most striking example of popular public entertainment in the early twenconey island tieth century was coney island the famous and self consciously fabulous amusement park and resort on a popular beach in brooklyn.
luna park the greatest of the coney island attractions opened in 1903 and provided rides stunts and lavish reproductions of exotic places and spectacular adventures japanese gardens venetian canals with gondoliers a chinese theater a simulated trip to the moon and reenactments of such disasters as burning buildings and earthquakes.
a year later a competing company opened dreamland which tried to outdo even luna park with a 375 foot tower a three ring circus chariot races and a lilliputian village from gullivers travels.
the popularity of coney island in these years was phenomenal.
thousands of people flocked to the large resort hotels that lined the beaches.
many thousands more made day trips out from the city by train and after 1920 subway.
in 1904 the average daily attendance at luna park alone was 90 000 people.
most people found coney island appealing in part because it provided an escape from the genteel standards that governed so much of american life at the time.
in the amusement parks of coney island decorum was often forgotten and people delighted in finding themselves in situations that in any other setting would have seemed embarrassing or improper womens skirts blown above their heads with hot air people pummeled with water and rubber paddles by clowns hints of sexual freedom as strangers were forced to come into physical contact with one another on rides and amusements.
not all popular entertainment however involved public events.
many americans dime novels amused themselves privately by reading novels and poetry.
the so called dime novels cheaply bound and widely circulated became popular after the civil war with detective stories tales of the wild west sagas of scientific adventure and novels of moral uplift publishers also distributed sentimental novels of romance which developed a large audience among women as did books about animals and about young children the age of the city 447 growing up.
louisa may alcotts little women most of whose readers were female sold more than 2 million copies.
the technologies of mass communication american journalism experienced dramatic change in the decades following the civil war.
between 1870 and 1910 the circulation of daily newspapers increased nearly ninefold from under 3 million to more than 24 million a rate three times as great as the rate of population increase.
and while standards varied widely from one paper to another american journalism was developing the beginnings of a professional identity.
salaries of reporters increased many newspapers began separating the reporting of news from the expression of opinion and newspapers themselves became important businesses.
this transformation was to a large degree a result of new technologies of communication.
the emergence of national press services for example was a product of the telegraph which made it possible to supply papers with news and features from around the nation and the world.
by the turn of the century important newspaper chains had emerged as well linked together by their own internal wire services.
the most powerful was owned by william randolph hearst who by 1914 controlled william randolph hearst nine newspapers and two magazines.
new printing technologies were making possible more elaborate layouts the publication of color pictures and by the end of the century the printing of photographs.
these advances not only helped publishers make their own stories more vivid they also made it possible for them to attract more advertisers.
the telephone the most important new technology of communication in the late nineteenth century was the telephone which alexander graham bell had first demonstrated in 1876 in its first years the telephone was a relatively impractical tool.
those who subscribed to telephone service had to have direct wire links to everyone else they wished to call.
in 1878 the first switchboard opened in new haven connecticut opening the way for more practical uses of the telephone.
once there was a switchboard a telephone subscriber needed only a line to the central telephone office from which connections could be made to any other subscriber.
a new occupation the telephone operator was born.
the bell system which controlled all american telephone service hired young white women to work as operators hoping that a pleasant female voice would make the experience of using the telephone and the inconvenience of the frequent technological problems that accompanied it less irritating to customers.
telephone signals were very weak at first and callers could seldom reach anyone more than a few miles away.
in an effort to increase the range of telephones engineers created the repeater which periodically strengthened the signal as it moved over distances.
by 1914 the repeaters had improved to the point that it was now practical to envision a transcontinental line.
in its early years the telephone was an almost entirely commercial instrument.
of the nearly 7 400 telephone customers in the new york new jersey area in 1891 6 000 were businesses and organizations.
even the residential telephones tended to belong to doctors or business managers.
the growing reach of the telephone in the early years of the twentieth century made the bell system formally named american telephone and telegraph or the bell system at t one of the most powerful corporations in america and a genuine monopoly.
448 chapter 18 education for women the post civil war era saw an important expansion of educational opportunities for women although such opportunities continued to lag far behind those available to men and were almost entirely denied to black women.
most public high schools accepted women readily but opportunities for higher education were fewer.
at the end of the civil war only three american colleges were coeducational.
after the war many of the land grant colleges and universities in the midwest and such private universities as cornell and wesleyan began to admit women along with men.
but coeducation was less crucial to womens education in this period than was the creation of a network of womens colleges.
mount holyoke in central massachusetts had begun its life in 1836 as a seminary for women it became a full fledged college in the 1880s at about the same time that entirely new female institutions were emerging vassar wellesley smith bryn mawr wells and goucher.
a few of the larger private universities created separate colleges for women on their campuses barnard at columbia and radcliffe at harvard for example.
the female college was part of an important phenomenon in the history of modern american women the emergence of distinctive womens communities outside the family.
most faculty members and many administrators were women usually unmarried.
and college life produced a spirit of sorority and commitment among educated women that had important effects in later years.
most female college graduates ultimately married but they married at a more advanced age than their noncollege counterparts.
a significant minority perhaps over 25 percent did not marry at all but devoted themselves to careers.
the growth of female higher education clearly became for some women a liberating experience persuading them that they had roles other than those of wives and mothers to perform in their rapidly changing urban industrial society.
conclusion the extraordinary growth of american cities in the last decades of the nineteenth century led to both great achievements and enormous problems.
cities became centers of learning art and commerce and produced great advances in technology transportation architecture and communications.
they provided their residents and their many visitors with varied and dazzling experiences so much so that people increasingly left the countryside to move to the city.
but cities were also places of congestion filth disease and corruption.
with populations expanding too rapidly for services to keep up most american cities in this era struggled with makeshift techniques to solve the basic problems of providing water disposing of sewage building roads running public transportation fighting fire stopping crime and preventing or curing disease.
city governments many of them dominated by political machines and ruled by party bosses were often models of inefficiency and corruption although in their informal way they also provided substantial services to the working class and immigrant constituencies who needed them most.
yet they also managed to oversee great public projects the building of parks museums opera houses and theaters usually in partnership with private developers.
the city brought together races ethnic groups and classes of extraordinary variety from the families of great wealth that the new industrial age was creating to the vast the age of the city 453 working class much of it consisting of immigrants who crowded into densely packed neighborhoods divided by nationality.
the city also spawned temples of consumerism shops boutiques and above all the great department stores.
and it created forums for public recreation and entertainment parks theaters athletic fields amusement parks and later movie palaces.
urban life created anxiety among those who lived within the cities and among those who observed them from afar.
but in fact american cities adapted reasonably successfully over time to the great demands their growth made of them and learned to govern themselves if not entirely honestly and efficiently at least enough to allow them to survive and grow.
key terms people places events armory show 448 ashcan school 448 city beautiful movement 434 coney island 446 consumerism 440 darwinism 449 jacob riis 436 kate chopin 448 national consumers league 443 public health service 437 tammany hall 440 tenements 436 theodore dreiser 438 vaudeville 445 william james 450 william m tweed 440 william randolph hearst 447 recall and reflect 1 what groups of people were most likely to move to the cities of late nineteenth century america and why.
2 what was the relationship between immigration and urbanization in the late nineteenth century.
3 how did the new consumer economy affect roles and expectations for women.
4 what was darwinism and what was its impact on american intellectual life.
from crisis to empire the politics of equilibrium the agrarian revolt the crisis of the 1890s stirrings of imperialism war with spain the republic as empire looking ahead 1 what were the major social and economic problems that beset the united states in the late nineteenth century and how did the two major political parties respond to these problems.
2 what was populism what were its goals and to what degree were these goals achieved.
3 how did the united states become an imperial power.
the united states approached the end of the nineteenth century as a fundamentally different nation from what it had been at the beginning of the civil war.
with rapid change came cascading social and political problems problems that the weak and conservative governments of the time showed little inclination or ability to address.
a catastrophic economic depression that began in 1893 created devastating hardship for millions of americans.
farmers responded by creating an agrarian political movement known as populism.
american workers facing massive unemployment staged large and occasionally violent strikes.
not since the civil war had american politics been so polarized and impassioned.
the election of 1896 which pitted the agrarian hero william jennings bryan against the solid conservative william mckinley was dramatic but anticlimactic.
supported by the mighty republican party and many eastern groups who looked with suspicion and unease at the agricultural demands coming from the west mckinley easily triumphed.
mckinley did little in his first term in office to resolve the problems and grievances of his time but the economy revived nevertheless.
having largely ignored the depression however mckinley focused on another great national cause the plight of cuba in its war with spain.
in the spring of 1898 the united states declared war on spain and entered the conflict in cuba a brief but bloody war that ended with an american victory four months later.
454 the conflict had begun as a way to support cuban independence from the spanish but a group of fervent and influential imperialists worked to convert the war into an occasion for acquiring overseas possessions.
despite a powerful anti imperialist movement the acquisition of the former spanish colonies proceeded only to draw americans into yet another imperial war this one in the philippines where the americans not the spanish were the targets of local enmity.
the politics of equilibrium the enormous social and economic changes of the late nineteenth century strained not only the nations traditional social arrangements but its political institutions as well.
searching for stability and social justice americans looked to the government for leadership.
yet that government during much of this period was ill equipped to confront these new challenges.
as a result problems and grievances festered and grew.
the party system the most striking feature of late nineteenthcentury politics was the stability of the party system.
from the end of reconstruction until the late 1890s the electorate was divided almost evenly between the republicans and the democrats.
sixteen states were solidly and consistently republican and fourteen states most in the south were solidly and consistently democratic.
only a handful of states were usually in doubt and they generally decided the results of national elections often on the basis of voter turnout.
the republican party captured the presidency in all but two of the elections of the era but in the five presidential elections beginning in 1876 the average popular vote margin separating the democratic and republican candidates was 1 5 percent.
the congressional time line hayes elected president national grange founded garfield elected president garfield assassinated arthur becomes president cleveland elected president interstate commerce act u s gains base at pearl harbor benjamin harrison elected president sherman antitrust act sherman silver purchase act mckinley tariff cleveland elected president again peoples party formed revolution in hawaii economic depression begins sherman silver purchase act repealed coxeys army marches on washington d c mckinley elected president war with spain treaty of paris 1898 1902 philippines revolt u s annexes hawaii puerto rico philippines open door notes boxer rebellion mckinley reelected platt amendment 455 456 chapter 32 roads airports and other projects that they claimed would be ecologically dangerous taking advantage of new legislation protecting endangered species and environmentally fragile regions.
in the late 1980s the environmental movement began to mobilize around a new and ominous challenge global warming it produced a steady rise in the earths temperature as a result of emissions from the burning of fossil fuels most notably coal and oil.
although considerable controversy has continued for years over the pace and even the reality of global warming by the early twenty first century a growing consensus began to emerge in part as a result of the leadership of significant public figures such as former vice president al gore who won a nobel peace prize in 2007 for his efforts to draw attention to the problem.
in 1997 representatives of the major industrial nations met in kyoto japan and agreed to a broad treaty establishing steps toward reducing carbon emissions and thus slowing or reversing global warming.
the clinton administration formally signed the kyoto protocol but nothing came of it.
reading the handkyoto protocol writing on the wall clinton never even submitted it for ratification because the senate had earlier passed the byrd hagel resolution by a vote of 95 to 0 that rejected the treatys key tenets.
president george w bush while proclaiming grave concern over climate concern refused to support the kyoto protocol because it excluded developing countries like china and india.
since 2009 president obama has met with mixed success on climate change issues.
while major international agreements have not materialized during his presidency the president did champion and sign legislation raising fuel efficiency in passenger cars and trucks in 2012 and has since directed the environmental protection agency to regulate coal ash a major co2 emitter primarily used in creating electricity to intense political scrutiny.
deepwater horizon disaster in 2010 a bp british petroleum offshore well deepwater horizon suffered a crippling explosion that sent approximately 5 million barrels of oil into the gulf of mexico.
this photograph shows the attempt to cap the well.
the oil leaked for months destroying local fisheries and the effects to the environment from the oil and the dispersants used to clean it up are still unknown.
the event galvanized the global environmental movement.
julie dermansky corbis the age of globalization 815 america in the world the celebration of the beginning of a new millennium on january 1 2000 was an important moment not just because of the change in the calendar.
it was notable above all as a global event a shared and for the most part joyous experience that united the world in its exuberance.
but if the millennium celebrations suggested the bright promise of an interconnected world other events at the dawn of the new century suggested its dark perils.
indeed the united states increasing role as an economic and military superpower triggered fears among many americans about a foreign policy that was too aggressive and trade initiatives that took advantage of low wage workers in other countries and unfairly benefited large international businesses.
the rise of mass protests over americas global economic policies and terrorism painfully brought home the dangers of living in the twenty first century.
opposing the new world order in the united states and other industrial nations opposition to globalization or to what president george h w bush once called the new world order took several forms.
to many americans on both the political left and right the nations increasingly interventionist foreign policy was deeply troubling.
critics on the left charged that the united states was using military action to advance its economic interests in the 1991 gulf war and above all in the iraq war that began in 2003 critics on the right criticized humanitarian interventions in somalia in 1993 and the balkans in the late 1990s as too costly and risky.
others complained that the united states was ceding its sovereignty to international organizations such as united nations led peacekeeping missions.
labor unions insisted that the rapid expansion of free trade agreements led to the export of jobs from advanced nations to less developed ones.
other groups attacked working conditions in new manufacturing countries on humanitarian grounds arguing that the global economy was creating new classes of slave laborers working in conditions that few western nations would tolerate.
environmentalists argued that globalization in exporting industry to low wage countries also exported industrial pollution and toxic waste into nations that had no effective laws to control them and contributed significantly to global warming.
and still others opposed global economic arrangements on the grounds that they enriched and empowered large multinational corporations and threatened the freedom and autonomy of individuals and communities.
varied opponents of globalization found a common enemy in the multinational institutions that policed and advanced the global economy.
among them were the world trade organization which monitored the enforcement of the general agreement on tariffs and trade gatt treaties of the 1990s the international monetary fund imf which controlled international credit and exchange rates and the world bank which made money available for development projects in many countries.
in november 1999 when leaders of leading industrial nations gathered for their annual meeting in seattle washington tens of thousands protested most of them peacefully.
but some of them clashed with police smashed store windows and all but paralyzed the city.
a few months later a smaller but still substantial demonstration disrupted meetings of the imf and the world bank in washington d c and in july 2001 at a meeting of the same leaders in genoa italy an estimated 50 000 demonstrators clashed violently with police in a melee that left one protester dead and several hundred injured.
the participants in the meeting responded to the demonstrations by pledging 1 2 billion to fight the aids epidemic in developing countries and by deciding to hold future meetings in remote locations far from major cities.
816 chapter 19 including one of the leading insurgent generals antonio maceo.
the sight of black cuban soldiers fighting alongside whites as equals gave african americans a stronger sense of the injustice of their own position.
seizing the philippines by an accident of history the assistant secretary of the navy during the cuban revolution was theodore roosevelt an ardent anglophile eager to see the united states join the british and other nations as imperial powers.
roosevelt was in fact a relatively minor figure in the navy department but he was determined to expand his power.
british friends had persuaded him that the war in cuba gave the united states a rare opportunity to expand the american empire.
roosevelt responded by sending the navys pacific fleet to the philippines with orders to attack as soon as america declared war.
on may 1 1898 commodore george dewey led the fleet into manila harbor quickly destroyed the aging spanish fleet and forced the spanish government to surrender manila with hardly a shot fired.
he became the first american hero of the war.
the battle for cuba cuba remained the principal focus of american military efforts.
at first the american commanders planned a long period of training before actually sending troops into combat.
but when a spanish fleet under admiral pascual cervera slipped past the american navy into santiago harbor on the southern coast of cuba plans changed quickly.
the american atlantic fleet quickly bottled cervera up in the harbor.
and the u s armys commanding general nelson a miles hastily altered his strategy and left tampa in june with a force of 17 000 to attack santiago.
general william r shafter the american commander moved toward santiago which he planned to surround and capture.
on the way he met and defeated spanish forces at las guasimos and a week later in two simultaneous battles el caney and san juan hill.
at the center of the fighting and on the front pages of the newspapers during many of the rough riders these engagements was a cavalry unit known as the rough riders.
nominally commanded by general leonard wood its real leader was colonel theodore roosevelt who had resigned from the navy department to get into the war and who had struggled with an almost desperate fury to get his regiment into the fighting.
his passion to join the war undoubtedly reflected the decision of his beloved father theodore roosevelt sr not to fight in the civil war a source of private shame within the family that his son sought to erase.
roosevelt rapidly emerged as a hero of the conflict.
his fame rested in large part on his role in leading a bold if perhaps reckless charge up kettle hill a minor part of the larger battle for the adjacent san juan hill directly into the face of spanish guns.
roosevelt himself emerged unscathed but nearly a hundred of his soldiers were killed or wounded.
he remembered the battle as the great day of my life although shafter was now in position to assault santiago his army was so weakened by sickness that he feared he might have to abandon his position.
but unknown to the americans the spanish government had by now decided that santiago was lost and had ordered cervera to evacuate.
on july 3 cervera tried to escape the harbor.
the waiting american squadron destroyed his entire fleet.
on july 16 the commander of spanish ground forces in santiago surrendered.
at about the same time an american army landed from crisis to empire 477 va norfolk tenn 400 mi north carolina 800 km south carolina spanish forces georgia u s forces u s blockade florida tampa ba a lo its rid of a havana r b r st f at l a n t i c ocean as u s s.
maine sunk february 1898 m key west ha shafter gulf of mexico u s victories s amp son bl o ck ad e santiago see detail map sch ley bloc kad e cuba ce er a c a r i b b e a n hispaniola rv jamaica br.
san juan haiti dominican republic puerto rico ceded to u s s e a 2 mi 4 km el caney july 1 1898 santiago kettle hill july 1 1898 5 mi las guasimos june 24 1898 blockhouse 10 km san juan hill july 1 1898 the spanish american war in cuba 1898 the military conflict between the united states and spain in cuba was a brief affair.
the cuban rebels and an american naval blockade had already brought the spanish to the brink of defeat.
the arrival of american troops was simply the final blow.
in the space of about a week u s troops won four decisive battles in the area around santiago in southeast cuba one of them the battle of kettle hill the scene of theodore roosevelts famous charge up the adjacent san juan hill.
this map shows the extent of the american naval blockade the path of american troops from florida to cuba and the location of the actual fighting.
what were the implications of the war in cuba for puerto rico.
478 chapter 20 believed than crowded immigrant neighborhoods.
one response to the problems of such communities borrowed from england was the settlement house the most famous was jane addams and hull house hull house which opened in 1889 in chicago as a result of the efforts of the social worker jane addams.
it became a model for more than 400 similar institutions throughout the nation.
staffed by members of the educated middle class settlement houses sought to help immigrant families adapt to the language and customs of their new country.
young college women mostly unmarried were important participants in the settlement house movement.
working in a settlement house a protected site that served mostly women was consistent with the widespread assumption that women needed to be sheltered from difficult environments.
the clean and well tended buildings that settlement houses created were not only a model for immigrant women but an appropriate site for elite women as well.
the settlement houses also helped create another important institution of reform the profession of social work.
a growing number of programs for the professional training of social workers began to appear in the nations leading universities partly in response to the activities of the settlement houses.
the allure of expertise as the emergence of the social work profession suggests progressives involved in humanitarian efforts placed a high value on knowledge and expertise.
even nonscientific problems they believed could be analyzed and solved scientifically.
many reformers came to believe that only enlightened experts and well designed bureaucracies could create the stability and order america needed.
some even spoke of the creation of a new civilization in which the expertise of scientists and engineers could be brought to bear on the problems of the economy and society.
the social scientist thorstein veblen for example proposed a new economic system in which power would reside in the hands of highly trained engineers.
only they he argued could fully understand the machine process by which modern society must be governed.
the professions the late nineteenth century saw a dramatic expansion in the number of americans engaged in administrative and professional tasks.
industries needed managers technicians and accountants as well as workers.
cities required commercial medical legal and educational services.
new technology required scientists and engineers who in turn required institutions and instructors to train them.
by the turn of the century those performing these services had come to constitute a distinct social group what some historians have called a new middle class by the early twentieth century millions within this new middle class were building organizations and establishing standards to secure their position in society.
most of all they created the modern organized professions.
the idea of professionalism had been a frail one in america even as late as 1880 but as the demand for professional services increased so did the pressures for reform.
among the first to respond was the medical profession.
in 1901 doctors who considamerican medical association ered themselves trained professionals reorganized the american medical association ama into a national professional society.
by 1920 nearly two thirds the progressives 493 of all american doctors were members.
the ama quickly called for strict scientific standards for admission to the practice of medicine.
state governments responded by passing new laws requiring the licensing of all physicians.
by 1900 medical education at a few medical schools notably johns hopkins in baltimore founded in 1893 compared favorably with those in the leading institutions of europe.
by 1916 lawyers in all forty eight states had established professional bar associations.
the nations law schools accordingly expanded greatly.
businessmen supported the creation of schools of business administration and set up their own national organizations the national association of manufacturers in 1895 and national association of manufacturers the united states chamber of commerce in 1912 farmers responded to the new order by forming through the national farm bureau federation a network of agricultural organizations designed to spread scientific farming methods.
the professions removed the untrained and incompetent.
but the admission requirements also protected those already in the professions from excessive competition and lent prestige and status to the professional level.
some professions used their entrance requirements to exclude african americans women immigrants and other undesirables from their ranks.
others used them simply to keep the numbers down to ensure that demand would remain high.
women and the professions american women found themselves excluded from most of the emerging professions.
but a substantial number of middle class women particularly those emerging from the new womens colleges and from the coeducational state universities entered professional careers nevertheless.
a few women managed to establish themselves as physicians lawyers engineers scientists and corporate managers.
most however turned by necessity to those professional outlets that society considered suitable for women settlement houses social work and most important teaching.
indeed in the late nineteenth century perhaps 90 percent of all professional women were teachers.
for educated black women in particular the existence of segregated schools in the south created a substantial market for african american teachers.
women also dominated other professional activities.
nursing had become primarily a womens field during and after the civil war.
by the early twentieth century it was adopting professional standards.
and many women entered academia often earning advanced degrees at such predominantly male institutions as the university of chicago mit or columbia and then finding professional opportunities in the new and expanding womens colleges.
women and reform the prominence of women in reform movements is one of the most striking features of progressivism.
in many states in the early twentieth century women could not vote.
they almost never held public office.
they had footholds in only a few and usually primarily female professions and lived in a culture in which most people male and female believed that women were not suited for the public world.
what then explains the prominent role so many women played in the reform activities of the period.
494 chapter 20 the new woman the phenomenon of the new woman was a product of social and economic changes in both the private and public spheres.
by the end of the nineteenth century almost all income producing activity had moved out of the home and into the factory or the office.
at the same time many women were having fewer children and their children were beginning school at earlier ages and spending more time there.
for wives and mothers who did not work for wages the home was less of an all consuming place.
hence more and more women began looking for activities outside the home.
some educated women shunned marriage entirely believing that only by remaining single could they play the roles they envisioned in the public world.
single women were among the most prominent reformers of the time.
some of these women lived alone.
others lived with other women often in long term relationships some of them secretly romantic that were known at the time as boston marriages the divorce rate also rose rapidly in the late nineteenth century from one divorce for every twenty one marriages in 1880 to one in nine by 1916 women initiated the majority of divorces.
the clubwomen among the most visible signs of the increasing public roles of women in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries were womens clubs which proliferated rapidly beginning in the 1880s and 1890s and became the vanguard of many important reforms.
the womens clubs began largely as cultural organizations to provide middle and upper class women with an outlet for their intellectual energies.
in 1892 when women formed the general federation of womens clubs there were more than 100 000 members in nearly 500 clubs.
by 1917 there were over 1 million members.
much of what the clubs did was uncontroversial planting trees supporting schools libraries and settlement houses building hospitals and parks.
but clubwomen were also an important force in winning passage of state and ultimately federal laws that regulated the conditions of woman and child labor.
they pushed government to inspect workplaces regulate the food and drug industries reform policies toward the indian tribes apply new standards to urban housing and perhaps most notably outlaw the manufacture and sale clubwomens causes of alcohol.
womens clubs were instrumental in pressuring state legislatures in most states to provide mothers pensions to widowed or abandoned mothers with small children a system that ultimately became absorbed into the social security system.
in 1912 they convinced congress to establish the childrens bureau in the labor department an agency directed to develop policies to protect children.
in many of these efforts the clubwomen formed alliances with other womens groups such as the womens trade union league wtul founded in 1903 by female union members and upper class reformers and committed to persuading women to join unions.
in addition to working on behalf of protective legislation for women wtul members held public meetings on behalf of female workers raised money to support strikes marched on picket lines and bailed striking women out of jail.
black women occasionally joined clubs dominated by whites.
but most clubs excluded blacks and so african americans formed clubs of their own.
some of them affiliated with the general federation but most became part of the independent national association of colored women.
some black clubs also took positions on issues of particular concern to african americans such as lynching and aspects of segregation.
the progressives 495 suffrage pageant on march 3 1913 the day before woodrow wilsons presidential inauguration more than 5 000 supporters of woman suffrage staged a parade in washington d c that overshadowed wilsons arrival in the capital.
crowds estimated at over half a million watched the parade some of the onlookers attacked the marchers.
in this photograph from the event suffragist florence noyce poses as liberty in front of the u s treasury building.
the library of congress woman suffrage perhaps the largest single reform movement of the progressive era indeed one of the largest in american history was the fight for woman suffrage.
throughout the late nineteenth century many suffrage advocates argued that natural rights entitled them to the same rights as men including first and foremost the right to vote.
elizabeth cady stanton for example wrote in 1892 of woman as the arbiter of her own destiny.
if we are to consider her as a citizen as a member of a great nation she must have the same rights as all other members this was an argument that challenged the views of the many men and women who believed that society required a distinctive female sphere in which women would serve first and foremost as wives and mothers.
a powerful antisuffrage movement emerged dominated by men but with the active support of many women.
to these critics woman suffrage seemed a radical demand.
in the first years of the twentieth century suffragists were becoming better organized and more politically sophisticated than their opponents.
under the leadership of anna howard shaw a boston social worker and carrie chapman catt a journalist from iowa membership in the national american woman suffrage association nawsa grew from about 13 000 in 1893 to over 2 million in 1917 the movement gained strength because many of its most prominent leaders began to justify suffrage in safer less threatening ways.
suffrage some supporters began to argue would not challenge the separate sphere in which women resided.
instead they claimed that because women occupied a distinct sphere because as mothers and wives and homemakers they had special experiences and 496 chapter 20 the troubled succession william howard taft who assumed the presidency in 1909 had been theodore roosevelts most trusted lieutenant and his handpicked successor progressive reformers believed him to be one of their own.
but taft was also a restrained and moderate jurist a man with a punctilious regard for legal process conservatives expected him to abandon roosevelts aggressive use of presidential powers.
by seeming acceptable to almost everyone taft easily won election to the white house in 1908 over william jennings bryan running for the democrats for the third time.
four years later however taft would leave office the most decisively defeated president of the twentieth century his party deeply divided and the government in the hands of a democratic administration for the first time in twenty years.
william howard taft taft and the progressives tafts first problem arose in the opening months of the new administration when he called congress into special session to lower protective tariff rates an old progressive demand.
but the president made no effort to overcome the opposition of the congressional old guard arguing that to do so would violate the constitutional doctrine of separation of powers.
the result was the feeble payne aldrich tariff which reduced tariff rates scarcely at all.
a sensational controversy that broke out late in 1909 helped destroy tafts popularity with reformers for good.
many progressives had been unhappy when taft replaced roosevelts secretary of the interior james r garfield an aggressive conservationist with richard a ballinger a conservative corporate lawyer.
suspicion of ballinger grew when he attempted to invalidate roosevelts removal of nearly 1 million acres of forests and mineral reserves from private development.
in the midst of this mounting concern louis glavis an interior department investigator charged ballinger with having once connived to turn over valuable public coal lands in alaska to a private syndicate for personal profit.
glavis took the evidence to gifford pinchot still director of the u s forest service and a critic of ballinger pinchot dispute ballingers policies.
pinchot took the charges to the president.
taft investigated them and decided they were groundless.
unsatisfied pinchot leaked the story to the press and asked congress to investigate the scandal.
the president discharged him for insubordination and the congressional committee appointed to study the controversy dominated by old guard republicans exonerated ballinger.
but progressives throughout the country supported pinchot.
the controversy aroused as much public passion as any dispute of its time.
by the time it was over taft had alienated the supporters of roosevelt completely and it seemed irrevocably.
the return of roosevelt during most of these controversies theodore roosevelt was out of the country on a long hunting safari in africa and an extended tour of europe.
to the american public however roosevelt remained a formidable presence.
his return to new york in the spring of 1910 was a major public event.
roosevelt insisted that he had no plans to reenter politics but within a month he announced that he would embark on a national speaking tour before the progressives 511 roosevelt at osawatomie roosevelts speech at osawatomie kansas in 1910 was the most radical of his career and openly marked his break with the taft administration and the republican leadership.
the essence of any struggle for liberty he told his largely conservative audience has always been and must always be to take from some one man or class of men the right to enjoy power or wealth or position or immunity which has not been earned by service to his or their fellows granger nyc all rights reserved.
the end of the summer.
furious with taft he was becoming convinced that he alone was capable of reuniting the republican party.
the real signal of roosevelts decision to assume leadership of republican reformers came in a speech he gave on september 1 1910 in osawatomie kansas.
in it he outlined a set of principles which he labeled the new nationalism that made new nationalism clear he had moved a considerable way from the cautious conservatism of the years of his presidency.
he argued that social justice was possible only through a strong federal government whose executive acted as the steward of the public welfare he supported graduated income and inheritance taxes workers compensation for industrial accidents regulation of the labor of women and children tariff revision and firmer regulation of corporations.
spreading insurgency the congressional elections of 1910 provided further evidence of how far the progressive revolt had spread.
in primary elections conservative republicans suffered defeat after defeat while almost all the progressive incumbents were reelected.
in the general election the democrats won control of the house of representatives for the first time in sixteen years and gained strength in the senate.
but roosevelt still denied any 512 chapter 8 their land often at a significant profit and resettling somewhere else.
when new areas for settlement opened farther to the west it was often the people already on the western edges of white settlement rather than those coming from the east who flocked to them first.
the plantation system in the old southwest in the old southwest later known as the deep south the new agricultural economy emerged along different lines.
the market for cotton continued to grow and the old southwest conthe black belt region tained a broad zone where cotton could thrive.
that zone became known as the black belt a region of dark productive soil in alabama and mississippi.
the first arrivals in the uncultivated regions of the old southwest were usually small farmers who made rough clearings in the forest.
but wealthier planters soon followed.
they bought up the cleared land as the original settlers moved farther west.
success in the wilderness was by no means assured even for the wealthiest settlers.
many planters managed to do little more than subsist in their new environment and others experienced utter ruin.
but some planters soon expanded small clearings into vast cotton fields.
they replaced the cabins of the early pioneers with more sumptuous log dwellings and ultimately with imposing mansions.
they also built up large slave workforces.
the rapid growth of the old northwest and southwest resulted in the admission of four new states four new states to the union indiana in 1816 mississippi in 1817 illinois in 1818 and alabama in 1819 trade and trapping in the far west not many anglo americans yet knew much about the far western areas of the continent.
nevertheless a significant trade began to develop between these western regions and the united states early in the nineteenth century and it grew steadily for decades.
mexico which continued to control texas california and much of the rest of the far southwest won its independence from spain in 1821 almost immediately it opened its trade with mexican territories northern territories to trade with the united states.
american traders poured into the region and quickly displaced indian and mexican traders.
in new mexico for example the missouri merchant william becknell began in 1821 to offer american manufactured goods for sale priced considerably below the inferior mexican goods that had dominated the market in the past.
mexico effectively lost its markets in its own colony as a steady traffic of commercial wagon trains began moving back and forth along the santa fe trail between missouri and new mexico.
fur traders created a wholly new kind of commerce.
after the war of 1812 john jacob astors american fur company and other firms extended their operations from the great white trappers in the west lakes area westward to the rockies.
at first fur traders did most of their business by purchasing pelts from the indians.
but increasingly white trappers entered the region and joined the iroquois and other indians in pursuit of beaver and other furs.
the trappers or mountain men who began trading in the far west were small in number.
but they developed important relationships with the existing residents of the west indian and mexican and altered the character of society there.
white trappers were mostly young single men.
many of them entered into sexual relationships with indian and mexican women.
they also recruited women as helpers in the difficult work of preparing furs and skins for trading.
in some cases though white trappers clashed violently with the mojave and other tribes.
in 1822 andrew and william ashley founded the rocky mountain fur company and recruited white trappers to move permanently into the rockies.
the ashleys d ispatched varieties of american nationalism 189 the annual rendezvous of fur trappers and traders was a major event for the lonely men who made their livelihoods gathering furs.
it was also a gathering of representatives of the many cultures that mingled in the far west among them anglo americans native americans and people of spanish origins.
walters art museum baltimore usa bridgeman images the rendezvous s upplies annually to their trappers in exchange for furs and skins.
the arrival of the supply train became the occasion for a gathering of scores of mountain men some of whom lived much of the year in considerable isolation.
but however isolated their daily lives these mountain men were closely bound up with the expanding market economy an economy in which the bulk of the profits from the trade flowed to the merchants not the trappers.
eastern images of the west americans in the east were only dimly aware of the world of the trappers.
they were more aware of the explorers many of them dispatched by the united states government.
in 1819 and 1820 the war department ordered stephen h long to journey stephen h longs expedition up the platte and south platte rivers through what is now nebraska and eastern colorado where he discovered the peak that would be named for him.
he then returned eastward along the arkansas river through what is now kansas.
long wrote an influential report on his trip which echoed the dismissive conclusions of zebulon pike fifteen years before.
the region between the missouri river and the rocky mountains long wrote is almost wholly unfit for cultivation and of course uninhabitable by a people depending upon agriculture for their subsistence on the published map of his expedition he labeled the great plains the great american desert the era of good feelings the expansion of the economy the growth of white settlement and trade in the west the creation of new states all reflected the rising spirit of nationalism that was spreading through the united states in the years following the war of 1812 that spirit found reflection for a time as well in the character of national politics.
190 chapter 21 like 5 million civilians died under the stress of war by violence or slower means though the exact number is hard to know.
the united states lost 116 000 soldiers about half of those in combat the others to disease.
some perished in the 1918 influenza pandemic that ultimately claimed an estimated 50 to 100 million lives worldwide.
although only in the war briefly the americans had played a significant role in the victory.
their casualty rates in the periods of intense fighting approximated or exceeded those of their allies.
the prospect of more doughboys arriving in the future surely affected the german leaderships capitulation in 1918 the british russian and french contributions of course dwarfed the american one in sheer numbers.
but wilsons army had acquitted itself well enough to earn him a seat at the negotiating table one of his ambitions all along.
organizing the economy for war by the time the war ended the federal government had appropriated 32 billion for war expenses a staggering sum at the time.
the entire federal budget had seldom exceeded 1 billion before 1915 and as recently as 1910 the nations entire gross national product had been only 35 billion.
to raise the money the government relied on two devices.
first it launched a major drive to solicit loans from the american people by selling liberty bonds liberty bonds to the public.
by 1920 the sale of bonds accompanied by elaborate patriotic appeals had produced 23 billion.
at the same time new taxes were bringing in an additional sum of nearly 10 billion some of it coming from levies on the excess profits of corporations but much of it coming from new steeply graduated income and inheritance taxes that ultimately rose as high as 70 percent in some brackets.
an even greater challenge was to organize the economy to meet war needs.
in 1916 wilson established the council of national defense composed of members of his cabinet and the civilian advisory commission which set up local defense councils in every state and locality.
but this early administrative structure soon proved completely unworkable and members of the council urged a more centralized approach.
the administrative structure that slowly emerged was dominated by a series of war boards one to oversee the railroads one to supervise fuel supplies largely coal another to handle food a board that elevated to prominence the brilliant young engineer and business executive herbert hoover.
the boards generally succeeded in meeting essential war needs without paralyzing the domestic economy.
the war industries board wib was created in july 1917 to coordinate government war industries board purchases of military supplies.
casually organized at first it stumbled badly until march 1918 when wilson restructured it and placed it under the control of the wall street financier bernard baruch.
baruch decided which factories would convert to the production of which war materials and he set prices for the goods they produced.
when materials were scarce baruch decided to whom they should go.
when corporations were competing for government contracts he chose among them.
baruch viewed himself openly and explicitly as a partner of business and within the wib businessmen themselves the so called dollar a year men who took paid leave from their corporate jobs and worked for the government for a token salary supervised the affairs of the private economy.
the national war labor board established in april 1918 served as the final mediator of labor disputes.
it pressured industry to grant important concessions to workers an america and the great war 533 women industrial workers in world war ii such women were often called rosie the riveter their presence in these previously all male work environments was no less startling to americans during world war i these women are shown working with acetylene torches to bevel armor plate for tanks.
the photographer was margaret bourke white who herself broke gender boundaries as the first female photojournalist for life magazine and the first female war correspondent.
photo by margaret bourke white the life picture collection getty images eight hour day the maintenance of minimal living standards equal pay for women doing equal work recognition of the right of unions to organize and bargain collectively.
in return it insisted that workers forgo strikes and that employers not engage in lockouts.
the search for social unity government leaders were painfully aware that public sentiment about the war was sharply divided.
the most conspicuous official effort to support the war was a vast propaganda campaign orchestrated by the committee on public information cpi wartime propaganda under the direction of the progressive journalist george creel.
the cpi supervised the distribution of over 75 million pieces of printed material and controlled much of the information available for newspapers and magazines.
creel encouraged journalists to exercise self censorship when reporting war news and most complied by covering the war largely as the government wished.
by 1918 government distributed posters and films were offering lurid and exaggerated portrayals of the savagery of the germans.
in this climate songwriters and other artists produced popular works that heavily favored the war.
see patterns of popular culture george m cohan over there 1917 the government also began efforts to suppress dissent.
cpi financed advertisements in magazines implored citizens to report to the authorities any evidence among their neighbors of disloyalty pessimism or yearning for peace.
the espionage act of 1917 gave the government new tools with which to combat spying sabotage or obstruction of the war effort crimes that were often broadly defined.
the sabotage act and the sedition act patterns of popular culture george m cohan over there 1917 music was one of the richest forms of american popular culture in the early twentieth century much of it emanating from new york city companies in a neighborhood known as tin pan alley.
lyricists and composers eager to peddle their sheet music widely had long captured popular attitudes toward the issues of their day.
in 1915 with men dying in the great war at a staggering rate songwriters churned out such antimilitarist numbers as i didnt raise my boy to be a soldier and dont take my darling boy away in april 1917 however president wilsons demand for unanimity changed tin pan alleys tune.
songs now demonized kaiser wilhelm ii the emperor of germany glorified the american doughboy a term dating to the mid nineteenth century but of mysterious origins and sentimentalized the homefront family.
other tunes became anthems of american confidence and strength none more so than george m cohans over there even before that hit which became the best known song of the war cohan was a leading figure in the american entertainment industry a prolific creator and performer of broadway productions and the composer of hundreds of original songs including classics such as yankee doodle boy written just after wilsons war address of april 2 over there offered a jaunty soundtrack for american intervention.
it was sung on the home front and in basic training doughboys in france found it in songbooks issued by various civilian agencies.
over 534 there represented a prominent strain in public culture of 1917 deeply patriotic optimistic and sentimental even as many americans worried quietly about what this new war would mean for them and their families.
johnnie get your gun get your gun get your gun take it on the run on the run on the run.
hear them calling you and me every son of liberty.
hurry right away no delay no delay make your daddy glad to have had such a lad.
tell your sweetheart not to pine to be proud her boys in line.
chorus over there over there send the word send the word over there that the yanks are coming the yanks are coming the drums rum tumming evrywhere.
so prepare say a prayr send the word send the word to beware.
well be over were coming over and we wont come back till its over over there.
johnnie get your gun get your gun get your gun johnnie show the hun whos a son of a gun.
hoist the flag and let her fly yankee doodle do or die.
pack your little kit show your grit do your bit.
yankee doodle fill the ranks from the towns and the tanks.
make your mother proud of you and the old red white and blue.
understand analyze evaluate 1 how did this song seek to motivate repeat chorus twice young men to join the army.
what image of war did this song convey.
2 what relationship between the united states and europe did the chorus imply.
source george m cohan over there public domain.
both passed in 1918 expanded the meaning of the espionage act to make illegal any public expression of opposition to the war in practice they espionage and sedition acts allowed officials to prosecute anyone who criticized the president or the government.
the most frequent targets of the new legislation were anticapitalist groups such as the socialist party and the industrial workers of the world iww.
many americans had favored the repression of socialists and radicals even before the war the wartime policies now made it possible to move against them with full legal sanction.
eugene v debs the humane leader of the socialist party and an opponent of the war was sentenced to ten years in prison in 1918.
a pardon by president warren g harding ultimately won his release in 1921.
big bill haywood and members of the iww were energetically prosecuted.
only by fleeing to the soviet union did haywood avoid imprisonment.
in all more than 1 500 people were arrested in 1918 for the crime of criticizing the government or the war.
state and local governments corporations universities and private citizens contributed as well to the climate of repression.
a cluster of citizens groups emerged to mobilize respectable members of communities to root out disloyalty.
the greatest target of abuse was the german american community.
most german americans supported the american war effort once it began but public opinion still turned bitterly hostile.
a campaign to purge society of all things german quickly gathered speed at times assuming ludicrous forms.
performances of german music were frequently banned.
german foods such as sauerkraut and bratwurst were renamed liberty cabbage and liberty sausage german books were removed from library shelves.
courses in the german language were dropped from school curricula.
germans were routinely fired from jobs in war industries lest they sabotage important tasks.
the search for a new world order woodrow wilson had led the nation into war promising a just and stable peace at its conclusion.
even before the armistice he was preparing to lead the fight for what he considered a democratic postwar settlement.
the fourteen points on january 8 1918 wilson appeared before congress to present the principles for which he believed the nation was fighting.
he grouped the war aims under fourteen headings widely known as the fourteen points they fell into three broad categories.
first wilsons proposals contained a series of eight specific recommendations for adjusting postwar boundaries and establishing new nations to replace the defunct austro hungarian 535 536 chapter 8 conclusion in the aftermath of the war of 1812 a vigorous nationalism increasingly came to characterize the political and popular culture of the united states.
in all regions of the country white men and women celebrated the achievements of the early leaders of the republic the genius of the constitution and the success of the nation in withstanding serious challenges from both without and within.
party divisions faded.
but the broad nationalism of the era of good feelings disguised some deep divisions.
indeed the character of american nationalism differed substantially from one region and one group to another.
battles continued between those who favored a strong central government committed to advancing the economic development of the nation and those who wanted a decentralization of power to open opportunity to more people.
battles continued as well over the role of slavery in american life and in particular over the place of slavery in the new western territories.
the missouri compromise of 1820 postponed the day of reckoning on that issue but only for a time.
key terms people places events adams ons treaty 191 american system 198 francis cabot lowell 186 gibbons v ogden 195 henry clay 192 john quincy adams 191 mcculloch v maryland 195 missouri compromise 193 monroe doctrine 197 panic of 1819 191 seminole war 191 stephen h long 189 tallmadge amendment 192 worcester v georgia 196 recall and reflect 1 how did the war of 1812 stimulate the national economy.
2 what were the reasons for the rise of sectional differences in this era.
what attempts were made to resolve these differences.
how successful were those attempts.
3 why was the monroe doctrine proclaimed.
4 what was the significance of andrew jacksons victory in the election of 1828.
jacksonian america the rise of mass politics federal union the removal of the indians jackson and the bank war the changing face of american politics politics after jackson looking ahead 1 how did the electorate expand during the jacksonian era and what were the limits of that expansion.
2 what events fed the growing tension between nationalism and states rights and what were the arguments on both sides of that issue.
3 what was the second party system and how did its emergence change national politics.
many americans in the 1830s were growing apprehensive about the future of their expanding republic.
some feared that rapid growth would produce social chaos they insisted that the countrys first priority was to establish order and a clear system of authority.
others argued that the greatest danger facing the nation was the growth of inequality and privilege they wanted to eliminate the favored status of powerful elites and make opportunity more widely available.
advocates of this latter vision seized control of the federal government in 1829 with the inauguration of andrew jackson.
201 the rise of mass politics time line webster and hayne debate 1830 1838 indians expelled from southeast anti mason party holds first convention jackson vetoes recharter of bank of u s jackson reelected 1832 1833 nullification crisis jackson removes deposits from bank of u s taney named chief justice of supreme court 1835 1842 seminole wars specie circular van buren elected president 1837 1844 panic and depression william henry harrison elected president independent treasury act 202 harrison dies tyler becomes president on march 4 1829 thousands of americans from all regions of the country crowded before the united states capitol to watch the inauguration of andrew jackson.
after the ceremonies the crowd poured into a public reception at the white house where in their eagerness to shake the new presidents hand they filled the state rooms to overflowing trampled one another soiled the carpets and damaged the upholstery.
it was a proud day for the people wrote amos kendall one of jacksons closest political associates.
supreme court justice joseph story a friend and colleague of john marshall remarked with disgust the reign of king mob seems triumphant in fact the age of jackson was much less a triumph of the common people than kendall hoped and story feared.
but it did mark a transformation of american politics.
once restricted to a relatively small elite of property owners politics now became open to virtually all the nations white male citizens.
in a political sense at least the period had some claim to the title the jacksonians gave it the era of the common man the expanding democracy what some have called the age of jackson did not really bring economic equality.
the distribution of wealth and property in america was little different at the end of the jacksonian era than it had been at the start.
but it did mark a transformation of american politics that widely extended to new groups the right to vote.
until the 1820s relatively few americans had been permitted to vote.
most states restricted the franchise to white male property owners or taxpayers or both.
but even before jacksons election the franchise began to expand.
change came first in ohio and other new states of the west which on jacksonian america 203 joining the union adopted constitutions that guaranteed all adult white males not just property owners or taxpayers the right to vote and permitted all voters the right to hold public office.
older states concerned about the loss of their population to the west began to drop or reduce their own property ownership or taxpaying requirements.
the wave of state reforms was generally peaceful but in rhode island democratization efforts created considerable instability.
the rhode island constitution barred more than half the adult males in the state from voting in the 1830s.
in 1840 the lawyer and activist thomas l dorr and a group of his followers formed a peoples party held a convention drafted a new constitution and submitted it to a popular vote.
it was overwhelmingly approved and the dorrites began to set up a new government with dorr as governor.
the existing legislature however rejected the legitimacy of dorrs constitution.
and so in 1842 two governments were claiming power in rhode island.
the old state government declared dorr and his followers rebels and began to imprison them.
the dorrites meanwhile made an ineffectual effort to capture the state the dorr rebellion arsenal.
the dorr rebellion as it was known quickly failed but the episode helped spur the old guard to draft a new constitution that greatly expanded suffrage.
the democratization process was far from complete.
in the south of course no slaves could vote.
in addition southern election laws continued to favor the planters and politicians of the older counties.
free blacks could not vote anywhere in the south and hardly anywhere in the north.
in no state could women vote.
nowhere was the ballot secret and often it was cast as a spoken vote which meant that voters could be easily bribed or intimidated.
despite the persisting limitations however the number of voters increased much more rapidly than did the population as a whole.
this scene of an election day gathering is peopled almost entirely by white men.
women and blacks were barred from voting but political rights expanded substantially in the 1830s and 1840s among white males.
saint louis art museum missouri usa gift of bank of america bridgeman images the verdict of the people 1855 by george caleb bingham 204 chapter 22 seemed meaningless and vulgar to many artists and intellectuals in particular.
as a result they came to view their own culture with contempt.
rather than trying to influence and reform their society they isolated themselves from it and embarked on a restless search the lost generation for personal fulfillment.
the american writer gertrude stein once referred to the young americans emerging from world war i as a lost generation many artists and intellectuals coming of age in the 1920s experienced that fundamental disenchantment with modern america reflected in a series of savage critiques of modern society critiqued modern society by a wide range of writers some of whom were known as the debunkers among them was the baltimore journalist h l mencken who delighted in ridiculing religion politics the arts even democracy itself.
sinclair lewis published a series of savage novels main street 1920 babbitt 1922 arrowsmith 1925 and others in which he lashed out at one aspect of modern bourgeois society after another.
intellectuals of the 1920s claimed to reject the success ethic they believed dominated american life.
the novelist f scott fitzgerald for example attacked the american obsession with material success in the great gatsby 1925.
the roster of important american writers active in the 1920s may have no equal in any other period.
it included fitzgerald lewis ernest hemingway thomas wolfe john dos passos ezra pound t s eliot gertrude stein edna ferber william faulkner and eugene oneill and a remarkable group of african american artists.
in new york city a new generation of black intellectuals created a flourishing artistic life widely described as the harlem harlem renaissance renaissance the harlem poets novelists and artists drew heavily from their african roots in an effort to prove the richness of their own racial heritage and assert resistance against white racism and stereotyping.
the ethos was captured in a single sentence by the poet langston hughes i am a negro and beautiful other black writers in harlem and elsewhere james weldon johnson countee cullen zora neale hurston claude mckay alain locke as well as black artists and musicians helped establish a thriving and at times highly politicized culture.
a conflict of cultures the modern secular culture of the 1920s did not go unchallenged.
it grew up alongside an older more traditional culture with which it continually and often bitterly competed.
prohibition when the prohibition of the sale and manufacture of alcohol went into effect in january 1920 it had the support of most members of the middle class and most of those who considered themselves progressives.
within a year however it had become clear that the failure of prohibition noble experiment as its defenders called it was not working well.
at first prohibition did substantially reduce drinking in most parts of the country.
but it also produced conspicuous and growing violations.
before long it was almost as easy to acquire illegal alcohol in many parts of the country as it had once been to acquire legal alcohol.
and since an enormous lucrative industry was now barred to legitimate businessmen organized crime took it over.
many middle class progressives who had originally supported prohibition soon soured on the experiment.
but a large constituency of provincial largely rural protestant americans continued vehemently to defend it.
to them prohibition represented the effort of an older the new era 557 america to protect traditional notions of morality.
drinking which they associated with the modern city and catholic immigrants became a symbol of the new culture they believed was displacing them.
as the decade proceeded opponents of prohibition or wets gained steadily in influence.
not until 1933 however when the great depression added weight to their appeals were they finally able to challenge the drys effectively and win repeal of the eighteenth amendment.
nativism and the klan agitation for a curb on foreign immigration had begun in the nineteenth century and as with prohibition had gathered strength in the years before the war largely because of the support of middle class progressives.
in the years immediately following the war as immigrations association with radicalism intensified and migration from europe resumed popular sentiment on behalf of restriction grew rapidly.
in 1921 congress passed an emergency immigration act establishing a quota system by which annual immigration from any country could not exceed 3 percent of the number of persons of that nationality who had been in the united states in 1910 the new law cut immigration from 800 000 to 300 000 in any single year but the nativists remained unsatisfied.
the national origins act of 1924 banned immigration from national origins act of 1924 east asia entirely and reduced the quota for europeans from 3 to 2 percent.
the quota would be based moreover not on the 1910 statistics but on the census of 1890 a year in which there had been far fewer southern and eastern europeans in the country.
what new immigration there was in other words would heavily favor northwestern europeans.
five years later a further restriction set a rigid limit of 150 000 immigrants a year.
in the years that followed immigration officials seldom permitted even half that number actually to enter the country.
to defenders of an older more provincial america the growth of large communities of foreign peoples alien in speech habits and values came to seem a direct threat to their own embattled way of life.
among other things this provincial nativism helped instigate the rebirth of the ku klux klan as a major force in american society.
the first klan founded during reconstruction had died in the 1870s.
but in 1915 a new group of white southerners met on stone mountain near atlanta and established rise of the new klan a modern version of the society.
nativist passions had swelled in georgia and elsewhere in response to the case of leo frank a jewish factory manager in atlanta convicted in 1914 on very flimsy evidence of murdering a female employee a mob stormed franks jail and lynched him.
the premiere also in atlanta of d w griffiths film the birth of a nation which glorified the early klan also helped inspire white southerners to form a new one.
at first the new klan like the old was largely concerned with intimidating blacks.
after world war i however concern about blacks gradually became secondary to concern about catholics jews and foreigners.
at that point membership in the klan expanded rapidly and dramatically not just in the small towns and rural areas of the south but in industrial cities in the north and midwest as well.
by 1924 there were reportedly 4 million members including many women organized in separate parallel units.
the largest state klan was not in the south but in indiana.
beginning in 1925 a series of scandals involving the organizations leaders precipitated a slow but steady decline in the klans influence.
558 chapter 22 conclusion the remarkable prosperity of the 1920s shaped much of what exuberant contemporaries liked to call the new era in the years after world war i america built a vibrant and extensive national culture.
its middle class moved increasingly into the embrace of the growing consumer culture.
politics were reorganized around the needs of a booming interdependent industrial economy rejecting many of the reform crusades of the previous generation but also creating new institutions to help promote economic growth and stability.
beneath the glittering surface of the new era however were great controversies and injustices.
although the prosperity of the 1920s was more widely spread than at any time in the nations industrial history more than half the population failed to achieve any real benefits from the growth.
a new optimistic secular culture attracted millions of urban middle class people.
but many other americans looked at it with alarm and fought against it with great fervor.
the unprepossessing conservative presidents of the era suggested a time of stability but in fact few eras in modern american history have seen so much political and cultural conflict.
the 1920s ended in a catastrophic economic crash that has colored the image of those years ever since.
the crises of the 1930s should not obscure the real achievements of the new era economy.
neither however should the prosperity of the 1920s obscure the inequity and instability in those years that helped produce the difficult years to come.
key terms people places events american plan 548 brotherhood of sleeping car porters 548 calvin coolidge 560 flappers 555 harlem renaissance 556 herbert hoover 561 issei 549 ku klux klan 557 langston hughes 556 lost generation 556 margaret sanger 554 national origins act of 1924 557 nisei 549 parity 551 scopes trial 558 teapot dome 560 the jazz singer 554 warren harding 559 welfare capitalism 547 recall and reflect 1 what was the impact of the automobile on american life.
2 how did labor fare during the 1920s.
what particular problems did female black immigrant and unskilled laborers face.
3 how did religion respond to the consumer culture of the 1920s.
4 what was the myth and what was the reality of the new professional woman of the 1920s.
5 what was the nature and extent of the nativism of the 1920s.
the great depression the coming of the depression the american people in hard times the depression and american culture the ordeal of herbert hoover looking ahead 1 what were some of the causes of the great depression.
what made it so severe and why did it last so long.
2 what was the impact of the depression on farmers minorities and women.
3 how did president hoover and his administration try to deal with the depression.
what was the result of those efforts.
in america today herbert hoover proclaimed in august 1928 are nearer to the final triumph over poverty than ever before in the history of any land only fifteen months later those words would return to haunt him as the nation plunged into the severest and most prolonged economic depression in its history a depression that continued in one form or another for a full decade not only in the united states but throughout much of the world.
563 the coming of the depression time line stock market crash great depression begins agricultural marketing act hawley smoot tariff drought begins in dust bowl scottsboro defendants arrested reconstruction finance corporation established southern tenant farmers union organized bonus army in washington franklin d roosevelt elected president american communist party proclaims popular front pare lorentzs the plow that broke the plains wrights native son 564 steinbecks the grapes of wrath the sudden financial collapse in 1929 came as an especially severe shock because it followed so closely an era that appeared to offer economic miracles miracles that seemed especially evident in the remarkable performance of the stock market.
in february 1928 stock prices began a steady ascent that continued with only a few temporary lapses for a year and a half.
between may 1928 and september 1929 the average price of stocks rose over 40 percent.
trading mushroomed from 2 or 3 million shares a day to over 5 million and at times to as many as 10 or 12 million.
in short a widespread speculative fever grew steadily more intense particularly once brokerage firms began encouraging the mania by offering absurdly easy credit to those buying stocks.
the great crash in the autumn of 1929 the market began to fall apart.
on october 29 black tuesday after a week of growing instability all efforts to save the market failed.
sixteen million shares of stock were traded the industrial index dropped 43 points or nearly 10 percent wiping out all the gains of the previous year stocks in many companies became virtually worthless.
within a month stocks had lost half their september value and despite occasional short lived rallies they continued to decline for several years after that.
popular folklore has established the stock market crash as the beginning and even the cause of the great depression.
although october 1929 might have been the most visible early sign of the crisis the depression had earlier beginnings and other causes.
the great depression 565 causes of the depression economists and historians have argued for decades about the causes of the great depression.
but most agree on several things.
they agree first that what is remarkable about the crisis is not that it occurred but that it was so severe and that it lasted so long which most observers agree even if they agree on little else was the result of several factors.
one was a lack of diversification in the american economy in the 1920s.
prosperity had depended excessively on a few basic industries notably construction and automobiles which in the late 1920s began to decline.
expenditures on weaknesses in the u s economy construction fell from 11 billion in 1926 to under 9 billion in 1929 automobile sales fell by more than a third in the first nine months of 1929 newer industries were emerging to take up the slack among them petroleum chemicals electronics and plastics but none had yet developed enough strength to compensate for this decline.
a second important factor was the maldistribution of purchasing power and as a result a weakness in consumer demand.
as industrial and agricultural production increased the proportion of the profits going to potential consumers was too small to create an adequate market for the goods the economy was producing.
even in 1929 after nearly a decade of economic growth more than half the families in america lived on the edge of or below the minimum subsistence level.
a third major problem was the credit structure of the economy.
farmers were deeply in debt and crop prices were too low to allow them to pay off what they owed.
small banks were in constant trouble as their customers defaulted on loans large banks were in trouble too.
although most american bankers were very conservative some of the nations biggest banks were investing recklessly in the stock market or making unwise loans.
when the market crashed and the loans went bad some banks failed and others made the crisis worse by contracting already scarce credit and calling in loans that borrowers could not pay.
a fourth factor was americas position in international trade.
late in the 1920s european demand for american goods began to decline partly because global factors european industry and agriculture were becoming more productive and partly because some european nations were having financial difficulties of their own.
but it was also because the european economy was being destabilized by the international debt structure that had emerged in the aftermath of world war i this debt structure therefore was a fifth factor contributing to the depression.
when the war came to an end in 1918 all the european nations that had been allied with the united states owed large sums of money to american banks sums much too large to be repaid out of their shattered economies which is partly why the allies had insisted on reparation payments from germany and austria.
reparations they believed would provide them with a way to pay off their own debts.
but germany and austria were no more able to pay the reparations than the allies were able to pay their debts.
the american government refused to forgive or reduce the debts.
instead american banks began making large loans to european governments which used them to pay off their earlier loans.
thus debts and reparations were being paid only by piling up new and greater debts.
at the same time american protective tariffs were making it difficult for europeans to sell their goods in american markets.
without any source of foreign exchange with which to repay their loans they began to default.
the collapse of the international credit structure was one of the reasons the depression spread to europe after 1931.
see america in the world the global depression america in the world the global depression the great depression began in the united states.
but it did not end there.
the american economy was the largest in the world and its collapse sent shock waves across the globe.
by 1931 the american depression had become a world depression with important implications for the course of global history.
the origins of the worldwide depression lay in the pattern of debts that had emerged during and after world war i when the united states loaned billions of dollars to european nations.
in 1931 with american banks staggering and in many cases collapsing large banks in new york began desperately calling in their loans from germany and austria.
that precipitated the collapse of one of austrias largest banks which in turn created panic through much of central europe.
the economic collapse in germany and austria meant that those nations could not continue paying reparations to britain and france required by the treaty of versailles of 1919 which meant in turn that britain and france could not continue paying off their loans to the united states.
this spreading financial crisis was accompanied by a dramatic contraction of international trade precipitated in part by the hawley smoot tariff in the united states which established the highest import duties in history and stifled much global commerce.
depressed agricultural prices a result of worldwide overproduction also contributed to the downturn.
by 1932 worldwide industrial production had declined by more than one third and world trade had plummeted by nearly two thirds.
by 1933 30 million people in industrial nations were unemployed five times the number of four years before.
but the depression was not confined to industrial nations.
imperialism and 566 an unemployed london man wears a sign that seems designed to convince passersby that he is an educated respectable person despite his present circumstances.
hulton archive getty images looking for work in london 1935 i ndustrialization had drawn almost all regions of the world into the international industrial economy.
colonies and nations in africa asia and south america critically dependent on exporting raw materials and agricultural goods to industrial countries experienced a collapse in demand for their products and thus rising levels of poverty and unemployment.
some nations among them the soviet union and china remained relatively unconnected to the global economy and suffered relatively little from the great depression.
but in most parts of the world the depression caused tremendous social and economic hardship.
it also created political turmoil.
among the countries hardest hit by the depression was germany where industrial production declined by 50 percent and unemployment reached 35 percent in the early 1930s.
the desperate economic conditions there contributed greatly to the rise of the nazi party and its leader adolf hitler who became chancellor in 1933 japan suffered as well dependent as it was on world trade to sustain its growing industrial economy and purchase essential commodities for its needs at home.
and in japan as in germany economic troubles produced political turmoil and aided the rise of a new militaristic regime.
in italy the fascist government of benito mussolini which had first taken power in the 1920s also saw militarization and territorial expansion as a way out of economic difficulties.
in other nations governments sought solutions to the depression through reform of their domestic economies.
the most prominent example was the new deal in the united states.
but there were important experiments in other nations as well.
among the most common responses to the depression around the world was substantial government investment in public works such as roads bridges dams public buildings and other large projects.
among the nations that adopted this approach in addition to the united states were britain france germany italy and the soviet union.
another response was the expansion of government funded relief for the unemployed.
all the industrial countries of the world experimented with various forms of relief often borrowing ideas from one another in the process.
and the depression helped create new approaches to economics in the face of the apparent failure of classical models of economic behavior to explain or provide solutions to the crisis.
the great british economist john maynard keynes revolutionized economic thought in much of the world.
his 1936 book the general theory of employment interest and money despite its bland title created a sensation by arguing that the depression was a result not of declining production but of inadequate consumer demand.
governments he said could stimulate their economies by increasing the money supply and creating investment through a combination of lowering interest rates and public spending.
keynesianism as keyness theories became known began to have an impact in the united states in 1938 and in much of the rest of the world in subsequent years.
the great depression was an important turning point not only in american history but also in the history of the twentieth century world.
it transformed ideas of public policy and economics in many nations.
it toppled old regimes and created new ones.
and perhaps above all it was a major factor in the coming of world war ii.
understand analyze evaluate 1 how did the 1919 treaty of versailles and the hawley smoot tariff contribute to the global depression of the 1930s.
2 how did the governments of european nations respond to the depression.
3 what effect did the global depression have on economic theory.
why was keyness economic theory so revolutionary.
progress of the depression the stock market crash of 1929 did not so much cause the depression then as help trigger a chain of events that exposed larger weaknesses in the american economy.
during the next three years the crisis grew steadily worse.
the most serious problem at first was the collapse of much of the banking system.
between 1930 and 1933 over 9 000 american banks either went bankrupt or closed their doors to avoid bankruptcy.
partly as a result of these banking closures the nations money 567 568 chapter in the history of reform but one that worked within rigid occasionally crippling limits.
much of that work on the new deal therefore focused on the constraints it faced.
some scholars notably the sociologist theda skocpol emphasized the issue of state capacity the absence of a government bureaucracy with sufficient strength and expertise to shape or administer many programs.
james t patterson barry karl mark leff and others stressed the political constraints the new deal encountered the conservative inhibitions about government that remained strong in congress and among the public.
frank freidel ellis hawley herbert stein and many others pointed as well to the ideological constraints affecting franklin roosevelt and his supporters the limits of their own understanding of their time.
alan brinkley in the end of reform 1995 described an ideological shift within new deal liberalism that marginalized older concerns about wealth and monopoly power and replaced them with consumer oriented keynesianism.
david kennedy in freedom from fear 1999 argued by contrast that the more aggressively anticapitalist measures of the early new deal actually hampered recovery.
only when roosevelt embraced the power of the market did prosperity begin to return.
the conservative attacks on the new deal in the 2000s provided a newly powerful alternative view.
a group of conservatives among them amity schlaes and burton folsom attacked the new deal as a failure that created a vast bureaucracy and caused the depression to last longer than it had to.
the phrase new deal liberalism has come in the postwar era to seem synonymous with modern ideas of aggressive federal management of the economy elaborate welfare systems a powerful bureaucracy and large scale government spending.
but many historians of the new deal would argue that the modern idea of new deal liberalism bears only a limited relationship to the ideas that new dealers themselves embraced.
understand analyze evaluate 1 how has the scholarly understanding of the new deal changed over time.
2 did the new deal save capitalism.
if so how and why.
roosevelt himself was among the most aristocratic presidents in american history.
but he became the enemy of the very world that he came from.
he was an alumnus of harvard university but the university president barely spoke to him when he went there to give a speech.
he was as many members of the american elite called him a traitor to his class but even greater hatred came from conservative businessmen and financiers who correctly accused new dealers of imposing new regulations on the business and financial worlds.
his critics were also infuriated by new taxes imposed by roosevelt even though high taxation reached only a few wealthy people.
the hatred of roosevelt from conservatives took many forms.
in 1935 a whispering campaign emerged from a new deal effort to regulate the public utility industry.
stories circulated that the president was a drug addict that he was insane and that he was surrounded by psychiatrists at all times.
hamilton fish jr a highly conservative member of congress said on the floor of the house of representatives that whom the gods would destroy they make first mad not all critics were as virulent in their hatred of the president.
walter lippmann a revered columnist complained that roosevelt was moving away from the nations traditions.
we belong to a generation that has lost its way he wrote.
unable to develop the great truths which it inherited from the emancipators it has returned to the heresies of absolutism authority and the domination of men by men he added that the enormous concentration of power in the hands of appointed officials.
can lead only to waste confusion bureaucratic rigidity and the loss of personal liberty he charged that roosevelt had become attracted to fascism and communism instead of protecting the freedom of individuals.
595 596 chapter 14 was being fought for the benefit of slaves.
the rioters lynched several african americans and burned down black homes businesses and even an orphanage leaving more than 100 dead.
only the arrival of federal troops direct from the battle of gettysburg halted the violence.
wartime politics when abraham lincoln arrived in washington many republicans considered him a minor prairie politician who would be easily controlled by the real leaders of his party.
but lincoln was not cowed by the distinguished figures around him.
the new president understood his own and his partys weaknesses and he assembled a cabinet representing every faction of the republican party and every segment of northern opinion.
he moved boldly to use the war powers of the presidency blithely ignoring inconvenient parts of the constitution because he said it would be foolish to lose the whole by being afraid to disregard a part.
and so he sent troops into battle without asking congress for a declaration of war arguing that the conflict was a domestic insurrection.
he increased the size of the regular army without receiving legislative authority to do so.
and he unilaterally proclaimed a naval blockade of the south.
lincolns greatest political problem was the widespread popular opposition to the war in the north.
lincoln ordered military arrests of civilian dissenters and suspended the right of habeas corpus the right of an arrested person to receive a speedy trial.
at first lincoln used these methods only in sensitive areas such as the border states but by 1862 he proclaimed that all persons who discouraged enlistments or engaged in disloyal practices were subject to martial law.
repression was not the only tool the north used to strengthen support for the war.
in addition to arresting disloyal northerners lincolns administration used new tools of persuasion to build popular opinion in favor of the war.
in addition to pro war pamphlets posters speeches and songs the war mobilized a significant corps of photographers organized by the renowned mathew brady one of the first important photographers in american history to take pictures of the war.
the photographs that resulted from this effort new to warfare were among the grimmest ever made to that point many of them displaying the vast numbers of dead on the civil war battlefields.
for some northerners the images of death contributed to a revulsion for the war.
but for most they gave evidence of the level of sacrifice that had been made for the preservation of the union and thus spurred the nation on to victory.
southerners used similar propaganda in the confederacy although less effectively.
by the time of the 1864 election the north was in political turmoil.
the republicans had suffered heavy losses in the midterm elections of 1862 and in response party leaders tried to create a broad coalition of all the groups that supported the war.
they called the new organization the union party but it was in reality little more than the republican party and a small faction of war democrats.
they nominated lincoln for a second term and andrew johnson of tennessee a war democrat who had opposed his states decision to secede for the vice presidency.
the democrats nominated george b mcclellan a celebrated former union general.
george b mcclellan the party adopted a platform denouncing the war and calling for a truce.
mcclellan repudiated that demand but the democrats were clearly the peace party in the campaign trying to profit from growing war weariness.
for a time lincolns prospects for reelection seemed doubtful.
presidential war powers the civil war 329 at this crucial moment however several northern military victories particularly the capture of atlanta georgia early in september 1864 rejuvenated northern morale and boosted republican prospects.
with the overwhelming support of union troops lincoln won reelection comfortably with 212 electoral votes to mcclellans 21 the politics of emancipation despite their surface unity in supporting the war and their general agreement on most economic matters the republicans disagreed sharply with one another on the issue of slavery.
radical republicans led in congress by such men as representative thaddeus stevens of pennsylvania and senators charles sumner of massachusetts and benjamin wade of ohio wanted to use the war to abolish slavery immediately and completely.
conservative republicans favored a more cautious policy in part to placate the slave states that remained precariously within the union.
nevertheless momentum began to gather behind emancipation early in the war.
in 1861 congress passed the confiscation act which declared that all slaves confiscation act used for insurrectionary purposes that is in support of the confederate military effort would be considered freed.
subsequent laws in the spring of 1862 abolished slavery in the district of columbia and the western territories and provided for the compensation of owners.
in july 1862 radicals pushed through congress the second confiscation act which declared free the slaves of persons supporting the insurrection and authorized the president to employ african americans as soldiers.
as the war progressed many in the north slowly accepted emancipation as a central war aim nothing less they believed would justify the enormous sacrifices the struggle had required.
as a result the radicals gained increasing influence within the republican party a development that did not go unnoticed by the president who decided to seize the leadership of the rising antislavery sentiment himself.
on september 22 1862 after the union victory at the battle of antietam the president announced his intention to use his war powers to issue an executive order freeing all slaves in the confederacy.
and on january 1 1863 he formally signed the emancipation proclamation which declared forever free the slaves inside the the emancipation proclamation confederacy.
the proclamation did not apply to the union slave states nor did it affect those parts of the confederacy already under union control tennessee western virginia and southern louisiana.
it applied in short only to slaves over whom the union had no control.
still the document was of great importance.
it clearly and irrevocably established that the war was being fought not only to preserve the union but also to eliminate slavery.
eventually as federal armies occupied much of the south the proclamation became a practical reality and led directly to the freeing of thousands of slaves.
even in areas not directly affected by the proclamation the antislavery impulse gained strength.
the u s governments tentative measures against slavery were not at first a major factor in the liberation of slaves.
instead the war helped african americans liberate themselves and they did so in increasing numbers as the war progressed.
many slaves were taken from their plantations and put to work as workers building defenses and other chores.
once transported to the front many of them found ways to escape across northern lines where they were treated as contraband goods seized from people who had no right to them.
they could not be returned to their masters.
by 1862 the union army often penetrated deep into the confederacy.
almost everywhere they went escaped slaves flocked to join them by the thousands often whole families.
some of them joined the 330 chapter 24 the recession of 1937 known to the presidents critics as the roosevelt recession was a result of many factors.
but to many observers at the time it seemed to be a direct result of the administrations unwise decision to reduce spending.
and so in april 1938 the president asked congress for an emergency appropriation of 5 billion for public works and relief programs and government funds soon began pouring into the economy once again.
within a few months another tentative recovery seemed to be under way.
at about the same time roosevelt sent a stinging message to congress vehemently denouncing what he called an unjustifiable concentration of economic power and asking for the creation of a commission to consider major reforms in the antitrust laws.
in response congress established the temporary national economic committee tnec whose members included representatives of both houses of congress and officials from several executive agencies.
later in 1938 the administration successfully supported one of its most ambitious pieces of labor legislation the fair labor standards act which for the first time established a national minimum wage and a forty hour workweek and which also placed strict limits on child labor.
despite these achievements however by the end of 1938 the new deal had essentially end of the new deal come to an end.
congressional opposition now made it difficult for the president to enact any major new programs.
but more important perhaps the threat of world crisis hung heavy in the political atmosphere and roosevelt was gradually growing more concerned with persuading a reluctant nation to prepare for war than with pursuing new avenues of reform.
sources of the roosevelt recession limits and legacies of the new deal the new deal made major changes in american government some of them still controversial today.
it also left important problems unaddressed.
african americans and the new deal the new deal was not hostile to black aspirations.
eleanor roosevelt spoke throughout the 1930s on behalf of racial justice and put continuing pressure on her husband and others in the federal government to ease discrimination against blacks.
the president himself appointed a number of african americans to significant second level positions in his administration creating an informal network of officeholders that became known the black cabinet as the black cabinet eleanor roosevelt interior secretary harold ickes and wpa director harry hopkins all made efforts to ensure that new deal relief programs did not exclude blacks.
by 1935 an estimated 30 percent of all african americans were receiving some form of government assistance even amid persistent racial discrimination against people of color by the administrators of aid.
one result was a historic change in black electoral behavior.
as late as 1932 most american blacks were voting republican as they had been doing since the civil war.
by 1936 more than 90 percent were voting democratic.
african americans supported franklin roosevelt but they had few illusions that the new deal represented a major turning point in american race relations.
the president was for example never willing to risk losing the support of southern democrats by supporting legislation to make lynching a federal crime or to ban the new deal 607 the poll tax one of the most potent tools by which white southerners kept blacks from voting.
new deal relief agencies did not challenge and indeed reinforced existing patterns of discrimination.
the ccc established separate black camps.
the nra codes tolerated paying blacks less than whites doing the same jobs.
the wpa routinely relegated african americans and hispanic workers to the least skilled and lowest paying jobs when funding ebbed african americans like women were among the first discrimination reinforced to be dismissed.
the new deal was not hostile to african americans and it made some contributions to their progress.
but it never made racial justice a significant part of its agenda.
the new deal and the indian problem new deal policy toward the indian tribes marked a significant break from earlier approaches largely because of the efforts of the extraordinary commissioner of indian affairs john collier.
collier was greatly influenced by the work of twentieth century anthropologists who advanced the idea of cultural relativism the theory that every culture should be accepted and respected on its own terms.
collier wanted to reverse the pressures on native americans to assimilate and instead allow them to remain indians.
he effectively promoted legislation which became the indian reorganization act of 1934 that restored to john colliers advocacy the tribes the right to own land collectively and to elect tribal governments.
in the thirteen years after passage of the 1934 bill tribal land increased by nearly 4 million acres and indian agricultural income increased from under 2 million in 1934 to over 49 million in 1947 even with the redistribution of lands under the 1934 act however indians continued to possess for the most part only territory whites did not want much of it arid some of it desert.
and as a group they continued to constitute the poorest segment of the population.
women and the new deal symbolically at least the new deal marked a breakthrough in the role of women in public life.
roosevelt appointed the first female member of the cabinet in the nations history secretary of labor frances perkins.
he also named more than 100 frances perkins other women to positions at lower levels of the federal bureaucracy.
but the administration was concerned not so much about achieving gender equality as about obtaining special protections for women.
the new deal generally supported the widespread belief that in hard times women should withdraw from the workplace to open up more jobs for men.
new deal relief agencies offered relatively little employment for women.
the social security program excluded domestic servants waitresses and other predominantly female occupations.
repeating its handling of racial justice the new deal was not actively hostile to feminist aspirations but it accepted prevailing cultural norms.
there was not yet sufficient political pressure from women themselves to persuade the administration to do otherwise.
indeed some of the most important supporters of policies that reinforced traditional gender roles such as social security were themselves women.
608 chapter 11 the culture of slavery resistance was only part of the slave response to slavery.
another was an elaborate process of adaptation.
one of the ways blacks adapted was by developing their own separate culture one that enabled them to sustain a sense of racial pride and unity.
slave religion almost all african americans were christians by the early nineteenth century.
some had converted voluntarily and others in response to coercion from their masters and protestant missionaries who evangelized among them.
masters expected their slaves to join their denominations and worship under the supervision of white ministers.
a separate slave religion was not supposed to exist.
indeed autonomous black churches were banned by law.
nevertheless blacks throughout the south developed their own version of christianity at times incorporating into it such practices as voodoo or other polytheistic religious traditions of africa.
or they simply bent religion to the special circumstances of bondage.
african american religion was often more emotional than its white counterpart and reflected the influence of african customs and practices.
slave prayer meetings routinely involved fervent chanting spontaneous exclamations from the congregation and ecstatic praying for freedom conversion experiences.
black religion was also generally more joyful and affirming than that of many white denominations.
and above all african american religion emphasized the dream of freedom and deliverance.
in their prayers and songs and harriet tubman ca.
1820 1913 was born into slavery in maryland.
in 1849 when her master died she escaped to philadelphia to avoid being sold out of state.
over the next ten years she assisted first members of her own family and then up to 300 other slaves to escape from maryland to freedom.
she is shown here on the far left with some of the slaves she had helped free.
archive photos getty images harriet tubman with escaped slaves cotton slavery and the old south 269 sermons black christians talked and sang of the day when the lord would call us home deliver us to freedom or take us to the promised land while whites generally chose to interpret such language merely as the expression of hopes for life after death many blacks used the images of christian salvation to express their own dreams of f reedom in the present world.
language and music in many areas slaves retained a language of their own.
having arrived in america speaking many different african languages the first generations of slaves had as much difficulty communicating with one another as they did with white people.
to overcome these barriers they learned a simple common language known to linguists as pidgin.
it pidgin retained some african words but it drew primarily if selectively from english.
and while slave language grew more sophisticated as blacks spent more time in america some features of this early pidgin survived in black speech for many generations.
music was especially important in slave society.
again the african heritage was an important influence.
african music relied heavily on rhythm and so did black music in america.
slaves often created instruments for themselves out of whatever materials were at hand.
the banjo became important to slave music.
but more important were voices and song.
field workers often used songs to pass the time since they sang them in the presence of the whites they usually attached relatively innocuous words to them.
but african americans also created more politically challenging music in the relative privacy of their own religious services.
it was there that the tradition of the spiritual emerged.
importance of slave spirituals through the spiritual africans in america not only expressed their religious faith but also lamented their bondage and expressed continuing hope for freedom.
slave songs were rarely written down and often seemed entirely spontaneous but much slave music was really derived from african and caribbean traditions passed on through generations.
performers also improvised variations on songs they had heard.
when the setting permitted it african americans danced to their music dances very different from and much more spontaneous than the formal steps that nineteenth century whites generally learned.
they also used music to accompany another of their important cultural traditions storytelling.
the slave family the slave family was the other crucial institution of black culture in the south.
like religion it suffered from legal restrictions.
nevertheless what we now call the nuclear family consistently emerged as the dominant kinship model among african americans.
black women generally began bearing children at younger ages than most whites often as early as fourteen or fifteen sometimes as a result of unwanted sexual relations with their masters.
slave communities did not condemn premarital pregnancy in the way white society did and black couples would often begin living together before marrying.
it was customary however for couples to marry in a ceremony involving slave marriages formal vows soon after conceiving a child.
husbands and wives on neighboring plantations sometimes visited each other with the permission of their masters but often such visits had to be in secret at night.
family ties among slaves were generally no less strong than those of whites.
270 chapter 12 america unlike in europe wild nature still existed and that america therefore was a nation of greater promise than the overdeveloped lands of the old world.
in later years some of the hudson river painters traveled farther west.
their enormous canvases of great natural wonders the yosemite valley yellowstone the rocky mountains touched a passionate chord among the public.
some of the most famous of their paintings particularly the works of albert bierstadt and thomas moran traveled around the country attracting enormous crowds.
an american literature the effort to create a distinctively american literature made considerable progress in the 1820s through the work of the first great american novelist james fenimore cooper.
what most distinguished his work was its evocation of the american west.
cooper had a lifelong fascination with the human relationship to nature and with the challenges and dangers of americas expansion westward.
his most important novels among them the last of the mohicans 1826 and the deerslayer 1841 examined the experience of rugged white frontiersmen with indians pioneers violence and the law.
cooper evoked the ideal of the independent individual with a natural inner goodness an ideal that many americans feared was in jeopardy.
another later group of american writers displayed more clearly the influence of walt whitman romanticism.
walt whitmans book of poems leaves of grass 1855 celebrated democracy the liberation of the individual spirit and the pleasures of the flesh.
in helping free verse from traditional restrictive conventions he also expressed a yearning for emotional and physical release and personal fulfillment a yearning perhaps rooted in part in his own experience as a homosexual living in a society profoundly intolerant of unconventional sexuality.
less exuberant was herman melville perhaps the greatest american writer of his era.
herman melville moby dick published in 1851 is melvilles most important although not in his lifetime his most popular novel.
it tells the story of ahab the powerful driven captain of a whaling vessel and his obsessive search for moby dick the great white whale that had once maimed him.
it is a story of courage and of the strength of human will.
but it is also a tragedy of pride and revenge.
in some ways it is an uncomfortable metaphor for the harsh individualistic achievement driven culture of ninetee nthcentury america.
literature in the antebellum south the south experienced a literary flowering of its own in the mid nineteenth century and it produced writers and artists who were like their northern counterparts concerned with defining the nature of america.
but white southerners tended to produce very different images of what society was and should be.
the southern writer edgar allan poe produced stories and poems that were primarily edgar allan poe sad and macabre.
his first book tamerlane and other poems 1827 received little recognition.
but later works including his most famous poem the raven 1845 established him as a major if controversial literary figure.
poe evoked images of individuals rising above the narrow confines of intellect and exploring the deeper and often painful and horrifying world of the spirit and emotions.
other southern novelists of the 1830s among them nathaniel beverley tucker william alexander caruthers and john pendleton kennedy produced historical romances and antebellum culture and reform 275 eulogies for the plantation system of the upper south.
the most distinguished of the regions men of letters was william gilmore simms.
for a time his work expressed a broad nationalism that transcended his regional background but by the 1840s he too became a strong defender of southern institutions especially slavery against the encroachments of the north.
there was he believed a unique quality to southern life that fell to intellectuals to defend.
one group of southern writers however produced works that were more broadly american.
these writers from the fringes of plantation society augustus b longstreet joseph g baldwin johnson j hooper and others depicted the world of the backwoods south and focused on ordinary people and poor whites.
instead of romanticizing their subjects they were deliberately and sometimes painfully realistic seasoning their sketches with a robust vulgar humor that was new to american literature.
these southern realists established a tradition of american regional humor that was ultimately to find its most powerful voice in mark twain.
the transcendentalists one of the outstanding expressions of the romantic impulse in america came from a group of new england writers and philosophers known as the transcendentalists.
borrowing heavily from german and english writers and philosophers the transcendentalists promoted a theory of the individual that rested on a distinction between what they called reason and understanding reason as they defined it had little to do with rationality.
it was rather the individuals innate capacity to grasp beauty and truth by giving full expression to the instincts and emotions.
understanding by contrast was the use of margaret fuller as a leading transcendentalist fuller argued for the important relationship between the discovery of the self and the questioning of the prevailing gender roles of her era.
in her famous feminist work women in the nineteenth century fuller wrote many women are considering within themselves what they need and what they have not she encouraged her readers especially women to set aside conventional thinking about the role of women in society.
corbis 276 chapter 12 i ntellect in the narrow artificial ways imposed by society it involved the repression of instinct and the victory of externally imposed learning.
every persons goal therefore should be the cultivation of reason and thus liberation from understanding each individual should strive to transcend the limits of the intellect and allow the emotions the soul to create an original relation to the universe transcendentalist philosophy emerged first in america among a small group of ralph waldo emerson intellectuals centered in concord massachusetts and led by ralph waldo emerson.
a unitarian minister in his youth emerson left the clergy in 1832 to devote himself to writing teaching and lecturing.
in nature 1836 emerson wrote that in the quest for self fulfillment individuals should work for a communion with the natural world in the woods we return to reason and faith.
standing on the bare ground my head bathed by the blithe air and uplifted into infinite space all mean egotism vanishes.
i am part and particle of god in other essays he was even more explicit in advocating a commitment to individuality and the full exploration of inner capacities.
equally influential was henry david thoreau.
thoreau went even further in repudiating henry david thoreau the repressive forces of society which produced he said lives of quiet desperation each individual should work for self realization by resisting pressures to conform to societys expectations and responding instead to his or her own instincts.
thoreaus own effort to free himself immortalized in walden 1854 led him to build a small cabin in the concord woods on the edge of walden pond where he lived alone for two years as simply as he could attempting to liberate himself from what he considered societys excessive interest in material comforts.
in his 1849 essay resistance to civil government he extended his critique of artificial constraints in society to government arguing that when government required an individual to violate his or her own morality it had no legitimate authority.
the proper response was civil disobedience or passive resistance a public refusal to obey unjust laws.
it was a belief that would undergird some antislavery reforms and much later in the mid twentieth century attacks on racial segregation.
the defense of nature as emersons and thoreaus tributes to nature suggest a small but influential group of americans in the nineteenth century feared the impact of capitalism on the integrity of the natural world.
the mountains and cataracts which were to have made poets and painters wrote the essayist oliver wendell holmes have been mined for anthracite and dammed for water power to the transcendentalists and others nature was not just a setting for economic activity as many farmers miners and others believed.
it was the source of deep personal human roots of environmentalism inspiration the vehicle through which individuals could best realize the truth within their own souls.
genuine spirituality they argued did not come from formal religion but through communion with the natural world.
in making such claims the transcendentalists were among the first americans to anticipate the environmental movement of the twentieth century.
they had no scientific basis for their defense of the wilderness and little sense of the twentieth century notion of the interconnectedness of species.
but they did believe in and articulate an essential unity between humanity and nature a spiritual unity they believed without which civilization would be impoverished.
they looked at nature they said with new eyes and with those eyes they saw that behind nature throughout nature spirit is present antebellum culture and reform 277 visions of utopia although transcendentalism was at its heart an individualistic philosophy it helped spawn one of the most famous nineteenth century experiments in communal living brook farm.
the dream of the boston transcendentalist george ripley brook farm was brook farm established in 1841 as an experimental community in west roxbury massachusetts.
there according to ripley individuals would gather to create a new society that would permit every member to have full opportunity for self realization.
all residents would share equally in the labor of the community so that all could share as well in the leisure which was essential for cultivation of the self.
the tension between the ideal of individual freedom and the demands of a communal society however eventually took its toll on brook farm.
many residents became disenchanted and left.
when a fire destroyed the central building of the community in 1847 the experiment dissolved.
among the original residents of brook farm was the writer nathaniel hawthorne who expressed his disillusionment with the experiment and to some extent with transcendentalism in a series of novels.
in the blithedale romance 1852 he wrote scathingly of brook farm itself.
in other novels most notably the scarlet letter 1850 and the house of the seven gables 1851 he wrote equally passionately about the price individuals pay for cutting themselves off from society.
egotism he claimed in an indirect challenge to the transcendentalist faith in the self was the serpent that lay at the heart of human misery.
brook farm was only one of many experimental communities in the years before the civil war.
the scottish industrialist and philanthropist robert owen founded an experimental community in indiana in 1825 which he named new harmony.
it new harmony was to be a village of cooperation in which every resident worked and lived in total equality.
the community was an economic failure but the vision that had inspired it continued to enchant some americans.
dozens of other owenite experiments were established in other locations in the ensuing years.
redefining gender roles many of the new utopian communities were deeply concerned with the relationship between men and women.
some even experimented with radical redefinitions of gender roles.
one of the most enduring of the utopian colonies of the nineteenth century was the oneida community established in 1848 in upstate new york by john humphrey oneida community noyes.
the oneida perfectionists as residents of the community called themselves rejected traditional notions of family and marriage.
all residents noyes declared were married to all other residents there were to be no permanent conjugal ties.
but oneida was not as horrified critics often claimed an experiment in unrestrained free love it was a place where the community carefully monitored sexual behavior where women were protected from unwanted childbearing and where children were raised communally often seeing little of their own parents.
the oneidans took pride in what they considered their liberation of women from the demands of male lust and from the traditional restraints of family.
the shakers too redefined traditional gender roles.
founded by mother ann lee in the 1770s the society of the shakers survived through the twentieth century.
shakers a tiny remnant is left today.
but the shakers attracted a particularly large following in the mid nineteenth century and established more than twenty communities throughout the northeast and northwest in the 1840s.
they derived their name from a unique religious ritual in which members of a congregation would shake themselves free of sin while performing a loud chant and an ecstatic dance.
278 chapter 25 the blitz london the german luftwaffe terrorized london and other british cities in 1940 1941 and again late in the war by bombing civilian areas indiscriminately in an effort to break the spirit of the english people.
the effort failed and the fortitude of the british did much to arouse american support for their cause.
st pauls cathedral largely undamaged throughout the raids looms in the background of this photograph as other buildings crumble under the force of german bombs.
daily mail rex alamy on may 16 in the midst of the offensive roosevelt asked congress for and quickly received an additional 1 billion for defense.
that was one day after winston churchill aid to churchill the new british prime minister had sent roosevelt the first of many long lists of requests for armaments without which he insisted england could not long survive.
some americans including the ambassador to london joseph p kennedy argued that the british plight was already hopeless that any aid to the english was a wasted effort.
but the president was determined to make war materials available to britain.
roosevelt even circumvented the cash and carry provisions of the neutrality acts by giving england fifty american destroyers most of them left over from world war i in return for the right to build american bases on british territory in the caribbean.
he also returned to the factories a number of new airplanes purchased by the american military so that the british could buy them instead.
roosevelt was able to take such steps in part because of a major shift in american public opinion.
by july 1940 more than 66 percent of the public according to opinion polls believed that germany posed a direct threat to the united states.
as a result congress was more willing to permit expanded american assistance to the allies.
congress was also becoming more concerned about the need for preparations for war and in peacetime draft september it approved the burke wadsworth act inaugurating the first peacetime military draft in american history.
but a powerful new isolationist lobby the america first committee whose members included such prominent americans as charles lindbergh and senators gerald nye and the global crisis 1921 1941 623 burton wheeler joined the debate over american policy toward the war.
the lobby had at least the indirect support of a large proportion of the republican party.
through the summer and fall of 1940 the debate was complicated by a presidential campaign.
the campaign of 1940 the biggest political question of 1940 was whether franklin roosevelt would break with tradition and run for an unprecedented third term.
the president himself did not reveal his own wishes.
but by refusing to withdraw from the contest he made it impossible for any rival democrat to establish a claim to the nomination.
and when just before the democratic national convention in july he let it be known that he would accept a draft from his party the issue was virtually settled.
the democrats quickly renominated him and even reluctantly swallowed his choice for vice president agriculture secretary henry a wallace a man too liberal and too controversial for the taste of many party leaders.
the republicans nominated for president a politically inexperienced indiana businessman wendell willkie who benefited from a powerful grassroots movement as well as strong support from the luce magazines especially time and life.
the republicans took positions little different from roosevelts they would keep the country out fdr reelected of war but would extend generous assistance to the allies.
willkie was an appealing figure and a vigorous campaigner and he managed to evoke more public enthusiasm than any republican candidate in decades.
but roosevelt still won decisively.
he received 55 percent of the popular vote to willkies 45 percent and he won 449 electoral votes to willkies 82 neutrality abandoned in the last months of 1940 roosevelt began to make subtle changes in the american role in the war.
great britain was virtually bankrupt and could no longer meet the cash andcarry requirements imposed by the neutrality acts.
the president therefore lend lease proposed a new system for supplying britain lend lease it would allow the federal government not only to sell but also to lend or lease armaments to any nation deemed pivotal to the defense of the united states in other words america could funnel weapons to england on the basis of no more than britains promise to return them when the war was over.
congress enacted the bill by wide margins in march 1941 attacks by german submarines had made shipping lanes in the atlantic extremely dangerous.
the british navy was losing ships more rapidly than it could replace them and was finding it difficult to transport materials across the atlantic from america.
roosevelt argued that the western atlantic was a neutral zone and the responsibility of the american nations.
by july 1941 therefore american ships were patrolling the ocean as far east as iceland.
at first germany did little to challenge these obviously hostile american actions.
by september 1941 however the situation had changed.
nazi forces had invaded the soviet union in june of that year.
when the soviets did not surrender as many had predicted they would roosevelt persuaded congress to extend lend lease privileges to them.
now american industry was providing vital assistance to hitlers foes on two fronts and the american navy was protecting the flow of those goods to europe.
in september nazi submarines began a concerted torpedo campaign against american vessels.
roosevelt ordered american ships to fire on german submarines on sight in october nazi submarines hit two american destroyers and sank one of them the reuben james killing many co ns ider t he s o urc e joint statement by president roosevelt and prime minister churchill in august 1941 franklin roosevelt and winston churchill met aboard a british vessel off the coast of newfoundland.
the president made no military commitments but he did join with the prime minister in releasing a document that became known as the atlantic charter.
the two nations called for a new world order based on selfdetermination economic cooperation and antimilitarism.
the president of the united states and the prime minister mr churchill representing his majestys government in the united kingdom have met at sea.
they have considered the dangers to world civilization arising from the policies of military domination by conquest upon which the hitlerite government of germany and other governments associated therewith have embarked and have made clear the stress which their countries are respectively taking for their safety in the face of these dangers.
they have agreed upon the following joint declaration joint declaration of the president of the united states of america and the prime minister mr churchill representing his majestys government in the united kingdom being met together deem it right to make known certain common principles in the national policies of their respective countries on which they base their hopes for a better future for the world.
first their countries seek no aggrandizement territorial or other second they desire to see no territorial changes that do not accord with the freely expressed wishes of the peoples concerned third they respect the right of all peoples to choose the form of government under which they will live and they wish to see 624 sovereign rights and self government restored to those who have been forcibly deprived of them fourth they will endeavor with due respect for their existing obligations to further the enjoyment by all states great or small victor or vanquished of access on equal terms to the trade and to the raw materials of the world which are needed for their economic prosperity fifth they desire to bring about the fullest collaboration between all nations in the economic field with the objector securing for all improved labor standards economic advancement and social security sixth after the final destruction of the nazi tyranny they hope to see established a peace which will afford to all nations the means of dwelling in safety within their own boundaries and which will afford assurance that all the men in all the lands may live out their lives in freedom from fear and want seventh such a peace should enable all men to traverse the high seas and oceans without hindrance eighth they believe that all of the n ations of the world for realistic as well as spiritual reasons must come to the abandonment of the use of force.
since no future peace can be maintained if land sea or air armaments continue to be employed by nations which threaten or may threaten aggression outside of their frontiers they believe pending the establishment of a wider and permanent system of general security that the disarmament of such nations is essential.
they will likewise aid and encourage all other practicable measures which will lighten for peace loving peoples the crushing burden of armaments.
franklin d roosevelt winston s churchill understand analyze evaluate 1 what inspired this meeting between the united states and great britain in the atlantic.
what goals did the two nations set for future international diplomacy and the rights of nations.
2 which mutual goals reflect the shared experience of the great depression.
which reflect the shared experience of world war i.
source the atlantic charter published in department of state executive agreement series no.
236 american sailors.
congress quickly voted to allow the united states to arm its merchant vessels and to sail all the way into belligerent ports.
the united states the atlantic charter had in effect launched a naval war against germany.
meanwhile roosevelt had met recently with churchill to issue a statement of shared goals known as the atlantic charter.
see consider the source joint statement by president roosevelt and prime minister churchill the road to pearl harbor japan in the meantime was still extending its empire in the pacific.
in september 1940 the japanese signed the tripartite pact a loose defensive alliance with germany and italy although in reality the european axis powers never developed a very strong relationship with japan.
in july 1941 japanese troops moved into indochina and seized the capital of vietnam a colony of france.
the united states having broken japanese codes knew japans next target was to be the oil rich dutch east indies and when tokyo failed to respond to roosevelts stern warnings the president froze all japanese assets in the united states severely limiting japans ability to purchase needed american supplies.
tokyo now faced a choice.
either it would have to repair relations with the united states to restore the flow of oil and other supplies or it would have to find those supplies elsewhere most notably by seizing british and dutch possessions in hideki tojo in power the pacific.
in october militants in tokyo forced the moderate prime minister out of office and replaced him with the leader of the war party general hideki tojo.
by late november the state department had given up on the possibility of a peaceful settlement.
american intelligence had decoded japanese messages that made clear a japanese attack was imminent.
but washington did not know where the attack would take place.
most officials continued to believe that the japanese would not move first against american territory but against british or dutch possessions to the south.
a combination of confusion miscalculation and underestimation of the japanese military caused the government to overlook indications that japan intended a direct attack on american forces.
at 7 55 a m on sunday december 7 1941 a wave of japanese bombers attacked the united states naval base at pearl harbor in hawaii part of a coordinated pattern of attacks against american and british holdings in asia.
a second wave came an hour later.
within two hours the united states lost 8 battleships 3 cruisers pearl harbor attacked 4 other vessels 188 airplanes and several vital shore installations.
more than 2 400 soldiers and sailors died and another 1 000 were injured.
the japanese suffered only light losses.
american forces were now greatly diminished in the pacific although by a fortunate accident no american aircraft carriers the heart of the pacific fleet had been at pearl harbor on december 7.
nevertheless the raid on hawaii unified the american people behind war.
on december 8 after a stirring speech by the president the senate voted 625 626 chapter 13 the claim was well grounded in missouri law and in 1850 the circuit court in which scott filed the suit declared him free.
by now john sanford the brother of the surgeons widow was claiming ownership of scott and he appealed the circuit court ruling to the state supreme court which reversed the earlier decision.
when scott appealed to the federal courts sanfords attorneys claimed that scott had no standing to sue because he was not a citizen.
the supreme court which misspelled sanfords name in its decision was so divided that it was unable to issue a single ruling on the case.
the thrust of the various rulings however was a stunning defeat for the antislavery movement.
chief justice roger taney taneys pro slavery decision who wrote one of the majority opinions declared that scott could not bring a suit in the federal courts because he was not a citizen.
blacks had no claim to citizenship taney argued.
slaves were property and the fifth amendment prohibited congress from taking property without due process of law consequently taney concluded congress possessed no authority to pass a law depriving persons of their slave property in the territories.
the missouri compromise therefore had always been unconstitutional.
the ruling did nothing to challenge the right of an individual state to prohibit slavery within its borders but the statement that the federal government was powerless to act on the issue was a drastic and startling one.
southern whites were elated the highest tribunal in the land had sanctioned parts of the most extreme southern argument.
in the north the decision produced widespread dismay.
the decision the new york tribune wrote is entitled to just so much moral weight as would be the judgment of a majority of those congregated in any washington bar room republicans threatened that when they won control of the national government they would reverse the decision by packing the court with new members.
deadlock over kansas president buchanan timidly endorsed the dred scott decision.
at the same time he tried to resolve the controversy over kansas by supporting its admission to the union as a slave state.
in response the pro slavery territorial legislature called an election for delegates to a constitutional convention.
the free state residents refused to participate claiming that the legislature had discriminated against them in drawing district lines.
as a result the pro slavery forces won control of the convention which met in 1857 at lecompton framed a constitution legalizing slavery and refused to give voters a chance to reject it.
when an election for a new territorial legislature was called the antislavery groups turned out in force and won a majority.
the new antislavery legislature promptly submitted the lecompton constitution to the voters who rejected it by more than 10 000 votes.
both sides had resorted to fraud and violence but it was clear nevertheless that a majority of the people of kansas opposed slavery.
buchanan however pressured congress to admit kansas under the pro slavery lecompton constitution.
stephen a douglas and other northern and western democrats refused to support the presidents proposal which died in the house of representatives.
finally in april 1858 congress approved a compromise the lecompton constitution would be submitted to the voters of kansas again.
if it was approved kansas would be admitted to the union if it was rejected statehood lecompton constitution rejected would be postponed.
again kansas voters decisively rejected the lecompton constitution.
not until the closing months of buchanans administration in 1861 did kansas enter the union as a free state.
the impending crisis 317 the emergence of lincoln given the gravity of the sectional crisis the congressional elections of 1858 took on a special importance.
of particular note was the united states senate contest in illinois which pitted stephen a douglas the most prominent northern democrat against abraham lincoln who was largely unknown outside illinois.
lincoln was a successful lawyer who had long been involved in state politics.
he had served several terms in the illinois legislature and one undistinguished term in congress.
but he was not a national figure like douglas and so he tried to increase his visibility by engaging douglas in a series of debates.
the lincoln douglas lincoln douglas debates debates attracted enormous crowds and received wide attention.
at the heart of the debates was a basic difference on the issue of slavery.
douglas appeared to have no moral position on the issue lincoln claimed.
he stated that douglas did not care whether slavery was voted up or voted down lincolns opposition to slavery was more fundamental.
if the nation could accept that blacks were not entitled to basic human rights he argued then it could accept that other groups immigrant laborers for example could be deprived of rights too.
and if slavery were to extend into the western territories he argued opportunities for poor white laborers to better their lots there would be lost.
the nations future lincoln argued reflecting the central idea of the republican party rested on the spread of free labor.
lincoln believed slavery was morally wrong but he was not an abolitionist.
that was in part because he could not envision an easy alternative to slavery in the areas where it already existed.
he shared the prevailing view among northern whites that the black race was not prepared to live on equal terms with whites.
but even while lincoln accepted the inferiority of black people he continued to believe that they were entitled to basic rights.
i have no purpose to introduce political and social equality between the white and the black races.
but i hold that.
there is no reason in the world why the negro is not entitled to all the natural rights enumerated in the declaration of independence the right to life liberty and the pursuit of happiness.
i hold that he is as much entitled to these as the white man lincoln and his party would arrest the further spread of slavery.
they would not directly challenge it where it already existed but would trust that the institution would gradually die out there of its own accord.
douglass popular sovereignty position satisfied his followers sufficiently to produce a democratic majority in the state legislature which returned him to the senate but aroused little enthusiasm.
lincoln by contrast lost the election but emerged with a growing following both in and beyond the state.
and outside illinois the elections went heavily against the democrats.
the party retained control of the senate but lost its majority in the house with the result that the congressional sessions of 1858 and 1859 were bitterly deadlocked.
john browns raid the battles in congress however were almost entirely overshadowed by an event that enraged and horrified the south.
in the fall of 1859 john brown the antislavery radical whose bloody actions in kansas had inflamed the crisis there staged an even more dramatic episode this time in the south itself.
with private encouragement and financial aid from some prominent abolitionists he made elaborate plans to seize a mountain fortress in virginia from which he believed he could foment a slave insurrection in the south.
on october 16 he and a group of eighteen followers attacked and seized control of a united 318 chapter 27 almost immediately on june 27 1950 the president ordered limited american military assistance to south korea and on the same day he appealed to the united nations to intervene.
the soviet union was boycotting the security council at the time to protest the councils refusal to recognize the new communist government of china and was thus unable to exercise its veto power.
as a result american delegates were able to win un agreement to a resolution calling for international assistance to the rhee government.
on june 30 the united states ordered its own ground forces into korea and truman appointed general douglas macarthur to command the un operations there.
several other nations provided assistance and troops but the un armies were in fact overwhelmingly american.
after a surprise american invasion at inchon in september had routed the north korean forces from the south and sent them back across the 38th parallel truman gave north korean forces june 25 1950 sept.
10 1950 chinese and north korean counterattack nov 26 1950 jan.
24 1951 china manchuria china manchuria r final un counterattack jan 25 1951 april 21 1951 r un counterattack sept 15 1950 nov.
24 1950 n tume 100 mi chongjin 200 km n tume 100 mi chongjin 200 km chosan chosan north korea r.
r lu ya u yal farthest extent of un counteroffensive nov 24 1950 se a of j apan pyongyang sea of japan pyongyang armistice line nov 1951 july 1953 north korea kaesong panmunjom inchon landing sept 15 1950 kaesong panmunjom 38th parallel seoul inchon seoul extent of communist counterattack jan 12 1951 ma car thu yellow se a r yellow se a 38th parallel south korea un defensive line sept 10 1950 pusan south korea pusan these two maps illustrate the changing fortunes of un forces which were mostly american during the 1950 1953 korean war.
the map at the left shows the extent of the north korean invasion of south korea in 1950 communist forces for a time controlled all of korea except a small area around pusan in the southeast.
on september 15 1950 un troops under douglas macarthur landed in force at inchon and soon drove the north koreans back across the border.
macarthur then pursued the north koreans well into their own territory.
the map at right shows the very different circumstances once the chinese entered the war in november 1950 chinese forces drove the un army back below the 38th parallel and briefly deep into south korea below seoul.
the un troops fought back to the prewar border between north and south korea late in 1951 but the war then bogged down into a stalemate that continued for a year and a half.
what impact did the korean war have on american politics in the early 1950s.
the korean war 1950 1953 the cold war 671 macarthur permission to pursue the communists into their own territory.
hoping now to create a unified independent and democratic korea the president had moved beyond simple containment to an attempted rollback of communist power.
from invasion to stalemate for several weeks macarthurs invasion of north korea proceeded smoothly.
on october 19 the capital pyongyang fell to the un forces.
victory seemed near until the chinese government alarmed by the movement of american forces toward its china intervenes border intervened.
in early november eight divisions of the chinese army entered the war.
the un offensive stalled and then collapsed.
through december 1950 outnumbered american forces were forced into a rapid bitter retreat in numbingly cold temperatures.
within weeks communist forces had pushed the americans back below the 38th parallel once again and had recaptured the south korean capital of seoul.
by mid january 1951 the rout had ceased and by march the un armies had managed to regain much of the territory they had recently lost taking back seoul and pushing the communists north of the 38th parallel for the second time.
with that the war turned into a protracted stalemate.
from the start truman had been determined to avoid a direct conflict with china which he feared might lead to a new world war.
once china truman macarthur controversy entered the war he began seeking a negotiated solution to the struggle.
but general macarthur had ideas of his own.
the united states was really fighting the chinese macarthur argued.
it should therefore attack china itself if not through an actual invasion then at least by bombing communist forces massing north of the chinese border with conventional or even atomic weapons.
in march 1951 he indicated his unhappiness with trumans reluctance to invade china.
in a public letter to house republican leader joseph w martin he concluded there is no substitute for victory his position had wide popular support.
yet the release of the martin letter struck the president as intolerable insubordination.
on april 11 1951 he relieved macarthur of his command.
sixty nine percent of the american people supported macarthur a gallup poll reported.
when the general returned to the united states later in 1951 he was greeted with wild enthusiasm.
public criticism of truman finally abated somewhat when a number of prominent military figures including general omar bradley publicly supported the presidents decision.
but substantial hostility toward truman remained.
in the meantime the korean stalemate continued.
negotiations between the opposing forces began at panmunjom in july 1951 but the talks and the war dragged on until 1953 limited mobilization the war in korea produced only a limited american military commitment abroad.
it also created only a limited economic mobilization at home.
truman set up the office of defense mobilization to fight inflation by holding down prices and discouraging high union wage demands.
when these cautious regulatory efforts failed the president took more drastic action.
railroad workers walked off the job in 1951 and truman who considered the workers demands inflationary ordered the government to seize control of the railroads.
in 1952 during a nationwide steel strike truman seized the steel mills citing his powers as commander in chief.
but in a 6 to 3 decision the supreme court ruled that the president had exceeded his authority and truman was forced to relent.

chapter 21 21 3 the end of silent films by the end of the decade hollywood began advertising all talking singing movies like cocoanuts a turbulent decade the twenties that deemphasized traditional victorian values of thrift and restraint.
americans instead increasingly relied on credit to buy cars radios and household appliances.
radio played a key role in forging a national mass culture.
over 60 percent of american homes acquired radios in the twenties which until 1924 required headphones.
americans from all walks of life now simultaneously gathered around their radios to learn election results.
baseball fans throughout the nation listened to the play by play of the world series radio broadcasts that made new york yankee player babe ruth a national hero.
farmers closely followed weather reports and bankers digested the days financial news.
there is radio music in the air every night everywhere one newspaper observed.
big companies like walgreen drugs and palmolive soap started sponsoring nationally syndicated radio shows to boost sales of their products.
these weekly comedies and dramas filled with plugs for the sponsors merchandise cultivated shared tastes in entertainment and products.
americans increasingly bought the same brand name toothpaste at a chain store like woolworths.
big business was not alone in recognizing the power of radio however.
local radio shows designed specifically for union members religious groups immigrant communities or african americans helped strengthen bonds within these subcultures as well.
movie stars and athletes enjoyed nationwide adulation in the twenties.
silent film actors like the comedian charlie chaplin the sex symbol rudolph valentino and americas sweetheart mary pickford became household names among a movie going public that avidly purchased fan magazines filled with glossy photos of their favorite stars.
by the end of the decade hollywood was producing films with sound a novelty highlighted in this 1929 poster 21 3 for the marx brothers first film.
the verbal repartee of the comedy trio delighted audiences.
as silent films disappeared so did the careers of many silent film stars whose artistic talents lay in physical not vocal expression.
meanwhile professional sports gave rise to a slew of national sports heroes such as the boxer jack dempsey.
in an era dominated by cultural heroes none rose to greater prominence than the pilot charles a lindbergh.
the age of flight charles a lindbergh the feats of pilot charles a lindbergh ushered the nation into the age of flight.
commentators called the sky the new frontier a label loaded with potent historical significance for americans.
by the late twenties a time when machines seemed to matter more than people the image of the lone pilot against the vast blue sky recalled the pioneer spirit of the nineteenth century.
lindbergh piloted his plane the spirit of st louis on the first ever nonstop solo flight from new york to paris on may 21 1927 flying without the radio or radar that help modern pilots navigate lindbergh relied on a few navigational instruments and looking out the window to locate his position on a paper map as he flew.
sitting in a wicker chair with sandwiches and water under it lindbergh had a rubber raft on board in case he was forced to land in the cold atlantic and a flashlight to examine his wings for ice.
how did a mass popular culture emerge in the twenties.
watch the video video lecture 1920s media cars and planes the promise of the twenties the spirit of st louis is a wonderful plane.
its like a living creature gliding along smoothly happily as though a successful flight means as much to it as to me charles a lindbergh evoking the perfect symmetry between man and machine lindberghs flight lasted 33 5 hours enough time to make him the hero of the decade.
this photomontage a composite photo made by pasting together separate images of the spirit of st louis passing the eiffel tower combined the symbol of paris with the image of lindberghs iconic plane 21 4.
had we searched all america we could not have found a better type than young lindbergh to represent the spirit and high purpose of our people the jubilant american ambassador wired president coolidge amid the celebrations that followed lindberghs landing in paris.
lindberghs triumph assured americans that individual initiative still mattered and that technological advancement benefited humankind at a time when the recent industrialized slaughter on the western front see chapter 2 models of settlement english colonial societies 1590 1710 theodore de brys 1619 engraving the chickahominy become new englishmen from his book america portrays treaty negotiations between virginia indians and the english.
captain samuel argall the englishman negotiating the treaty sits on a mat with a tribal elder.
another tribal leader addresses his people informing them about the terms of the treaty which was meant to promote trade and peace between the english and the virginia indians.
as the engraving title which refers to the chickahominy as new englishmen suggests the english insisted that indian tribes submit to english rule and accept the english king as their lord.
by contrast the indians believed that negotiating a treaty with the english did not mean that they had given up control of their own political affairs.
these differing visions of diplomacy led to conflict between native americans and english settlers throughout the seventeenth century.
at the dawn of the 1600s england trailed far behind spain and france in the race to exploit the wealth of the americas.
by 1700 however england had become a formidable colonial power in both north america and the caribbean.
in contrast to spain and france whose colonization efforts relied on active support from the monarchy and church englands first efforts to colonize america relied on joint stock companies which were privately financed commercial ventures.
the two great early english experiments in colonization in virginia and new england faced many challenges in their early years including how to deal with local indian populations.
the solution for the english was not simply rendering the indians politically subservient to the king but also segregating themselves from the indians whenever possible.
relations between settlers and indians complicated colonial politics for most of the seventeenth century.
bacons rebellion 1676 a popular uprising in virginia triggered by colonists conflict over indian policy shook the foundations of the colony.
in new england persistent conflict between indians and settlers exacerbated existing social and economic tensions and contributed to the worst outbreak of witchcraft accusations in colonial america the salem witchcraft hysteria 1692.
the reassertion of political control by england whose glorious revolution 1688 contributed to the emergence of a new more stable colonial world helped facilitate the resolution of the witchcraft crisis.
in the years to come colonists would often invoke the political and constitutional ideas of the glorious revolution to defend their liberties.
our first work is expulsion of the savages to gain the free range of the country.
for it is infinitely better to have no heathen among us who at best are but thorns in our side than to be at peace and league with them virginia governor francis wyatt 1623 1624 chapter 2 models of settlement english colonial societies 1590 1710 new england the same year that the virginia company of london obtained a charter to settle what is now virginia another group of investors organized a rival company the virginia company of plymouth intending to settle north of virginia.
their charter included lands as far north as modern bangor maine.
in 1607 the company established a small plantation at the sagadahoc river known now as the kennebec.
the fierce maine winter however proved too much for the colonists who abandoned the settlement and returned to england.
although the regions severe winters seemed to have doomed the prospects of settling this region a group of protestant religious dissenters known as puritans expressed interest in migrating to new england.
the ascension of queen elizabeth i 1558 1603 who had embraced the protestant faith and supported the ideals of the reformation helped further the progress of the english reformation.
the queens support for protestantism the name puritan is very aptly stopped well short of what the most zealous reformers had sought.
elizabeth given to these men.
because opted to chart a middle path between they think themselves.
more traditional catholicism and the pure than others.
and separate most radical wing of the protestant reformation.
those who urged further themselves from all other reform earned themselves the name churches and congregations puritans because of their desire to purify as spotted and defiled the church of england of all vestiges of john whitgift catholic belief and practice.
elizabeth never married and produced elizabethan clergyman 1573 no heir so the royal line passed to her cousin king james vi of scotland who became james i of england when elizabeth died in 1603 although eager to assert his power james was not particularly interested in pursuing the ideals of the protestant reformation.
when his son charles i ascended the throne in 1625 and took a french catholic woman for his wife proponents of reform feared the worst a revival of catholicism.
in response to religious developments in england two factions emerged within the reformation movement.
puritans continued to believe that reform was possible within the church of england.
separatists bent on further reformation argued for complete separation from the established church.
plymouth plantation in 1608 a large group of separatists fled to holland renowned for its religious toleration and a haven for protestant dissenters including other calvinists from france and england.
life there proved difficult for the english separatists.
the problem was not persecution but rather the corrupting influences of the affluent urban culture of the dutch republic.
describing the separatists experience in the dutch university town of why were english reformers called puritans.
leiden william bradford recalled the manifold temptations of the place and expressed particular concern that the separatists children would be drawn away by evil examples into extravagant and dangerous courses jan steen a dutch painter who explored the theme of corruption in many of his paintings captured these fears in his portrayals of dutch urban life.
images as history corruption versus piety examines one of steens moralizing paintings about the temptations of dutch life.
new england images as history corruption versus piety in his painting the topsy turvy world jan steen conjures up a chaotic household that seems to be the exact opposite of the ideals of domestic tranquility godliness and order.
the painting depicts a multitude of sins.
the seated couple in the middle represents unbridled sensuality.
the duck on the shoulder of the piously dressed man mocks the couples commitment to religion.
neither man nor woman seems aware of the lewd behavior around them.
what moral lessons does this painting teach and how does the artist represent the vices of city life in holland.
a small child unattended smokes a pipe while another unsupervised youth steals a coin from a purse in the cupboard against the wall.
the duck on the shoulder of the man mocks his false piety.
the man hides his face in his book rather than restore order to the chaos around him.
jan steen the topsy turvy world the immodestly dressed woman in the center of the painting leers at viewers.
she rests a wine glass suggestively in the lap of the drunken man seated next to her.
the animals represent vice and disorder.
instead of sitting obediently in the background the dog scavenges for food on the table while a pig roots around on the floor for a meal.
read the document mayflower compact what does jan steens painting tell us about the world english separatists encountered in holland.
chapter 2 models of settlement english colonial societies 1590 1710 heresy.
antinomians took the logic of calvinism to its extreme the elect if possessed of true saving grace need not follow earthly laws.
if good works really had no connection to salvation then why follow earthly laws.
most puritans feared that the antinomian heresy would lead to moral anarchy.
for additional discussion see competing visions antinomianism or tolerance the puritan dilemma.
the puritans also charged hutchinson with violating the fifth commandment by refusing to honor and obey the ministers who were the colonys patriarchs.
in 1637 hutchinson was hauled before a special court and subjected to a grueling examination.
during this ordeal she brilliantly parried virtually all of the questions posed.
at the end of her examination however she made a serious mistake.
when asked how she could be so sure of her actions she claimed that god spoke directly to her by an immediate revelation.
puritans believed that god spoke to his chosen people only by his revealed word the bible not by direct revelations.
for winthrop and others the claim that god spoke directly to hutchinson exposed the dangerous antinomian strain in her thinking.
if this was true anyone including those who acted immorally could simply claim to be acting according to a prophetic voice from god.
hutchinson was convicted and banished from massachusetts bay colony.
she headed south to rhode island where she and several of her followers sought refuge before eventually settling on what is now long island near the dutch town of new amsterdam in the colony of new netherlands.
while puritans in new england continued striving to build their city upon a hill and protect it from heresy puritans on the other side of the atlantic had been locked in a protracted political struggle with king charles i this led to civil war in 1642 emerging victorious parliament tried the king for crimes against his people and executed him in 1649 the commander of parliamentary forces oliver cromwell assumed the title of lord protector of england with nearly monarchical powers.
while raising an army against the king parliament had decided to lift censorship and allow freedom of the press for the first time in english history.
to gain popular support and recruit soldiers for their army parliament also inaugurated a new policy of religious toleration for all protestants.
with censorship lifted a host of sectarian religious groups emerged during the civil war.
one of these sects the society of friends or quakers believed each individual possessed a divine spark why was ann hutchinson such a threat to the puritan elite.
of grace an inner light that could lead him or her to salvation.
the origin of the word quaker is complex.
the leader of the quakers george fox had earned this name when he reminded a magistrate that the righteous ought to tremble at the word of the lord the name stuck because of the nature of quaker worship.
as one contemporary noted men women and children would fall into quaking fits in response to the workings of grace within themselves.
quakers rejected the need for any ministry at all.
at their meetings anyone who felt the spirit move within them was entitled to preach.
expansion and conflict in contrast to the disease ridden chesapeake new englands environment was reasonably healthy and the population expanded owing to natural increase.
infant mortality in new england was lower than in england.
although exact figures are difficult to obtain historians estimate that just over 10 percent of the children born in colonial new england died before their first birthday.
the comparable figure in england was about 15 percent.
while few people in england lived past middle age about 50 percent of new englanders who survived to age 20 would have lived until their late 60s.
new englands growing population combined with the relative longevity of its inhabitants created enormous pressure to acquire additional land so that children could start their own families.
religious leaders played a prominent role in new englands early expansion.
the puritan minister thomas hooker led a group of massachusetts settlers in 1636 and founded the town of hartford connecticut the reverend john davenport left massachusetts and established the town of new haven connecticut a year later.
in 1638 representatives from connecticut towns drafted a frame of government the fundamental orders of connecticut.
expansion into the connecticut valley brought new englanders into direct conflict with the local pequot indians who refused to submit to english authority.
in the resulting fierce war against the pequots new englanders exploited intertribal rivalries to gain an advantage over the pequots.
new englanders aligned with tribes that sought to take advantage of the colonists firearms to destroy a rival tribe.
the ferocity of english warfare horrified the narragansett and mohegan indians traditional enemies of the pequots who joined forces with the english in the war against the pequots.
new england competing visions antinomianism or toleration the puritan dilemma during the english civil war english puritans embraced the idea of religious toleration for all protestants.
new englanders who continued to oppose such policies gained a reputation for intolerance.
nathaniel ward a massachusetts puritan defended new englands polices against english criticism.
in new england roger williams championed the new idea of toleration.
for williams the religious and secular spheres were entirely separate.
freedom in one sphere had no necessary implications for actions in the other sphere.
in his pamphlet the simple cobbler of aggwam nathaniel ward captured the views of puritan new englanders who opposed religious toleration.
according to ward religious toleration invariably led to ethical relativism and moral anarchy.
without religion to guide behaviour how could one avoid the temptation to indulge the basest passions.
wee have beene reputed.
wild opinionists swarmed into a remote wildernes to find elbow roome for our phanatick doctrines and practises i trust our diligence past and constant sedulity against such persons and courses will plead better things for us.
i dare take upon me to bee the herald of new engiand so farre as to proclaime to the world in the name of our colony that all.
antinomians anabaptists and other enthusiasts shall have free liberty to keepe away from us and such as will come to be gone as fast as they can the sooner the better.
that state that will give liberty of conscience in matters of religion must give liberty of conscience and conversation in their morall laws or else the fiddle will be out of tune and some of the strings crack.
experience will teach churches and christians that it is farre better to live in a state united though a little corrupt then in a state whereof some part is incorrupt and all the rest divided.
the ranters a true antinomian sect that emerged in the chaos of the english civil war believed that salvation exempted one from all earthly law including laws prohibiting sexual misconduct.
read the document john calvin on predestination roger williams followed the logic of puritanism in a different direction.
in his zeal to purify the church williams came to believe it was impossible for any earthly power to rid itself of corruption and false piety.
to avoid contaminating the purity of religion he proposed separating church and state.
williams developed the metaphor of the state as a ship.
although passengers were free to worship as they saw fit this did not exempt them from following the orders of the captain.
is the metaphor of the ship of state an effective rebuttal to those who feared that liberty would become anarchy.
that ever i should speak or write a title that tends to such an infinite liberty of conscience is a mistake and which i have ever disclaimed and abhorred.
to prevent such mistakes i shall at present only propose this case there goes many a ship to sea with many hundred souls in one ship whose weal and woe is common and is a true picture of a commonwealth or a human combination or society.
it hath fallen out sometimes that both papists and protestants jews and turks may be embarked in one ship upon which supposal i affirm that all the liberty of conscience that ever i pleaded for turns upon these two hinges that none of the papists protestants jews or turks be forced to come to the ships prayers of worship nor compelled from their own particular prayers or worship if they practice any.
i further add that i never denied that notwithstanding this liberty the commander of this ship ought to command the ships course yea and also command that justice peace and sobriety be kept and practiced both among the seamen and all the passengers.
why did puritans oppose religious toleration.
chapter 22 a new deal for america the great depression 1929 1940 on monday october 20 1929 the downward spiral began.
stock prices plummeted three days later on black thursday when a record 12 9 million shares changed hands.
on black tuesday the following week october 29 1929 16 million shares were traded and losses totaled 14 billion.
that evening james rosenberg a wall street bankruptcy lawyer who was also an artist etched an expressionist portrait of the chaotic scenes he had witnessed.
rosenbergs oct 29 dies irae day of wrath 1929 22 1 captured the panic that swept wall street as investors raced to the new york stock exchange.
in the lithograph the nations financial institutions teeter on the verge of collapse frightened crowds gather in the streets and dark clouds hover over a sky filled with stockbrokers jumping to their deaths.
throughout the crisis rumors circulated about ruined investors committing suicide by leaping from the citys skyscrapers and ambulance sirens wailed continually as crews responded to false alarms.
22 1 oct 29 dies irae day of wrath 1929 to convey the panic that swept wall street after the stock market crashed james rosenberg employed apocalyptic biblical imagery traditionally used to depict gods wrath as the world comes to an end.
the photo shows investors racing to the new york stock exchange.
what factors led to the stock market crash in 1929.
the early days of the depression hoovers response to the depression when the stock market crashed no one knew that this was the beginning of a ten year ordeal.
the great depression lasted from 1929 to 1939 the most devastating and longest economic crisis in american history.
in the 1920s the federal government played a relatively minor role in the economy and conservative businessmen urged hoover to keep it that way.
do nothing the laissez faire capitalists told the president setting in motion a political debate over government intervention that would dominate the depression era.
rejecting the laissez faire suggestion hoover envisioned the government fostering a spirit of teamwork that encouraged americans to work together as the nation weathered the economic downturn.
in keeping with his ideas of service minded individualism he brought the leaders of banking industry and labor to the white house and urged them to do their bit to keep the economy afloat.
responding to hoovers plea industry agreed not to lay off workers or cut wages and labor leaders accepted a shorter workday to create more jobs.
hoover asked state governments to accelerate their road and public building projects to add jobs in their communities.
hoover also stepped up hiring for long planned federal construction projects including the hoover dam in the west and asked congress to extend the tariff on manufactured goods to agricultural imports.
congress complied in 1930 raising tariffs to their highest level ever.
when other nations retaliated with their own high tariffs american companies and farmers lost overseas markets.
as a result the world and the united states plunged deeper into economic depression.
in orchestrating this unprecedented federal response to an economic depression hoover stayed within limits acceptable to conservatives.
most fiscal conservatives wanted government built roads and a high protective tariff and preferred non governmental solutions to economic problems.
when it came to helping needy citizens directly hoover went no further than asking local governments and charities to assume their traditional role of distributing food and clothing to the poor.
this stance surprised hoovers progressive supporters given his previous triumph organizing massive international relief efforts to feed hungry europeans during and after world war i it was not a question of helping people hoover asserted.
it is solely a question of the best method by which hunger and cold shall be prevented he explained.
to hoover the american tradition of self help made relief the responsibility of local governments and charities.
when the crisis entered its second year u s steel announced a ten percent wage cut.
other companies followed suit and within ten days american business had slashed millions of workers wages and begun massive layoffs.
the nations deepening financial woes convinced hoover to lend federal money to businesses and states.
this decision was a dramatic break from past practice.
in previous financial panics and depressions private bankers had put up the money needed for recovery and presidents had cut federal spending to ensure a balanced budget.
in 1932 by proposing a direct economic role for the government in ending the depression herbert hoover the man who wanted to decrease how did hoover respond to the initial economic crisis.
several developments in american colonial history helped reinforce the growth of legislative power.
although voting in america remained restricted to adult white male landholders the percentage of such individuals in the colonies was larger than it was in britain.
the larger voting population meant that a higher percentage of americans were politically active than britons.
additionally none of the colonies had anything like an upper house comparable to parliaments house of lords.
the governors councils the closest thing to a colonial upper house had little power.
americas nativeborn elites were not a titled british aristocracy with a distinct legislative body the house of lords to guard their privileges and powers.
ambitious young americans from good families like the young thomas jefferson expected to enter politics by election to the lower house of the colonial assembly not by inheriting a place in an aristocratic upper house.
culture and society in the eighteenth century in part the actions of colonial assemblies filled a void that the structure of the empire had created.
in an age in which a letter could take months to travel from london to the colonies it was imperative that local assemblies have the authority to deal with a host of governmental responsibilities from organizing the militia to providing for the poor.
although colonists had gained the right to legislate on local matters they were also part of the larger british empire.
most colonies had agents who represented their interests in london and lobbied parliament.
apart from these agents the colonies had no actual representation in parliament no member of parliament was elected from the colonies or watched over their interests.
in this regard the american colonies were no worse off than were other british colonies including barbados and jamaica.
even within britain newer cities such as manchester and birmingham had no representation in parliament and at least one town dunwich continued to send two members to parliament even though the town to take a more active role in managing the empire and collecting greater revenues in the 1760s the colonial practices and british theory collided.
royal governors repeatedly complained that the colonial assemblies had exercised authority that did not belong to them and frustrated their plans.
the royal governors dependence on the assemblies for their salaries weakened their position with regard to the legislature.
by controlling the power of the purse colonial assemblies were able to frustrate the plans of the most ambitious royal governors if they wished to collect their salaries the governors dared not anger the assemblies.
colonial assemblies came to act like and think of themselves as mini parliaments with full legislative power over local matters.
in 1728 the massachusetts legislature reminded the governor that it was the undoubted right of all english men.
to raise and dispose of moneys for the publick service of their own free accord without any compulsion my lord cornbury has and dos still make use of an unfortunate custom of dressing himself in womens cloaths and of exposing himself in that garb upon the ramparts to the view of the public in that dress he draws a world of spectators about him and consequently as many censures letter spreading rumors of lord cornburys cross dressing 1709 had literally crumbled into the north sea.
to cast their votes legal residents of dunwich had to row out to the location of the former town hall which was submerged.
according to traditional whig political theory members of parliament were expected to represent the whole nation not a particular locality.
rather than speak for any local interest representatives were supposed to act in the larger public good.
by the 1760s the differences between american and british practices had become so great that they prompted a new theoretical defense.
thus champions of the traditional british practice argued that all britons including the colonists had virtual representation in parliament even if they had no actual representatives to guard their interests.
as long as parliament did not meddle much in colonial affairs a policy of salutary neglect this theory caused few problems.
when parliament began colonial politics could be nasty and most royal governors lacked the power to tame their legislatures.
no governor was more ineffective and despised than lord cornbury royal governor of new york and new jersey the two colonies shared the same royal governor until 1738.
enemies of cornbury accused him of parading around the ramparts of new yorks forts in womens clothing and used these rumors to undermine his authority a strategy that was extremely effective.
sir danvers osborne another new york governor became so despondent over dealings with the colonial assembly that he hanged himself.
to avoid the fate of cornbury or osborne savvy royal governors understood the necessity of making strategic alliances with members of the assembly.
the give and take between the governors and the assembly defined colonial politics for much of the eighteenth century.
why were colonial governors so weak.
chapter 22 a new deal for america the great depression 1929 1940 22 2 bread line no one has starved 1932 breadlines became an iconic symbol of depression era suffering when private charities began providing free meals to the unemployed.
rather than forming bonds with one another over their shared plight the men in this drawing remain isolated islands of desperation.
americans reliance on the government to solve their problems went further than any previous peacetime president in similar circumstances.
by providing money to banks insurance companies farm mortgage associations and railroads through the reconstruction finance corporation rfc act of 1932 hoover helped institutions that were vital to the prosperity of any community.
in its first year the government loaned more than 1 5 billion to these businesses but little relief trickled down to workers.
when critics pressured the president to provide direct help to those without work or food hoover responded with the emergency relief act 1932 which lent money to the states for public works programs.
although his farm program the rfc and state loans failed to bring about recovery hoover had unknowingly set a precedent for direct governmental management of the economy that franklin d roosevelt would expand.
we didnt admit it at the time but practically the whole new deal was extrapolated from programs that hoover started rexford tugwell a key advisor to fdr later acknowledged.
reginald marshs bread line no one has starved 22 2 depicts a group of downtrodden men waiting for a free meal visual evidence of the growing crisis.
the hunched posture of these former wage earners symbolizes the shame associated with accepting charity.
the men stand close together to keep their place in line but do not converse or even look at each other.
keeping their hands in their pockets they have been paralyzed by poverty.
marsh based his title on hoovers remark that no one is what innovative solutions did hoover propose as the economic crisis continued.
actually starving the president had hoped to boost morale but marshs satire portrayed hoover as out of touch with reality.
with unemployment hovering around 20 percent in 1932 hoovers popularity declined steadily.
shantytowns constructed by the homeless became known as hoovervilles and people waved hooverflags empty pockets turned inside out in street protests.
a well circulated joke began with hoover asking an aide for a nickel to call a friend from a public telephone.
here said the man tossing him a dime call them both in the 1932 presidential campaign hoover faced off against fdr a fifth cousin of theodore roosevelt.
in sharp contrast to how he would govern franklin d roosevelt ran a fairly conservative campaign and let hoovers missteps win him the election.
one of those mistakes was the violent eviction of war veterans from the nations capital.
throughout the summer of 1932 the bonus march a two month long demonstration by 40 000 impoverished world war i veterans and their families in washington d c transfixed the nation.
the veterans demanded early payment of a bonus promised them by congress.
the bonus march ended violently when the army expelled the protesters using tanks cavalry and troops with fixed bayonets further damaging hoovers popularity at a key moment during the presidential campaign.
choices and consequences evicting the bonus marchers explores how hoover lost control of the decision to evict the bonus marchers from the city and paid the consequences.
view the image children with hoovers poor farm sign the early days of the depression choices and consequences evicting the bonus marchers in 1924 world war i veterans had received a federal bond certificate worth an average of 1 500 set to mature in 1945 in may 1932 veterans and their families arrived en masse in the nations capital to demand immediate payment of this bonus.
they set up a huge hooverville of makeshift shacks and tents and staged continuous demonstrations on the capitol steps.
hoover faced three choices about how to deal with the demonstration depending on what interpretation of the protest he embraced.
choices accept the veterans argument that the government should pay the bonus immediately to alleviate their depressioncaused suffering.
accept his advisers view that the bonus march was a communist inspired plot to incite revolution and use force to suppress it.
reject their claim but treat the veterans as essentially harmless if misguided citizens in desperate financial straits.
decision while many in the general public and press viewed the bonus marchers as down on their luck citizens hoover grew convinced that they were a dangerous radical force.
after a skirmish between veterans and the police in august hoover opted to send in troops with instructions to restore order.
consequences once the troops were deployed chief of staff general douglas macarthur exceeded hoovers orders and decided to drive the veterans out of the city using tear gas tanks and bayonets.
hoover never publicly revealed macarthurs insubordination.
when franklin d roosevelt heard of the violent eviction he reportedly told an adviser well felix this will elect me continuing controversies was the government right to use force to evict the bonus marchers.
to justify the eviction the white house mounted a furious public relations campaign that included false accusations of discovering dynamite in the main veterans encampment.
some upper class americans applauded the governments actions hoping to dampen any revolutionary impulse among the poor.
but many working and middle class americans saw their own destroyed lives in the smoldering ruins of the veterans shantytown and turned against hoover for refusing to aid men who had served the nation loyally.
the ruins of a bonus army encampment 1932 why was hoovers choice to evict the bonus marchers significant.
chapter 22 a new deal for america the great depression 1929 1940 recovering from the depression first of all fdr stated in his first inaugural address let me assert my firm belief that the only thing we have to fear is fear itself these courageous words inspired confidence in the countrys new leader at a time when financial institutions were on the brink of collapse.
jump starting the economy involved restoring confidence in the banking system putting people to work and keeping businesses afloat.
following hoovers lead fdr established a cooperative relationship between the government and business and provided federal money for banks and businesses.
but unlike hoover he was willing to provide jobs through extensive public works programs and to fund temporary direct relief for average citizens.
revamping banking and financial institutions by the time fdr took office americans had lost nearly 2 5 billion in 9 000 bank failures.
the new president declared an immediate bank holiday on march 6 1933 that closed the nations banks for a week.
an obedient congress quickly passed emergency banking legislation that allowed only banks with the federal reserves stamp of approval to reopen.
i can assure you that it is safer to keep your money in a reopened bank than under the mattress fdr told the public in his first fireside address.
when the holiday ended millions of americans demonstrated their faith in the president by depositing more money than they withdrew in the weeks that followed.
capitalism a fdr adviser said later was saved in those eight days it was the governments job to straighten out this situation fdr told radio listeners.
his administration soon proposed more reform measures to inspire public confidence in the nations banks.
the glass steagall act of 1933 created the federal deposit insurance corporation fdic insuring the accounts of small depositors in member banks.
the fdic still exists.
the same legislation protected the deposits of ordinary americans by separating investment and commercial banking so bank officials could no longer make speculative loans or stock purchases with depositors money.
this provision was repealed in 1999 finally the new deal tackled the problems caused by an unregulated stock market that had contributed to the crash of 1929 laws established the securities and exchange commission sec and reformed the practices of buying and selling stock.
the sec required companies to disclose financial how did fdr reform the nations banking and financial institutions.
details to potential investors so they could make an informed stock purchase.
the sec also regulated the practice of buying stocks on margin.
reforms in home mortgage lending practices probably had a more immediate impact on the lives of ordinary americans than stock market reform.
in 1933 40 percent of homeowners were on the brink of losing their homes to bank foreclosures.
in response fdr created a program that refinanced one out of every ten home mortgages and spread the payments over 20 years instead of the usual five.
designed to encourage americans to purchase homes and thereby boost the construction industry the federal housing authority fha founded in 1934 offered insurance to private lenders who financed home mortgages for new homes.
fha backing allowed creditors to reduce the down payment required lower interest rates and lengthen the life of the loan.
these government supported initiatives helped form the modern mortgage lending practices that enabled the percentage of americans who owned their own homes to increase by one third over the next 40 years.
father charles coughlin many businessmen and bankers supported these reforms because they renewed public faith in the basic structures of capitalism.
with internal squabbles dividing its members the communist party never effectively challenged the new deal.
instead the most influential challenger on the left to new deal banking reforms was father charles coughlin.
a popular radio priest from detroit who spoke with an irish brogue father coughlin gave sermons on a weekly radio program that drew audiences of 30 to 40 million.
in 1934 he received more mail read the document franklin d roosevelt radio address 1933 recovering from the depression helping industry and people besides shoring up banks fdr also immediately sought to get people back to work.
as the graph 22 9 reveals fdr faced the most severe jobs crisis in american history.
at first he followed in hoovers footsteps.
the reconstruction finance corporation continued to make loans and began buying bank stocks to help banks acquire the liquid capital unemployed persons as a percentage of the civilian labor force 25 great depression 20 15 10 5 2000 4 1 vietnam war 0 1900 5 world war ii world war i than anyone in the united states including roosevelt most of it from adoring fans making donations to coughlins cause.
coughlin singled out financiers and international bankers as the culprits who caused the depression.
the popularity of his relentless attacks on the elite helped push fdr increasingly to the left during his first administration.
following the lead of the populists of the nineteenth century see chapter 22 a new deal for america the great depression 1929 1940 children followed the crops in oklahoma and texas.
well be in california yet he proclaimed.
lange was renowned for her ability to take photographs that revealed her subjects true feelings.
left lame by polio she believed that her own disability made strangers trust her.
her photographs discussed more fully in images as history migrant mother an american icon had a distinct political purpose to cement public support for migrant worker aid programs.
repatriating mexican immigrants 22 12 migrants hit the road rickety trucks piled high with possessions and children filled western highways as families fled the dust bowl in search of employment elsewhere.
near disease ridden water ditches.
when the government tried to create camps that offered migrants better and cleaner facilities some californians objected.
growers worried that concentrating migrant workers in government run camps would make it easier for them to organize unions and strikes.
other californians believed that improving living conditions would draw even more displaced farmers to their state.
in 1935 california based photographer dorothea lange began taking photographs for the resettlement administration to document migrant workers suffering and arouse the publics sympathy.
this photo 22 12 shows a father from arkansas changing the tire on his truck as he and his seven reducing competition from immigrants seeking work was another way the government tried to help native born farm workers.
in 1929 the government effectively ended legal immigration from mexico for the duration of the depression to protect jobs for american citizens.
foreshadowing todays debate over the benefits and drawbacks of immigration california officials argued that alien workers held jobs that should go to native born americans.
owners of large farms disagreed predicting that they would face a serious labor shortage if they lost their traditional workforce since few americans wanted these jobs.
anti immigration forces prevailed.
faced with the offer of a free trip back to their original homes financed by the united states and mexico or the option of staying in a country where employment options had dwindled thousands of mexican workers accepted repatriation.
local and federal officials arrested and then deported others who had entered the country illegally.
with the advent of the new deal immigrants interest in voluntary repatriation dwindled.
new deal regulations made legal aliens eligible for food relief although most public works programs gave jobs only to citizens.
overall approximately 415 000 mexicans left the united states during the 1930s both voluntarily and involuntarily.
social change is a difficult thing in our civilization unless you have sentiment president franklin d roosevelt what happened to mexican immigrants during the depression.
watch the video video lecture dorothea lange and migrant mother a new deal for farmers images as history mother an american icon in march 1936 the photographer dorothea lange entered a makeshift migrants camp and saw a 32 year old woman sitting with four of her seven children and all the familys possessions.
taking six quick pictures lange jotted down notes about the family destitute in pea pickers camp nipomo california because of the failure of the early pea crop.
these people had just sold their tires in order to buy food.
of the 2 500 people in this camp most of them were destitute langes final portrait migrant mother was a masterpiece.
the viewer has the sense of intruding on an intensely personal moment but lange made no apologies for invading this womans privacy.
she asked me no questions the photographer later recalled.
instead the woman seemed to know that my pictures might help her and so she helped me when these photographs appeared in the san francisco news relief authorities immediately sent food to the entire camp of starving pea pickers.
migrant mother and her family however had already left the camp.
in later years florence thompson the subject of migrant mother tried to suppress the diffusion of this photograph because she felt that it stigmatized her as poor.
as she lay dying of cancer in 1983 however her children used the image to raise funds for their mothers medical expenses.
migrant mother series no.
2 in her next shots lange carefully framed out the open luggage and trash to erase any suggestion that the family lacked discipline.
the presence of an older daughter raised potentially troublesome questions about when the woman began having children why she continued to have so many or why the teenager was not working to help the family.
because they wanted their photographs to arouse public sympathy and support for federal aid government photographers always depicted the migrants as heroic victims.
they were never shown smiling angry or as responsible for their misery.
migrant mother series no.
6 view the closer look images as history migrant mother an american icon the father was nowhere in sight conveying either the comforting possibility that he was out looking for work or the discomforting suggestion that he had abandoned the family.
this initial photograph did not send the clear message that lange wanted.
in subsequent photos she focused on the despair of the mother and her small children rather than their general poverty.
as adults thompsons daughters believed that this image underscored the importance of individual initiative not the need for federal aid.
to make sure that they never lived like that again we all worked hard and we all had good jobs and we all stayed with it one explained.
langes composition suggests a sort of anti madonna and child wrote one critic.
what was the purpose and impact of dorothea langes migrant farmer photographs.
chapter 3 growth slavery and conflict colonial america 1710 1763 they were as rude in their manners as the common savages and hardly a degree removed from them.
their dresses almost as loose and naked as the indians and differing in nothing save complexion minister charles woodmason observations on the back country 1766 country region and the local indians erupted into violence throughout the eighteenth century.
back country settlers farmed hunted and raised livestock for their own consumption and local trade and were less connected to the burgeoning atlantic economy.
the economic realities of life in the back country encouraged independence and a strongly egalitarian culture.
courts were rare and so were tax officials or other representatives of either the colonial or the british governments.
a visitor to this region would also have noted a lack of churches primary schools and institutions of higher education.
had more than 100 000 inhabitants by the mideighteenth century.
but the growth rates of the cities of colonial british america were impressive.
boston for example doubled in size between 1700 and 1760 larger towns including albany new york newport rhode island and baltimore maryland became regional centers.
throughout these urban areas eighteenthcentury society became polarized along economic lines.
the percentage of wealth owned by the richest americans increased.
in boston and philadelphia 5 percent of the population had amassed almost half of their citys wealth by the last quarter of the eighteenth century.
at the same time the number of the urban poor also rose dramatically in boston new york and philadelphia.
the graph 3 18 illustrates the dramatic climb in the amount of money boston devoted to poor relief from the mid century onward.
during this same period many trades and crafts established their own mutual benefit societies to help the poor.
the stark inequality between the lives of the destitute and those of bostons wealthiest merchants who lived in fine new mansions and traveled around the city in elegant coaches grew more pronounced especially by the 1770s.
cities growth and inequality rural america although most americans lived in the countryside land becomes scarce during the eighteenth century cities were growing.
3 18 poor relief boston poverty increased in colonial boston in the late eighteenth century as did the poor relief needed to deal with this problem.
philadelphia boasted 23 000 residents by 1760 making it the largest city in the colonies.
still america was far less urban than either europe or the spanish colonies to the south.
compared to london with more than 700 000 people philadelphia was tiny and spanish america had half a dozen cities larger than philadelphia.
mexico city for example poor relief in boston 1710 1775 expenditure in pounds per 1 000 population how was american society becoming more unequal toward the end of the eighteenth century.
by the mid eighteenth century many americans living in the countryside or in small towns in most of the settled regions of the colonies confronted a scarcity of land.
the problem connecticuts colonists faced illustrates the interconnected issues of population growth and land scarcity.
between 1720 and 1760 connecticuts population more than doubled from 59 000 to 142 000 beginning in the 1740s children faced the prospect that their parents would not have enough land to help them establish their own farms when they became adults.
many sons and daughters delayed marriage until they could acquire a farmstead and establish their own independent household.
others moved to nearby towns.
many of connecticuts young adults went as far as northern new hampshire and others headed to the most western parts of new york pennsylvania virginia or the carolinas.
finally some families simply postponed their dreams of independence working as tenants on another farmers land as they struggled to save enough money to purchase their own farm.
view the closer look expanding settlements c 1750 war and the contest over empire war and the contest over empire by mid century nearly 1 2 million people lived in the british mainland colonies making it far more densely populated than new france which numbered well under 100 000 britain and france had been almost constantly at war since the late seventeenth century.
although these wars generally originated in europe control of north america became important to both nations.
the british were keen to eliminate french influence in canada and the great lakes.
eliminating france also appealed to american colonists who viewed the rich agricultural lands controlled by france as a means of alleviating the land shortage they faced.
the struggle between the british and the french for control of north america would dramatically alter the map of north america.
the relatively small population of new france was spread across a vast territory from quebec in the north to new orleans in the south and as far west as illinois see map 3 19.
in the great lakes region french traders lived and worked among the indians often marrying indian women.
unlike the british who sought to displace the tribes and resettle the land with small farmers the french developed a complex multiracial society that included indians.
the rise and fall of the middle ground in 1600 more than two million indians lived in communities east of the mississippi river.
lacking immunity to diseases brought by the europeans indian populations who came into contact with europeans were extremely vulnerable to infection.
tribes east of the mississippi were repeatedly devastated by epidemics that reduced their numbers to less than 250 000 by 1700 one response to this dramatic decrease in population was mourning wars in which rival tribes raided each others villages and took prisoners to bolster their own populations.
in these wars men were often tortured and executed but women and children were typically adopted into the conquering tribes.
indians were also increasingly drawn into the trans atlantic economy exchanging furs for european goods including beads fabric alcohol metal tools and even firearms.
the growing european demand for furs and increased indian desires for european goods led to conflict among tribes for access to prime hunting and trapping grounds.
intertribal warfare changed as limited mourning wars evolved into beaver wars in which tribes fought one another for control of territory.
further west in the great lakes region france not britain was the dominant power.
here the french and indians created a middle ground a cultural and geographical region in which indians and the french negotiated with each other for goods and neither side could impose its will on the other by force.
indians traded furs for guns metal tools and cloth.
although the french colonial government had hoped to regulate and tax this lucrative trade by establishing a series of forts or outposts young fiercely independent french traders known as coureurs des bois runners of the woods established their own trading networks beyond the direct control of the french government.
many married indian women producing children who became a distinctive group called mtis or people of mixed french and indian descent.
familiar with both indian and french customs and fluent in both indian languages and french the mtis became critical intermediaries between indian and french cultures even when the gulf was difficult to bridge.
like other european societies french culture was patriarchal inheritance passed from father to son a practice that gave fathers enormous power over their sons.
thus it was natural for the french to cast themselves as fathers to their indian children in the great lakes region.
indians accepted the notion of the french as fathers but they understood the concept of fatherhood in radically different terms than europeans.
in the indian cultures of the middle ground region fathers were not powerful patriarchs.
indeed one chief tried in vain to explain read the document cadwallader colden an iroquois chief argues for his tribes property rights 1742 what made the middle ground a distinctive region of colonial america.
chapter 3 growth slavery and conflict colonial america 1710 1763 the news that the french have been defeated while an american indian a symbol of the noble warrior looks on respectfully in tribute to the heroism of the general.
next to the indian warrior west placed a figure whose clothes include elements of indian and british dress.
the figure sir william johnson played a vital role helping the british forge and preserve their alliances with indians in the region.
for more on johnsons role as a cultural and political mediator see competing visions sir william johnson and the iroquois indian visions versus british arms.
the other important population center in french canada montreal fell to the british in late 1760 ending french domination in canada.
in 1763 france and britain signed the treaty 3 20 the death of general wolfe benjamin west cast the dying wolfe in the same pose artists used to depict jesus after the crucifixion.
the messenger arriving with the news of victory enters the scene from the light filled area of the painting symbolizing the bright future of north america after the british victory.
what role does the indian figure play in wests painting.
of paris permanently altering the map of north america.
quebec remained french culturally but britain now controlled canada.
although the british had defeated the french in canada relations with indians along the frontier particularly in ohio remained tense.
in 1762 the indian revivalist prophet neolin developed a pan indian movement that rallied the tribes of the midwest against british colonial expansion.
a year later the ottawa indian chief pontiac led a pan indian force against the british garrison at fort detroit.
in what the colonists called pontiacs rebellion indian peoples across the midwest attacked weakly defended frontier garrisons in what is now michigan indiana and ohio and settler communities in western pennsylvania.
anger over the failure of the colonial war and the contest over empire competing visions sir william johnson and the iroquois indian visions versus british arms in 1762 a delegation of iroquois leaders met with the british superintendent for indian affairs sir william johnson at his impressive residence johnson hall near saratoga new york.
during the meeting an onondaga chief confronted johnson revealing a vision that a member of his tribe had received from the great spirit regarding english expansion into indian lands.
johnson dismissed indian visions and he warned the tribes that englishmen would not take such claims seriously and that english military power demonstrated that the great spirit favored the english.
what does johnsons dismissive view of indian religion reveal about anglo indian relations.
the onondaga chief testified to the assembled members of the iroquois council and sir william johnson about a recent vision to his tribe that revealed the great spirits displeasure with the british displacement of indian peoples.
the revelation contained a thinly veiled threat about the consequences of continuing this policy.
johnson curtly told the members of the iroquois council that the british would not pay attention to indian religious beliefs which he dismissed as foolish superstitions.
in response to the onondagas oblique threat johnson reminded the iroquois that british arms were superior to indian weaponry and that resistance would not be tolerated.
onondaga chief brother sir william johnson brethren one of our people lately in a vision was told by the great spirit above that when he first made the world.
he gave this large island to the indians for their use at the same time he gave other parts of the world beyond the great waters to the rest of his creating and gave them different languages that he now saw the white people squabbling and fighting for these lands which he gave the indians and that in every assembly and company of governors and great men.
he heard nothing scarce spoke or talkd of but claiming and wanting large possessions in our country.
this he said was so contrary to his intention and what he expected would be the consequence at the time when the white people first came like children among us that he was quite displeasd and would altho their numbers were ever so great punish them if they did not desist.
your romantic notions custom of dreaming and seeing visions however usual amongst you cannot but appear in a very ridiculous light to white people who will consider it only as a scheme set on foot by some designing persons to answer their purposes and i hope you cannot but be convinced that the divine being is satisfied with the justice of our cause from the great successes with he has crowned the british arms i hope therefore you will not suspect us of defrauding you of your lands.
sir william johnson presented this certificate to the iroquois for their loyalty to his britannic majesty diplomacy with indians included many ceremonial exchanges such as the one depicted in the image at the top of this document.
how did johnson react to indian demands that western expansion be halted.
chapter review works progress administration share our wealth movement dust bowl crisis worsens public works program employs one fifth of the workforce from 1935 to 1943 senator huey longs proposal to redistribute wealth pushes fdr to the left drought soil erosion result in major ecological disaster fdr tries to reform supreme court wagner act cio founded new deal coalition forms offers government protection to unions organizes workers by industry rather than by trade fdr wins reelection proposals failure exposes limits of fdrs power social security payroll taxes begin establishes funding mechanism for federal pensions myhistorylab connections visit for a customized study plan that will help you build your knowledge of a new deal for america.
questions for analysis 1 why would the sentiments expressed in this political cartoon lead to dissatisfaction with hoover.
view the image john baer we demand a new deal 1931 p 662 other resources from this chapter hear the audio file fdrs first inaugural address p 663 read the document father charles e coughlin a third party 1936 p 667 carey mcwilliams okies in california 1939 p 671 2 how did fdr reassure the public about his plan for alleviating their financial hardships.
mrs henry weddington letter to president roosevelt 1938 p 680 read the document franklin d roosevelt radio view the closer look address 1933 p 666 images as history migrant mother an american icon p 673 competing visions sharing the wealth p 675 3 what values did post office murals celebrate.
view the closer look images as history post office murals p 669 envisioning evidence interpreting public opinion polls p 681 view the image children with hoovers poor farm sign p 660 4 why did interpretations of migrant mother differ.
watch the video video lecture dorothea lange ccc worker 1938 p 668 view the map interactive map the great depression p 670 and migrant mother p 672 watch the video 5 how did employers try to break strikes in the 1930s.
read the document investigation of strikebreaking 1939 p 678 prosperity of the 1920s and the great depression p 656 video lecture responding to the great depression whose new deal p 679 what major decisions set the stage for u s entry in the war.
on the home front p 693 how did different groups of americans experience the war.
on the front lines p 702 what challenges did the united states face in the pacific and european theaters of war.
ending the pacific war p 711 how was the war in the pacific brought to a close.
chapter 20.
instead of mobilizing their armies when germany violated the versailles treaty by rearming and threatening its neighbors france and britain tried to negotiate.
in 1938 germany annexed austria and then demanded the sudetenland a german speaking province made part of czechoslovakia against its will by the allies when the austro hungarian empire collapsed at the end of world war i by the 1930s many europeans felt that the versailles peace treaty had punished germany too severely creating the widespread impression that hitlers actions and demands were reasonable.
taking hitler at his word that he was interested only in reuniting german speaking peoples into one nation britain and france agreed at the munich conference in 1938 to let germany occupy the sudetenland.
instead of dampening hitlers ambitions the munich conference convinced him that the western democracies were too weak to oppose him militarily.
arguing that germany needed living space in the east for its people hitler initiated his master plan to displace what he demeaningly called the inferior slavic races the peoples living in eastern europe and to exterminate the jews.
intent on avoiding the mistakes of world war i when germany had fought a two front war hitler resolved to fight one war at a time.
to accomplish this in august 1939 he signed a non aggression pact with josef stalin the dictator of the soviet union ussr.
germany and the ussr u s countdown to war 1931 1941 japan attacks china japan invades manchuria 1935 1939 u s neutrality acts german soviet non aggression pact munich conference germany occupies western europe including france u s embargo against japan germany invades poland u s lend lease policy shooting war in atlantic between united states and germany united states declares war on japan battle of britain begins watch the video video lecture hitler and roosevelt tripartite pact between gemany japan italy germany invades the soviet union japanese attack pearl harbor and southeast asia 23 2 origins of world war ii the united states remained neutral until the japanese attacked pearl harbor.
germany and italy declare war on the united states what different lessons did america and other world powers draw from world war i.
chapter 23 world war ii fighting the good war 1939 1945 competing visions civil liberties and national security clash in korematsu v united states 1944 the supreme court upheld the constitutionality of relocating and interning japanese americans as a justifiable military measure.
three justices dissented from the majority opinion concluding that internment violated the constitutional rights of japanese american citizens.
which side made the stronger argument.
how has america resolved a similar dilemma over national security versus civil rights in the aftermath of the 9 11 attacks see chapter 23 world war ii fighting the good war 1939 1945 the wrongs which we seek to condemn and punish have been so calculated so malignant and so devastating that civilization cannot tolerate their being ignored because it cannot survive their being repeated american prosecutor supreme court justice robert jackson in opening the nuremberg war crimes trials 23 19 german civilians viewing corpses in a concentration camp photographs from liberated concentration camps like this one from buchenwald germany shocked the world.
american military commanders forced german civilians who professed ignorance about the atrocities to view and bury the dead.
determination to use any means possible to slaughter the jews including mass executions by firing squads and forced marches until the very end of the war.
as the camps were liberated reporters tried through words and pictures to convey how six million jews had met their deaths.
even though americans had grown accustomed to seeing photos of war dead nothing prepared them for images from the concentration camps.
american commanders invited the press into the camps to head off denials over the scope of the holocaust and nazi atrocities.
photographs of concentration camps were one reporter wrote so horrible that no newspaper normally would use them but they were less horrible than the reality soldiers set themselves up as witnesses a term used to describe both survivors how did images instruct americans about the meaning of the holocaust and their role as liberators.
and liberators who could personally vouch for the extent of the horrors by posing in photographs before piles of corpses and skeletal survivors.
you can photograph results of suffering but never suffering itself observed one british politician.
by documenting the act of discovering nazi atrocities witness photographs helped americans share the horror that soldiers felt.
the american military also posted photographs of concentration camp atrocities in german towns and villages for civilians to see but many american commanders went further.
in the photo shown here 23 19 american soldiers assembled german civilians before a truckload of corpses to listen to a lecture on the barbarity.
forcing german civilians to view the carnage with their own eyes and in some cases to bury the bodies was part of a deliberate allied campaign to make all germans accept responsibility for their nations war crimes.
after the war the allies jointly tried 22 nazi leaders in the nuremberg war crimes trials.
in these trials individual germans were charged with starting the war authorizing the killing of prisoners of war and orchestrating the wartime genocide against victims who mostly came from nations occupied by germany see the jews in the holocaust chart page 709.
the united states independently tried thousands of other german officials as well.
these trials were not enough to calm the fears of survivors.
many left europe to resettle elsewhere.
watch the video nazi murder mills ending the pacific war ending the pacific war germany was now under allied control but in the pacific the war raged on.
there the fighting took a desperate turn in 1945 and each victory cost the united states dearly.
despite a mounting death toll american troops edged closer to japan and officials began planning an invasion of the japanese mainland.
news of a successful atomic bomb test in the new mexico desert dramatically altered political and military calculations on how to achieve victory.
employing this new terrible weapon eventually generated conflicting views within the united states over the ethics of atomic warfare.
from harassing b 29s headed to japan and to provide emergency landing fields for american pilots brought the war home to the crippled planes returning from mainland japanese people from new air bases in the bombing raids.
in their conquest of china r u s s took i a only 216 marianas.
when the bombing campaign began iwo jima the americans hokkaido in earnest in the pacific theater in 1945 the prisoners out of 21 000 enemy troops united states quickly abandoned efforts to difthe rest perishing in the fighting.
as muroran ferentiate between civilian and military targets the marines shot flamethrowers into as it had in germany.
there are no civilians in caves to flush out enemy soldiers the japan declared one air force official.
we are scene became wild and terrible one aomori making war and making it in the all out fashcorrespondent recalled.
more japs ion which saves american lives shortens the s e athe o fcaves.
rushed screaming from agony which war is and seeks to bring about they tumbled over the rocks japan kamaishi an enduring peace the united states targeted their clothes and bodies burn67 japanese cities for incendiary bombing in ing fiercely the capture of sendai 1945 resulting in the destruction of 187 square okinawa needed as a stagsado miles and approximately 300 000 deaths 23 20.
ing area for the invasion j a pa n during one night raid the entire city of toyama of japan was equally honshu hitachi burned to the ground.
the most destructive air korea bloody.
weeks of attack of the war came on march 9 10 1945 tokyo oki choshi fukui when incendiary bombs ignited fires in tokyo hiroshima nagoya kawasaki august 6 1945 that american bombers kept going by spreading kobe gasoline and chemicals over the city.
this atyokohama shimonoseki hamamatsu osaka tack destroyed 16 square miles and killed nearly pa c i f i c yawata 90 000 japanese more than would perish from matsuyama fukuoka ocean the atomic bomb blast over hiroshima five 200 km shikoku sasebo months later.
200 miles japans use of cave and bunker tactics on major firebomb attacks 25 50 of city destroyed land and kamikazes at sea dramatically raised kyushu firebomb attacks the cost of capturing iwo jima february nagasaki atomic bomb attacks 19 march 26 1945 and okinawa april 1 june august 9 1945 minelaying operations 21 1945 the last two islands left to be taken before the united states could invade the japanese homeland.
battles on iwo jima and okinawa produced some of the toughest fighting of 23 20 attacking japan in 1945 american firebomb attacks destroyed 67 japanese the war.
cities while extensive mining of major waterways severely the americans coveted the seven mile reduced trade.
millions of japanese civilians were homeless porkchop shaped island of iwo jima for its and starving by the time the united states dropped two atomic airstrips both to stop japanese fighter planes bombs in august.
edging closer to japan what new tactics raised the death toll in the pacific war.
chapter 25 too much for conservatives and too little for liberals also contributed to his poor rating.
korea was the last american war that the public viewed primarily through photographs.
only 34 percent of american homes had television sets in 1952 rising to 86 percent by 1960 in 1950 newsweek published the photograph the price of victory a soldier grieves for his lost buddy 24 9.
one readers suggestion that this image should serve as the iconic photo of the korean war just as old glory goes up on mt.
suribachi iwo jima had served to represent world war ii revealed a significant shift in the publics attitudes over the last five years see images as history combat photography chapter 6 the new republic an age of political passion 1789 1800 partisanship without parties the idea of political parties was inimical to the republican values of the post revolutionary era.
in the struggle over ratification in 1788 madison had written in federalist no.
10 that the public good is disregarded in the conflicts of rival parties the partisan struggles that dominated american politics after ratification forced madison to rethink his view of parties.
in 1792 madison conceded that in every political society parties are unavoidable although americans increasingly used terms like party to describe the bitter conflicts of the 1790s the partisan alignments they described had not yet achieved the organized structure of modern political parties.
political conflict in the 1790s was a transitional phase in the evolution of a modern two party system.
some historians describe this period as that of the first party system but many characterize it as a proto party system that set the stage for the later developments of modern parties.
indeed although americans were deeply divided politically neither federalists nor republicans functioned as disciplined modern political parties.
neither group organized loyal supporters around well defined messages at a national level.
nor did either side create permanent political structures that brought local and state politics under the umbrella of a coherent national organization.
the partisan conflicts of this era produced two proto parties the federalists and the republicans.
a new type of politician although the aristocratic thomas jefferson and james madison dominated the republican movement its success owed much to a new type of politician whose expertise lay in mobilizing voters and creating effective political organizations.
the most influential of these new politicians was virginias john beckley.
in contrast to jefferson and madison who were connected to the gentry elite that dominated political life in virginia beckley rose from the status of an indentured servant to become the clerk of the u s house of representatives.
he became indispensable in advancing the republican cause.
indeed although aristocratic politicians such as jefferson and madison continued to view themselves as members of a virtuous elite who were not motivated by party spite beckley and others of this new class of professional politicians immersed themselves in the sometimes sordid task of coordinating campaigns and attacking their opponents.
beckley and other republicans who did much of the grassroots organizing were more at home in taverns and coffee houses than they were in the elegant dinner parties that jefferson and madison attended.
having worked as a clerk beckley felt a kindred spirit with the artisans and merchants of new york what role did the partisan press play in the politics of the 1790s.
city and philadelphia.
he felt a particular kinship with other self made men many of whom joined the republican movement.
beckleys life more closely resembled hamiltons than jeffersons.
yet beckley threw himself into promoting jeffersons fortunes and attacking hamilton.
gossip became one means of political warfare that beckley developed to a fine art.
he leaked information about an adulterous affair hamilton was having with the wife of a shady financier.
when the press reported rumors that hamilton had provided sensitive financial information to his lovers husband republican politicians pounced on hamilton who was forced to admit the affair but denied any financial improprieties.
beckleys efforts weakened hamilton but did not destroy the new yorkers influence among federalists.
the growth of the partisan press the expansion of the press facilitated the rise of partisan politics.
the number of newspapers increased from around 100 in 1788 to well over 200 in 1800 while eastern ports still supported the majority of papers many interior market towns also boasted papers by the 1790s.
many of these papers aligned partisanship without parties themselves with one or the other main political movements in the country.
john fennos gazette of the united states which he established to endear the general government to the people articulated the federalist point of view.
to combat fennos influence jefferson and madison persuaded the poet philip freneau to found the national gazette which rallied opposition to hamilton and the federalists.
the resulting battle of words between the two publications intensified the already charged political atmosphere.
federalists and republicans recognized that political success meant managing public opinion.
all power madison noted has been traced to public opinion a free government therefore calls for a circulation of newspapers through the entire body of the people partisan rancor in the press grew during the 1790s.
no person was sharper in his attacks than federalist william cobbett who often wrote under the pen name peter porcupine a choice that reflected his prickly personality and barbed writing.
jefferson lamented that a single sentence got hold of by the porcupines will suffice to abuse and persecute me in their papers for months cobbett lambasted the republicans as atheists and radical democrats who sought to destroy government.
he compared the leading republican newspaper the aurora to a lewd and common strumpet whose illegitimate offspring were falsehood and slander.
the republicans replied with their own stinging attacks.
this republican political cartoon 6 5 casts cobbett literally represented as peter porcupine doing the devils work as he is encouraged by great britain represented as a lion.
society asserted that public opinion is the foundation of all our liberties and constitutes the only solid groundwork for all our rights in addition to publishing their sentiments about political issues the societies staged celebrations gave festive dinners and sponsored public orations.
republicans viewed the societies as a way to improve understanding of political issues and refine public opinion.
federalists denounced these self created societies for sowing the seeds of jealousy and distrust of the government for federalists the societies not only sapped the peoples confidence in their government but also fomented radical ideas.
federalists viewed the role of elected representatives differently from republicans.
federalists supported a more traditional republican ideal of virtue in which citizens deferred to the wisdom of their leaders once they had been placed in office.
republicans embraced a more democratic ideal in which the voice of the people could be brought to bear on public questions through organizations such as the democratic republican societies.
6 5 peter porcupine liberty sits forlorn while federalist william cobbett peter porcupine scribbles attacks and insults.
the devil and the british lion wearing a monarchs crown urge on the porcupine.
a jay bird symbolic of jays treaty perches on the lion.
the democraticrepublican societies the emergence of a new type of political organization helped transform the political life of the new nation.
between 1793 and 1794 35 democratic republican societies sprouted up across america.
although not official organs of the republican movement most of the societies had close ties to local republican organizations.
their goal was to influence public opinion.
the new york democratic republican why did the federalists oppose the democratic republican societies.
chapter 6 the new republic an age of political passion 1789 1800 6 15 the paris monster this cartoon ridicules french corruption and depravity in the xyz affair.
the many headed monster the symbol of french government wields a dagger while he solicits a bribe from the american delegation.
the american envoys respond we will not give you six pence years from 1798 to 1800 in addition to creating a new department of the navy congress tripled the size of the regular army and created a special provisional army numbering 50 000 men.
washington reluctantly agreed to head the provisional army if hamilton were appointed his second in command a request that would have given hamilton authority over many military leaders more experienced than he.
hamiltons bold effort to elevate himself above so many other qualified officers angered many federalists who aligned themselves with adams.
federalists were now divided into adams and hamilton factions.
why did the federalists believe it was vital to american security to restrict immigration.
the alien and sedition acts federalists enacted a broad program to deal with the threats posed by the quasi war.
to pay for the enormous expansion of the military the federalistcontrolled congress passed a new property tax on land slaves and buildings.
federalists in congress then proposed laws the alien and sedition acts to protect america from foreign and domestic subversion.
the alien acts which included three separate laws made it more difficult to become a citizen and gave the government far reaching powers to read the document the alien and sedition acts the stormy presidency of john adams deport resident aliens.
the sedition act made it a crime to combine or conspire together with the intent to oppose any measure or measures of the government of the united states the act criminalized any attempt to write print utter or publish statements false scandalous or malicious against the government of the united states or either house of congress of the united states or the president conspicuously absent were penalties for attacking republican vice president thomas jefferson.
the federalist press was free to hurl whatever invectives it chose at jefferson with impunity.
federalists used the sedition act to prosecute 25 people all republican sympathizers including printers outspoken politicians and other prominent figures.
federalists even prosecuted one drunken republican for declaring that he did not care if a cannon salute to president adams fired thro his a the harshest sentence a 400 fine and an 18 month prison sentence went to david brown an itinerant preacher and political agitator who had raised a liberty pole in dedham massachusetts with a placard that read no stamp act no sedition no alien bills no land tax downfall to the tyrants of america peace and retirement to the president long live the vice president republicans had tried to use every constitutional means at their disposal to protest the sedition act.
they first sought to petition congress to repeal it and then tried to use the courts to challenge its constitutionality.
when both of these means failed republicans cast about for a new strategy.
in 1798 madison and jefferson articulated such a strategy in two separate documents the virginia resolution by madison and the kentucky resolution by jefferson both documents defended the rights of the states to judge the constitutionality of federal laws and if necessary to protect their citizens against the federal government.
republicans based this idea on the notion that the constitution was a compact among the people of the states who not only retained all powers not delegated to the new government but also retained a right to judge when acts of the federal government violated the constitution.
neither madison nor jefferson took the next logical step and asserted a right of the states to actively nullify an unconstitutional act of the federal government.
both men hoped that the states would use persuasion not force to challenge an unconstitutional exercise of federal power.
in keeping with this notion virginia and kentucky distributed their resolutions to the other state legislatures hoping that other states would also rally against the sedition act.
however legislatures in the federalist dominated new england states attacked the resolutions as dangerous and unconstitutional assertions of state power.
federalists argued that the final arbiter of the constitutionality of acts of congress ought to be the federal courts not the state legislatures.
angered by the northern federalist legislatures reactions jefferson authored a second set of kentucky resolutions 1799.
in these he introduced the constitutional doctrine of nullification which asserted that states could nullify unconstitutional laws.
jefferson did not explain how a state would accomplish the goal of constitutional nullification.
the virginia and kentucky resolutions became the foundation for subsequent arguments about states rights the theory that the constitution was a compact among the states and that the individual states retained the right to judge when the federal governments actions were unconstitutional.
the alien and sedition crisis also led to the development of a new theory of freedom of the press.
this new theory the basis for modern theories of freedom of the press argued that political opinions were not subject to government control.
rather than try to limit dissenting ideas the new view embraced the idea of a marketplace of ideas.
more speech not less was the antidote to the threat posed by dangerous ideas.
the disputed election of 1800 the quasi war with france which was winding down by 1800 had split federalists into two factions.
although adams supported a military build up he never abandoned hope of a negotiated settlement.
hamilton by contrast believed that war with france provided an opportunity to crush domestic opposition and forge an alliance with britain.
adams had little interest in such grandiose schemes which may have included vague plans for a joint anglo american conquest of spanish america.
the president also resented hamiltons meddling in his administration.
changes in the french government now made a peaceful solution likely.
the radical phase of the french revolution ended when napoleon view the closer look competing visions congressional debates over the sedition act what strategies were used to challenge the sedition act.
chapter 25 in a land of plenty contentment and discord 1945 1960 thomas dewey.
on the political left former vice president henry wallace ran on the progressive citizens of america ticket representing a coalition of liberals and radicals upset about the assault on civil liberties at home and the nations aggressive foreign policy as the cold war took shape.
trumans campaign assault on big business as gluttons of privilege strong support from labor and blacks and the success of the berlin airlift propelled him to a clear victory in the electoral college 303 to 189 but he led dewey by just two million in the popular vote see chapter 25 in a land of plenty contentment and discord 1945 1960 new consumerist orientation.
one executive conceded that it was the advertisers job to see to it that americans are never satisfied a middle class family now considered their car or refrigerator obsolete after two or three years even though it works well financial columnist sylvia porter noted.
the move to the suburbs suburbs built in the 1920s ringed major cities and remained connected to the metropolitan core by streetcars or rail lines.
in the 1950s suburbs moved farther away from cities becoming insular communities that depended increasingly on cars to transport people.
the roads eisenhower built to help evacuate urban areas if the nation came under nuclear attack see chapter of the naacp and had attended the left leaning highlander folk school in tennessee where civil rights and labor leaders trained.
she knew that the naacp wanted to test the bus segregation law in the courts and had recently participated in a mass meeting protesting emmett tills murder.
boycott leaders played down parkss activist past worried that it would diminish her everywoman appeal and that moderates might view her as a radical agitator.
some activists later suggested that this simplified tale sent the wrong message about how to initiate social change.
rosa parkss bravery mattered they agreed but so did careful preparation organization building and ideological dedication.
what is the enduring legacy of rosa parkss decision.
chapter 25 in a land of plenty contentment and discord 1945 1960 1945 1946 five thousand labor strikes sweep the country taft hartley act pollock paints autumn rhythm.
nixons checkers speech puts restrictions on labor unions creates public backlash against unions first levittown built abstract expressionism and beat writing transform the arts first use of television to diffuse a political crisis mass migration to suburbs begins baby boom begins chapter 7 jeffersonian america an expanding empire of liberty 1800 1824 rapaho ohio indiana pawnee territory st louis kentucky comanche tennessee pi missi ssip apache r osage mississippi territory geo natchez new orleans 1800 1802 jefferson elected president louisiana purchase burr and hamilton duel embargo act peaceful transfer of power from federalists to republicans jefferson acquires louisiana territory doubling the size of the nation vice president burr kills opponent alexander hamilton in a duel jefferson adopts a policy of peaceful coercion and institutes an embargo sally hemings scandal chapter review 1814 1815 1819 1822 war of 1812 treaty of ghent missouri compromise united states and britain go to war britain and america sign a treaty ending the war of 1812 james monroe elected president battle of new orleans monroe inaugurates the era of good feelings andrew jackson and his troops defeat the british at battle of new orleans settles the issue of slavery in the territories by drawing an imaginary line across the map of the united states and creating a permanent division between slave and free territory denmark vesey charged with plotting an uprising slaves and free blacks in charleston s c are captured charged with plotting an insurrection tried and executed myhistorylab connections visit for a customized study plan that will help you build your knowledge of jeffersonian america.
questions for analysis 1 was jefferson successful at implementing his vision of government.
other resources from this chapter 26 a nation divided the vietnam war 1945 1975 the long road to war from 1945 to 1965 america gradually shifted its cold war focus from europe to asia.
the united states first supported french efforts to recover vietnam as a colony and then sustained an independent anti communist south vietnam with financial aid.
at home some american policymakers envisioned the war as part of the worldwide struggle between democracy and communism.
in vietnam however americans confronted a country torn apart by a civil war that reflected its long standing religious and political divisions.
no american president sought a war in vietnam and key advisors offered competing assessments of americas chances for victory.
yet at critical moments when the intractable political and military situation called for a response each president chose to bolster the american commitment rather than turn back.
the escalating importance of vietnam america first became involved in vietnam during world war ii when japan took over the french colony of indochina present day laos cambodia and vietnam.
in 1945 u s intelligence operatives worked with ho chi minh the leader of an underground vietnamese communist resistance movement that launched guerilla attacks against the japanese occupiers.
when the war ended ho chi minh and his rebel force formed a provisional government in hanoi and declared independence from france.
eager to reestablish its position as a world power after the humiliating occupation by germany in world war ii france sent in troops to crush the vietnamese independence movement.
in search of international support for vietnamese independence the western educated ho chi minh turned to the united states.
ho chi minh had previously tried to interest the united states in vietnamese independence by submitting a petition to the american delegation at the paris peace conference in 1919 after world war i that called for democratic reforms in french indochina.
the american delegation ignored his request mindful that his proposal would anger the french whose support president woodrow wilson needed to create the league of nations see chapter 26 26 4 jackie kennedy on november 22 1963 the day president john f kennedy was assassinated in dallas texas the first ladys personal tragedy became enveloped in political symbolism.
here she stands by as the new president lyndon b johnson takes the oath of office to visibly assure the nation that she supported the smooth transition of power.
a nation divided the vietnam war 1945 1975 only one direction.
counterclaims that the assassination was the result of a wider conspiracy involving other gunmen the mafia cuban dictator fidel castro and the cia continue to this day.
vice president lyndon baines johnson lbj was riding two cars behind kennedy in the dallas motorcade.
when kennedy died within hours of the shooting johnson who was next in line to assume the presidency insisted on taking the oath of office before judge sarah hughes with jackie kennedy on one side and his wife on the other before the presidential airplane air force one left dallas.
the presence of the slain presidents widow would johnson felt immediately legitimatize the transfer of power in the eyes of the american people.
already on board the plane which was carrying her husbands body back to washington d c jackie kennedy complied with johnsons request but had no chance to change her clothes.
in this portrait 26 4 of johnsons swearing in photographer cecil stoughton carefully framed out jackie kennedys skirt which was stained with her husbands blood.
her pale and drawn expression nonetheless reflected the days ordeal.
a wealthy massachusetts born catholic kennedy had selected johnson a powerful texan politician as his vice presidential running mate to help broaden his appeal in the south.
johnson grew how did images both provoke and quell controversy surrounding the kennedy assassination.
up poor and worked as a teacher before entering national politics as an avid supporter of the new deal in 1937 johnson relied heavily on his superior political instincts and outgoing personality to rise to prominence.
in the senate he became the most powerful majority leader in history.
a larger thanlife figure his brashness contrasted sharply with the slain presidents debonair manner.
johnsons most legendary gaff came in 1965 when he lifted his shirt during a press conference to show reporters his 12 inch scar from recent gallbladder surgery.
johnson wanted to reassure the nation about his recovery but critics lampooned the act as crude and undignified.
the gulf of tonkin lyndon baines johnson inherited a rapidly deteriorating situation in vietnam after the diem assassination.
like his predecessors he faced the choice of pulling back or escalating the american commitment which at this point consisted of sixteen thousand military advisors and green berets and substantial financial aid to south vietnam.
after the diem assassination south vietnam slipped into perpetual political instability as a succession of rulers failed to gain the support of the people.
the shifting geopolitical situation also prompted a reappraisal of the american assumption that the soviet union was controlling the movements of communists throughout the world.
the previous american conception of a global communist conspiracy became harder to maintain in the face of the open split between the soviet union and china in 1964 the sino soviet alliance fell apart when the soviets suggested that the two countries scale back their support of worldwide communist insurgencies to improve relations with the united states.
mao refused.
once again elected officials and policymakers differed behind closed doors on the best course of action.
national security advisor mcgeorge bundy told johnson that the right course is to continue to strengthen our struggle against the communist terror which is exactly what this is senator richard russell a close confidant of the president disagreed with those who claimed that well lose everything in southeast asia if we lose vietnam johnson himself feared that read the document george balls dissenting opinion on vietnam 1965 the long road to war withdrawal would mark him as a weak leader emboldening conservative challenges to the general earle wheeler civil rights laws and expanded supporting the troop buildup in vietnam social welfare programs for the poor that he wanted to enact.
i was determined to keep the war on march 8 1965 the first american marines from shattering that dream johnson later admitlanded at da nang along the northern coast of south ted by which time the war had indeed consumed vietnam where young women put leis around their the financial resources and political goodwill that necks during an official ceremony.
in the years that the president needed to fully realize this dream see followed troops received a distinctly less warm chapter 8 democrats and whigs democracy and american culture 1820 1840 we wish to remain on the land of our fathers.
we have a perfect and original right to remain without interruption or molestation address of a council of the cherokee nation to the people of the united states written in july of 1830 informed indians that if they chose to remain the government would tacitly allow the states to run roughshod over indian rights.
although some tribes reluctantly accepted the inevitability of relocation others resisted.
the cherokee eloquently protested against their forced relocation.
their leaders stated their desire to remain on the land of their ancestors and reminded americans that their existing treaties with the united states guaranteed them this right.
rather than concede to the unfavorable terms presented by the federal government or accede to the pressure from state governments the cherokee decided to seek a legal remedy in federal court.
when georgia violated cherokee rights the tribe sued and the case ended up in the supreme court.
the cherokee cases the struggle between georgia and the cherokee raised important constitutional questions.
the cherokee claimed to be a sovereign nation not subject to the laws of the state of georgia.
as was true of any sovereign nation they claimed the right to govern themselves by rules that their own legislature enacted and to deal with the united states as a sovereign power.
georgia argued that indians were subjects of the united states and that the idea of an independent indian state within georgia was an absurdity.
the status of indian nations in american constitutional law came before the supreme court in two separate cases related to the claims of the cherokee nation.
in the cherokee cases cherokee nation v georgia 1830 and worcester v georgia 1832 the supreme court determined that indian tribes retained certain rights traditionally associated with sovereign nations including the right to govern themselves by their own laws but lacked other rights such as the ability to sue the state of georgia.
the latter case came to the supreme what do the cherokee cases reveal about the limits of judicial power.
court because georgia had imprisoned two protestant missionaries samuel worcester and elizur butler charging them with residing on indian land without obtaining a license from the state.
as both men were citizens of the united states clearly they were entitled to sue in federal courts.
writing for the court chief justice john marshall found that the missionaries had been wrongly imprisoned and were entitled to protection by the federal courts.
moreover marshall gave the cherokee an important victory when he held that the laws of georgia can have no force on cherokee territory.
although the cherokee did not enjoy all the privileges accorded foreign nations by u s law they did retain the right to make laws within their own lands.
one cherokee leader elias boudinot greeted marshalls ruling in worcester enthusiastically.
andrew jackson was dismissive and wrote a supporter that the decision was unenforceable.
georgia refused to accept the courts ruling and did not release the imprisoned missionaries.
president jackson was unwilling to antagonize georgia and was ill disposed to indians rights so he refused to enforce marshalls decision.
the case might have precipitated a major constitutional crisis a president refusing to follow a court decision would have undermined the legitimacy of the entire federal judiciary.
to avoid such a showdown jackson persuaded the governor of georgia to simply pardon worcester and butler.
once the men were freed the legal issue vanished and jackson and marshall were no longer pitted against one another.
resistance and removal the release of the two missionaries eliminated any legal issues and cleared the way for the jackson administration to pursue its policy of removal.
the cherokee now faced the painful choice of accepting the inevitability of removal or continuing to resist jackson and the state of georgia.
see choices and consequences acquiesce or resist.
the cherokee dilemma.
in 1835 a minority of the cherokee leadership signed a treaty agreeing to relocate west of the mississippi.
many cherokee denounced the treaty and hoped that their leaders could avert relocation.
in 1838 federal troops began rounding up cherokee and placing them in stockades to await deportation.
the squalid conditions in the stockades took a heavy toll and many of the most outspoken cherokee white mans democracy choices and consequences acquiesce or resist.
the cherokee dilemma should the cherokee have resisted jacksons removal policy.
the cherokee nation faced a difficult decision regarding how to deal with the increasing pressure to abandon their land and relocate to what is now oklahoma.
the tribal leadership was divided.
most cherokee supported principal chief john ross who believed that there was enough support among jacksons political opponents to block relocation.
a minority within the tribe supported elias boudinot who argued that it was better to relocate than oppose the inevitable.
choices agree to the treaty and relocate seek the best possible terms from the u s government to facilitate the removal process.
reject the treaty and resist removal by force if necessary.
decision a small but vocal minority of the cherokee including elias boudinot believed that continued residence in georgia would only result in further harassment.
they reasoned that it would be more prudent to try to obtain the best deal from the united states and relocate west.
however most cherokee supported john ross who believed that it was still possible to rally support among boycott the vote on the treaty and continue to rally support and lobby congress to protect indian rights against georgia.
religious groups and other whites sympathetic to indian rights.
ross also recognized that senators daniel webster and henry clay two of the most powerful figures in the senate opposed jackson and were eager to use the plight of indians to attack him.
most cherokees refused to participate in the referendum held on the treaty.
supporters of the treaty accepting relocation won but the treaty was not widely accepted by most cherokee who had boycotted the vote.
consequences bolstered by popular opposition to the treaty among the cherokee john ross lobbied the senate hard to reject it and came within one vote of defeating it.
having won a narrow victory jackson signed the treaty and the cherokee were given two years to leave their homes or face military deportation.
after relocation prominent indian supporters of the treaty including elias boudinot were assassinated.
continuing controversies john ross elias boudinot was it realistic for the cherokees to think that they might win support for their cause.
most scholars agree that jacksons indian policy was racist and unethical particularly the violation of existing treaties.
there is however disagreement over how to make sense of the cherokee response to the dilemma jacksons policy created.
supporters of john ross note that he was a savvy politician whose calculation that opposition to jackson and sympathy for the plight of indians made continued resistance a reasonable strategy.
opponents of ross argue that boudinot and others who voted in favor of the treaty were more realistic in their assessment of the political situation.
was resistance to removal a viable strategy for the cherokee.
chapter 8 democrats and whigs democracy and american culture 1820 1840 images as history king andrew and the downfall of mother bank as proof that the president had become a corrupt tyrant.
reaching back more than a half century to the colonists struggle against king george iii jacksons opponents sought to shift attention away from the bank and focus it on his abuse of executive power.
by portraying him as a corrupt monarch andrew jacksons war on the second bank of the united states provided political cartoonists with an excellent subject for satire.
jacksons enemies seized on his veto of the bill renewing the banks charter and his decision to withdraw federal funds from the bank and deposit them in state banks jackson wears a royal crown and holds a scepter the president holds a copy of the bank veto in his other hand jackson crushes the constitution beneath his feet.
why is jackson portrayed as a monarch in this political cartoon.
democrats whigs and the second party system who had trampled on the constitution and recklessly distributed government funds to political cronies the presidents opponents found a potent rhetorical theme that was easily translated into powerful visual images.
the whig view of jackson is beautifully illustrated in king andrew the first in this cartoon he not only sports a crown and scepter two obvious symbols of monarchy but is adorned in rich robes fit for a king.
jackson holds a copy of the bank veto in one hand and tramples on the constitution.
jacksons supporters also found fertile subject for visual treatment.
in this cartoon the downfall of mother bank jackson and a popular cartoon character major jack downing a forerunner of the character uncle sam bring down the pillars of the bank by announcing the withdrawal of government funds.
the banks president rendered with a demonic head flees the scene.
jacksons enemies the whigs henry clay and daniel webster also rendered in an unflattering light.
clay begs webster to save him from the collapse of the banks columns.
nicholas biddle the banks president is rendered as a demonic figure and flees the collapse.
lighting bolts emanating from jacksons order to withdraw funds from the bank topple its columns.
henry clay lies helpless and calls out for fellow senator daniel webster to rescue him.
read the document andrew jackson veto of the bank bill how does this pro jackson cartoon portray the whigs.
chapter 8 democrats and whigs democracy and american culture 1820 1840 democratic policies had left the american economy in shambles and whig policies promised to bring back prosperity.
whigs sponsored all female rallies in support of harrison including a meeting in ohio in which whig women raised cups of tea in toasts to old tippecanoe democrats complained about the whigs making politicians of their women which was something new under the sun whigs also attacked democrats for fanning class resentments.
thus one whig chided the democrats for their incessant and unrelenting assaults that tore asunder the good feelings which bind men to each other rather than highlight the struggle between democracy and aristocracy a favorite rhetorical theme of democrats whigs stressed the essential harmony of all economic classes.
an observer at a whig rally proudly noted that all classes had rediscovered that their interests were the same calvin colton a leading whig evoked the notion that this is a country of self made men whig policies would promote prosperity for all hard working americans.
the election clearly energized the voters who turned out in record numbers nearly four fifths of eligible voters casting a vote.
harrison defeated van buren by 150 000 votes and a 4 to 1 margin in the electoral college.
president harrisons inaugural speech was the longest in american history 105 minutes long.
his term in office however was the shortest.
within a month of becoming president he contracted pneumonia and died.
vice president john tyler then became the tenth president of the united states.
some dubbed him his accidency because he inherited his position after harrisons death.
democrats and whigs two visions of government and society the whigs and democrats represented opposing political visions.
the whigs favored a strong central government encouragement for industry and defense of indians rights in the north and parts of the midwest they aligned themselves against slavery.
rejecting the views of old style conservatives such as chancellor james kent an heir to the federalist vision of politics the whigs adopted the more popular style of politics pioneered by the anti masonic party using it to reach out to voters.
whigs embraced clays american system arguing that would help all americans so that the rich and poor would each see their fortunes rise.
whigs what were the most important differences between whigs and democrats on economic issues.
emphasized the harmonious interaction of different elements of the economy and attacked democrats for preaching an ideology that fostered class conflict.
the whig version of democracy was not egalitarian.
it recognized the need for a talented and virtuous elite to guide the nation.
the whigs frank acceptance of inequality allowed them to find a place in their ranks for african americans indians women and any other group who needed guidance or protection by an enlightened elite.
although slightly paternalistic in outlook the whigs believed they had a duty to protect these groups.
thus whigs championed the rights of indians against the efforts of jackson and other democrats to forcibly remove them from their lands.
although southern whigs supported slavery whigs outside the south often supported its abolition.
finally whigs actively cultivated womens involvement in their campaign efforts.
the whig party drew from the old national republican party of john quincy adams adding to their ranks democrats who opposed jacksons bank war.
anti masons and the more commercial southern planters were also drawn to the whig message.
whiggery also had a significant ethnic and religious basis.
individuals of english origin were also more likely than others to be whig in sympathy and mainstream protestant denominations such as the congregationalists presbyterians and episcopalians were more likely to vote whig.
democrats vision of white mens democracy was more egalitarian than that of the whigs but it was also more exclusive.
although democrats often couched their appeals in egalitarian terms this rhetoric was not inclusive when it came to racial equality.
instead democrats reached out to workers small farmers and the planter class.
democrats attracted voters who were suspicious of the burgeoning market economy including those who blamed banks especially the bank of the united states for their economic problems.
they asserted their support for the sanctity of private property and for the doctrine of states rights meaning that they were the party best suited to protect the interests of southern slaveholders.
obtaining more land for white farmers including southern planters was the primary goal of democrats.
promoting this old jeffersonian ideal of an expanding nation of yeoman farmers meant having to sacrifice the rights of indians.
from jeffersonianism jacksonian democrats inherited a fear of centralized government and large concentrations of financial power.
thus democrats opposed clays american view the image mattys dream playing the democrats game whigs in the election of 1840 democrats whigs oppose tariffs favor tariffs oppose federal support for internal improvements favor federal support for internal improvements oppose bank of the united states support the bank of the united states favor indian removal oppose indian removal states rights support strong central government 8 17 democrats and whigs major beliefs system and the whigs emphasis on a powerful federal government involved in economic development.
although not opposed to economic growth democrats believed that the individual states not the federal government ought to guide economic development.
rural farmers and urban workers flocked to the ranks of the democrats.
religious affiliation also dictated democratic affiliation.
democrats were more popular among the less affluent evangelical protestant sects such as the baptists and methodists who found jacksons egalitarian message appealing.
democrats also attracted free thinkers and catholics who feared that the whigs were trying to impose protestant morality on them.
for a summary of the ideas of the democrats and whigs see the chart 8 17.
democrats hailed the majesty of the people and attacked aristocracy particularly artificial privilege and monopolies.
whigs embraced a more measured view of democracy.
they warned americans of the threat posed by demagogues tyrants who flattered the people but who willingly sacrificed the common good the rule of law and the rights of the individual as they pursed their own quest for power and glory.
the expansion of democracy in america was accompanied by profound changes in the economy.
the whigs and the democrats each grappled with these changes in different ways.
developments in technology the growth of the factory system and the burgeoning market would produce changes no less profound than the democratization of politics.
taken together these interrelated changes helped usher in an economic and cultural transformation historians describe as the market revolution the whigs would become the great champions of the market revolution believing that government including the national government could help expand the market economy and promote american prosperity.
democrats accepted the necessity of the market but were more wary of its changes and were particularly concerned that government not manipulate the market economy to further the interests of a wealthy elite.
they were especially suspicious of the national government and believed that the states could better promote growth.
whigs and democrats would also come to view the geographical expansion of the united states in radically different ways.
for democrats more land meant the fulfillment of the old jeffersonian dream of creating a nation of independent farmers.
whigs worried about the political side effects of expansion.
they sought to improve america not expand it.
economic development and reform not geographical expansion would become the key to the whigs very different vision of the american future.
the aristocracy of our country continually contrive to change their party name.
it was first tory then federalist then no party then national republican now whig.
but by whatever name they reorganize themselves the true democracy of the country the producing classes ought to be able to distinguish the enemy frederick robinson democrat 1834 view the closer look images as history old hickory or king andrew popular images of andrew jackson what role did ethnic politics play in the contest between whigs and democrats.
chapter the market revolution p 254 hear the audio file on watch the video critical visions chapter read the document declaration of independence for vietnam 1945 p 780 read the document dwight d eisenhower dien bien george balls dissenting opinion on vietnam 1965 p 786 phu 1954 p 782 martin luther king jr conscience and the vietnam war 1967 p 797 2 how did johnson justify fighting in vietnam.
richard nixon vietnamization 1969 p 801 read the document ojohnsons defense of the view the closer look u s presence in vietnam 1965 p 787 images as history the power of the press in vietnam p 794 3 what differing views do these two songs offer on the war in vietnam.
view the closer look competing visions popular music and the vietnam war p 790 competing visions who was responsible for the my lai massacre p 800 envisioning evidence vietnam the war by the numbers p 803 view the image vietnam i want out p 796 kent state demonstrations p 802 4 what message does this film send to middle america about the peace movement.
watch the video protests against the vietnam war p 798 5 what is the significance of my lai.
watch the video video lecture atrocity and cover up my lai massacre p 799 view the map interactive map the vietnam war p 793 watch the video video lecture protest counterculture and the antiwar movement during the vietnam era p 804 how did the great society transform american society.
nonviolence triumphant the civil rights movement 1960 1965 p 819 why were nonviolent civil rights protests successful in the 1960s.
the fractured left p 828 why did disagreements arise among liberals and radicals.
the end of an era p 836 why did conservative ideals gain strength as the decade progressed.
chapter the liberal moment p 812 hear the audio file on watch the video critical visions chapter 24.
the soviets sent the first astronauts into space in 1961 prompting kennedy to announce that the united states intended to recover its reputation as the worlds technological leader by putting a man on the moon.
the youngest elected president in american history kennedys charisma and idealism inspired many baby boomers who were just reaching adolescence or entering college.
thousands rushed to join the peace corps an agency established by kennedy that sent recent college graduates to work on humanitarian projects in developing nations.
i really believed that i was going to change the world recalled one teenager.
by 1970 over 10 000 peace corps volunteers had traveled abroad to teach build hospitals set up water treatment plants and establish irrigation systems.
kennedy raised unemployment and social security benefits and the minimum wage but he had trouble implementing other parts of his read the document john f kennedy inaugural address 1961 liberal legislative program.
unskilled in lobbying legislators just over one third of his proposals became law.
conservative congressmen balked at using deficit spending to fund the tax cuts and programs kennedy proposed.
southerners objected to northerners insistence that federal education funds go only to racially integrated schools while protestants resisted offering public monies to private catholic parochial schools.
it was one of the great ironies of american politics a new york times reporter noted that jfk the immensely popular president could not reach his legislative goals a liberal court under the leadership of chief justice earl warren from 1953 1969 the supreme court became an aggressive champion of individual rights fostering the liberal agenda more successfully than kennedy and democrats in congress.
warren believed that the constitution gave the government the power and the responsibility to protect the relatively powerless against oppression by the majority.
by rendering opinions on a wide range of social justice issues the warren court brought about a legal revolution in the united states that permanently altered american schools politics the criminal justice system and cultural norms.
northern liberals cheered these decisions but conservatives in both parties viewed the warren court as an activist court rewriting rather than upholding the constitution.
in 1954 the brown v board of education decision see chapter 27 a decade of discord the challenge of the 1960s the fractured left conservative republicans and democrats never liked the antipoverty initiatives of kennedy and johnson while die hard segregationists adamantly opposed the integrationist goals of nonviolent civil rights leaders like king.
the most potent attacks on these progressive visions however came from the left where competing visions proliferated.
by the mid 1960s disaffected student activists increasingly dismissed the great society as too cautious and protested against johnsons war in vietnam while others renounced all ties to mainstream culture.
within the civil rights movement militancy replaced nonviolence as the dominant ethos.
meanwhile many white women left the civil rights movement to pursue womens liberation.
the new left and the counterculture the baby boom generation came of age in the 1960s.
by 1968 over half of the american population was under the age of 25 by then a core of white middleclass college students had created the new left a small but highly visible coalition of student based organizations that attacked racial discrimination poverty and the war in vietnam.
al haber formed students for a democratic society sds in 1960 at the university of michigan believing that if any really radical liberal force is going to develop in america it is going to come from the colleges and the young in 1962 tom hayden a white activist in the civil rights movement penned the groups manifesto the port huron statement hayden urged his peers to act noting we are people of this generation bred in at least modest comfort housed now in universities looking uncomfortably to the world we inherit although most college age americans did not attend university their ranks were increasing.
by 1965 nearly 6 5 million students attended colleges or universities compared with 2 2 million in 1950 strict rules governed student behavior.
students lived in single sex dormitories had to obey curfews each evening and abide by dress codes that prohibited female students from wearing pants.
the university of california berkeley even forbade political debate or discussion on campus a rule in place since the 1930s to prevent communist student groups from recruiting.
for years students had used a small strip just outside the berkeley campus main gate to hand out political pamphlets or give speeches.
in the fall of 1964 the university administration shut this down as well provoking the free speech movement a mass student protest that accused the university of california how did the new left affect university life.
of denying students the right to freedom of speech.
protest leader mario savio who had just returned from freedom summer pointed out that the two battlefields in mississippi and berkeley may seem quite different to some observers but this is not the case.
the same rights are at stake in both places the right to participate as citizens in a democratic society aided by sympathetic television coverage the free speech movement succeeded after four months of demonstrations and inspired left leaning students on other university campuses.
most college students never joined any organized protests but in response to those who did universities eliminated codes of conduct introduced more elective courses into curriculums and established black and womens studies.
after 1964 sds chapter 3.
in the next four decades this emotional style of evangelical protestantism attracted many americans.
for those swept up in the revival the changes transforming american society were seen as a threat to the church and the family.
however the most farsighted proponents of revival such as charles grandison finney realized that the power of the market revolution might be turned to good ends and used to promote religion and reform.
by the 1830s americans began to believe that the economic political and social changes sweeping over their society were undermining individual morality the ability of communities to prosper and the integrity of the family.
this belief drove the push for moral reform.
in many cases religious impulse inspired reformers.
finney preached that true saints love reform and argued that humankind could create a perfect society here on earth if all americans made the reformation of the whole world their priority.
not all reformers were religiously motivated however.
some reform efforts promoted secular goals and drew on the enlightenments ideals of reason science and faith in humankinds ability to improve and reshape its surroundings see chapters 3 and 4.
secular reform movements led to improvements in schools care for the mentally ill and methods of reforming criminals.
whether religious or secular reform efforts targeted individual behavior such as drunkenness and prostitution.
revivalism and the market revolution one way of promoting revivalism was the camp meeting an outdoor religious revival that lasted for days.
this painting of religious camp meeting 10 1 by an english artist captures the emotional intensity of these events during which grown men and women swooned and collapsed in response to the fiery preaching of ministers.
the painting shows overwrought men and women physically exhausted from the revival splayed across the ground and on the benches in the foreground.
one observer compared the audiences response to the fiery sermons of the camp meeting with the swelling of an ocean wave an awesome spectacle of fainting shouting yelling crying sobbing and grieving the tents in the background of the painting give only a small sense of the scope of these events.
camp meetings could last for a week and attract 3 000 people and 100 preachers.
what was the second great awakening.
read the document reverend peter cartwright cane ridge and the new lights revivalism and reform revivalists faulted many mainstream ministers for their overly intellectualized preaching.
ministers also blamed americas problems on the materialism associated with the market revolution.
one minister feared that the same forces that were increasing the business and moneyed interests in the nation would by spreading vice and irreligion prove its ruin.
those very things which all regard as improvements will be our destruction for some however the new methods of communication and wealth generated by the market revolution were tools to press into the service of revivalism.
no figure proved more adept at turning the tools of the market to religious purposes than charles grandison finney a lawyer turned preacher who became a leading spokesman for spreading the revivalist message of the second great awakening to towns and cities.
his influence was felt particularly strongly in those urban centers most closely associated with the market revolution.
while walking to his law offices one day finney experienced a religious conversion.
in a lawyerly manner he declared that from that day on he would be on a retainer from the lord jesus christ to plead his cause drawing on his experience as a courtroom lawyer he fashioned a forceful and direct style of preaching that cajoled harangued and pleaded with his audience to embrace salvation.
finneys theology rejected many of the calvinist assumptions of nonevangelical churches see chapter 27 a decade of discord the challenge of the 1960s malcolm x an alternative to nonviolence 27 11 malcolm x snaps a photo of muhammad ali 1964 this meeting between two mid1960s icons of black manhood came just after ali won the heavyweight boxing title.
both black muslims malcolm x and muhammad ali enjoyed keeping whites on edge with militant rhetoric that emphasized black pride and physical prowess.
the new left and counterculture did not speak with one voice and by the mid 1960s fractures within the civil rights movement were also apparent.
the nation of islam an african american religious sect founded in the 1930s rejected integration as the path to salvation for the black community and instead wanted to establish a separate black nation within the united states.
followers of nation of islam leader elijah muhammad prayed to mecca five times a day dressed modestly and avoided pork and alcohol.
the nation of islam departed from mainstream islamic practices however by viewing whites as blue eyed devils whom allah would condemn to eternal damnation on a forthcoming day of judgment.
the celebrated african american writer james baldwin understood the appeal of elijah muhammads prophecies even though he rejected them.
the white god has not delivered them perhaps the black god will wrote baldwin in the fire next time 1963 to explain the nation of islams growing popularity within northern urban neighborhoods.
malcolm x moved armed self defense and black separatism from the fringes to the center of the civil rights debate.
a magnetic speaker he had converted to islam while serving a six year stint in prison.
after his release he changed his name from malcolm little to malcolm x the x signifying the lost name of his african ancestors.
why did northern blacks find malcolm xs vision appealing.
i dont see any american dream i see an american nightmare malcolm x ridiculing kings i have a dream speech during the 1963 march on washington even during the heyday of nonviolence in the 1950s and early 1960s more militant voices within the black community championed a competing vision of self defense and racial pride that extended back to marcus garvey see chapter 27 a decade of discord the challenge of the 1960s derarm deodorant.
worried that the counterculture had made addictive drugs such as heroin popular among the young states passed stringent anti drug laws.
at the federal level in 1972 president nixon announced a war on drugs to disrupt the illicit drug trade.
the quick commercialization of the counterculture also hastened its demise as a potent alternative social vision.
modes of hippie dress slang and values albeit in diluted form swept into the mainstream.
granola appeared on supermarket shelves and middle aged men grew their hair long.
affluent and educated adults increasingly smoked marijuana and listened to rock music.
more sexually explicit movies and highly profitable rock record sales fueled rather than undermined acquisitive capitalism.
27 17 the first moon landing national pride surged at the sight of an american flag planted on the moon.
for many americans beating the soviets to the moon challenged the radical lefts view that american society was faltering.
planted an american flag 27 17 near manmade footprints that would permanently mark the moons surface.
this iconic photo of the united states conquering the moon bolstered many citizens faith in the superiority of the american way of life giving them another reason to reject the new left and counterculture critique of american culture.
the demise of the counterculture as with the civil rights movement and the great society the hippie counterculture also unraveled.
media coverage drew large crowds to the 1967 summer of love in san franciscos haightashbury neighborhood a hippie gathering dedicated to free food drugs sex and music.
in the fall hippie stalwarts organized a mock death of hippie son of media funeral procession blaming the over hyped media image of the free loving hippie for the drug related violence and epidemic of rapes that now beset haight ashbury.
they then departed en masse moving the foci of hippie culture to rural communes away from the media glare where some kept the hippie utopian ideal alive.
ronald reagan the republican governor of california echoed the views of mainstream america in 1969 when he characterized a hippie as someone who dresses like tarzan has hair like jane and smells like cheetah a reference to the countercultures embrace of public nudity long hair and disdain for un how did media exposure affect the counterculture.
keeping protest alive mexican americans and native americans the declining fortunes of the civil rights movement and the counterculture did not mean the end of all campaigns for social justice in the late 1960s.
mexican american and native american activists drew inspiration from the african american struggle and launched their own highly visible if short lived crusades to end ethnic discrimination.
ultimately however factionalism and police harassment also hurt these crusades.
in the 1960s the life expectancy for mexican american migrant workers hovered around age 50 while their infant mortality rate was double the national average.
the short handed hoe represented the nearly complete exploitation of california migrant workers.
the short one forced workers to bend all day 27 18 as they worked in the fields often causing crippling back pain that sidelined workers who could not afford health care.
california regulators finally banned the tool in 1975 rallying mexican americans around the slogan si se puede yes it can be done csar chvez head of the united farm workers union used strikes and marches to secure better working and living conditions.
chvez also appealed directly to consumers convincing 17 million americans to stop buying nonunionpicked grapes.
these tactics provoked a backlash in some quarters.
one safeway grocery store manager reported antiunion customers loading up their car with grapes and nothing else by the end of an era 1970 however the economic toll of the boycott forced growers to recognize the united farm workers and raise wages.
latino urban radicals in texas california and colorado embraced a competing vision called la raza the race that emphasized racial identity over union organizing.
the brown berets modeled themselves after the black panthers and proudly called themselves chicanos embracing their mexican american heritage while demanding an end to anglo american discrimination.
in march 1968 10 000 high school students in east los angeles staged a blow out by walking out of their classrooms to protest the poor education they received in their mostly hispanic schools.
by this point most white americans had little tolerance for radical political protest and overwhelmingly supported the police for shutting the demonstrations down.
internal divisions within the mexican american community over the wisdom of mass demonstrations and steady harassment from the police hastened the demise of the chicano student movement.
native american activists also drew inspiration from the integrationist vision that championed equality and the competing militant one that emphasized racial identity.
after encouraging indians to move off their reservations in the 1950s the bureau of indian affairs bia began terminating the rights of some indian tribes to federal protection.
ending their dependence on the bia to run schools manage their lands and provide health care the agency argued would encourage indians to assimilate into mainstream culture more quickly.
indian activists wanted the federal government to continue its financial assistance while also allowing more self government on reservations.
on november 20 1969 a group calling themselves indians of all tribes took over the abandoned federal prison on alcatraz island in san francisco bay.
the indian activists issued the sardonic alcatraz proclamation that offered to purchase the island for 24 in glass beads and red cloth the same amount that the dutch had paid indigenous people for manhattan island in 1626 the proclamation described alcatraz as the perfect site for an indian reservation because it lacked running water sanitation schools mineral resources and productive soil plus the population has always been held as prisoner and kept dependent upon others eventually the cold and isolation took its toll and the protest ended in june 1971 native americans staged nearly 70 other occupations throughout the nation including the american indian movements armed takeover of the village of wounded knee south dakota in 1973 the site of the armys massacre of 300 sioux in 1890 these highly visible protests prompted nixon to increase funds for social services on indian reservations and establish the office of indian water rights.
in the early 1970s the federal government ended the policy of termination and congress increased indian selfrule on the reservations.
indian tribes also began successfully suing the government for past treaty violations.
but government harassment part of a general crackdown on revolutionary political movements in the early seventies eviscerated radical indian groups.
read the document cesar chavez he showed us the way 1978 27 18 hispanic farm workers using short hoes workers nicknamed short hoes the devils arm because using them caused intense back pain.
every time union activist csar chvez saw a head of lettuce in the supermarket he remembered the suffering field workers had endured and felt renewed determination to organize strikes and boycotts to improve their working conditions.
what problems did chicanos and native americans face in the 1960s.
chapter 27 a decade of discord the challenge of the 1960s peace corps established supreme court rules school prayer unconstitutional birmingham freedom summer furor lays the foundation for religiously based conservative resurgence outrage over fire hose and dog attacks on civil rights protesters prompts kennedy to support a federal civil rights law murder of three civil rights workers in mississippi prompts congress to pass the civil rights act of 1964 port huron statement march on washington motivates student activists to join sds international press coverage turns the peaceful march into a triumphant movement for the nonviolent civil rights movement largest legislative liberal reform effort since the new deal program sends u s aid volunteers worldwide freedom rides chapter downturn and scandal p 844 hear the audio file on watch the video critical visions chapter 10 revivalism reform and artistic renaissance 1820 1850 competing visions reactions to shaker gender roles the unique religious practices of the shakers drew many comments.
for americans nothing was more remarkable than the shakers reconfiguration of traditional gender roles and the family.
travelers including the english novelist charles dickens home grown literary figures such as nathaniel hawthorne and a variety of journalists toured shaker communities and commented on the sects unique practices and habitations.
in the shaker bridal nathaniel hawthorne recounts the plight of two young lovers martha and adam who give up their chance for earthly love to join the shakers.
rather than transcend earthly suffering and reach a higher spiritual level however her decision to forsake conventional marriage ultimately leaves her despondent and an object of pity.
the following account of a visit to new york shakers in 1829 paints a different portrait of life and love among this utopian community.
this visitor did not encounter a repressed and puritanical religion but something close to a religious utopia.
the brothers and sisters in this view had traded the suffering of the world for their own vision of heaven on earth i have bidden you to join your hands said he not in earthly affection for ye have cast off its chains forever but as brother and sister in spiritual love and helpers of one another in your allotted task.
teach unto others the faith which ye have received.
the aged father sank back exhausted and the surrounding elders deemed with good reason that the hour was come when the new heads of the village must enter on their patriarchal duties.
in their attention to father ephraim their eyes were turned from martha pierson who grew paler and paler unnoticed even by adam colburn.
he indeed had withdrawn his hand hers from fr om her hers s and and folded fol folde ded d his his arms arms with wit with h a sense sens se nse e of satisfied ssat atis isfified ed ambition.
but paler and paler grew martha by his side till lilike ke a corpse cor c orps pse e in its its burial bur b uria iall clothes clot cl othe hess she she sank ssan ankk down down at at the the feet feet of her her early ear e arly ly lover lov lover er for forr after fo aft after er many man m anyy trials tria tr ials ls firmly fir firml mlyy borne born bo rne e her her heart h hea eart rt could co uld ld endure end en dure re the tth he weight weiight ht off its itits desolate d des esollate te agony agon ag onyy no longer.
lon longe gerr.
it is impossible to describe the air of tranquility and comfort that diffuses itself over a shaker settlement.
it is no matter what the enemies of such peaceful unoffending communities may say about them.
the acute observer of human manners will testify for them that they do not live after the manner of world.
with the shakers the two sexes together bear the burdens if burden it may be of celibacy they enliven its dullness by the amenity of their intercourse with one another.
the union of these people their uniform kindness to each other and the singularly benevolent and tender expression of their countenances speak spea sp eakk a stronger stro st rong nger er language lan langu guag age e than than their the theirir profession.
p pro rofe fess ssio ion.
n what do reactions to shaker gender roles reveal about ninteenth century american values.
religious and secular utopianism approached the family and sex from different perspectives both groups embraced communal ownership of property and although differing in means they both also attempted to free women from traditional gender roles.
see choices and consequences mary cragins experiment in free love at oneida.
joseph smith the founder of the church of jesus christ of the latter day saints or mormonism created another model of a religious utopia.
smith grew up in western new york where the fires of the great awakening burned hot.
in this evangelical milieu he had a revelation on which mormonism was based.
according to the book of mormon in 1823 an angel steered him to a set of golden tablets written in an ancient language.
with divine help smith deciphered the tablets which told of the travails of a lost tribe of israelites who had settled in america and who mormons believed were the ancestors of native americans.
the book of mormon was published in palmyra new york in 1830 and this town became the site of one of the earliest mormon communities.
the belief that the indians were actually descendants of a lost tribe of hebrews was not unique to the mormons.
the theory attracted attention from several prominent religious authors of the time.
smiths treasure hunting was also not that unusual spurred on by popular stories about buried treasures gathered by ancient indian civilizations.
smith was influenced by the widespread belief that the millennium was at hand bringing with it an end to debt and the return of christ and a new era of peace happiness and prosperity.
the revelations detailed by smith struck a resonant chord with small farmers tradesmen and mechanics whose experience with the expanding market economy had been largely negative.
smiths new revelation attracted thousands of followers.
mormons set up their own community in kirtland ohio and then a larger community at nauvoo illinois.
the mormons did not go as far as the shakers or oneidians in embracing communism but they had a strong communal economic ethic.
smiths 1831 law of consecration urged mormons to deed their land to the church which would distribute it among the faithful and retain any surplus.
secular utopias secular utopia also attracted individuals frustrated with american society.
hostility to the market revolution provided inspiration for a variety of socialist utopian communities.
robert owens new harmony in indiana was one such ambitious experiment.
a successful textile mill owner who began his career in scotland owen was worried about the impact of industrialization on society and hoped to create an ideal community built on a socialist model.
despite early enthusiasm his community lasted only three years.
the french theorist charles fourier provided a more popular socialist alternative including a utopian theory of phalanxes ideal communities organized around socialist ideals that gained a considerable following in the 1840s.
indeed between 1841 and 1846 25 of these phalanxes popped up across new england new york and the midwest.
rather than accept the values of the marketplace fourier championed the ideas of association and cooperation individual communities divided the profits produced by agricultural labor or goods manufactured at the phalanx among the members according to a formula that included the amount invested a persons skills and the amount of his or her physical labor.
fouriers socialist theories also questioned traditional gender roles.
in his view social progress occurred in direct proportion to the advance of women toward liberty women in fourierist communities enjoyed equal pay and equal opportunities with men and benefited from under our system of isolated and separate households with separate interests and separate pursuits instead of association and combination among families there is the most deplorable waste which is one of the primary sources of the general poverty that exists and discord antagonism selfishness and an anti social spirit are engendered albert brisbane american fourierist concise exposition of the doctrine of association 1843 why did mormon values appeal to farmers and other small producers in the era of the market revolution.
chapter 26 and the great society programs see chapter 28 righting a nation adrift america in the 1970s and 1980s 28 3 the soiling of old glory 1976 the image of an anti busing protester in boston preparing to ram an african american lawyer with a flagpole underscored that deeply ingrained racial prejudices were more than just a southern problem.
boston herald photographer stanley formans pulitzer prize winning photo the soiling of old glory 28 3 showed rakes poised to attack landsmark with his flagstaff.
in the photo landsmark apparently struggles to free himself from the grip of another white man grabbing him from the rear.
contrary to the impression given by the photo however the man holding landsmark was actually helping him to his feet after white youths had thrown him to the ground and beaten him.
rakes never hit landsmark with the flagstaff.
yet when landsmark a seasoned civil rights activist who had marched from selma to montgomery in 1965 see chapter 28 righting a nation adrift america in the 1970s and 1980s images as history watergate through political cartoons political cartoons have been a mainstay of political debate in america since the colonial era.
if the prime role of a free press is to serve as critic of government cartooning is often the cutting edge of that criticism stated herb block who drew under the pseudonym herblock.
political cartoonists like herblock and paul conrad followed the long career of richard nixon from his early days as a communist hunting congressman through his resignation as president.
their illustrations caricatured his face and shoulders depicting a long beak like nose dark circles under his eyes five oclock shadow and slumping shoulders.
some conservative cartoonists defended nixon even as the watergate scandal deepened.
one caricature depicted the media as piranhas nipping at nixons heels as he tried to reach calmer waters suggesting that he was the victim of a media feeding frenzy.
when nixon resigned a bert whitman cartoon in the phoenix gazette showed the president exiting center stage leaving behind spotlights that illuminated his foreign policy successes such as ending the vietnam war and improving relations with china and the soviet union.
to these conservative commentators nixons record as a strong leader in the world mattered more than his transgressions at home.
the cartoon herblock later noted comments not only on his situation at the time but on his veracity and honesty without using any words other than his own nixon struggles to pull the two ends of a severed tape together a reference to the severely edited tapes of white house conversations that nixon had released to watergate investigators.
by depicting nixon with the word not in his mouth herblock transformed nixons 1973 statement im not a crook into i am a crook in this 1974 cartoon.
herblock nixon hanging between the tapes washington post 1974 conrad satirized the presidents paranoia by depicting nixon as a despot sitting in the dark creating enemies lists which eventually included 30 000 people.
by 1973 the public knew that nixon had instructed the fbi and irs to harass people he considered political enemies the list included paul conrad who drew political cartoons for the los angeles times.
to prevent future presidents from using the fbi to spy on their domestic critics the foreign intelligence surveillance act 1978 required secret judicial approval for any internal surveillance of u s citizens.
after the terrorist attacks on september 11 2001 congress loosened these restrictions on monitoring americans at home.
the cartoon title suggested that nixon rather than his opponents destroyed his presidency.
what insights do these cartoons offer into the watergate scandal.
paul conrad his own worst enemy los angeles times 1973 view the closer look images as history watergate through political cartoons a crisis of presidential leadership a crisis of presidential leadership the watergate scandal and the scars from the vietnam war tested americans faith in the federal government.
congress moved to limit the powers of the president and americans disagreed over the direction to take in foreign policy post vietnam.
the challenges were significant dealing with renewed soviet aggression ensuring that support for israel did not alienate oil producing arab nations and improving relations with central america.
a weakened presidency when gerald r ford became president for the first time a man unelected as either president or vice president led the nation.
nixon had appointed ford then republican house minority leader as his vice president in 1973 invoking the twentyfifth amendment to fill the office after disgraced vice president spiro agnew resigned for having accepted bribes while governor of maryland.
during his 24 years in congress ford built a reputation as an honest fiscally conservative republican and won the respect of legislators in both parties.
im a ford not a lincoln he said when he became vice president distancing himself from both the elite who bought luxurious lincoln cars and the political genius of the nations sixteenth president.
fords modesty compared favorably with nixons obsessive quest for power.
believing that the nation wanted to turn the page quickly on the watergate scandal ford announced that he was giving nixon a full free and absolute pardon for any illegal acts that he might have committed as president.
a long trial and possibly imprisoning the former president would only prolong the nations agony he believed.
ford however had misread the publics mood.
his approval rating sank to 42 percent amid accusations that he was fulfilling the terms of a backroom deal made while nixon was still president a pardon in return for the presidency.
nixon went free but over 70 others were eventually convicted of watergaterelated crimes.
ford never recovered from this loss of confidence in his leadership.
an emboldened congress reined in presidential power.
nixon had accepted large donations from businessmen in return for favors and influence.
in response congress created a federal election commission fec in 1974 to monitor federal elections.
congress also limited campaign contributions by individuals and official political organizations and established a system of public funding for presidential elections.
opponents immediately challenged the constitutionality of these restrictions.
in 1976 the supreme court struck down a provision that limited how much an individual could spend of his or her own money to win elected office claiming that such restrictions except for candidates who accepted matching federal funds violated the first amendment right to free speech.
these efforts to curb influence peddling through campaign donations had unintended consequences.
political action committees pacs which represented private interest groups such as labor business and retirees were allowed to donate more money than individuals increasing their sway over the politicians they supported.
to repair public faith in the presidency president ford tried to shape a post vietnam foreign policy that restored americas image as an invincible superpower without reigniting fears that the nation was overextending its reach or behaving unethically.
exposs about how the united states was conducting the cold war acquainted americans with their governments willingness to support dictators around the world who pledged friendship to the united states over the soviet union.
in 1974 the new york times exposed the cias covert involvement in the overthrow of salvador allende the democratically elected marxist president of chile.
with aid from cia operatives anti soviet and pro american general augusto pinochet seized power and established a brutal 16 year dictatorship that tortured imprisoned and killed dissenters.
congressional investigations also exposed cia plots to assassinate leftist leaders in the congo cuba and the dominican republic.
to regain public confidence in how the government was waging the cold war ford prohibited any government employee from engaging or conspiring in assassination plots.
complaints over how did congress and ford respond to nixons wrongdoing.
chapter 11 overspread the continent westward expansion and political conflict 1840 1848 manifest destiny and changing visions of the west 11 1 the trapper and his family artist charles deas offers a glimpse into the world of the trapper in this watercolor image.
the canoe represents the multicultural world created by trappers in miniature.
during the early nineteenth century american fur traders had engaged in a lucrative trade with western indian tribes.
the interactions between the traders and indians created a middle ground see chapter 19 carter negotiated a treaty that returned the panama canal to panama in 2000 the united states had controlled the canal zone since 1903 but by the 1970s americas bigger submarines and ships did not fit through the canal reducing its importance to national security and the economy.
three previous presidents had recognized these facts and opened negotiations but carter sealed the deal and won senate ratification for the agreement in 1978 giving up control of the panama canal failed to dramatically improve relations between the united states and latin america.
overtures to normalize relations with the communist cuban dictator fidel castro went nowhere.
carter also faced a severe test in nicaragua where civil war pitted the anti communist dictator anastasio somoza against the cuban supported sandinista rebels.
when the sandinistas prevailed carter offered them economic aid in the vain hope that he could dissuade them from creating a cubanlike authoritarian communist state.
turning to asia carter continued along the path forged by nixon and established diplomatic relations with the peoples republic of china in 1979 this decision angered conservatives who viewed taiwan where the nationalist government had fled after the communist takeover of the mainland in 1949 as the rightful government of china.
to the communists and those others who are hostile to our country reagan fumed president carter and his supporters in the congress seem like santa claus.
they have given the panama canal away abandoned taiwan to the red chinese and theyre negotiating a salt ii treaty with the soviets that could very well make this nation number two ignoring these criticisms carter signed the salt ii pact in june 1979 which capped missiles and bombers on each side.
but as reagans comments revealed american disaffection with dtente ran deep.
in the 1970s soviet backed regimes took control of angola somalia ethiopia an inordinate fear of communism has led us to embrace any dictator who joined in our fear president jimmy carter making human rights a guiding principle in u s foreign policy and afghanistan confirming skeptics fears that dtente had strengthened the enemy.
additional signs of moscows aggressive intentions came in 1977 when the soviets began aiming new highly accurate intermediate range missiles ss 20s at western europe.
carter responded by securing natos authorization to install pershing ii missiles in western europe which could reach moscow in ten minutes.
strained soviet american relations took another hit when the soviet union invaded afghanistan in december 1979 to prop up its faltering marxist government.
the soviets were eager to keep a friendly regime in power along their border but the united states feared their ambitions might stretch into the oil rich middle east.
calling the invasion the most serious threat to peace since the second world war carter announced the carter doctrine a declaration that the united states would use armed forces to stop any outside power from making inroads into the persian gulf region.
he withdrew the salt ii treaty from the senate increased defense spending cut off shipments of grain and technology to the soviet union and announced that the united states would boycott the summer olympics in moscow.
the carter administration also sent aid to muslim fundamentalist rebels battling the soviets in afghanistan whose ranks included the saudi born islamic militant osama bin laden.
a wealthy recent college graduate dedicated to establishing an islamic state in afghanistan bin laden would later found al qaeda an islamic fundamentalist terrorist organization.
the cold war had long held the attention of american presidents.
the united states was just learning however to take conflicts in the middle east as seriously.
carter hoped to lessen tension by negotiating an end to hostilities between israel and egypt.
in 1978 he invited egyptian president anwar el sadat and israeli prime minister menachem begin to camp david a presidential mountain retreat in maryland.
thirteen days of tense did carters dealings with the soviet union continue or undo initiatives undertaken by nixon and ford.
chapter 27 also prevented women from speaking with one voice.
the feminist movement occasionally benefited from positive media coverage as during made fortelevision moments like the heavily hyped battle of the sexes in 1973 between tennis stars billie jean king and bobby riggs.
millions of americans tuned in to watch king defeat riggs a self proclaimed male chauvinist pig who argued that even a 55 year old former tennis champion like himself could defeat the best female player in the world.
riggs announced his conversion to the feminist cause by shouting equality for women as he hit the final volley into the net.
kings triumph advanced opportunities for womens professional sports.
feminist campaigning also led to the passage of title ix of the 1972 education act prohibiting gender discrimination in education.
this law revolutionized high school and college sports by forcing administrators to create more teams and scholarships for female students.
despite negative media portrayals and problems attracting working class women the feminist movement enjoyed other successes in the early 1970s.
cities established shelters for battered women and rape crisis centers.
congress also passed the equal rights amendment era in 1972 a proposal that congressional supporters had introduced regularly since 1923 that stated equality of rights under the law shall not be denied or abridged by the united states or by any state on account of sex within three years 34 of the 38 states needed for ratification of the era had approved the measure.
this avalanche of change outraged cultural conservatives who charged that the era would destroy the american family.
phyllis schlafly a conservative illinois lawyer with six children led the anti era crusade.
catapulting into the national spotlight schlafly helped forge the coalition among catholics southerners antifeminists religious fundamentalists and fiscal conservatives that pushed the republican party to the right throughout the 1970s.
feminists branded schlafly a hypocrite pointing out that she was a well educated woman who had enjoyed a satisfying career in republican politics before spearheading the anti era campaign.
shes an extremely liberated woman asserted karen decrow the president of the feminist national organization for women.
competing visions defining the ideal woman page 860 explores the debate over female gender identity in the 1970s.
schlaflys anti feminist message resonated in the southern and mountain states areas without strong local feminist organizations to offer a competing view of how gender discrimination adversely affected women in the workplace.
in the end the anti era forces prevailed.
the era remained three states short when the deadline for approving the measure came in 1982 the first of many conservative political victories to come in the 1980s.
the rancor over legalized abortion however far surpassed the barbs exchanged over the era.
between 700 000 and 800 000 women a year sought illegal abortions and botched procedures by incompetent practitioners working in unsanitary conditions killed 2 000 3 000 patients annually.
the signs 28 8 in this 1970 st louis missouri protest march held on the anniversary of the ratification of the nineteenth amendment listed the right of legalized abortion as a key feminist demand.
it remained the right of individual states sttattess to to determine dete de term te rmin rm inee the in t legality th l 28 8 women marching for equal rights these protesting feminists carried signs demanding legalized abortions childrens day care centers passage of the equal rights amendment and more female candidates for political office.
how did the women participating in this protest march define female liberation.
chapter review sets in motion constitutional crisis over extent of presidential power dramatizes american dependence on overseas oil exports roe v wade legalizes abortion religious conservative coalition forms in opposition shakes public confidence in fords leadership camp david accords review questions 1 what were the differences and similarities between the watergate and iran contra scandals.
2 how did concerns over human rights communism and the domestic economy influence foreign relations during the 1970s and 1980s.
3 how did ronald reagans political vision differ from those embraced by his predecessors in the white house.
4 what competing visions animated debates over feminism gay rights and environmentalism.
5 why did the new right become so influential.
key terms salt i 1972 the first treaty between the soviet union and the united states that limited the deployment of intercontinental and submarine launched ballistic missiles and the creation of missile defense systems.
mutually assured destruction mad the claim that the guarantee of a devastating nuclear counter attack would deter the united states and soviet union from ever employing their nuclear arsenals.
camp david accords 1978 israel agreed to give the sinai peninsula back to egypt in return egypt became the first arab state to recognize israels right to exist.
iranian hostage crisis defining event in carters presidency as iranian revolutionaries held 52 americans captive for 444 days.
equal rights amendment era a proposed constitutional amendment which stated that equality of rights under the law shall not be denied or abridged by the united states or by any state on account of sex roe v wade 1973 supreme court decision that legalized abortion.
stonewall riot a 1969 battle between patrons of a greenwich village male gay bar and police that became the catalyst for the gay rights movement.
religious right a collection of right wing christian groups that defended traditional values and supported conservative political causes.
iran contra scandal a law breaking scheme that sold arms to iran to secure the hostages release and used the proceeds to support anti communists in nicaragua.
intermediate range nuclear forces treaty 1987 approved the destruction of all u s and soviet intermediate range missiles in europe.
chapter 11 overspread the continent westward expansion and political conflict 1840 1848 the arrival of the caravan in santa fe produced a great deal of bustle and excitement among the natives.
los americanos la entrada de la caravana the americans.
the caravan has arrived.
josiah gregg commerce of the prairies or the journal of a santa fe trader 1844 11 6 view of the san francisco presidio this depiction of the mission system by a russian artist captures the exploitation of the indian population.
american settlers were an economic boon to the region.
texans exported an estimated 500 000 worth of goods to new orleans mainly cotton and cattle.
additional trade networks developed elsewhere along the mexican american border.
in california new england merchants sought seal and sea otter pelts to sell in china.
in 1821 american traders established a trade route from missouri to santa fe.
far safer and less rugged than the nearly 1 700 mile journey to mexico city the santa fe trail became a thriving trade route.
american traders whose profits on the sale of goods ranging from cloth to what advantages did americans have over mexicans in the lucrative trade with santa fe.
manufactured items such as umbrellas sometimes reached 40 percent were often paid in hard currency.
indeed trade with santa fe became so crucial that the mexican silver peso became the unofficial unit of exchange for much of the western united states.
the clash of interests in texas although mexico benefited from the increased trade with the united states the presence of so many american settlers in texas worried mexican officials.
three issues were particularly troubling.
first the americans flouted the laws requiring they learn spanish and convert to catholicism.
second they brought thousands of slaves into texas at a time when mexico was heading toward the abolition of slavery a goal it achieved in 1829.
third many american settlers did little to conceal their interest in joining the united states.
a small uprising in 1826 of americans hoping to secede was easily crushed by the mexican army.
the mexican government reacted by banning further immigration from the united states.
still americans came and mexico lifted the ban in 1833 before long there were 30 000 americans in texas.
view the image texas home for the emigrant american expansionism into the southwest a well organized effort to separate from mexico occurred in 1834 this time americans took advantage of the instability of mexican politics.
in 1834 mexican general antonio lpez de santa anna staged a coup and assumed dictatorial powers.
when american settlers in texas revolted demanding a restoration of the constitution santa anna decided to crush the rebellion.
the ensuing war between santa annas forces and the american texans was brutal.
one of the bloodiest battles occurred in early 1836 near san antonio at the alamo an old spanish mission defended by a small force of texans including legendary frontiersman and politician davy crockett and jim bowie for whom the bowie knife was named.
historians continue to argue over the exact death toll but few dispute that the fighting was fierce and many died that day.
images such as this woodcut of crocketts death inspired americans whose battle cry for the rest of the war against mexico became remember the alamo 11 7.
even as santa annas forces assaulted the alamo american texans declared independence from mexico march 2 1836 and drafted a new constitution.
meanwhile his victory at the alamo convinced santa anna that the texas forces were no match for his army.
overconfident he recklessly divided his troops leading to his defeat and capture at the battle of san jacinto by the texans under sam houston.
the republic of texas and the politics of annexation the citizens of the now independent republic of texas expected the united states to act quickly and annex texas into the expanding american republic.
they would have to wait nearly a decade however as annexation proved to be a divisive issue in american politics.
opponents of slavery feared annexation would upset the delicate balance between free and slave states.
conversely southerners and others who favored slavery supported texas annexation.
heated debate in 1836 and 1837 died down as both the democrats and whigs sought to avoid the texas issue.
for the moment the economic problems associated with the panic of 1837 see chapter review indians traders and trappers gather to buy sell and promote intercultural exchanges review questions 1 what role did ideas of race play in the theory of manifest destiny.
2 what symbolic function did indians play in american artists representations of the west during the era of expansion.
4 who were the conscience whigs.
5 how did zachary taylors campaign in 1848 deal with the divisive issue of slavery.
3 why did the young whig abraham lincoln oppose the annexation of texas.
key terms rendezvous a festive annual gathering held in the rocky mountains in which indians mountain men and traders gathered together to exchange pelts for a variety of goods.
manifest destiny a term coined by editor and columnist john osullivan to describe his belief in americas divine right to expand westward.
overland trail the 2 000 mile route taken by american settlers traveling to new settlements in oregon california and utah.
liberty party the staunchly antislavery anti annexation party was short lived but captured 62 000 votes a small number but enough some historians argue to effectively rob henry clay of electoral victories in new york and michigan thereby handing polk the presidency in 1844 treaty of guadalupe hidalgo this treaty formally ended the war between the united states and mexico 1848.
in addition to settling the border dispute between texas and mexico the united states gained a significant swath of new territory in the southwest.
wilmot proviso bill introduced by congressman david wilmot would have banned slavery from the territories acquired from mexico.
popular sovereignty an approach to the question of slavery in a newly acquired territory that would have allowed the people in each territory to decide for themselves whether to permit slavery.
chapter 28 with his call to end the corrupt liberal welfare state the republicans captured both the house and the senate for the first time since 1952 gingrichs manifesto the contract with america envisioned smaller government less regulation term limits for members of congress welfare reform and adding a balanced budget amendment to the constitution.
little of this ambitious agenda was enacted partly because clinton stole some of gingrichs thunder by undertaking his own program of welfare reform.
modifying legislation passed during the new deal he joined with republicans and conservative democrats in congress to reduce the time that families mostly single mothers with dependent children could receive financial assistance.
clinton also tried to appeal to fiscal conservatives by balancing the federal budget for the first time in 30 years.
clinton used his superior political skills not only to weaken the republican resurgence but also to survive the scandals that plagued his presidency.
in 1994 a special federal prosecutor kenneth starr began investigating charges that the president had read the document articles of impeachment against william jefferson clinton participated in a fraudulent land deal during his tenure as arkansas attorney general.
during his investigation starr learned that president clinton had engaged in a sexual relationship with a white house intern named monica lewinsky.
clinton was not the first president to have extramarital dalliances but when giving testimony under oath on an unrelated matter he denied the affair.
seven months later the president publicly acknowledged that he had lied as seen in this new york daily news headline reporting his televised address to the nation 29 6.
republicans argued that clintons failure to tell the truth warranted impeachment.
in 1998 the republicancontrolled house of representatives completed the first stage of impeachment by voting that the president had lied under oath and obstructed justice.
the senate now had to decide whether these infractions met the constitutional test of high crimes and misdemeanors needed to remove a president from office.
ten republican senators joined with democrats in defeating the first charge of perjury by a vote of 55 to 45 the second charge of obstructing justice resulted in a 50 to 50 tie.
neither charge obtained the requisite two thirds vote required to remove clinton from the white house.
clinton survived impeachment by cultivating the same everyman appeal that won him the presidency.
the essence of clintons success has been to persuade america that this scandal is about human weakness not crime and that at its core is not a string of felonies but a sin familiar to all adultery lamented conservative commentator patrick buchanan.
the strong economy also helped keep clintons approval ratings near 60 percent throughout the ordeal.
29 6 clintons sex scandal when clinton finally admitted to an inappropriate relationship with white house intern monica lewinsky the lies he had previously told to cover it up led to his impeachment.
how did clintons sex scandal compare to the reagan era iran contra scandal see chapter 11.
overall the united states attracted twice as many immigrants as all of the other nations in the world combined.
competing claims about the economic benefits of immigration emerged a debate explored more fully in competing visions the economic costs of immigration.
the new right also feared dire cultural consequences as the nation fragmented into permanent ethnic enclaves.
if america is to survive as one nation one people we need to call a time out on immigration to assimilate the tens of millions who have lately arrived exhorted patrick buchanan.
to protect the nations cultural cohesion these right leaning critics organized campaigns to make english the nations official language.
both democrats and republicans worried that immigrants who were willing to work for less took jobs away from native born workers.
critics especially denounced illegal immigration arguing that people who sneaked across the border often violated other laws as well.
illegal immigrants sent their transforming daily life competing visions the economic costs of immigration to this day americans continue to disagree about the economic costs of immigration.
in the following passage harvard economist george j borjas paints a pessimistic economic portrait.
tamar jacoby disputes his claim that three decades of high immigration have hurt the u s economy.
what factors does each emphasize to make a case.
george j borjas suggested that immigration affected socioeconomic groups differently in his 1996 article the new economics of immigration affluent americans gain poor americans lose new research has established a number of points.
the relative skills of successive immigrant waves have declined over much of the postwar period.
in 1970 for example the latest immigrant arrivals on average had 0 4 fewer years of schooling and earned 17 percent less than natives.
by 1990 the most recently arrived immigrants had 1 3 fewer years of schooling and earned 32 percent less than natives the large scale migration of less skilled workers has done harm to the economic opportunities of less skilled natives.
immigration may account for perhaps a third of the recent decline in the relative wages of less educated native workers the increasing welfare dependency in the immigrant population suggests that immigration may create a substantial fiscal burden on the most affected localities and states there exists a strong correlation between the skills of immigrants and the skills of their american born children so that the huge skill differentials observed among todays foreign born groups will almost certainly become tomorrows differences among american born ethnic groups.
in effect immigration has set the stage for sizable ethnic differences in skills and socioeconomic outcomes which are sure to be the focus of intense attention in the next century current immigration redistributes wealth from unskilled workers whose wages are lowered by immigrants to skilled workers and owners of companies that buy immigrants services and from taxpayers who bear the burden of paying for the social services used by immigrants to consumers who use the goods and services produced by immigrants immigration changes how the economic pie is sliced up the harmful effects of immigration will not go away simply because some people do not wish to see them.
view the closer look competing visions the economic costs of immigration in her 2002 article too many immigrants tamar jacoby argued that large scale immigration benefited the united states economically.
the most commonly heard complaint about foreign workers is that they take jobs from americans.
not only is this assertion untrue nobody has found real evidence to support it but cities and states with the largest immigrant populations new york los angeles and others boast far faster economic growth and lower unemployment than cities and states that do not attract immigrants.
in many places the presence of immigrants seems to reduce unemployment even among native born blacks probably because of the way immigrants stimulate economic growth even if borjas is right that a native born black worker may take home 300 less a year as a result of immigration this is a fairly small amount of money in the overall scheme of things.
more to the point globalization would have much the same effect on wages immigrants or no immigrants what about the costs imposed by immigrants especially by their use of government services.
it is true that many immigrants though far from all are poorer than nativeborn americans and thus pay less in taxes.
it is also true that one small segment of the immigrant population refugees tends to be heavily dependent on welfare.
as a result states with large immigrant populations often face chronic fiscal problems but if we shift the lens to the federal level and include the taxes that immigrants remit to the irs the calculation comes out very differently immigrants pay in more than they take out 28 million immigrants form but a small part of the 12 trillion u s economy and most of the fiscal costs and benefits associated with them are relatively modest.
besides fiscal calculations are only a small part of the larger economic picture.
how do we measure the energy immigrants bring the pluck and grit and willingness to improvise and innovate.
not only are immigrants by and large harder working than the native born they generally fill economic niches that would otherwise go wanting.
are contemporary concerns about immigration similar or different from objections made earlier in the twentieth century.
chapter 22 to rally popular support for aiding the poor.
president george h w bush responded to the public outcry by sending u s troops to help un peacekeepers restore order aid that incoming president bill clinton continued.
public opinion shifted dramatically in 1993 however when news cameras captured the image of cheering somalis dragging the corpse of an american soldier through the streets of mogadishu the capital city of somalia after rebel somali warlords downed a u s helicopter 29 13.
the new threats in the post cold war world public now demanded an immediate withdrawal and clinton complied.
the un also withdrew its troops and years of anarchy in somalia followed.
reluctant to jeopardize american soldiers lives again clinton proceeded cautiously in april 1994 when hutus the majority ethnic group in rwanda a nation in central africa unleashed a 100 day genocidal rampage that killed 800 000 tutsis a minority ethic group.
this time clinton came under attack for failing to intervene decisively with force.
the photo of somalis desecrating the corpse of an american soldier had other repercussions.
osama bin laden the saudi exile who headed al qaeda a fundamentalist islamic terrorist organization concluded that terrorist attacks against the united states would work because americans had no stomach for casualties.
one american pilot was dragged in the streets of mogadishu and you left.
the extent of your impotence and weaknesses became very clear he jeered in 1996 such pronouncements caused paul watson the photojournalist who took the pulitzer prize winning image to conclude that the storm of outrage over his photo taught terrorists that they could rely on publicity in the western media to amplify the impact of their terrorist attacks.
during his first years in office clinton also had to respond to ethnic cleansing the intentional mass killing of one ethnic group by another in the balkans a mountainous region of southeastern europe.
when communist yugoslavia dissolved in 1991 ethnic and religious differences provoked a civil war among croatia bosnia and serbia all former parts of yugoslavia.
clinton resisted intervening until july 1995 when serbian forces forced 25 000 bosnian muslim women and children to leave the town of srebrenica and murdered the 7 500 muslim men and boys who remained behind.
the united states participated in nato air strikes of serbian military positions and helped broker the 1995 dayton peace accords which settled disputed territorial boundaries and placed nato troops including americans on the ground as peacekeepers.
preoccupied with humanitarian tragedies overseas americans paid less attention in the early 1990s to signs that the terrorist threat was moving closer to home.
many arabs saw the united states and israel as one blaming both for taking away land that belonged to the palestinians.
overseas hostagetakings and plane hijackings in the 1970s and 1980s kept the arab israeli conflict in the news.
in 1993 kuwaiti and iraqi born terrorists exploded a massive car bomb in the parking garage of the world trade center two towering skyscrapers in the heart of new york citys financial district that housed governmental agencies and companies involved in foreign trade.
the explosion killed six people and created a six story hole in the ground.
the fbi captured the culprits easily when one tried to recover his deposit from a car rental agency for the van used in the attack.
reassured that law enforcement agencies had done their job and that the terrorists were inept the public and government quickly forgot the incident.
but al qaeda which maintained training bases in afghanistan resolved to try again.
determined to launch a jihad or holy war against western nonbelievers bin laden relied on his familys fortune and donations from saudi arabians to construct a clandestine terrorist network that recruited disciples from the middle east asia and africa.
not all terrorist threats during this period originated overseas.
on april 19 1995 timothy mcveigh parked a rental truck filled with explosives in front of a federal building in oklahoma city.
the blast killed 168 people including many children in a day care center and wounded 800 mcveigh and his accomplice terry nichols viewed the attack as payback for the federal governments recent assaults against private paramilitary groups and their rural compounds filled with caches of weapons.
militia supporters like mcveigh rejected any legal restriction on their second amendment right to bear arms citing gun laws as just one example of government tyranny.
the bombing remained the deadliest terrorist attack against american civilians until 9 11.
meanwhile al qaeda attacked u s targets overseas.
issuing a fatwa or religious decree declaring war against all americans bin laden demanded that the united states remove its troops from saudi arabia stationed there since the 1991 persian gulf war and end its support of israel.
it is more important for muslims to kill americans than other infidels bin laden declared.
this pronouncement was more than rhetoric.
in august 1998 al qaeda terrorists bombed the u s embassies in nairobi the capital of kenya and dar es salaam a city in tanzania.
clinton ordered an immediate retaliatory attack and tomahawk cruise missiles rained down on eight al qaeda training camps in afghanistan and on a pharmaceutical plant in sudan which was thought to have supplied bin laden with chemical weapons.
his advisors presented clinton with competing views over the next possible step.
his antiterrorist advisor recommended continuing the bombing until the taliban afghanistans fundamentalist islamic why did foreign and domestic terrorists attack americans.
chapter 12 slavery and sectionalism the political crisis of 1848 1861 called for splitting the area into two separate territories kansas west of missouri and nebraska west of iowa 12 9.
he intended this last provision to placate both north and south by allowing the eventual establishment of kansas as a slave state since its soil and climate were similar to neighboring missouri and nebraska as a free state.
the kansas nebraska act touched off a national debate more intense than that of 1850 most northerners both whigs and democrats considered the 36 30 line an untouchable agreement that had ensured national peace for more than 30 years.
although some moderates had been willing in 1850 to allow slavery via popular sovereignty into western territory lying south of the line they now balked at doing so in land north of it.
free soilers and abolitionists denounced the bill as conclusive evidence that the south now increasingly referred to as the slave power was bent on spreading the curse of slavery wherever possible.
they organized hundreds of anti nebraska rallies across the north and forwarded petitions to congress.
despite corruption bribery and treachery asserted one typical resolution nebraska the heart of our continent shall forever remain free undeterred douglas prevailed and his bill passed in may 1854 but it was a costly victory that seriously weakened his democratic party and hampered his presidential ambitions by associating him with controversy.
the impact on the whigs was even worse shattering the party along sectional 12 9 the kansas nebraska act the goal of stephen a douglas in gaining passage of the kansas nebraska act was to open the great plains to settlement and facilitate the construction of a transcontinental railroad ideally running through his home state of illinois.
his repeal of the missouri compromise line and the ensuing vigilante conflict in kansas reignited the slavery controversy.
canada washington territory 1853 vermont minnesotaterritory 1849 nebraska territory 1854 oregon territory 1848 new hampshire massachusetts wisconsin.
iowa pennsylvania ir r ipp ri ou iss iss ss m mi new york michigan ohio platte river valley illinois utah territory 1850 kansas river valley arkansa s r kansas territory 1854 missouri 30 missouri compromise line 36 california new mexico territory 1850 indian territory maine delaware indiana maryland.
io r kentucky virginia oh north carolina tennessee south carolina arkansas mississippi pa c i f i c ocean rhode island connecticut new jersey at l a n t i c ocean georgia alabama texas louisiana mexico o ri florida de an gr free states and territories slave states indian territory unorganized slave or free to be decided by popular sovereignty kansas nebraska act gulf of mexico slave or free to be decided by popular sovereignty compromise of 1850 why did most northerners oppose the repeal of the missouri compromise line of 36 30.
view the map interactive map the compromise of 1850 and the kansas nebraska act political realignment lines.
every northern whig in the house and senate voted against the measure whereas most southern whigs joined the democrats in support.
more seriously the death of the whig party in the south indicated that the bitter fight over nebraska had permanently ended the long standing spirit of accommodation between the north and south.
many northerners resolved to make no more concessions to the slave power whereas a growing number of southerners resolved to preserve their rights from attacks by abolitionists.
this intensifying polarization between north and south is revealed in these two sculptures of freedom by thomas crawford 12 10.
crawford was commissioned in 1854 to create a statue of a monumental figure representing liberty to top the capitol building in washington d c one year later he submitted a proposed model for the sculpture to secretary of war jefferson davis who was overseeing the renovation of the capitol.
davis approved of the overall scheme a large classically robed woman holding a sword and shield but one detail infuriated the vociferous defender of slavery from mississippi.
crawford had given freedom a cap worn by freed slaves in ancient rome.
sensing an abolitionist plot crawford was a friend of leading abolitionist senator charles sumner davis threatened to cancel the commission.
crawford quickly replaced the cap with a helmet surrounded by stars and a bald eagle.
with the addition of proslavery whigs.
from that point the party came under growing southern proslavery control.
the nascent republican party was not the only movement seeking to succeed the defunct whig party.
although many northerners harbored growing concern about the slave power others perceived a greater threat to their way of life mass immigration.
the flow of immigrants into the united states rising steadily since the 1820s became a tidal wave in the mid 1840s.
industrialization population growth and crop failure in europe led hundreds of thousands of irish german and other western europeans to seek new lives in america where industrial jobs and cheap land abounded.
between 1845 and 1855 three million immigrants arrived with most settling in northern cities.
republicans and know nothings the political impact of the kansas nebraska controversy became clear in the 1854 congressional elections.
free soilers ex whigs and antislavery democrats in the north formed dozens of local parties under names like the anti nebraska or the peoples party.
the most popular name and the one under which they would eventually unite was republican.
despite their varied names the parties shared an overriding commitment to opposing further concessions to southern slave interests.
as this loose collection of antislavery groups coalesced into the republican party the democratic party was transformed.
in the midterm elections of 1854 northern democrats lost control of the house of representatives and all but two free state legislatures.
many of the defeated democrats lost because they had voted for the kansas nebraska act.
but in the south the democratic party grew stronger 12 10 slavery and the republican image crawfords design for a sculpture to top the capitols dome included a hat worn by freed slaves in ancient rome above left.
bowing to proslavery objections crawford redesigned freedoms hat as a helmet surrounded by stars and topped by a bald eagle.
what events led to the formation of the republican party.
chapter 12 slavery and sectionalism the political crisis of 1848 1861 dominated by proslavery southerners including chief justice roger slave states won free states won b taney the court ruled in dred 1 339 932 scott v sandford that african ameri33 1 cans both free and enslaved could never become citizens and thus had 871 731 no right to sue.
recognizing an op21 6 portunity to defend southern rights and undermine the efforts of abolitionists the justices also declared that congress lacked the right to regulate slavery in the territories.
in other words the court established as the law of the land the extreme southern position that the right to property in slaves was inviolable and untouchable by any level of american government.
opponents of slavery denounced the courts decision as a wicked and false judgment and a the three way contest played out as two dis willful perversion of the law.
they seized on the tinct sectional elections.
as shown in the chart decision as an example of the corruption of gov 12 13 buchanan won easily in the south ernment by a slave power intent on spreading slavthough fillmore polled 44 percent of the vote there.
in the north frmont outpolled buchanan ery into every corner of the nation including free states.
already in control of the white house and but the latters national total won him the overall disproportionately influential in congress they election.
argued slaveholders now controlled the judiciary.
heightening their sympathy for scott were antislavery publications such as the widely read frank leslies illustrated weekly which showed him as a buchanan barely had time to settle into the white house in march 1857 when the slavery issue again dignified man with a loving family 12 14.
some abolitionists declared the ruling not binding in seized center stage with a controversial supreme law and conscience but most seemed to recognize court decision.
dred scott had spent years livthat the only way to reverse the decision was by ing in different parts of the country as the slave of naming new justices to the court.
that would haparmy surgeon john emerson.
when he returned pen only if the republicans could win the white to the slave state of missouri scott sued for his house in 1860 freedom arguing that his years in the free state as both north and south considered the meanof illinois and the wisconsin territory where ing of the dred scott decision kansas again bethe missouri compromise barred slavery had came the focus of growing sectional animosity.
made him a free man.
the state supreme court in the introduction of federal troops in 1856 had missouri rejected his suit but scott enlisted the temporarily ended the spiral of vigilante violence.
help of abolitionist lawyers and appealed to the but tensions reached the breaking point in june supreme court.
1 832 955 45 3 12 13 the election of 1856 the republican party founded only two years earlier earned the secondhighest vote tally but its support came almost exclusively from the north.
number of votes electoral votes deepening controversy they african americans had no rights which the white man was bound to respect chief justice of the u s supreme court roger b taney majority of the opinion in the dred scott case how did the supreme court use the dred scott case to expand and protect the rights of slaveholders.
read the document a slave sues for freedom in 1857 political realignment 1857 when proslavery kansans who controlled the territorial legislature held a convention in lecompton and drafted a proslavery state constitution as a preliminary step to applying to congress for statehood.
when these proslavery men put the lecompton constitution before the people of kansas in a referendum antislavery residents deeming both the legislature and the convention illegitimate boycotted it.
as a result the constitution won approval easily and was forwarded to congress.
to complicate matters however in the fall the antislavery party won control of the territorial legislature and immediately authorized a second referendum on the proslavery constitution.
this time proslavery residents boycotted and the constitution was rejected by more than twothirds of the voters who were overwhelmingly antislavery.
the scene then shifted to washington.
president buchanan gave in under intense pressure from southerners in his cabinet and in congress who threatened secession if the proslavery lecompton constitution was not accepted and kansas admitted as a slave state.
douglas came out against lecompton because it was unpopular in his home state of illinois and it mocked his vaunted principle of popular sovereignty even as it exposed its weakness.
months of rancorous debate ensued.
a brawl broke out in the house and some members of congress began to come to the chamber armed.
the senate approved the lecompton constitution but the house narrowly rejected it.
kansas would remain a territory indefinitely.
a sympathetic portrayal of dred scott and his family frank leslies illustrated a widely read weekly sympathetic to abolitionism presented dred scott and his family on its cover to emphasize his humanity after a supreme court decision declared him nothing more than property.
watch the video video lecture dred scott and the crises that led to the civil war why did congress reject the lecompton constitution.
chapter review 1857 1858 the u s supreme court decides the dred scott case.
john browns failed raid on harpers ferry virginia.
abraham lincoln is elected president.
south carolinians fire upon the union held fort sumter.
court rules that slaves are property not people or citizens and that the missouri compromise prohibition on slavery above 36 30 is unconstitutional.
the south vilifies brown as an abolitionist fanatic the north hails him as a martyr.
lincoln wins despite receiving no support in the south revealing the deepening sectional rift over slavery.
first shots of the civil war prompt the lincoln administration to issue a call for 75 000 military volunteers.
four more southern states secede.
lincoln and douglas debate a relatively unknown abraham lincoln earns national attention as he forces stephen a douglas to make controversial statements about slavery.
south carolina secedes from the union.
six more slave states follow suit and unite as the confederate states of america.
myhistorylab connections visit for a customized study plan that will help you build your knowledge of workers farmers and slaves.
questions for analysis 1 what did calhoun argue constituted the primary threat to the union.
read the document john c calhoun proposal to preserve the union 1850 p 344 2 how did abolitionists try to characterize the fugitive slave act as a violation of american ideals.
other resources from this chapter 13 a nation torn apart the civil war 1861 1865 13 9 the minie ball the conical shaped minie ball left replaced round musket balls right and increased the accuracy of rifle fire.
its adoption during the civil war contributed to the high death toll in combat.
killing a man from a distance of 400 to 500 yards versus 100 yards for traditional muskets.
the key technological breakthrough for the rifle was the minie ball invented in france in the 1840s.
as these photographs 13 9 show the conical shaped minie ball left replaced round musket balls right and were the forerunners of the bullet.
the grooves inside the rifle barrel caused the minie ball when fired to spiral much like a football increasing its accuracy.
other aspects of modern war included the emphasis on destroying the enemys army rather than merely seizing and holding territory and a willingness to inflict suffering on the civilian population.
military commanders on both sides however were slow to adjust to these changes.
schooled in traditional warfare at military academies such as west point most were reluctant to abandon the strategy of attacking entrenched enemy positions with massed infantry.
when defenders of these positions turned their modern weaponry on charging soldiers the results were horrific.
toward emancipation along with modern technology slavery also shaped the civil war.
at the outset of the conflict moderates like lincoln insisted the goal of the war was to preserve the union not to abolish slavery.
they realized that while many northerners opposed slavery they also rejected the idea of racial equality.
they also feared that talk of emancipation would cause the border states to secede and alienate pro union residents of the south who lincoln hoped would overthrow confederate rule and return their states to the union.
abolitionists however argued that because the southern states seceded to protect slavery reunion could occur only after it was destroyed.
but while white northerners debated emancipation enslaved african americans in the south how did lincoln expect the emancipation proclamation to benefit the union war effort.
took matters into their own hands by fleeing to union army lines.
only weeks after the war began in may 1861 an angry virginia slaveholder demanded the union army observe the terms of the 1850 fugitive slave act and return his three escaped slaves.
general benjamin butler refused declaring fugitive slaves contraband of war or seized property.
the lincoln administration endorsed the contraband policy as a shrewd war tactic likely to cause havoc in the south.
self emancipating slaves continued to arrive at union army camps in ever growing numbers totaling close to one million by the wars end see images as history who freed the slaves.
in response to these events congress slowly began the process of dismantling slavery.
in august 1861 the first confiscation act declared free any slaves used in the confederate war effort.
a second confiscation act in july 1862 empowered the army to seize and render forever free the slaves of anyone aiding the confederacy.
that same month congress authorized the president to let african americans fight in the union army.
these measures demonstrated a growing understanding among northerners that winning the war required the abolition of slavery.
the threat to slavery posed by these actions was not lost on southerners who feared not only the loss of their slaves but also a large scale slave insurrection.
slave escapes rumors of slave revolts and the increased insubordination of many slaves led to rising anxiety among southerners.
they accordingly stepped up slave patrols and scrutinized slave behavior for any sign of ill intent.
lincoln gradually came to see emancipation not merely as inevitable but as essential for union victory since it would strike at the heart of the rebellion and prevent british intervention.
on july 22 1862 he informed the cabinet of his intent to issue a decree of emancipation.
but to avoid the appearance of acting in desperation lincoln waited for a union victory before issuing this decree.
the union victory came two months later in mid september at the battle of antietam in maryland.
lee choosing to wage a bold offensive led his army north into maryland.
mcclellan even after acquiring a copy of the confederate battle plan reacted slowly allowing lee to consolidate his troops.
finally on september 17 1862 mcclellan attacked lees army.
after squandering several chances to defeat lee mcclellans forces were eventually stymied by the last minute arrival of confederate reinforcements.
the next day view the closer look lincoln visits mcclellan the early campaigns 1861 1863 images as history who freed the slaves.
why did abraham lincoln decide to issue the emancipation proclamation in 1862 after stating many many times that he had no intention of abolishing slavery.
there were several reasons not the least of which was that one year into the war the confederacy seemed as strong as ever.
lincoln decided that attacking slavery would hasten the end of the war.
but there is another often overlooked reason for lincoln to change and decide to embrace abolition from the moment the war began thousands of slaves began to flee to freedom often to the camps of union soldiers.
this wave of selfemancipation vividly captured in this 1867 painting by theodor kaufmann on to liberty forced the lincoln administration to formulate wartime policies regarding slavery a process that ultimately led to emancipation.
but even as kaufmann and others celebrated african americans role in their own liberation white americans after the war began to present a different and inaccurate version of the story see chapter review herma n june 27 1864 c atlanta s july 20 sept 2 1864 h n erm ov a d ns ec m 1 arc 86 h to 4 macon ma andersonville grant seizes vicksburg lincoln names grant commander of all union armies union general william t sherman captures atlanta thirteenth amendment passed unlike the inept generals before him grant understands the nature of modern warfare sherman begins his march to the sea destroying georgian agriculture and infrastructure grant defeats lee in the battles of the wilderness spotsylvania and cold harbor lincoln wins reelection entire length of mississippi river under union control severing the confederacy in two bread riots break out in confederacy.
draft riots erupt in new york city reveal growing discontent over the cost and duration of the war the 54th massachusetts participates in attack on fortress wagner ensures the union war effort will continue abolishes slavery ratified late 1865 grant captures petersburg and richmond lee surrenders ending the war lincoln assassinated by john wilkes booth lincoln becomes a martyr figure lees army digs in at petersburg near richmond grant begins siege their courage undermines the belief that african americans will make poor soldiers myhistorylab connections visit for a customized study plan that will help you build your knowledge of a nation torn apart.
questions for analysis 1 how did both the union and confederacy use religious and patriotic ideals to bolster support for the war.
hear the audio battle hymn of the republic p 376 2 why did the union army have so much difficulty in defeating the confederacy.
view the closer look lincoln visits mcclellan p 384 3 how did the war create new opportunities for women.
other resources from this chapter hear the audio when this cruel war is over p 399 read the document joseph e johnston a confederate general assesses first bull run 1861 p 381 memoirs of clara barton p 388 letter from j r underwood to wm.
h seward october 24 1863 p 389 testimony from victims of new yorks draft riots july 1863 p 391 abraham lincoln gettysburg address 1863 p 392 view the closer look nurse ann bell tending to james henry gooding letter to president lincoln 1863 p 394 wounded p 388 view the closer look images as history photography and 4 what did african americans hope to achieve by serving in the union army.
the visualization of modern war p 386 view the map read the document letter from a free black volunteer to interactive map the civil war part i 1861 1862 p 382 the christian recorder p 395 interactive map the civil war part ii 1863 1865 p 398 5 how did abolitionist sentiment in britain benefit the union war effort.
read the document the working men of manchester england write to president lincoln on the question of slavery in 1862 p 397 watch the video video lecture the meaning of the civil war for americans p 401 how did reconstruction efforts during the war reveal conflicting visions over the kind of freedoms former slaves would be granted.
the fruits of freedom p 409 how did freedmen envision and act on their freedom after the war.
the struggle to define reconstruction p 412 why did northern republicans reject president johnsons reconstruction plan.
implementing reconstruction p 418 what policies did the republican party in the south pursue.
reconstruction abandoned p 423 how did changing northern attitudes affect the end of reconstruction.
the new south p 428 what were the key economic developments in the south after 1877.
chapter 14 now that we are free reconstruction and the new south 1863 1890 powerless under the authority of their former masters.
in new orleans home to the souths largest free black population before the war african americans began to demand equal rights for all freedmen including the right to vote and hold office.
although their efforts failed they sparked a national debate over freedmens rights that would dominate reconstruction.
the experiences in the sea islands davis bend louisiana and elsewhere during the war created conflicting visions regarding the rights of freedmen land redistribution and the authority of exslave owners.
yet emancipation also revealed the optimism of the freedmen and their commitment to defend their newly won freedom and make the most of it.
lincolns ten percent plan even as the civil war raged president lincoln had begun to formulate an official reconstruction policy.
in keeping with his moderate political views before the war lincoln proposed a moderate reconstruction policy.
as he suggested so eloquently in his second inaugural address he intended to deal with the defeated south with malice toward none and charity for all to achieve and cherish a just and lasting peace among ourselves he believed that extending lenient terms to the south would convince confederates to surrender sooner and speed the healing process necessary for the good of the union.
vengeance he held would only delay reconstruction.
it might even inspire defeated confederate soldiers to form renegade bands of insurgents to wage a war of terrorism for years to come.
a more studied outrage on the legislative authority of the people has never been perpetuated wade davis manifesto denouncing lincolns veto of the wade davis bill in december 1863 lincoln issued his proclamation of amnesty and reconstruction also known as the ten percent plan.
intended to establish southern state governments the plan pardoned all southerners except high ranking military officers and confederate officials who what advantages did lincoln see in a moderate reconstruction policy.
took an oath pledging loyalty to the union and support for emancipation.
as soon as 10 percent of a states voters took this oath they could call a convention establish a new state government and apply for federal recognition.
radical republicans offer a different vision lincolns lenient plan enraged many radical republicans.
in july 1864 radical republican leaders senator benjamin wade of ohio and congressman henry w davis of maryland cosponsored the wade davis bill a reconstruction program designed to punish confederate leaders and destroy the souths slave society.
southerners could reestablish new state governments only after a majority of a states voters signed an ironclad oath declaring they never aided the confederate army or government.
southerners who served as high ranking army officers or government officials would be stripped of their citizenship including the right to vote and hold office.
the former confederate states would be readmitted only after a long period of punishment and a clear demonstration of their commitment to the union emancipation and freedmens rights.
lincoln quietly pocket vetoed the bill.
furious radicals sought to replace him as the republican party presidential nominee in 1864 although the effort failed it exposed the deeply divided opinions regarding reconstruction.
lincoln and his fellow republicans did manage to find common ground on two issues.
in late january 1865 at the urging of lincolns administration congress passed the thirteenth amendment abolishing slavery.
the measure ended any ambiguity over the emancipation proclamation abolishing slavery everywhere in the united states and offering no compensation to former slaveholders.
by years end 27 states including eight former confederate states would ratify the amendment.
in march 1865 congress established the bureau of refugees freedmen and abandoned lands.
known simply as the freedmens bureau it became an all purpose relief agency in the war ravaged south distributing food providing emergency services building schools and managing confiscated lands.
it represented the first attempt by the federal government to provide social welfare services and quickly became the bedrock institution for implementing reconstruction policy.
read the document carl schurz report on the condition of the south 1865 the fruits of freedom the fruits of freedom many southerners were stunned by the response of their slaves to freedom.
clinging to self serving paternalistic notions of the plantation as one big family under the benign authority of the master and planter they were taken aback when their slaves refused to obey their orders or exhibited anger or disrespect toward them.
susan bradford a young woman living on a florida plantation wrote in her diary that she was hurt and dazed when one of her former slaves refused to prepare a dinner for her mother.
tell her if she want any dinner sneered the free woman she kin cook it herself i believed that these people were content happy and attached to their masters wrote one south carolina planter in 1865 unable to comprehend why slaves abandoned their masters in their moment of need it would be the first of many such shocking experiences for whites who never imagined that slavery might one day be abolished.
freedom of movement even before the guns of the civil war went silent african americans had begun to explore the meaning of their freedom and formulate their own vision of a reconstructed postwar south both of which included unrestricted mobility.
under slavery movement was sharply limited and few slaves ventured far from their plantations.
in the chaos of war however and later with official emancipation african americans hit the road.
many did so to escape the plantations that were home to their former masters and countless bitter memories.
others simply reveled in free and unfettered movement.
they wandered for the pleasure of it with no particular destination in mind.
as these advertisements 14 3 from the colored tennessean tennessees only african american owned newspaper indicate many freedmen also journeyed in search of loved ones sold away years before.
african american mobility led to a sharp rise in the black population of southern cities.
in contrast to rural life black settlements in cities offered more varied job opportunities albeit nearly always menial difficult and low paid.
urban life also provided freedmen access to strong black institutions such as churches charities and newspapers.
southern whites reacted to black mobility with both alarm and disdain.
just as former slaves equated freedom with mobility their former masters saw in it a shocking reminder that the old order was gone.
as a consequence in one of the first expressions of resistance to black freedom white southerners passed vagrancy laws intended to restrict african american mobility.
read the document james c beecher report on land reform 1865 1866 forty acres and a mule many freedmen also tried to become landowners.
if travel was a symbolic expression of their new freedom land was freedom in concrete form.
land the freedmen believed would give their freedom meaning by providing an independent living free of planter control.
the idea that freedmen would receive land in addition to their freedom originated during the war.
as southerners abandoned their plantations before the advancing union army ex slaves often took control partitioned land and planted crops.
freedmen defended these extralegal actions as simple justice citing the generations of unpaid labor that they and their ancestors had performed on farms and plantations.
the property which they former slaveholders hold asserted a group of freedmen was nearly all earned by the sweat of our brows 14 3 freedmen searching for loved ones sold away during slavery these classified advertisements in the august 12 1865 colored tennessean were just two of thousands published in mainly black owned newspapers during reconstruction.
they vividly highlight the efforts of freed men to overcome one of slaverys harshest legacies.
source t ichi 36218 information wanted of a man by the name of elias lowery mcdermit nashville tennessee 1865 creator the colored tennessean b ichi 36219.
saml dove wishes to know of the whereabouts of his mother utica ny.
aug 5 1865 looking for his mother areno and his sisters and brother.
give us our own land and we take care of ourselves but without land the old masters can hire or starve us as they please a south carolina freedman speaking to a northern journalist 1865 to bring order to these unofficial acts of confiscation general william t sherman issued in early why did freedmen believe they were owed land.
chapter 14 now that we are free reconstruction and the new south 1863 1890 latin america did so soon and so completely after emancipation.
yet its spare wording left wide open the possibility that states could devise clever ways to deny blacks the right to vote that did not directly invoke race color or previous condition of servitude the rise of white resistance 14 15 another victim of the klan terrorist violence by white vigilante groups soared in the early 1870s.
in this scene from moore county north carolina a freedman pleads for his life surrounded by klansmen in full regalia.
the secret white terrorist organizations that first arose in 1866 and that wrought havoc in parts of the south during the 1868 election grew bolder and more violent by 1870 1871 especially during election season.
known by various names including the white brotherhood knights of the white camelia and especially the ku klux klan they functioned in much the same manner.
as illustrated in a popular northern newspaper 14 15 klansmen often operated at night wearing hoods robes and other regalia to hide their identities and terrify their victims.
blacks and occasionally carpetbaggers and scalawags targeted for punishment were beaten and frequently killed.
some had their crops or homes burned or their mules killed.
klansmen also targeted symbols of black self improvement and independence such as black churches businesses and schools.
why did groups like the klan indulge in anti black violence.
klan terrorism served many purposes.
for the poor whites who made up the bulk of klansmen the violent suppression of african americans provided the psychological reassurance that they were not at the bottom of the social order.
for white elites who approved of and often assisted the violence it prevented a political alliance between poor whites and blacks.
it also maintained a large exploitable workforce for plantations and industry by keeping african americans powerless and poor.
klan violence also discouraged african american voting and thus threatened the republican party in the south.
in response to surging violence in the south republicans in congress with strong support from the grant administration passed several enforcement acts in 1870 and 1871 outlawing armed combinations that deprived anyone of their civil or political rights.
the justice department vigorously enforced these laws across the south arresting and prosecuting thousands and weakening significantly the klan and similar organizations by 1872 although the enforcement acts demonstrated that federal authority could effectively protect the rights of freedmen they also revealed the vulnerability of freedmen should the federal commitment to reconstruction ever wane.
read the document hannah irwin describes ku klux klan ride late 1860s reconstruction abandoned reconstruction abandoned by the end of grants first term in office in 1873 supporters of reconstruction and freedmens rights could look with satisfaction at the many extraordinary changes that had taken place in the south.
yet ominous signs suggested reconstruction was in trouble.
despite the crackdown on the klan white southerners increasingly demonstrated their commitment to seizing power and imposing a new form of servitude on african americans.
northerners by contrast seemed less and less willing to support a vigorous reconstruction policy.
slowly from 1872 to 1877 the extraordinary experiment in interracial democracy and progressive government in the south was dismantled in favor of oligarchy and white supremacy.
corruption and scandal a major factor in the pullback from reconstruction was a series of corruption scandals that plagued the grant administration.
grant himself was honest but also politically naive and given to a hands off style of leadership that gave officials in his administration unusual independence.
many of them took advantage of grants trust to enrich themselves through illegal schemes.
for example in the 1869 black friday scandal wall street titans jay gould and jim fisk conspired with grants brother in law to corner the gold market.
the plan failed but not before hundreds of innocent investors were ruined.
in the credit mobilier scandal grants vice president and several high ranking members of congress took bribes from the company involved in the completion of the government subsidized union pacific railroad.
in the so called whiskey ring scandal treasury secretary orville e babcock made a fortune by illegally allowing whiskey distillers to avoid paying excise taxes.
in yet another scandal secretary of war william w belknap accepted bribes from companies engaged in corrupt activities on indian reservations.
with so much negative publicity stirred up by corruption scandals grants administration took steps to minimize political controversies.
to secure his reelection and keep the republican party in power grant adopted a more conservative approach to reconstruction by now a frequent source of rancor in washington.
in summer 1872 for example grant lobbied congress for and then signed into law the amnesty act granting a general pardon to all but a few hundred former confederate leaders.
now eligible to vote and hold office these planters and ex confederate army officers and officials wasted little time in reasserting their authority.
republican disunity the retreat from reconstruction in the 1870s was also hastened by growing dissention within the republican party.
many republicans including some former radicals began to question the wisdom of maintaining a strong federal role in the affairs of southern states.
some argued the fundamental goals of reconstruction citizenship civil rights and suffrage for the freedmen had been accomplished.
there was they believed a constitutional and moral limit to what the federal government could do for the freedmen.
now was the time for freedmen to use their new rights to elevate themselves economically socially and politically.
other republicans argued for an end to reconstruction for less idealistic reasons.
even though some of them had been abolitionists before the war and advocates of freedmens rights in the first years that followed they now considered reconstruction a failure.
these liberal republicans as they came to be called had grown tired of the political strife produced by debates over freedmens rights.
it seems to me that we are drifting drifting back under the leadership of the slaveholders.
our former masters are fast taking the reins of government george m arnold african american republican read the document credit mobilier union pacific railroad scandal testimony of c p.
huntington 1873 how did the scandals of the grant administration undermine reconstruction.
chapter review 1872 1873 1874 1875 1876 1877 1883 1889 amnesty act the mississippi plan compromise of 1877 pardons and restores full political rights to most ex confederates violence by white terrorist groups keeps thousands of blacks from voting.
restores the democratic party to power republican rutherford b hayes becomes president republicans promise to remove federal troops from the south.
end of reconstruction civil rights act of 1875 declared unconstitutional panic of 1873 begins four years of severe economic depression that weakens northern support for reconstruction second civil rights act passed guarantees equal access to public facilities and affirms the right of blacks to serve on juries clears the way for adoption of jim crow policies across the south tennessee enacts first poll tax sharply reduces black voting adopted by other southern states.
followed by literacy test and grandfather clause myhistorylab connections visit for a customized study plan that will help you build your knowledge of now that we are free.
questions for analysis 1 how did former slaves make use of their new freedoms.
read the document charlotte forten life on the sea islands p 406 2 why did some americans believe the federal government was obligated to assist the freedmen.
view the closer look competing visions federal authority and equal rights p 412 3 what changes did republican governments bring to southern society.
view the closer look first vote p 419 4 how did the system of sharecropping sharply limit the freedom of african americans.
read the document james t rapier testimony before other resources from this chapter 15 conflict and conquest the transformation of the west 1860 1900 kwakiuti salish cree great plains lummi sub arctic plateau makah quileute chinook kalapuya tolowa yakima assiniboine blackfeet ojibwa spokane flathead gros hidatsa nez perce ventre cayuse crow mandan winnebago sioux sauk arikara great ponca cheyenne fox basin northwest coast karok yurok shasta wiyot hupa washo wintun yuki pomo maidu pacific ocea n miwok shoshone arapaho ute paiute illinois northeast kansa yokuts chumash california omaha iowa missouri pawnee oto kiowa hopi mohave comanche navajo quapaw zuni luiseo pima tohono osage wichita apache southwest jumano caddo southeast jumano karankawa gulf of mexico 15 3 the major tribes of the trans mississippi west more than 360 000 native americans constituting some 500 tribes lived west of the mississippi river.
devastating disease.
most indians had lived there as far back as anyone could remember while some had come from the east only decades earlier during the many forced removals see chapter 15 conflict and conquest the transformation of the west 1860 1900 montana.
eager to earn fame and believing there were only a few hundred indian warriors when in fact the number was closer to 2 000 custer attacked before the rest of the army and other officers who might overshadow him arrived.
the battle of little bighorn quickly disintegrated into one of the most devastating defeats ever suffered by the u s military as custer and more than 250 of his men were killed.
although the battle was an overwhelming triumph for the sioux cheyenne and arapaho it quickly proved a hollow victory.
as this cartoon 15 16 published in the new york graphic a few weeks after the battle demonstrates the eastern media ignored custers blundering and instead depicted him and his men as valiant victims and demanded vengeance.
note the artists blunt depiction of indians as savage semi animal beings in stark contrast to the two white soldiers one a heroic victim and the other a coolheaded executioner.
the caption the right way to dispose of sitting bull and his braves what the country expects of general sheridan was a not so subtle assertion of the popular belief that the government was showing too much leniency toward native americans who resisted white expansion.
responding to this pressure the government expanded military action in the black hills and forced the sioux and other defiant tribes onto reservations.
war and conflict in the far west 15 16 the negative fallout from little bighorn after the sioux cheyenne and arapaho indians defeated custer and the seventh cavalry in the battle of little bighorn negative press coverage hardened white attitudes toward native americans.
this image appeared in the new york graphic august 15 1876 with the caption the right way to dispose of sitting bull and his braves what the country expects of general sheridan how did the victory over custer and his men ultimately prove costly to the plains indians.
farther west native tribes encountered similar problems.
during the last third of the nineteenth century the states and territories west of the rockies also were growing.
the mining and railroad industries the economic centerpieces of that native americans under siege region required a great deal of land land long occupied by native americans.
just as on the great plains the tribes on the west coast and in the intermountain west faced an encroaching white population that considered the land theirs for the taking.
in 1876 following the massacre of custer and the seventh cavalry army and government officials increased pressure on tribes to move to reservations.
one such group targeted was a portion of the nez perce tribe that lived on the northwestern plateau of idaho oregon and washington.
in 1863 most of the nez perce had agreed to move onto a reservation but about a quarter had refused.
led by chief joseph about 750 nez perce 500 of them women children and elderly non combatants fled the region to escape the army.
over the ensuing four months they engaged in an epic flight of 1 400 miles hoping to cross into canada.
despite their small numbers and dwindling supplies they defeated the army in several battles and came within 40 miles of the canadian border before they were forced to surrender to the army and to life on a reservation.
similar scenes of final military resistance played out in the southwest.
an apache warrior named geronimo had emerged in the 1860s and 1870s as a fearless opponent to encroaching euro american and mexican settlers.
captured in 1874 geronimo and some 4 000 apaches were sent to a reservation at san carlos arizona.
the grim life on the reservation led him to escape and resume his campaign of resistance.
he surrendered in 1884 but in 1885 and again in 1886 geronimo escaped with a few warriors and their families and eluded capture for months.
these escapades added to his already legendary status but he eventually surrendered for good in 1886 ending the last significant native american resistance.
in the 1880s and 1890s resistance to exploitation and abuse also erupted in the southwest among hispanos descendants of spanish colonists and mexicans.
euro american settlers who arrived in new mexico in the mid nineteenth century eventually gave rise to a powerful ruling class of politicians landowners and ranchers.
many allied themselves with powerful gangs that provided protection and intimidated and sometimes killed their rivals.
poor hispano and mexican farmers often bore the brunt of these ruling euro americans ruthless tactics and hunger for read the document helen hunt jackson from a century of dishonor 1881 land.
when officials began to sell off to speculators and ranchers what had long been used as common grazing lands the poor farmers resisted.
the most famous of these resistors were las gorras blancas or the white caps a secret militant vigilante group of mexican men who in the late 1880s and early 1890s wore white masks and cut fences on lands taken over by speculators.
they also destroyed railroad bridges buildings and crops.
in pursuit of a solution while most americans expressed little concern over the fate of native americans in the west a few did protest.
one of the first was helen hunt jackson.
inspired by an 1879 lecture by susette la flesche and her uncle chief standing bear relating the plight of the ponca tribe to an audience in connecticut she began speaking and lobbying on behalf of native americans.
in 1881 she published a century of dishonor a book that chronicled in searing detail the misguided and murderous treatment of native americans by the u s government.
the book prompted congress to appoint a commission to study indian affairs and seek a new and more humane policy.
hear me my chiefs.
i am tired.
my heart is sick and sad.
from where the sun now stands i will fight no more forever chief joseph shortly after his surrender in 1877 another influential reformer garnered a wide audience as an authentic spokesperson for the native americans.
sarah winnemucca the granddaughter of a northern paiute chief had received some education from white families in nevada and california and worked as a translator for the army.
in the late 1870s her lectures in the east demanding more humane treatment of the paiutes and other tribes brought her to the attention of reformers.
winnemucca tried to gain credibility among whites by presenting herself as an indian princess an image firmly established in american popular why did native americans resist the governments demand that they settle on reservations.
chapter review soldiers in colorado massacre two hundred indians john gast paints american progress widely reproduced the painting presents an enthusiastic vision of westward expansion and manifest destiny.
defeat of lt col custer and seventh cavalry hardens white attitudes toward native americans the flight of the nez perce fails symbolizes both native american resistance to reservation policy and its ultimate failure gold discovered in black hills leads to escalating conflict as white miners move onto land reserved to native americans in the second fort laramie treaty review questions 1 what was the significance of railroad building to the west as a region and to its peoples.
2 what challenges did american farmers face in establishing successful farms in the west.
3 what significant industries including agriculture developed in the west and how were they linked to the economy of the eastern united states.
4 what critical factors led to the conquest of native american tribes and their forced relocation to reservations.
5 why did u s officials favor forced assimilation for native americans in the late nineteenth century.
how did they implement it.
6 why did americans embrace a romanticized vision of the american west in the late nineteenth century.
how close was this image to reality.
key terms homestead act passed in 1862 it provided 160 acres of free land to any settler willing to live on it and improve it for five years promoted massive westward migration.
transcontinental railroad a line spanning the continental united states.
congress helped the union pacific and central pacific railroads build it by providing land grants cash incentives and loans.
great plains vast open territory stretching east to west from present day missouri to the rocky mountains and north to south from north dakota to texas.
exodusters more than twenty thousand ex slaves who in 1879 left violence and poverty in the south to take up farming in kansas.
grange originally founded in the fall of 1867 by oliver h kelley as a social and educational society for farmers it became a major political force in the midwest in the mid 1870s.
long drive the annual cattle drives of more than 1 000 miles from texas to the great plains that started in 1866 and established the ranching industry in the west.
battle of little bighorn lt col george a custer and the seventh cavalry are wiped out by a force of cheyenne sioux and arapaho warriors on june 25 1876 hardens white attitudes toward native americans.
dawes severalty act 1887 law that started the breakup of reservations by offering native americans allotments of 160 acres of reservation land to encourage them to become independent farmers.
wounded knee massacre u s soldiers open fire on a group of sioux indians on december 29 1890 killing between two hundred and three hundred.
buffalo bills wild west a circuslike production begun in 1883 that helped create a romantic and mythological view of the west in the american imagination.
frontier thesis historian frederick jackson turners 1893 theory that extolled the positive role the frontier had played in shaping the american character and consequently american institutions.
chapters 13 and 15.
public officials in an argument later used to justify government support for the interstate highway system and the internet defended this largess by arguing that railroads generated economic growth that benefited everyone from travelers to farmers to manufacturers.
high federal tariffs that raised the price of imported goods thereby helping domestic manufacturers also promoted industrialization.
yet the government also facilitated industrialization by inaction.
public officials business leaders and conservatives subscribed to the philosophy of laissez faire french for let do or leave alone which argued that the government should impose no restraints on business including workers demands for laws to regulate the hours of work safety conditions and wages.
government officials also ignored reformers demands for an income tax and laws curbing cutthroat business read the document thomas edison the success of the electric light october 1880 16 2 the matzeliger lasting machine jan matzeligers complex sewing machine wiped out jobs for skilled shoe lasters who had hand stitched shoe tops to soles but allowed for a huge increase in mechanized shoe production.
as thomas nasts political cartoon vividly shows 16 3 business and government leaders argued that government interference harmed the american economy depicted here as a woman weighed down by government imposed burdens such as income taxes laws regulations and ideal money money not backed by gold.
the closed shop and idle ship in the background and the vultures circling overhead all suggested these policies would kill the economy.
widespread support for laissez faire among lawmakers left capitalists to operate in a market free of the restraints of government regulation.
16 3 defending laissez faire this 1878 cartoon warns that government interference with the economy threatens the well being of the nation.
how did government officials defend the practice of making huge land grants to the railroads.
chapter 15 it led a successful political movement in the 1870s to pass numerous laws regulating prices and outlawing unfair business practices.
andrew carnegie making steel and transforming the corporation 16 5 demonizing the monopoly americans grew increasingly worried about the rising power of railroads and the largest were often criticized as monopolies that strangled their competition.
the southern pacific railroad as a ravenous octopus 16 5 expressed their concern.
the railroads and the fabulously wealthy men who ran them shown in the eyes of the octopus wielded immense power.
the artist labeled the octopus a monopoly a popular term to describe the control of an industry or market by one corporation.
was such unchecked power vested in the hands of so few people worried the critics compatible with the nations republican principles.
many feared it was not especially when they learned that railroad executives routinely bribed state legislators members of congress and cabinet officials.
revelations of stock manipulation price gouging of farmers and manufacturers exploitation of workers shoddy construction and unsafe opera why did many americans come to see railroads as potential threats to democracy.
of all the new things produced by the explosion of industrial output after 1865 none was more important than steel.
much stronger than iron steel became the essential ingredient in the transformation of america into an industrial society allowing for the construction of the railroad and telegraph networks and tall buildings called skyscrapers steel also enabled the construction of huge factories filled with powerful machinery made from steel of course.
sharp durable and deep cutting steel plows and mechanical reapers accelerated the commercialization of american agriculture.
more accurate and powerful and thus more deadly weapons made of steel also altered modern warfare.
steel in short was as influential and revolutionary a substance in the late nineteenth century as silicon used to make computer chips was to become in the late twentieth.
steel was important in still another way for it brought to prominence the single most influential big businessman of the era andrew carnegie.
carnegies success was all the more remarkable because of his humble origins.
born in scotland in 1836 he immigrated to america with his family at age 12 settling in pittsburgh they struggled to earn a living.
young carnegie dropped out of school and worked view the image modern colossus of rail roads 1879 the emergence of big business in a textile factory where he earned just 1 20 per finally carnegie pursued cutthroat practices week.
bright and ambitious he took night classes in to battle rival steel producers.
carnegie slashed his accounting taught himself telegraphy and worked prices to levels that bankrupted his competitors for western union.
in 1853 pennsylvania railroad allowing him to buy them out and gain a greater regional supervisor and future company president share of the market.
like many other industrialists thomas a scott hired the 17 year old as his perhe also signed secret deals with railroads secursonal telegrapher and eventually private secretary.
ing lower transportation rates for his steel than his in this capacity carnegie learned every detail of competitors charged.
most of these tactics were the modern business practices that the railroad was legal at that time but many critics considered developing.
he also became rich by investing in rail them abusive.
roads factories and increasingly the iron and steel industries.
vertical integration seeking to bring under one company the many different products and processes that go into the making of paper company a has acquired forests in 1870 while running a suclogging companies railroads and chemical companies as well as paper manufacturing cessful company that built steel plants.
the advantages in this system are lower prices for and greater control over supplies bridges carnegie decided to move of essential materials such as wood pulp from trees.
entirely to steel production.
he paper company a acquires built his own steel works and drawing on his knowledge of railroad forests management followed obsessively to supply pulp needed for paper one fundamental business principle reducing production costs to logging company the lowest possible level.
to harvest the trees to achieve this goal carnegie hired the brightest executives railroad to bring lumber and chemicals to the paper factory and to ship the accountants managers scientists finished product to market and engineers.
he also invested heavily in the latest technology.
he was chemical company the first u s steelmaker to invest in to manufacture chemicals like bleach needed to make paper the breakthrough bessemer kelly process a method of making exceppaper factory tionally strong steel quickly and at to manufacture the paper from pulp low cost in part due to reducing the need for skilled metalworkers.
carnegies focus on cost control horizontal integration seeking to gain the largest share of the market for paper led him to pioneer what is known products company b has acquired five more paper manufacturing companies.
the as vertical integration the orgaadvantage of this system is that company b can generate more revenue from the nization of a business by which added production and sales of paper products.
it can also lower costs by eliminating redundant operations like advertising marketing and accounting in the one company controls all the main acquired companies in favor of single operations covering these functions.
because of its phases of production from acquirincreased size the company can also lower costs by striking deals with suppliers wood ing raw materials to retailing the pulp chemicals etc.
eager for its business.
finished product.
other industrial paper company b acquires magnates who came to dominate their industries opted for a horizontal integration a model where they bought out many companies producing the same product to eliminate competition and achieve paper paper paper paper paper greater efficiency 16 6.
to provide company company company company company a steady supply of cheap coal iron 16 6 horizontal integration versus vertical integration and other essential raw materials industrialists pursued two strategies when seeking to expand their corporations.
with vertical integration that steel production depended on they sought to minimize costs and increase control of production by acquiring different kinds of companies carnegie bought mines smelting involved in the chain of production.
through horizontal integration they attempted to reduce competition by acquiring their competitors.
operations railroads and ships.
read the document interstate commerce act what policies contributed to andrew carnegies success in business.
chapter review first of one hundred rags to respectability novels popularizing the ideal of the self made man begins four years of severe economic depression wanamaker opens grand depot in philadelphia sets standard for lavish department stores in an era of increasing consumerism massive strike spreads to several cities.
clashes between workers and police and soldiers leave dozens killed and millions of dollars in damage transforms kol into a powerful industrial union with 700 000 members by 1886 henry george publishes progress and poverty the bestseller gives voice to the anxiety over growing social inequality review questions 1 what strengths did the united states possess in terms of resources culture technology and public policy that facilitated industrialization after 1865.
4 why did american workers have such a difficult time uniting to oppose abusive and exploitative employers.
2 why were the supreme court and congress so slow to curb the power of big business.
5 how did industrialization create new opportunities for women.
how and why were these opportunities limited.
3 how was advertising transformed after 1865.
how did it affect the industrial revolution.
6 why did the knights of labor expand in the 1880s.
why did it collapse almost as suddenly.
key terms laissez faire french for let do or leave alone a philosophy that argued that the government should impose no restraints on business.
monopoly the control of an industry or market by one corporation.
vertical integration business organization where one company controls the main phases of production of a good from acquiring raw materials to retailing the finished product.
sherman anti trust act authorized the justice department to prosecute any illegal contract combination or conspiracy among corporations that eliminated competition or restrained free trade.
blacklist a list of workers that employers in a particular town or industry refused to hire because they were considered troublemakers.
horizontal integration business organization where one company buys many other companies producing the same product to eliminate competition and achieve greater efficiency.
social darwinism the belief that the principles of evolution which darwin had observed in nature also applied to society.
advocates argued that individuals or groups achieve advantages over others as the result of biological superiority an idea expressed as survival of the fittest robber barons a pejorative name for big business leaders that suggested they grew rich by devious business practices exploitation of workers and political manipulation.
knights of labor a labor organization founded in 1869 that in the 1880s accepted workers of all trades and backgrounds and became the worlds largest industrial union trust a legally binding deal bringing many companies in the same industry under the direction of a board of trustees haymarket riot a violent incident touched off when a bomb exploded amid a group of policemen as they broke up a peaceful labor rally in chicagos haymarket square on may 4 1886 chapters also sprang up in most cities in the east.
the city has become a serious menace to our civilization.
it has a peculiar attraction for the immigrant here is heaped the social dynamite here roughs gamblers thieves robbers lawless and desperate men of all sorts congregate men who are ready on any pretext to raise riots for the purpose of destruction and plunder.
josiah strong our country its possible future and its present crisis 1885 in 1890 congress made oversight of immigration a federal responsibility and established immigration depots in most major ports to weed out and reject immigrants with incurable diseases radical beliefs criminal backgrounds or so little money and skills they seemed likely to swell the ranks of the urban poor.
the largest and most famous of these facilities ellis island in new york harbor opened in 1892 many nativists considered this new system too lenient and called for additional restrictions on immigration.
in 1894 several harvard graduates founded the immigration restriction league to lobby for a literacy test for all would be immigrants requiring they demonstrate the ability to read and write in any language.
presidents cleveland taft and wilson vetoed immigrant literacy test bills but congress overrode wilsons veto and it became law in 1917 how did urban reformers try to improve the safety and livability of cities.
a different view urban reforms while some americans believed urban poverty crime disease and overcrowding could be eliminated simply by restricting immigration others developed a range of innovative policies and institutions to solve or at least minimize these problems.
to meet the problem of rising crime most cities followed the lead of new york when in 1845 it replaced the traditional night watch of a few untrained and unarmed men with a paid professional police department.
large cities also disbanded their volunteer fire companies and invested in new fire fighting technology such as steam pumpers and adopted tougher building codes.
more dangerous to a city than fire at least to its inhabitants were the frequent outbreaks of cholera diphtheria typhoid fever and other maladies.
drawing on increasing knowledge about germ theory cities established boards of health and took steps to improve water quality waste removal and street cleaning.
the latter half of the nineteenth century also witnessed a movement to build urban parks to provide the beauty and serenity of nature and offer wholesome and healthy recreation space as opposed to alleys and saloons for all.
new yorks central park built in the 1850s and 1860s proved so successful that nearly every large city commenced its own park projects.
because most of the grand parks were located far from the slums however reformers in the 1890s pushed urban governments to condemn blocks of tenements and build parks within working class neighborhoods.
urban reformers also expanded public education.
compulsory education laws usually requiring schooling until age 14 and a massive building campaign saw public school enrollments surge from 6 9 million to 17 8 million between 1870 and 1910 millions more students attended parochial schools established by the catholic church.
this effort reflected the traditional belief that education made for a productive and informed citizenry.
but as the photograph 17 7 of children reciting the pledge of allegiance illustrates advocates also saw expanded urban public schooling as a means of americanizing the immigrant masses teaching them english and respect for democracy and the law.
the pledge was first published in a youth magazine in 1892 to promote patriotism and civic pride among school children on the eve of the 400th anniversary of read the document proposal to buffalo new york park commission 1888 a search for solutions christopher columbuss arrival in the new world.
educators quickly made its recitation a daily ritual in schools across the country.
this earlier style which required people to end the pledge by extending their arms out straight was abolished in the 1930s because of its similarity to salutes used in fascist germany and italy.
capturing a new view of poverty reformers in the gilded age also developed a new way of thinking about poverty and its causes.
most americans held to the traditional view that poverty was caused by personal or moral failures such as laziness or drunkenness.
the poor as read the document jacob riis how the other half lives horatio alger and others argued so persuasively in popular literature see chapter review reflects growing discontent of american farmers that eventually leads to the formation of the peoples party the vanderbilt ball a lavish exhibition of conspicuous consumption attended by the richest families in america the pendleton act becomes law intended to diminish nepotism and corruption it required civil service exams for 10 percent of federal jobs josiah strong publishes our country a best selling book written in an alarmist style it warned americans that cities and immigrants posed a grave threat to the republic.
review questions 1 why did cities grow in the late nineteenth century.
2 who supported political machines and why.
why did reformers dislike political machines so much.
3 how did the approach to poverty by reformers like jacob riis and jane addams differ from traditional approaches.
4 how did the roles and expectations for middleclass women change in the gilded age.
what social and economic developments made this possible.
5 what were the primary grievances of people who supported the peoples party.
how did they propose to resolve them.
6 what was the long term impact of the 1896 election.
key terms gilded age the name for the period 1877 1900 that suggested the amazing achievements of the period were like a thin gold layer that covered many unresolved social problems.
tenement multiple family dwelling of four to six stories housing dozens of families that became the most common form of housing for poor city dwellers by the 1860s.
political machine powerful urban political organization that mobilized large blocs of working class and immigrant voters and often engaged in corrupt and illegal activity.
peoples party a third party effort launched in 1890 by a coalition of farmer organizations reformers and labor unions and dedicated to curbing corporate power and increasing the voice of the masses in politics.
farmers alliance organization in the 1870s and 1880s dedicated to helping farmers struggling with rising costs and falling crop prices by advocating farmer cooperatives and laws to regulate banks and railroads.
settlement house institution established in cities beginning in the 1880s and dedicated to helping the poor by providing a wide range of social and educational services.
coxeys army a protest march from ohio to washington d c organized by jacob coxey in 1894 to publicize demands for the federal government to alleviate the suffering brought on by the panic of 1893 city beautiful movement a movement begun in the 1880s that advocated comprehensive planning and grand redesign of urban space to eliminate pollution and overcrowding.
company town a town built and owned by a corporation and rented to its employees reflecting both the corporations desire to help their workers and to control them.
new woman a phrase used to describe young women in the 1890s and early 1900s that reflected their rising levels of education economic independence and political and social activism.
pullman strike a bitter strike that began on may 11 1894 at the pullman palace car company and soon spread nationwide paralyzing the railroad system.
president cleveland sent in federal troops and broke the strike.
chapter 14.
by 1900 southern states had rushed to pass laws that formally segregated every public facility from railroad waiting rooms to cemeteries parks beaches and water fountains.
use of poll taxes and literacy tests to disenfranchise blacks also exploded.
when southern born woodrow wilson took office in 1913 he let the heads of federal agencies segregate their offices.
african american leaders cultivated their own reform impulse during the progressive era.
unlike white progressives black leaders had little faith that government would solve their social problems.
the most prominent african american of the progressive era booker t washington instead embraced self help as the best way to end poverty among african americans.
born a virginia slave in 1859 after the civil war washington developed an almost fanatical desire to get an education arriving penniless at the doorstep of virginias hampton institute a vocational high school founded in 1868 to educate freed slaves and indians.
he passed his entrance exam sweeping a floor with flying colors.
hampton taught practical skills such as brick making blacksmithing and shoemaking along with more traditional academic subjects like reading and math.
this staged photograph 18 13 of a hampton institute carpentering class taken 20 years after washington attended encapsulated the schools educational philosophy.
the photo underscored that these perfectly groomed hard working and well trained students had the skills they needed to advance step bystep up the ladder in this case staircase of success.
18 13 hampton institute students building a staircase 1900 black educators distributed images of tidy black students working industriously to counter stereotypes that portrayed blacks as lazy or dangerous.
how does this photograph convey the hampton institutes educational philosophy.
chapter review expos of oil trust stokes interest in trust busting northern securities trust dissolved earns roosevelt reputation as a trust buster stymies progressive effort to mandate set working hours and wages socialist party of america and iww formed unlike progressives socialists and iww emphasize working class solidarity over reform establishes new regulatory role for the federal government treason of the senate expos reveals close ties between senators and big business review questions 1 what social problems did middle class progressives identify at the beginning of the twentieth century.
how did their solutions differ from those embraced by socialists and laissez faire industrialists.
2 why did the progressive notion of an activist regulatory government create controversy on both the right and the left.
3 how did visual images and investigative journalism transform americans views of poverty and corruption.
4 what role did government including presidents the supreme court and state and local governments play during the progressive era.
5 in what ways did the progressive reform agenda succeed.
how did it fail.
key terms federal reserve act 1913 the act creating a federally run federal reserve to serve as a bankers bank that held a portion of bank funds in reserve to help member banks in time of crisis set rates for business loans and issued a new national paper currency.
the government could not abridge an employees freedom to negotiate his own work schedule with his employer.
clayton anti trust act 1914 the act prohibited interlocking company directories and exempted trade unions from prosecution under the 1890 sherman anti trust act.
muller v oregon 1908 the supreme court upheld maximum hour laws for female workers because protecting womens reproductive health served the public good.
scientific management the effort to use scientific knowledge to secure maximum output and profit.
pure food and drug act 1906 law levied federal fines for mislabeling food or medicine.
industrial workers of the world iww this group envisioned one big union that welcomed all workers regardless of sex race ethnicity or skill which would one day take over all means of production.
muckrakers progressive era term for investigative journalists who wrote exposs on government and business corruption.
lochner v new york 1905 a supreme court ruling that unless long work hours directly jeopardized workers health ludlow massacre 1914 colorado state troops set a striking miners camp ablaze killing thirteen women and children an act that outraged laborers throughout the nation.
seventeenth amendment 1913 a constitutional amendment that enabled voters rather than state legislatures to elect federal senators.
chapter 19 cape verde islands gambia barbados windward islands portuguese what factors propelled the united states beyond its borders.
the spanishamerican war chapter 19 imperial america the united states in the world 1890 1914 becoming a world power throughout the nineteenth century the atlantic and pacific oceans provided americans with a sense of security and detachment from world affairs.
by the 1880s however advancements in transportation and communication suddenly made the world seem smaller and more dangerous to americans.
fear alone though did not explain americans growing interest in venturing overseas.
americans looked outside their borders to find markets for u s goods and the raw materials needed to fuel a growing industrial economy.
international recognition as a world power and spreading american values also appealed to the countrys growing sense of national greatness.
c a n a d a newfoundla st pierre and miquelon u n i t e d s tat e s of america bermuda ri o nde gra a t l a n t i c o c e a n bahamas mexico dominican republic cuba haiti jamaica leeward islands british honduras honduras guatemala salvador nicaragua puerto rico virgin islands st martin we st i n d i e s curaao guadeloupe martinique c barbados windward islands european imperialism gre e n alaska c a n a d a newfoundland st pierre and miquelon u n i t e d s tat e s azores of america bermuda rio a t l a n t i c nde gra o c e a n bahamas m exi co puerto rico virgin islands st martin haiti jamaica leeward islands british honduras guatemala salvador guadeloupe martinique west indies honduras curaao nicaragua windward islands costa rica trinidad and tobago venezuela british guiana dutch guiana french guiana colombia galapagos islands to ecuador ecuado r b r a z i l e acre r u ottoman empire pa ra gu britain and possessions ay uruguay a german empire and possessions ntin netherlands and possessions e portugal and possessions chil spain and possessions arge france and possessions pa ran b o l i v ia denmark and possessions cape verde islands barbados russian empire and possessions japan and possessions italy and possessions us and territories falkland islands how did european imperialism affect the u s effort to create a formal empire.
canary i dominican republic cuba p in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries britain france and spain had based their world prominence on far flung colonial empires places that they populated with settlers and soldiers to exploit economic resources and protect ocean trade routes.
in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries these settler communities launched a slew of successful revolutions that liberated colonies in north and south america from european rule.
with the old colonial empires now defunct european nations and japan sought new ones.
as britain france belgium germany italy portugal spain russia the netherlands and japan discovered vulnerable areas around the globe to colonize they developed a new style of empire building.
imperialism the late nineteenth century term for colonizing foreign nations and lands relied primarily on business political and military structures rather than settlers to rule colonized peoples and exploit their resources.
europes drive to create colonial empires in africa and asia in the late nineteenth century provided a model to either emulate or reject as the united states embarked on its campaign to become a world power.
besides exploiting colonies for economic gain europeans also drew satisfaction from fulfilling a self imposed civilizing mission to spread western culture and values to nonwhite and nonchristian populations throughout africa and asia.
the drawbacks to empires however included the need to defend widely dispersed territories and suppress popular uprisings against colonial rule.
americans therefore developed conflicting visions from the lessons that they drew from the european experience.
some saw it as an inspiration others a cautionary tale.
view the map world colonial empires 1900 port becoming a world power as the map 19 1 indicates the world situation in 1898 affected where the united states could hope to expand its influence.
by the time the united states began exploring opportunities for expansion beyond the north american continent britain france germany and the netherlands had already established colonial empires throughout africa east asia and south asia.
great britain exerted the greatest reach making it the worlds preeminent imperial power.
this left the western hemisphere and china as possibilities for u s colonial expansion.
the impulse for expansion throughout american history territorial expansion played an important role in defining national identity and providing economic opportunity to americans.
in the early nineteenth century manifest destiny or the belief that americans had a divine right to expand across north america fueled expansion.
imbued with a sense of cultural and racial superiority over the indigenous peoples who inhabited these lands americans felt justified in taking away land from indians.
in their 19 1 map of the world 1898 the creation of far flung european empires at the end of the nineteenth century limited opportunities for the united states to establish its own colonies or new overseas markets.
n la nd y w a de n finland n swe o r iceland r u s s i a n e m p i r e denmark britain german neth.
poland empire belgium austro hungarian empire france romania switz.
khiva black sea korea bu kh montenegro greece ri o islands t t o m a ncyprus british occupied re d arabian se a peninsula angloegyptian sudan eritrea french somaliland madras pondicherry karikal nominally independent under belgian control angola maldive islands german east africa southern rhodesia caroline islands malaya pa c i f i c o c e a n bor neo dutch east indies portuguese east africa orange free state natal kaiser wilhelms land bismarck archipelago gilbert islands new guinea chagos islands java cocos islands comoro islands south african republic cape colony british north borneo brunei amirante islands bechuanaland marshall islands seychelles zanzibar british central africa barotselandnorthwestern rhodesia philippine islands sarawak northeastern rhodesia german southwest africa french indochina ceylon congo free state ascension walvis bay to cape colony guam mah italian somaliland british east africa siam goa socotra tra french congo st helena mariana islands ma rio muni burma a bys s i n i a lado hong kong macao guangzhouwan su sao tome and principe taiwan diu damo hadhramaut ma da ga sc ar fernando po g i n d i a british somaliland ka me ru n togo bhutan yanaon al eg liberia nepal l a y a s japan weihaiwei jiaozhou es a to oman trucial oman n i ger i a sierra leone a gwadar ottoman dominions under british control gambia nig er m ga n egypt french in terms of 1899 franco british agreement.
gold coast i g kuwait bahrain french west africa tuguese guinea persia af rio de oro se n a h ifni tunis alge morocco malta melilla ire nis ceuta madeira p em c h i n a ta n i ta ly gibraltar ar n s pa i n om a portugal serbia bulgaria ha bosniaherzegovina christmas island solomon islands papua portuguese timor ellice islands santa cruz islands indian ocean mauritius runion fiji new caledonia australian colonies basutoland lord howe island new zealand which characteristics defined a nation as a world power in the late nineteenth century.
chapter 19 imperial america the united states in the world 1890 1914 the importance of illustrations to the yellow press became clear in a fabled exchange between hearst and the artist frederic remington.
remington already famous for his portraits of the american west went to cuba to draw illustrations for the new york journal.
tiring of the rebellions slow pace remington told hearst he was leaving cuba.
hearst supposedly replied please remain.
you furnish the pictures and ill furnish the war this exchange passed quickly into american folklore as proof of hearsts determination to use shocking images real or staged to provoke a war with spain.
no evidence exists however that hearst ever wrote or sent this reply.
images as history atrocity stories and public opinion examines how yellow press illustrations shaped american public opinion.
next the maine exploded in havana harbor.
after a month of press speculation about the cause of the explosion an official naval investigation erroneously blamed a spanish harbor mine for the disaster rather than the real culprit faulty ship design that caused an internal explosion or perhaps sabotage by cuban rebels who wanted the united states to declare war on spain.
in the weeks immediately following the sinking of the maine mckinley tried unsuccessfully to convince spain to grant cuba independence and to calm calls for war from congress.
i have been through one war mckinley told a friend referring to his service in the civil war.
i have seen the dead piled up and i do not want to see another for many other americans however memories of brutal civil war battles had faded.
they enthusiastically viewed war as a manly adventure that would instill discipline and vigor in american men.
the assistant secretary of the navy theodore roosevelt championed this competing view writing to a friend in 1897 i should welcome almost any war for i think this country needs one with the yellow press clamoring for military action with the democrats championing war repubpresident mckinley turned to diplomacy to end the licans feared that mckinleys resistance to fighting impasse over cuba peacefully and repeatedly asked might hurt the party at the polls.
some senators spain to grant cuba more autonomy.
in 1897 the even suggested that congress declare war whether spanish government ended reconcentration by mckinley agreed or not.
the pressure for war recalling weyler and allowing displaced cuban increased when senator peasants to return to their redfield proctor several homes.
spain also andays before the navy renounced a plan for limited leased its findings on the cuban self government maine attack gave the inviting protests from all senate a grim accounting sides.
cuban rebels urged yellow press headline regarding spanish of the appalling effects of americans to help them ambassadors disparaging comments spains reconcentration attain complete indepenabout mckinley policy on the cuban peodence.
meanwhile cubans ple.
i went to cuba with still loyal to spain reacted a strong conviction that the situation had been overangrily to the limited autonomy plan and rioted drawn proctor noted then went on to detail the in havana.
an alarmed mckinley decided to send starvation squalor and sickness he had seen.
this the maine battleship to havana to deter loyalists sober address from a conservative republican and from attacking americans or their property.
acting stalwart friend of mckinleys convinced many wawithin the boundaries of acceptable international vering congressmen and americans that the country practice mckinley expected the battleships preshad a humanitarian duty to save cuba.
ence with the implied threat of bombardments to to head off a war spain made one last offer to restore calm to havana.
events in february 1898 grant cuba increased autonomy rejecting mckinleys however conspired against mckinleys effort to call for total independence.
president i can no resolve the crisis peacefully.
first hearsts journal longer hold back the senate vice president garpublished a private letter written by the spanish rett hobart told mckinley.
they will act without ambassador which described mckinley as weak you if you do not act at once accepting that he and a bidder for the admiration of the crowd had failed to settle the crisis mckinley asked conalthough tame compared with the vicious stategress to authorize an armed intervention to end the ments american newspapers routinely made about civil war in cuba without declaring war on spain.
the president the letter outraged the public.
the decision to intervene in cuba worst insult to the united states in its history why was mckinley unable to avoid war with spain.
watch the video burial of the maine victims the spanish american war images as history atrocity stories and public opinion ever since the yellow press helped raise american ire against spain in the years leading up to the spanish american war americans have pondered the power of the press in the united states.
how much power do atrocity stories and pictures have to shape public opinion.
can the press convince the public to fight a war.
on february 12 1897 the new york journal published a story by richard harding davis about a young cuban woman whom spanish authorities had expelled for carrying secret messages between cuban rebels.
davis reported that spanish officers followed clemencia arango and her companions onto an american ship.
the spanish officers demanded that a cabin should be furnished to them to which the girls might be taken and they were then undressed and searched for messages to exiled cuban rebels living in the united states.
frederic remingtons illustration spaniards search women on american steamers accompanied daviss story.
the paper next took up the cause of evangelina cisneros.
sentenced to 20 years in prison for trying to lure a spanish officer into a rebel death trap cisneros was awaiting deportation to an african penal colony.
according to the new york journal her only crime was calling for help from nearby cuban rebels to stop a spanish officer a beast in uniform from raping her.
on october 10 1897 the paper triumphantly announced that a new york journal reporter had helped cisneros break out of jail and sail to the united states.
the yellow press presented clemencia and evangelina as symbols for the virtuous and victimized cuban people fueling public sympathy for the cuban rebellion.
view the closer look images as history atrocity stories and public opinion frederic remington who was in the united states when this incident occurred drew a beautiful naked white woman standing defiantly before the three overly curious and swarthylooking spanish officers who had undressed her.
in fact female prison matrons performed the search.
there are things more dreadful than even war and one of them is dishonor the new york journal editorialized about the clemencia arango incident.
this 1897 illustration of dark skinned men viewing and touching the body of a white woman resonated powerfully with many white americans because it aroused their racial prejudices.
spaniards search women on american steamers new york journal february 12 1897 press coverage of cisneross escapades generated so much interest that huge crowds gathered to hear of her adventures when she appeared in new york and washington d c where president mckinley received her in the white house.
the headline criticized diplomatic inaction and suggested that only military style action could save cuban rebels.
new york journal accounts exaggerated cisneross lightskinned beauty noble birth and prison sufferings.
nearly 15 000 women including president mckinleys wife signed the newspapers petition to spains queen mara cristina demanding cisneross release.
evangelina cisneros rescued by the journal new york journal october 10 1897 why did popular media accounts depict the cubans as light skinned and the spanish as dark skinned.
chapter 19 imperial america the united states in the world 1890 1914 in the caribbean and guam the largest of the mariana islands in the pacific.
in return for 20 million spain also ceded the philippines to the united states.
how this land transfer would affect the political future of the philippines remained in doubt.
did the united states intend to grant the philippines independence or keep it as a colony.
americans soon offered competing visions on how to resolve this question.
despite the idealistic guarantees given in the teller amendment cuba became an independent nation in name only.
the united states linked the withdrawal of american occupation troops to concessions from cuba.
the platt amendment 1901 required cuba to give the united states the right to maintain a naval base at guantnamo bay and to intervene militarily to protect life property and individual liberty besides granting the united states a privileged trading relationship the cuban government also needed permission from the united states before entering into treaties with other nations.
the former spanish colony essentially became a u s protectorate a relationship in which a superior power assumes authority over a weaker country or territory to protect it from invasion and dominate its affairs.
the united states took advantage of these rights and occupied cuba numerous times until congress repealed the platt amendment in 1934 the united states continues to maintain a naval base at guantnamo bay using it to jail and interrogate prisoners captured during the wars in afghanistan and iraq that began in 2001 and 2003 respectively.
in his successful 1900 reelection bid against democrat william jennings bryan mckinley made a strong connection between events at home and abroad.
one campaign poster 19 5 featured portraits of the president and his war hero running mate theodore roosevelt.
the individual images reminded americans of cuban suffering under spanish rule and blamed the devastating depression of the 1890s on the democrats.
the poster then noted that domestic prosperity returned and social justice prevailed overseas once the united states led by the republicans stepped out into the world.
the claim that american intervention improved life for both u s and world citizens became a powerful argument in favor of constructing an american empire.
bryan focused his campaign on the evils of imperialism but mckinley carried the election with a full dinner pail slogan that emphasized restored prosperity.
19 5 mckinley campaign poster this poster helped voters visualize how expanding the nations global influence created trading opportunities that made the whole country more prosperous.
emphasizing the american humanitarian mission abroad resonated with progressive reformers and religious groups dedicated to spreading american values and institutions.
what steps did the united states take to construct a formal and informal empire after its victory over spain.
read the document the platt amendment 1901 creating an american empire creating an american empire the senates razor thin ratification of the treaty of paris with just two votes to spare ignited a strident internal debate over whether the united states should annex or free the philippines.
in the wake of ratification both imperialists and anti imperialists offered competing economic political and racial arguments about the wisdom of colonizing the philippines.
unwilling to leave their fate in the hands of american politicians filipinos revolted against u s forces.
the rebellion soon evolved into a vicious all out war with high casualties on both sides.
the debate over colonies countries the league asked.
instead of economic gains anti imperialists foresaw decades of expenses to maintain colonial outposts.
debate also centered on the ability of the filipinos to govern themselves.
on the imperialist side mckinley adopted a strong paternalistic stance arguing that we could not leave them to themselves they were unfit for self government and they would soon have anarchy and misrule worse then spains was caricatures helped imperialists in a risky strategic move that divided democrats party leader william jennings bryan had urged anti imperialist democratic senators to support ratification of the treaty of paris so that the united states could grant the philippines independence once spain relinquished control.
but after the senate had ratified the treaty the majority of republicans fought to keep the philippines as a colony.
maps in the popular press helped americans visualize the strategic and commercial importance of the nations new island possessions.
the map of the china seas under the national flags 1898 19 6 published in harpers weekly portrayed key parts of the imperialist argument for building an american empire in east asia.
by showing the proximity of the philippines to european colonial possessions in east asia the map reinforced mckinleys claim that another european power would colonize the islands if the united states withdrew.
the map also illustrated the imperialist slogan trade follows the flag the closeness of the philippines to china for example underscored the usefulness of the colony for developing a strong trading relationship between the united states and china.
a competing economic argument came from the anti imperialist league an organization that attracted a broad cross section of politicians progressive reformers writers industrialists and labor activists who opposed overseas colonial expansion.
how would markets for 19 6 map of the china seas under the national flags 1898 american industrialized goods suddenly this harpers weekly map depicted the united states taking its rightful place alongside other world powers with colonial empires in east asia.
materialize in undeveloped asian what competing economic arguments did imperialists and anti imperialists offer about colonies.
chapter 19 imperial america the united states in the world 1890 1914 you had to pray everyday for god to carry you safe and bring you back a black worker on felling giant trees and surviving mudslides while building the panama canal this photo of roosevelt sitting at the controls of a bucyrus steam shovel 19 13 captured the adventurous spirit of an era dedicated to overseas economic expansion technological innovation and world prominence.
the real builder of the panama canal was theodore roosevelt wrote major george w goethals chief engineer on the project.
americans usually 19 13 theodore roosevelt visits the canal zone instead of observing construction of the panama canal from a safe distance roosevelt climbed into the seat of a steam shovel to work its controls.
what does this photograph convey about roosevelt and the feat of building the panama canal.
saw photos of their formally dressed presidents standing on podiums sitting at desks or posing with dignitaries.
in this photograph roosevelt appears as the larger than life personality he was literally building the canal he played such a large part in securing for the united states.
americans solved more than the engineering riddle of constructing the canal.
they also conquered the disease carrying mosquito.
guided by the recent discovery that mosquitoes transmitted malaria and yellow fever dr william c gorgas undertook a relentless fumigation campaign that saved thousands in americas backyard of lives.
nonetheless poor sanitation in the black workers camps which roosevelt criticized during his visit and the dangers posed by mudslides and working with dynamite exacted a toll.
nearly 4 500 foreign black workers and 500 white americans died during the american phase of construction.
the roosevelt corollary the panama canal was a symbol of u s technological achievement naval power and economic strength.
the canal also increased the importance of the caribbean to u s national security.
americas interests in this hemisphere are greater than those of any european power roosevelt stated.
therefore the united states intended to police and protect the canal alone.
roosevelt had reason to worry about european naval incursions into the region.
anxious about overdue debts britain italy and germany blockaded venezuela in 1902 and two years later european nations threatened to intervene in the dominican republic for the same reason.
to head off a european invasion the dominicans asked roosevelt to accept the nation as a protectorate.
roosevelt privately remarked he had about the same desire to annex it as a gorged boa constrictor might have to swallow a porcupine wrong end to he nonetheless agreed to help but only after deciding to use the incident to establish a new principle in u s foreign policy.
to prevent european military incursions into the western hemisphere roosevelt announced a corollary to the 1823 monroe doctrine see chapter 20 the great war world war i 1914 1918 angering the public with higher taxes to pay for the war the government financed two thirds of the wars costs with war bonds short term loans that individual citizens made to the government.
throughout the period of u s neutrality german secretary of the treasury william g mcadoo spies and saboteurs in the united states tried to believed that americans who bought a 50 liberty disrupt the munitions trade with britain and france.
bond a 5 war savings certificate or a 25 cent spies planted tiny egg shaped bombs on ships thrift stamp felt personally connected to the war.
carrying munitions and detonated dynamite in any great war must necessarily be a popular munitions factories.
the most spectacular prewar movement mcadoo noted.
financing the war through war bonds however made it more expen strike by german saboteurs occurred at black tom a sive because the government had to pay interest to munitions depot in jersey city new jersey along the hudson river.
citizens as far away as philadelphia each bondholder.
heard the huge explosions on the morning of july 30 with the government reaching out to immi1916.
shrapnel from the blast left holes in the statue grants from russia poland and italy through war of liberty and shock waves shattered thousands of bond campaigns and military recruitment many windows in lower manhattan.
anxious to keep the immigrants felt american for the first time.
recent country neutral the government labeled each inciarrivals often lived in ethnic neighborhoods and dent an accident worked alongside despite evidence of their compatriots sabotage.
circumstances once the counthat had made astry entered the similation difficult.
war government rather than having propaganda urged to choose between the public to stay their homelands and alert for spies and their new country supreme court justice oliver wendell lies and report the t hes e immigrants holmes jr upholding the constitutionality man who spreads could openly supof the espionage act pessimistic stoport both during the ries divulges or war.
by helping the seeks confidential american red cross military informayou are helping italy read an ad in one italian american newspaper.
tion cries for peace or belittles our efforts to win the war the 1917 espionage act made it a crime to immigrants from the allied nations thrived obstruct military recruitment to encourage mutiny during the war but for german americans the or to aid the enemy by spreading lies.
these prohibiwar years were bleak.
wartime propaganda actions had a chilling effect on speech.
the sedition centuated americans sense of duty concern act passed in 1918 prohibited anyone from utterfor troops in the field and fears of a german ing writing or publishing any abusive or disloyal invasion.
images as history propaganda posters language concerning the flag constitution governdiscusses the impact of this anti german imagment or armed forces.
civil liberties and antiwar ery more fully.
propaganda posters whipped up advocates challenged both laws but the supreme patriotic fervor and hate for the enemy to justify court upheld the acts as constitutional.
upholding the war and motivate young americans to fight.
the espionage act in 1919 the court established a to their dismay progressive reformers soon real clear and present danger test that limited the right ized that the same publicity techniques they had of free speech during wartime.
words used to creperfected to expose corrupt business practices and spur interest in reform during the progressive ate a clear and present danger that will bring about the substantive evils that congress has a right to era see chapter 21.
why did the government choose to draft the wartime army.

chapter 24 1935 american communist party proclaims popular front 1930 tariff act of 1930 ten year drought begins in south and midwest the dust bowl 1932 reconstruction finance corporation established bonus marchers come to washington d c franklin d roosevelt elected president banking crisis begins 1934 southern tenant farmers union organized 1936 margaret mitchell publishes gone with the wind life magazine begins publication 1939 john steinbeck publishes the grapes of wrath nazi soviet pact weakens american communist party 1941 james agee and walker evans publish let us now praise famous men 1940 richard wright publishes native son ernest hemingway publishes for whom the bell tolls the new deal tva jobs are war jobs the tennessee valley authority a federally owned corporation sought to revitalize a region devastated by depression and other catastrophes.
by the time of world war ii much of the work of the tva centered on producing hydroelectric power with which to build war materiel.
war posters alamy no tank no shell no plane can ee mam without it m jobs m g war jqgjj looking ahead 1 what emergency measures did fdr take in his first hundred days as president.
2 who were the major critics of fdr s new deal and how did their criticisms influence fdr s second new deal.
3 what were the principal achievements of the second new deal in 1945.
setting the stage the administration of franklin roosevelt was in many ways the most politically successful presidency in american history roosevelt won four successive terms in office and his administration constructed a series of programs that permanently altered the shape of the federal government and its relationship to society by the end of the 1930s the new deal as the roosevelt program was called had created many of the broad outlines of the political world we know today.
it had created a powerful coalition within the democratic party that would dominate american politics for most of the next thirty years and it had produced the beginnings of a new liberal ideology that would govern reform efforts for decades.
one thing the new deal had not done however was end the great depression.
at the end of 1940 near the end of roosevelt s second term many of the basic problems of the depression remained unsolved.
the persistence of the depression created many challenges to the new deal.
dissident groups on both the right and the left some of them of considerable size and strength mobilized outside the conventional party system to promote alternative paths to recovery.
factions within the democratic party most notably southern conservatives turned against roosevelt s policies joined with republicans and helped create a conservative coalition in congress that frustrated many of his goals.
only the advent of world war ii in 1940 and 1941 succeeded in ending the great depression.
it also brought to a close most of the domestic initiatives of the new deal.
launching the new deal roosevelts first task upon taking office was to alleviate the panic that was threatening the financial system.
he did so in part by force of personality and in part by constructing very rapidly an ambitious and diverse program of legislation.
restoring confidence much of roosevelts success was a result of his ebullient personality.
in his inaugural address he assured the american people that the only thing we have to fear is fear itself and promised to roosevelts take drastic even warlike action against the emergency.
he projected an infec personality tious optimism that helped alleviate the growing despair.
he was the first president to make regular use of the radio and his friendly fireside chats during which he explained his programs and plans to the people helped build public confidence in the administration.
roosevelt held frequent informal press conferences and won the respect and friendship of most reporters.
their regard for him was such that by unwritten agreement no journalist ever photographed the president getting into or out of his car or sitting in his wheelchair.
much of the american public remained unaware throughout the roosevelt years that the presidents legs were completely paralyzed.
but roosevelt could not rely on image alone.
on march 6 1933 two days after taking office he issued a proclamation closing all american banks for four days until congress could meet in special session to consider banking reform legislation.
so great was the panic about bank failures that the bank holiday as the president euphemistically described it created a general sense of relief.
three bank days later roosevelt sent to congress the emergency banking act a generally holiday conservative bill much of it drafted by hoover administration holdovers designed primarily to protect the larger banks from being dragged down by the weakness of smaller ones.
the bill provided for treasury department inspection of all banks before they would be allowed to reopen for federal assistance to some troubled institutions and for a thorough reorganization of those in the greatest difficulty.
a confused and frightened congress passed the bill within four hours of its introduction.
i can assure you roosevelt told the public on march i2 in his first fireside chat that it is safer to keep your money in a reopened bank than under the mattress.
whatever else the new law accomplished it helped dispel the panic three quarters of the banks in the federal reserve system reopened within the next three days and billion in 662 the new deal 663 the radio president franklin d roosevelt was the first american president to master the use of radio.
beginning in his first days in office he regularly bypassed the newspapers and communicated directly with the people through his famous fireside chats.
he is shown here speaking in 1938 urging communities to continue to provide work relief for the unemployed.
l bettmann corbis hoarded currency and gold flowed back into them within a month.
the immediate banking crisis was over.
on the morning after passage of the emergency banking act roosevelt sent to congress another measure the economy act designed to convince fiscally conservative americans especially the business community that the federal government was in safe responsible hands.
the act proposed to balance the federal budget by cutting the salaries of government employees and reducing pensions to veterans by as much as 15 percent.
otherwise the president warned the nation faced a 1 billion budget deficit.
like the banking bill this one passed congress almost instantly despite heated protests from some congressional progressives.
roosevelt also moved in his first days in office to put to rest one of the divisive issues of the 1920s.
he supported and then signed a bill to legalize the manufacture and sale of beer with r a 3 2 percent alcohol content an interim repealed measure pending the repeal of prohibition for which a constitutional amendment the twenty first was already in process.
the amendment was ratified later in 1933 agricultural adjustment these initial actions were largely stopgaps to buy time for comprehensive programs.
the first of them was the agricultural adjustment act which congress passed in may 1933 its most important feature was its provision for reducing crop production to end agricultural surpluses and halt the downward spiral of farm prices.
under the provisions of the act producers of seven basic commodities wheat cotton corn hogs rice tobacco and dairy products would decide on production limits for their crops.
aaa the government through the agricultural adjustment administration aaa would then tell individual farmers how much they should produce and would pay them subsidies for leaving some of their land idle.
a tax on food processing for example the milling of wheat would provide the funds for the new payments.
farm prices would be subsidized up to the point of parity.
the aaa helped bring about a rise in prices for farm commodities in the years after 1933 gross farm income increased by half in the first three years of the new deal and the agricultural economy emerged from the 1930s much more stable and prosperous than it had been in many years.
the aaa did however favor larger farmers over smaller ones particularly since local administration of its programs often fell into the hands of the most powerful producers in a community.
by distributing payments to landowners not those who worked the land the government did little to discourage planters who were reducing their acreage from evicting tenants and sharecroppers and firing field hands.
in january 1936 the supreme court struck down the crucial provisions of the agricultural adjustment act arguing that the government had no constitutional authority to require farmers to limit production.
but within a few weeks the administration had secured passage of new legislation the soil conservation and domestic allotment act which permitted the government to pay farmers to reduce production so as to conserve soil prevent erosion and accomplish other secondary goals.
the court did not interfere with the new laws.
the administration launched several efforts to assist poor farmers as well.
the resettlement administration established in 1935 and its successor the farm security administration created in 1937 provided loans to help farmers cultivating submarginal soil to relocate to better lands.
but the programs never moved more than a few thousand farmers.
more effective was the rural electrification administration created in 1935 which worked to make electric power available for the first time to thousands of farmers through utility cooperatives.
industrial recovery ever since 1931 leaders of the u s chamber of commerce and many others had been urging the government to adopt an antideflation scheme that would permit trade associations to cooperate in stabilizing prices within their industries.
existing antitrust laws clearly forbade such practices and herbert hoover had refused to endorse suspension of the laws.
the roosevelt administration was more receptive.
in exchange for relaxing antitrust provisions however new dealers insisted on other provisions.
business leaders would have to make important concessions to labor recognize the workers right to bargain collectively through unions to ensure that the incomes of workers would rise along with prices.
and to help create jobs and increase consumer buying power the administration added a major program of public works spending.
the result of these and many other impulses rural electrification banking crises when franklin delano roosevelt took office as president in 1933 the u s banking system was close to collapse.
as depositors panicked by the worsening depression withdrew their savings from the banks bank after bank was forced to close.
to prevent a complete collapse of the banking system fdr first declared a bank holiday calling for the closing of all banks and then called congress into special session to pass banking reform legislation the emergency banking act.
in his first fireside chat on march 12 1933 excerpted in the first source document below the president sought to explain to the public the actions he and congress had undertaken and to reassure his listeners that their money would be safe in banks.
some seventy five years after the great depression of the 1930s the nation once again experienced a serious financial crisis in the great recession of 2007 2010 once again congress passed banking reform legislation calling for closer regulation of banks and providing greater protections for consumers.
in his address of july 21 2010 president barack obama outlined the provisions of the new legislation and sought to reassure the public.
excerpts from this address comprise the second source in this feature.
the great depression 1933 franklin delano roosevelt the banking crisis first fireside chat first of all let me state the simple fact that when you deposit money in a bank the bank does not put the money into a safe deposit vault.
it invests your money in many different forms of credit in bonds in commercial paper in mortgages and in many other kinds of loans.
in other words the bank puts your money to work to keep the wheels of industry and of agriculture turning around.
what then happened during the last few days of february and the first few days of march.
because of undermined confidence on the part of the public there was a general rush by a large portion of our population to turn bank deposits into currency or gold a rush so great that the soundest banks couldn t get enough currency to meet the demand.
by the afternoon of march third a week ago last friday scarcely a bank in the country was open to do business.
proclamations closing them in whole or in part had been issued by the governors in almost all the states.
it was then that i issued the proclamation providing for the national bank holiday and this was the first step in the governments reconstruction of our financial and economic fabric.
the second step last thursday was the legislation promptly and patriotically passed by the congress confirming my proclamation and broadening my powers so that it became possible in view of the requirement of time to extend the holiday and lift the ban of that holiday gradually in the days to come.
this law also gave authority to develop a program of rehabilitation of our banking facilities.
the new law allows the twelve federal reserve banks to issue additional currency on good assets and thus the banks that reopen will be able to meet every legitimate call it is necessary that the reopening of banks be extended over a period of several days in order to permit the banks to make applications for the necessary loans to obtain currency needed to meet their requirements and to enable the government to make common sense checkups we have had a bad banking situation.
some of our bankers had shown themselves either incompetent or dishonest in their handling of the peoples funds.
they had used the money entrusted to them in speculations and unwise loans this was of course not true in the vast majority of our banks but it was true in enough of them to shock the people of the united states for a time into a sense of insecurity and to put them into a frame of mind where they did not differentiate but seemed to assume that the acts of a comparative few had tainted them all and i t j.
u oecame the governments iob to straighten out this situation and do it as quickly as possible.
and that job is being performed 664 ere is n ement m t e rea justment of our financial system more important than currency more important than g an 1 3 js 1 6 c ence people themselves.
confidence and courage are the essentials of success in carrying out our p an.
ou peop e must have faith you must not be stampeded by rumors or guesses.
let us unite in banishing ear.
e ave provi e t e machinery to restore our financial system and it is up to you to support and make it work.
source whitehouse c span org understand analyze and evaluate the great recession of 2007 2010 how does president roosevelt explain the current economic crisis.
what group does he single out as being most to blame.
what tone does president roosevelt use in addressing the public.
what specific actions does he ask of the american public.
barack obama signing of dodd frank wall street reform and consumer protection act over the past two years we have faced the worst recession since the great depression.
eight million people lost their jobs.
tens of millions saw the value of their homes and retirement savings plummet.
countless businesses have been unable to get the loans they need and many have been forced to shut their doors.
and although the economy is growing again too many people are still feeling the pain of the downturn.
now while a number of factors led to such a severe recession the primary cause was a breakdown in our financial system.
it was a crisis born of a failure of responsibility from certain corners of wall street to the halls of power in washington.
for years our financial sector was governed by antiquated and poorly enforced rules that allowed some to game the system and take risks that endangered the entire economy.
unscrupulous lenders locked consumers into complex loans with hidden costs.
firms like aig placed massive risky bets with borrowed money.
and while the rules left abuse and excess unchecked they also left taxpayers on the hook if a big bank or financial institution ever failed.
now lets put this in perspective.
the fact is the financial industry is central to our nations ability to grow to prosper to compete and to innovate.
there are a lot of banks that understand and fulfill this vital role and there are a whole lot of bankers who want to do right and do right by their customers.
this reform will help foster innovation not hamper it.
it is designed to make sure that everybody follows the same set of rules so that firms compete on price and quality not on tricks and not on traps rjeform will also rein in the abuse and excess that nearly brought down our financial system.
it will finally bring transparency to the kinds of complex and risky transactions that helped trigger the financial crisis.
shareholders will also have a greater say on the pay of ceos and other executives so they can reward success instead of failure.
and finally because of this law the american people will never again be asked to foot the bill for wall streets mistakes.
there will be no more tax funded bailouts period.
if a large financial institution should ever fail this reform gives us the ability to wind it down without endangering the broader economy.
and there will be new rules to make clear that no firm is somehow protected because it is too big to fail.
the fact is every american from main street to wall street has a stake in our financial system.
wall street banks and firms invest the capital that makes it possible for start ups to sell new products.
they provide loans to businesses to expand and to hire.
they back mortgages for families purchasing a new home.
thats why well all stand to gain from these reforms.
we all win when investors around the world have confidence in our markets.
we all win when shareholders have more power and more information.
we all win when consumers are protected against abuse.
and we all win when folks are rewarded based on how well they perform not how well they evade accountability.
source make connections 1 what specifics does obama offer in his explanation of the dodd frank wall street reform and consumer protection act.
why do you thin.
obama s explanation is more detailed than fdr s.
rr 9 2 both presidents appealed to the public to support the new legislation.
how do their appeals to he public differ.
3 wbtcb zte fs r obama s do you hink offers greater reassurance to the public why is that message more reassunag.
666 chapter 1 the mexicans strike back in this vivid scene from the duran codex mexican artists illustrate a rare moment in which mexican warriors gained the upper hand over the spanish invaders.
driven back by native fighters the spanish have taken refuge in a room in the royal palace in tenochtitlan while brightly attired mexican warriors besiege them.
although the mexicans gained a temporary advantage in this battle the drawing illustrates one of the reasons for their inability to withstand the spanish in the longer term.
the spanish soldiers are armed with rifles and crossbows while the indians carry only spears and shields.
biblioteca nacional madrid spain the bridgeman art library their second attempt at conquest.
the spanish believed that the epidemic was a vindication of their efforts.
when the christians were exhausted from war one follower of cortes pizarro in peru a european artist depicted pizarro s arrival on the coast of peru in the early 1530s where he was greeted by crowds of hostile indians.
by 1538 pizarro had conquered the empire of the incas.
library of congress said at the time god saw fit to send the indians smallpox through his ruthless suppression of the surviving natives.
cortes established a lasting reputation as the most brutal of the spanish conquistadores conquerors.
the news that silver was to be found in mexico attracted the attention of other spaniards.
from the island colonies and from spain itself a wave of conquistadores descended on the mainland in search of fortune.
francisco pizarro who conquered peru 1532 1538 and revealed to europeans the wealth of the incas opened the way for other advances into south america.
his onetime deputy hernando de soto in a futile search for gold silver and jewels led several expeditions 1539 1541 through florida west into the continent and became the first white man known to have crossed the mississippi river.
francisco coronado traveled north from mexico 1540 1542 into what is now new mexico in a similarly fruitless search for gold and jewels in the process he helped open the southwest of what is now the united states to spanish settlement.
the story of the spanish warriors is one of great military daring and achievement.
it is also a story of great brutality and brutality and 8re d a story that would be repeated greed time and again over centuries of european conquest of the americas.
the conquistadores in some areas almost exterminated the native populations through a combination of warfare and disease.
the collision of cultures 15 de soto in north america this gruesome drawing portrays spanish troops under hernando de soto massacring a group of mobile indians in what is now alabama in the winter of 1540 1541 de soto had been governor of cuba but in 1539 he sailed to florida with 600 troops and for the next several years traveled through large areas of what would later become the southern united states until he died of fever in 1542 here as elsewhere his troops dealt with the indian tribes they encountered along the way with unrestrained brutality.
rare books and special collections library of congress spanish america lured by dreams of treasure spanish explorers conquistado res and colonists established a vast empire for spain in the new world.
the history of the spanish empire spanned three distinct periods.
the first was the age of discovery and exploration beginning with columbus and continuing through the ordinances first two decades of the sixteenth cen of discovery tury.
the second was the age of the con quest in which spanish military forces aided by the diseases they unleashed established their dominion over the lands once ruled by natives.
the third phase began in the 1570s when new spanish laws the ordinances of discovery banned the most brutal military conquests.
from that point on the spanish expanded their presence in america through colonization.
the first spaniards to arrive in the new world the con quistadores had been interested in only one thing getting rich.
and in that they were fabulously successful.
for 300 years beginning in the sixteenth century the mines in spanish america yielded more than ten times as much gold and silver as the rest of the world s mines put together.
these riches made spain the wealthiest and most powerful nation for a time.
after the first wave of conquest however most spanish settlers in america traveled to the new world for other reasons.
many went in hopes of creating a profitable agricultural economy.
unlike the conquistadores who left little but destruction behind them these settlers helped establish elements of european civilization in america that permanently altered both the landscape and the social structure.
another important force for colonization was the catholic church.
ferdinand and isabella in establishing spain s claim to most of the americas from mexico south bowed to the wishes of the church and established the requirement that catholicism be the only religion of the new territories.
spain abided by that condition.
although the spanish founded commercial and military centers in the sixteenth century another common form of settlement by the early seventeenth century was the catholic mission.
missions had commercial lives.
but their primary purpose at least at first was converting natives to catholicism.
there were usually military garrisons connected to the missions to protect the europeans from hostile natives.
presidios military bases often grew up nearby to provide additional protection.
16 chapter 24 the memorial day massacre the bitterness of the labor struggles of the 1930s was nowhere more evident than in chicago in 1937 when striking workers attempting to march on a republic steel plant were brutally attacked by chicago police who used clubs tear gas and guns to turn the marchers away.
ten strikers were killed and many others were injured.
carl linde ap images social security in 1935 roosevelt gave public support to what became the social security act which congress passed the same year.
it established several distinct programs.
for the elderly there were two types of assistance.
those who were presently destitute could receive up to 15 a month in federal assistance.
more important for the future many americans presently working were incorporated into a pension system to which they and their employers would contribute by paying a payroll tax it would provide them with an income on retirement.
pension payments would not begin until 1942 and even then would provide only 10 to 85 a month to recipients.
and broad categories of workers including domestic servants and agricultural laborers occupations with disproportionate numbers of blacks and women were excluded from the program.
but the act was a crucial first step in building the nation s most important social program for the elderly.
in addition the social security act created a system of unemployment insurance which employers alone would finance unemployment and which made ic possible for workers insurance laid off from their jobs to receive temporary government assistance.
it also established a limited system later expanded of federal aid to people with disabilities and a program of aid to dependent children.
the framers of the social security act wanted to create a system of insurance not welfare and the largest programs old age pensions and unemployment insurance were in many ways similar to private insurance programs with contributions from participants and benefits available to all.
but the act also provided considerable direct assistance based on need to the elderly poor to those with disabilities to dependent children and their mothers.
these groups were widely the new deal 673 perceived to be small and genuinely unable to support themselves.
but in later generations the programs for these groups would expand considerably.
new directions in relief social security was designed primarily to fulfill long range goals.
but millions of unemployed americans had immediate needs.
to help them the roosevelt administration established the wpa works progress administration wpa in 1935 like the civil works administration and earlier efforts the wpa established a system of work relief for the unemployed.
but it was much bigger than the earlier agencies both in the size of its budget 5 billion in its first two years and in the energy and imagination of its operations.
under the direction of harry hopkins the wpa was responsible for building or renovating 110 000 public buildings schools post offices government office buildings and for who is eligible everybody working for salary or wages with only a few exceptions.
such as agriculture do t c service and government work applications for social security a untjp eyearv able ihrough employers if you do not get one from your employer.
ask tor one at the post office how to return application do ii nuw.
i j iuil jicuzitij.
d zd iformation at anyb pon offke constructing almost 600 airports more than 500 000 miles of roads and over 100 000 bridges.
in the process the wpa kept an average of 2 1 million workers employed and pumped needed money into the economy.
the wpa displayed flexibility and imagination in offering assistance to those whose occupations did not fit into any traditional category of relief.
the federal writers project of the wpa for example gave unemployed writers a chance to do their work and receive a government salary.
the federal arts project similarly helped painters sculptors and others to continue their careers.
the federal music project and the federal theater project oversaw the production of concerts and plays creating work for unemployed musicians actors and directors.
other relief agencies emerged alongside the wpa.
the national youth administration nya provided work and scholarship assistance to high school and college age men and women.
the emergency housing division of the public works administration began federal sponsorship of public housing.
men and women alike were in distress in the 1930s as in all difficult times.
but the new welfare system dealt with members of the two sexes in very different ways.
for men the government concentrated mainly on work relief on such programs as the ccc the cwa and the wpa all of which were overwhelmingly male and through the social security act pensions and unemployment insurance both structured initially to assist mostly men.
the principal government aid to women was not work relief but cash assistance most notably through the aid to dependent children program of social security which was designed largely to assist single mothers.
this disparity in treatment reflected a widespread assumption that men constituted the bulk of the paid workforce and that women needed to be treated within the context of the family.
in fact millions of women were already employed by the 1930s.
the 1936 referendum for a time in 1935 there had seemed reason to question the presidents prospects for reelection.
but by the middle of 1936 with the economy visibly reviving there could be alf landon doubt that he would win a second term.
the republican party nominated the moderate governor of kansas alf m landon who waged a weak campaign.
roosevelts dissident challengers now appeared powerless.
one reason was the violent death of their most effective leader huey long who was assassinated in louisiana in september 1935 another reason was the ill fated alliance among father coughlin dr townsend and gerald l k smith an intemperate henchman of huey long who joined forces that summer to establish a new political movement the union party which nominated an undistinguished north dakota congressman william lemke for president.
the result was the greatest landslide in american history to that point.
roosevelt polled just under 61 percent of the security poster 1935 within months of the passage of the social irity act of 1935 the new social security board began publicizing the benefits the new im offered to working americans the most dramatic of which was a monthly pension to ed americans who had paid into the system.
the library of congress 674 chapter 24 significant events declining unemployment 1 000 000 unemployed totals for entire labor force unemployment 1920 1945 this chart shows the shifting patterns of unemployment from 1920 to the end of world war ii.
as it reveals nonfarm unemployment was very high in the early 1920s in the last year of the postwar recession but remained relatively low from 1923 to 1929 the beginning of the great depression sent unemployment soaring to a peak of nearly 13 million people in early 1933 an unemployment rate of 25 percent.
the new deal helped create a partial recovery from the depression over the next four years but unemployment remained very high throughout the 1930s and spiked sharply higher again during the recession of 1937 1938 before falling rapidly after war began in europe.
why was the war so much more successful than the new deal in ending unemployment.
wpa workers on the job the works progress administration funded an enormous variety of work projects to provide jobs for the unemployed.
but most wpa employees worked on construction sites of one kind or another.
jospeh schwartz corbis the new deal 675 wpa mural art the federal arts project of the works progress administration commissioned an impressive series of public murals from the artists it employed.
many of these murals adorned post offices libraries and other public buildings constructed by the wpa.
shown here is a portion of a mural of shipbuilders at the rincon center san francisco.
this mural is unusual in showing an african american worker.
most wpa iconography portrayed workers as white men only.
architec tour alamy vote to landons 36 percent and carried every state except maine and vermont.
the democrats increased their already large majorities in both houses of congress.
the union party received fewer than 900 000 votes.
the election results demonstrated the party realignment electoral rhat ew eal had produced.
the realignment democrats now controlled a broad coalition of western and southern farmers the urban working classes the poor and unemployed and the black communities of northern cities as well as traditional progressives and committed new liberals a coalition that constituted a substantial majority of the electorate.
it would be decades before the republican party could again create a last ing majority coalition of its own.
the new deal in disarray roosevelt emerged from the 1936 election at the zenith of his popularity.
within months however the new deal was mired in serious new difficulties a result of continuing opposition the presidents own political errors and major economic setbacks.
the court fight the 1936 mandate franklin roosevelt believed made it possible for him to do something about the problem of the supreme court.
no program of reform he had become convinced could long survive the conservative justices who had already struck hown the nra and the aaa and threatened to invalidate even more legislation.
in february 1937 roosevelt sent a surprise message to capitol hill proposing a general overhaul of the federal curt system included among the many provisions was one to add up to six new justices to the supreme court with a new justice added for every sitting justice over the age of court seventy.
the courts were overworked packing he claimed and needed additional manpower and fresh ideas to enable them to cope with their increasing burdens.
but roosevelts real purpose was to give himself the opportunity to appoint new liberal justices and change the ideological balance of the court.
conservatives were outraged at the court packing plan and even many roosevelt supporters were disturbed by what they considered evidence of the presidents hunger for power.
still roosevelt might well have persuaded congress to approve at least a compromise measure had not the supreme court itself intervened.
of the nine justices three reliably supported the new deal and four reliably opposed it.
of the remaining two chief justice charles evans hughes often sided with the progressives and associate justice owen j roberts usually voted with the conservatives.
on march 29 1937 roberts hughes and the three progressive justices voted together to uphold a state minimum wage law in the case of west coast hotel u parrishthus appearing to reverse a 5 to 4 decision of the previous year invalidating a similar law.
two weeks later again by a 5 to 4 margin the court upheld the wagner act and in may it validated the social security act.
whether or not for that reason the courts newly moderate position made the courtpacking bill seem unnecessary.
congress ultimately defeated it.
on one level the affair was a significant victory for franklin roosevelt.
the court was no longer an obstacle to new deal reforms particularly after the older justices began to retire to be replaced by roosevelt appointees.
but the court packing episode did lasting political damage to the administration.
from 1937 on southern democrats and other conservatives voted against roosevelts measures much more often than they had in the past.
1 the golden age of comic books superman the most popular action figure in the history of comic books was superman whose superhuman powers were particularly appealing fantasies to americans suffering through the depression and later world war ii.
hulton archive getty images the troubled years of the great depression and world war ii many americans sought release from their anxieties in fantasy.
movies plays books radio shows and other diversions drew people out of their own lives and into a safer or more glamorous or more exciting world.
beginning in 1938 one of the most popular forms of escape for many young americans became the comic book.
in february 1935 malcolm wheeler nicholson founded the first comics magazine what we now know as the comic book titled new fun.
new fun was not successful but wheeler founded a new company detective comics and began in 1937 to design a new magazine called action comics.
wheeler ran out of money before he could publish anything but the company continued without him.
in 1938 the first issue of action comics appeared with a startling and controversial cover a powerful man in a skintight suit lifting a car over his head.
his name was superman and he became the most popular cartoon character of all time.
within a year superman had a comic book named after him which was selling over 1 2 million copies each issue.
by 1940 there was a popular superman radio show introduced by a breathless announcer crying its a bird.
it s a plane.
soon other publishers began developing new superheroes a term invented by the creators of superman to capitalize on this growing new popular appetite.
in 1939 a second great comic book publisher appeared marvel comics.
by the early 1940s superman had been joined by other superheroes the human torch the sub mariner batman the flash and wonder woman a character created in part to signal the importance of women to the war effort.
it is not hard to imagine why superheroes would be so appealing to americans particularly to the teenage boys who were the largest single purchasers of comic books in the 1930s and 1940s.
superman and other superheroes were idealized versions of the ideal boy smart good the perfect boy scout as one fan put it.
but they were also all powerful capable of righting wrong and preventing catastrophe.
at a time when catastrophe was an ever present possibility in the world superheroes were a comforting escape from fear.
many of the early comic book writers were young jewish men conscious of their outsider status in an american culture not yet wholly open to them.
almost all the characters they created had alter egos identities they used while living within the normal world.
superman was clark kent a mild mannered reporter.
batman was bruce wayne a wealthy heir the superhero characters were outsiders themselves but outsiders endowed with special powers and abilities unavailable to ordinary people.
even before america entered world war ii the comic superheroes were battling the axis powers marvel s the human torch and the sub mariner joined forces against the german navy.
superman fought spies and saboteurs at home.
captain america a new character created in march 1941 was a frail young man rejected by the army who after being given a secret serum by a military doctor became extraordinarily powerful.
the cover of the first issue of captain america showed the title character punching hitler in his headquarters in germany.
the end of the war was also the end of this first golden age of american comic books.
many superhero magazines ceased publication as peacetime reduced the popular appetite for fantasy.
in their place emerged new comic books which emphasized romance and even mild sexuality.
in the late 1940s and early 1950s comic books began to come under attack from educators psychiatrists journalists and even the federal government.
congress took no legal action against comic book publishers or writers but the comic book industry itself created a trade association which produced a comics code to prevent indecency in the industry.
comic books experienced an unexpected revival in the late 1950s and 1960s.
old superheroes captain america the human torch and others reappeared new ones spiderman iron man the silver surfer joined them.
superman who had never disappeared enjoyed newfound popularity and became the hero for a time of a popular television show.
but these new or showed similar advances.
roosevelt seized on these improvements as an excuse to try to balance the federal budget convinced by treasury secretary henry morgenthau and many economists that the real danger now was no longer depression but inflation.
between january and august 1937 retrenchment and recession by the summer of 1937 the gross national product which had dropped from 82 billion in 1929 to 40 billion in 1932 had risen back to nearly 72 billion.
other economic indices 676 superman today superman continues to appeal to the fantasies of americans as shown by this poster of the movie superman returns from 2006 another film man of steel was released in 2013 and yet another is in the works for 2015 or 2016.
warner bros photofest revised heroes were not entirely like those of the 1930s and 1940s.
they reflected the realities f an increasingly complex and complicated world which their characters like their mostly young readers were struggling to understand.
understand.
and evadj vr what could comic books offer readers suffering through the crisis of the great depression.
how and why have comic book superheroes changed over time.
what might account for the upsurge in comic books popularity in the late 1950s and 1960s.
conditions were soon almost as bad as they had been in the bleak days of 1932 1933 the recession of 1937 known to the presidents critics as the roosevelt recession was a result of many factors.
but to many observers at the time including apparently the he cut the wpa in half laying off 1 5 million relief workers.
a few weeks later the fragile boom collapsed.
other cuts in spending followed.
the index of industrial production dropped from 117 in august 1937 to 76 in may 1938 fur million additional workers lost their jobs.
economic 677 1 678 chapter 13 looking for gold finding gold in california was not for the most part a task for lone prospectors.
more common were teams of people who together built elaborate mining technologies this 1852 photograph shows the mining teams were often interracial.
the white miners on the left stand conspicuously apart from the chinese workers on the right but both groups were e of the enterprise.
the granger collection new york but name.
white vigilantes who called themselves indian hunters were already hunting down and killing thousands of indians before the gold rush contributing to the process by indian which the native american population of slavery california declined from 150 000 to 30 000 between the 1850s and 1870.
now a new state law permitted the arrest of loitering or orphaned indians and their assignment to a term of indentured labor.
the gold rush was of critical importance to the growth of california but not for the reasons most of the migrants hoped.
there was substantial gold in the hills of the sierra nevada and many people got rich from it.
but only a tiny fraction of the forty niners ever found gold or even managed to stake a claim to land on which they could look for gold.
some disappointed migrants returned home after a while.
but many stayed in california and swelled both the agricultural and urban populations of the territory.
by 1856 for example san francisco whose population had been 1 000 before the gold rush and at one point declined to about 100 as people left for the mines was the home of over 50 000 people.
by the early 1850s californias population which had always been diverse had become even more so.
the gold rush had attracted not just white americans but also europeans chinese south americans mexicans free blacks and slaves who accompanied southern migrants.
conflicts over gold intersected with racial and ethnic tensions to make the territory an unusually turbulent place.
as a result pressure grew to create a stable and effective government.
the gold rush therefore became another factor putting pressure on the united states to resolve the status not only of california but of all territories and of slavery within them as well.
the impending crisis 353 rising sectional tensions zachary taylor believed statehood could become the solution to the issue of slavery in the territories.
as long as the new lands remained territories the federal government was responsible for deciding the fate of slavery within them.
but once they became states he thought their own governments would be able to settle the slavery question.
at taylors urging california quickly adopted a constitution that prohibited slavery and in december 1849 taylor asked congress to admit california as a free state.
new mexico he added should also be granted statehood as soon as it was ready and should like california be permitted to decide for itself what it wanted to do about slavery.
congress balked in part because of several other controversies concerning slavery that were complicating the debate.
one was the effort of antislavery forces to abolish slavery in the district of columbia a movement bitterly resisted by southerners.
another was the emergence of personal liberty laws in northern states which barred courts and police officers from helping to return runaway slaves to their owners.
in response southerners demanded a stringent law that would require northern states to return fugitive slaves to their owners.
but the biggest obstacle to the presidents program was the white souths fear that two new free states would be added to the northern majority.
the number of free and slave states was equal in 1849 fifteen each.
but the admission of california would upset the balance and new mexico oregon and utah might upset it further leaving the south in a minority in the senate as it already was in the house.
tempers were now rising to dangerous levels.
even many otherwise moderate southern leaders were beginning to talk about secession from the union.
in the north every state legislature but one adopted a resolution demanding the prohibition of slavery in the territories.
the compromise of 1850 faced with this mounting crisis moderates and unionists spent the winter of 1849 1850 trying to frame a great compromise.
the aging henry clay who was spearheading the effort believed that no compromise could last unless it settled all the issues in dispute between the sections.
as a result he clays took several measures that had been pro proposed posed separately combined them into a solution single piece of legislation and presented it to the senate on january 29 1850 among the bills provisions were the admission of california as a free state the formation of territorial governments in the rest of the lands acquired from mexico without restrictions on slav ery the abolition of the slave trade but not slavery itself in the district of columbia and a new more effective fugitive slave law.
these resolutions launched a debate that raged for seven monthsboth in congress and throughout the nation.
the debate occurred in two phases the differences between sectional conflict over slavery in the territories which revealed much about how american politics was changing in the 1850s.
in the first phase of the debate the dominant voices in congress were those of old men national leaders who still remembered jefferson adams and other founders who argued for or against the compromise on the basis of broad ideals.
clay himself seventy three years old in 1850 appealed to shared national sentiments of nationalism.
early in march another of the older leaders john c calhoun sixty eight years old and so ill that he had to sit grimly in his seat while a colleague read his speech for him joined the debate.
he insisted that the north grant the south equal rights in the territories that it agree to observe the laws concerning fugitive slaves that it cease attacking slavery and that it amend the constitution to create dual presidents one from the north and one from the south each with a veto.
calhoun was making radical demands that had no chance of passage.
but like clay he was offering what he considered a comprehensive permanent solution to the sectional problem that would he believed save the union.
after calhoun came the third of the elder statesmen sixty eight year old daniel webster one of the great orators of his time.
still nourishing presidential ambitions he delivered an eloquent address in the senate trying to rally northern moderates to support clays compromise.
but in july after six months of this impassioned nationalistic debate congress defeated the clay proposal.
and with that the controversy moved into its second phase in which a very different cast of characters predominated.
clay ill and tired left washington to spend the summer resting in the mountains.
calhoun had died even before the vote in july.
and webster accepted a new appointment as secretary of state thus removing himself from the senate and from the debate.
in place of these leaders a new younger group now emerged.
one spokesman was william h seward of new york new forty nine years old a wily political opera leadership tor who staunchly opposed the proposed compromise.
the ideals of union were to him less important than the issue of eliminating slavery.
another was jefferson davis of mississippi forty two years old a representative of the new cotton south.
to him the slavery issue was less one of principles and ideals than one of economic self interest.
most important of all there was stephen a douglas a thirty seven year old democratic senator from illinois.
a westerner from a rapidly growing state he was an open spokesman for the economic needs of his section especially for the construction of railroads.
his was a career devoted not to any broad national goals but to sectional gain and personal self promotion.
the new leaders of the senate were able as the old leaders had not been to produce a compromise.
one spur to the compromise was the disappearance of the most powerful obstacle to it the president.
zachary taylor had been adamant that only after california and possibly new mexico were admitted as states could other measures be discussed.
but on july 9 1850 taylor suddenly died the victim of a violent stomach disorder.
he was succeeded by millard fillmore of new york a dull handsome 354 chapter 26 million combatants had died in the struggle.
as many as 40 million civilians may have died mostly from bombings from disease and starvation from genocidal campaigns of extermination.
the united states had suffered only light casualties in comparison with many other nations but the cost had still been high 322 000 dead another 800 000 injured.
and despite the sacrifices the world continued to face an uncertain future menaced by the threat of nuclear warfare and by the emerging antagonism between the worlds two strongest nations the united states and the soviet union that would darken the peace for many decades to come.
looking back the united states played a critical indeed decisive role in the war against germany and italy and it defeated japan in the pacific largely alone.
but americas sacrifices in the war paled next to those of the nations most important allies.
britain france and above all the soviet union paid a staggering price in lives infrastructure and social unity that had no counterpart in the united states most of whose citizens experienced a booming prosperity and only modest privations during the four years of american involvement in the conflict.
there were of course jarring social changes during the war that even prosperity could not entirely offset shortages restrictions regulations family dislocations and perhaps most of all the absence of millions of men and considerable numbers of women who went overseas to work and fight.
american fighting men and women of course had very different experiences than those americans who remained at home.
they endured tremendous hardships substantial casualties and great loneliness.
they fought effectively and bravely.
they helped liberate north africa and italy from german occupation.
and in june 1944 finally they joined british french and other forces in a great and successful invasion of france which led less than a year later to the destruction of the nazi regime and the end of the european war.
in the pacific they turned back the japanese offensive through a series of difficult naval and land battles.
but in the end it was not the american army and navy that brought the war against japan to a close.
it was the unleashing of the most destructive weapon mankind had ever created the atomic bomb on the people of japan that finally persuaded the leaders of that nation to surrender.
key terms people places events a philip randolph 715 battle of the bulge 723 braceros 716 colossus ii 715 congress of racial equality core 715 d day 722 dwight d eisenhower 722 enola gay 729 enrico fermi 726 guadalcanal 705 harry s truman 722 hiroshima 729 holocaust 708 korematsu v u s 721 luftwaffe 722 manhattan project 726 midway 705 office of price administration opa 712 okinawa 725 relocation centers 721 rosie the riveter 717 vichy 707 zoot suits 720 recall and reflect 1 list some of the measures that the federal government took to mobilize the nations economy for the war effort.
2 how did advances in technology affect the course of the military conflict.
3 how did the united states contribute to the allied victory in europe.
how important were americas allies.
which allies were most important.
4 how did the war affect u s society.
for workers.
for african americans.
for japanese americans.
for immigrants.
5 why did the united states bomb civilians in japan and europe in the last years of the war.
america in a world at war 731 significant events 1941 roosevelt establishes fair employment practices commission manhattan project begins a philip randolph proposes march on washington 1943 americans capture guadalcanal soviets defeat germans at stalingrad allies launch invasion of italy 1942 japanese capture philippines battle of midway war production board created congress of racial equality core founded japanese americans interned 1945 atomic bomb tested in new mexico roosevelt dies truman becomes president hitler kills himself allies capture berlin germany surrenders americans capture okinawa united states drops atomic bombs on hiroshima and nagasaki japan surrenders 1944 roosevelt reelected president americans recapture philippines allies invade normandy the cold war i looking ahead 1 what made the growing tension between the united states and the soviet union evolve into the cold war.
2 what was the theory of containment and how did it drive u s foreign policy and foreign interventions in the postwar era.
3 why did the u s government and the american people believe that there was a threat of internal communist subversion.
red menace this 1949 movie poster suggests how much attention was directed to the threat of communism.
the film produced by epu ic pictures and directed by r g springsteen told the story of a man and a woman who joined the communist party only to become disillusioned en t ey watched the murder of a party member who begins to doubt the s prmcip es.
this mvie and most others like it got poor reviews and did not attract large audiences.
0 republic pictures photofestl setting the stage even before the end of world war ii there were signs of tension between the united states and the soviet union.
once the war was over those tensions quickly grew to create what became known as the cold war a tense and dangerous rivalry that like world war ii reshaped the world order in important ways.
the intense rivalry between the united states and the soviet union and between democratic capitalism and communism divided much of the world into two not quite warring camps.
out of this rivalry came a series of new military alliances on both sides of the conflict.
a new conception of american foreign policy known as containment also emerged based on the belief that the principal international goal of the united states should be to prevent communism from spreading beyond its present boundaries.
containment helped keep the tensions between the rival blocs low enough to avoid a catastrophic nuclear war.
but the cold war world was far from stable as two major wars in korea and vietnam and countless smaller conflicts all over the world made clear.
the cold war also cast its shadow over domestic life in the united states.
it transformed american politics weakening the grip of the democratic party on the electorate making the issue of communism a central part of postwar political life and helping to produce a great anticommunist frenzy in the late 1940s and early 1950s that had corrosive effects on american life.
known to many as mccarthyism after the wisconsin senator who became the most famous and notorious voice of anticommunism for a time the post world war ii red scare was a widespread phenomenon that affected almost every area of american life.
origins of the cold war few issues in twentieth century american history have aroused more debate than the question of the origins of the cold war.
some historians have claimed that soviet duplicity and expansionism created the international tensions while others have proposed that american provocations and imperial ambitions were at least equally to blame.
most historians agree however that wherever the preponderance of blame may lie both the united states and the soviet union contributed to the atmosphere of hostility and suspicion that quickly clouded the peace.
see debating the past pp.
americas postwar vision sources of soviet american tension at the heart of the rivalry between the united states and the soviet union in the 1940s was a fundamental difference in the ways the great powers envisioned the postwar world.
one vision first openly outlined in the atlantic charter in 1941 was of a world in which nations abandoned their traditional beliefs in military alliances and spheres of influence and governed their relations with one another through democratic processes with an international organization serving as the arbiter of disputes and the protector of every nations right of self determination.
that vision inspired in part by woodrow wilson appealed to many americans including franklin roosevelt.
the other vision was that of the soviet union and to some extent it gradually became clear of great britain.
both stalin and churchill had signed the atlantic charter.
but britain had always been uneasy about the implications of the self determination ideal for its own spheres of enormous empire.
and the soviet union was determined to create a secure influence sphere for itsejf in central and eastern europe as protection against possible future aggression from the west.
both churchill and stalin therefore tended to envision a postwar structure in which the great powers would control areas of strategic interest to them in which something vaguely similar to the traditional european balance of power would reemerge.
gradually the differences between these two positions would turn the peacemaking process into a form of warfare.
733 734 chapter 27 peace mongerim saluting the marshall plan in another age a chimney spouting smoke would evoke environmental damage.
but in the aftermath of world war ii the rebuilding of europe s industrial capacity was a great achievement helped by and celebrated by the united states and the marshall plan.
the granger collection new york mobilization at home that the united states had accepted a continuing commitment to the containment policy became clear in 1947 and 1948 through a series of measures designed to maintain american military power at near wartime levels.
in 1948 at president trumans request congress approved a new military draft and revived the selective service system.
in the meantime the united states having failed to reach agreement with the soviet union on international control of nuclear weapons redoubled its own efforts in atomic research elevating nuclear weaponry to a central place in its military arsenal.
the atomic energy commission established in 1946 became the supervisory body charged with overseeing all nuclear research both civilian and military.
and in 1950 the truman administration approved the development of the new hydrogen bomb a nuclear weapon far more powerful than the bombs the united states had used in 1945 the national security act of 1947 reshaped the nations major military and diplomatic institutions.
it created a new department of defense to oversee all branches of the armed services combining functions previously performed separately by the war and navy departments.
a national security council nsc operating out of the white house would oversee foreign and military policy.
a central intelligence agency cia would replace the wartime office of national security act of 1947 sixteen western european nations eagerly participated.
whatever domestic opposition to the plan there was in the united states largely vanished after a sudden coup in czechoslovakia in february 1948 that established a soviet dominated communist government there.
in april congress approved the creation of the economic cooperation administration the agency that would administer the marshall plan as it became known.
over the next three years the marshall plan channeled over 12 billion of american aid into europe helping to spark a substantial economic revival.
by the end of 1950 european industrial production had risen 64 percent communist strength in the member nations had declined and opportunities for american trade had revived.
surviving nuclear war preoccupation with the possibility of a nuclear war reached a fever pitch in the first years of the atomic era.
the federal civil defense agency which in 1950 issued these simple rules for civilians to follow in dealing with an atomic attack was one of many organizations attempting to convince the american public that a nuclear war was survivable.
federal civil defense agency survival secrets for atomic attacks always put first things first try to get shielded mf you have time get down in a basement or subway.
should you unexpectedly be caught ougof doors seek shelter alongside a building or jump in any handy ditch or gutter.
drop flat on ground or floor ta keep from being tossed about and to lessen the chances of being struck by falling and hying objects flatten out at the base of a wall ar at the bottom of a bank.
bury your face in your arms when you drop flat hide your eyes in the crook of your elbow.
that will protect your face from flash bums prevent temporary blindness and keep flying objects out of your eyes.
never lose your head the cold war 739 strategic services and would be responsible for collecting information through both open and covert methods as the cold war continued the cia would also engage secretly in political and military operations.
the national security act in other words gave the president expanded powers with which to pursue the nations international goals.
the road to nato at about the same time the united states was moving to strengthen the military capabilities of western europe.
convinced that a reconstructed germany was essential to the hopes of the west truman reached an agreement with england and france to merge the three western zones of occupation into a new west german republic which would include the former american british and french sectors of berlin even though that city lay well within the east german zone.
stalin responded quickly.
on june 24 1948 he imposed a tight blockade around the western sectors of berlin.
if germany was to be officially divided he was implying then the country s western government would have to abandon its outpost in the heart of the soviet controlled eastern zone.
truman refused to do so.
reykjavik iceland j faeroe is.
h atlantic oclan shetland is.
north ireland eat n britain.
amsterdam zlondon c 7 eth.
brussels denjmark.
j c copenhagen sweden finland f rway he sjnki oslo stockholm1 moscow berlin east warsaw soviet union lisbon a.
madrid spain morocco belg.
bnn germany poland paris lux.
france west prague germany c ch.
vienna switz austria budapest hunga romania 1o1 corsica fr.
h sardinia dt.
f italy rome sicily algeria fr.
belgrade bucharest 0q a l 4 sofia tirane albania greece j j athens j a finck sen ankara turkey syria hi malta br.
iran nato countries 1956 warsaw pact countries 1956 unaffiliated countries tunisia c crete n n s c a cyprus r br.
lebanon israel jordan iraq kuwait libya suez canal egypt saudi arabia toed europe after world war ii this map shows the sharp division that emerged in europe after world war ii between the area under the control of the soviet union and the a lied with the uni ed state in the east soviet control or i divitixrzxxlupying power a the end of the war.
eventually the american british and french sectors were combined to create west be a city rned by west germany but entirely surrounded by communist east germany.
ow did the west prevent east germany from absorbing west berlin.
740 chapter 3 and families remained until at least the mid eighteenth century the extraordinarily high mortality rate.
under those circumstances the traditional male centered family structure of england by which husbands and fathers exercised firm even dictatorial control over the lives of their wives and children was difficult to maintain.
because so few families remained intact for long rigid patterns of male authority were constantly undermined.
standards of sexual behavior were also more flexible in the south than they were in england or other parts of america.
because of the large numbers of indentured servants who were forbidden to marry until their terms of service expired premarital sexual relationships were frequent.
female servants who became pregnant before the expiration of their terms could expect harsh treatment heavy fines whippings if no one could pay the fines an extra year or two of service added to their contract and the loss of their children after weaning.
bastard children were themselves bound out as indentures at a very early age.
on the other hand a pregnant woman whose term of service expired before the birth of her child or whose partner was able to buy her remaining time from her master might expect to marry quickly.
over a third of chesapeake marriages occurred with the bride already pregnant.
women in the chesapeake could anticipate a life consumed with childbearing.
the average wife became pregnant every two years.
those who lived long enough bore an average of eight children apiece up to five of whom typically died in infancy or early childhood.
since childbirth was one of the most frequent causes of female death relatively few women survived to see all their children grow to maturity.
for all the hardships women encountered in the seventeenth century south they also enjoyed more power and greater independence in the south a greater level of freedom than women in other parts of america or than southern women in later years.
because men were plentiful and women scarce females had considerable latitude in choosing husbands.
they also often had no fathers or other male relatives nearby trying to control their choices.
because women generally married at a much younger age than men they often outlived their husbands even though female life expectancy was somewhat shorter than male.
widows were often left with several children and with responsibility for managing a farm or plantation a circumstance of enormous hardship but one that also gave them significant economic power.
widows seldom remained unmarried for long however.
those who had no grown sons to work the tobacco farms and plantations had particular need for male assistance and marriage was the surest way to secure it.
since many widows married men who were themselves widowers complex combinations of households were frequent.
with numerous stepchildren half brothers and half sisters living together in a single household women often had to play the role of peacemaker a role that may have further enhanced their authority within the family.
by the early eighteenth century the character of the chesapeake population was beginning to change and with it the nature of the typical family.
life expectancy was increasing indentured servitude was in decline and natural repro duction was becoming the principal source revival of r h h patriarchy w ite population increase.
the sex ratio was becoming more equal.
one result of these changes was that life for white people in the region became less perilous and less arduous.
another result was that guide to the seasons among their many purposes almanacs sought to help farmers predict weather and plan for the demands of changing seasons.
this illustration part of a calendar of farming images shows a man and a woman tending fields in july in preparation for the coming harvest.
american antiquarian society society and culture in provincial america 71 women lost some of the power that their small numbers had once given them.
as families grew more stable traditional patterns of male authority revived.
by the mid eighteenth century southern families were becoming highly patriarchal that is dominated by the male head of the family.
women and families in new england in new england where many more immigrants arrived with family members and where death rates declined quickly family structure was much more stable than it was in the chesapeake and hence much more traditional.
because the sex ratio was reasonably balanced most men could expect to marry.
women however remained in the minority and as in the chesapeake they married young began producing children early and continued to do so well into their thirties.
in contrast to the south however northern children were more likely to survive the average family raised six to eight children to maturity and families were more likely to remain intact.
fewer new england women became widows and those who did generally lost their husbands later in life.
hence women were less often cast in roles independent of their husbands.
young women moreover had less control over the conditions of marriage both because there were fewer unmarried men vying for them and because their fathers were more often alive and able to exercise control over their choice of husbands.
among other things increased longevity meant that unlike in the chesapeake where three fourths of all children lost at least one parent before the age of twenty one white parents in new england usually lived to see their children and even their grandchildren grow to maturity.
still the lives of most new england women were nearly as consumed by childbearing and child rearing as those of women in the chesapeake.
even women who lived into their sixties spent the majority of their mature years with young chil dren in the home.
the longer lives in new england also meant that parents continued to control their children far longer than did parents in the south.
although they were less likely than parents in england to arrange marriages for their children few sons and daughters could choose spouses entirely independent of their parents wishes.
men usually depended on their fathers for land generally a prerequisite for beginning families of their own.
women needed dowries from their parents if they were to attract desirable husbands.
stricter parental supervision of children meant too that fewer women became pregnant before marriage than in the south although even in puritan new england the premarital pregnancy rate was not insubstantial as high as 20 percent in some communities.
puritanism placed a high value on the family which was the principal economic and religious unit within every com munity.
at the same time however p p v purinism enforced the dea o need absolute male authority and the assumption of female weakness and inferiority.
women were life spans expected to be modest and submissive.
such popular girls names as prudence patience chastity and comfort suggest something about puritan expectations of female behavior.
a wife was expected to devote herself to serving the needs of her husband and household.
the beginnings of slavery in british america almost from the beginning of european settlement in north america there was a demand for african workers to supplement the always scarce southern labor supply.
the demand grew rapidly once tobacco cultivation became a staple of the chesapeake economy.
but the supply of african laborers was limited during much of the seventeenth century because the atlantic slave trade did not at first serve the english colonies in america.
portuguese slavers who had dominated the trade since the sixteenth century shipped captive men and women from the west coast of africa to the new european colonies in south america and the caribbean.
gradually dutch and french navigators joined the slave trade.
but a substantial commerce in slaves grew up within the americas particularly between the caribbean islands and the southern colonies of british america.
by the late seventeenth century the supply of african workers in north america was becoming plentiful.
as the commerce in slaves grew more extensive and sophisticated it also grew more horrible.
before it ended in the nineteenth century it was responsible for the forced immigration of as many as 11 million africans to the new world.
until the late eighteenth century the number of african immigrants to the middle americas was higher than that of passage europeans.
native african chieftains captured members of enemy tribes in battle tied them together in long lines or coffles and sold them in the flourishing slave marts on the african coast.
then after some haggling on the docks between the european traders and the african suppliers the terrified victims were packed into the dark filthy holds of ships for the horrors of the mid dle passage the journey to america.
for weeks sometimes even months the african prisoners remained chained in the bowels of the slave ships.
conditions varied from one ship to another.
some captains took care to see that their potentially valuable cargo remained reasonably healthy.
others accepted the deaths of numerous africans as inevitable and tried to cram as many as possible into their ships to ensure that enough would survive to yield a profit at journeys end.
on such ships the african prisoners were sometimes packed together in such close quarters that they were unable to stand hardly able to breathe.
some ships supplied them with only minimal food and water.
women were often victims of rape and other sexual abuse.
those who died en route were simply thrown overboard.
upon arrival in the new world slaves were auctioned off to white landowners and transported frightened and bewildered to their new homes.
debating the past the origins of slavery m t t c debate among historians over how and why white americans created a system of slave x h u labor in the seventeenth century and how and why they determined that people of african descent and no others should populate that system has been a long and unusually heated one.
at its center is the question of whether slavery was a result of white racism or whether slavery created racism.
in 1950 oscar and mary handlin published an influential article origins of the southern labor system comparing slavery to other systems of unfreedom in the colonies.
what differentiated slavery from other conditions of servitude they argued was that it was restricted to people of african descent it was permanent and it passed from one generation to the next.
the unique characteristics of slavery the handlins maintained were part of an effort by colonial legislatures to increase the available labor force.
white laborers needed an incentive to come to america black laborers forcibly imported from africa did not.
the distinction between the conditions of white workers and the conditions of black workers was therefore based on legal and economic motives not on racism.
racism emerged to justify slavery it did not cause slavery.
winthrop d jordan was one of a number of historians who later challenged the handlins thesis and argued that white racism more than economic interests produced african slavery.
in white over black 1968 and other works jordan argued that europeans had long viewed people of color and black africans in particular as inferior beings appropriate for serving whites.
those attitudes migrated with white europeans to the new world and white racism shaped the treatment of africans in america and the nature of the slave labor system from the beginning.
george fredrickson echoed jordan s emphasis on the importance of racism as an independent factor reinforcing slavery but unlike jordan he argued that racism did not precede slavery.
the treatment of blacks he wrote engendered a cultural and psycho social racism that after a certain point took on a life of its own racism although the child of slavery not only outlived its parent but grew stronger and more independent after slavery s demise.
in black majority 1974 a study of seventeenth century south carolina peter wood moved the debate away from racism and back toward social and economic conditions.
wood demonstrated that blacks and whites often worked together on relatively equal terms in the early years of settlement.
but as rice cultivation expanded finding white laborers willing to do the arduous work became more difficult.
the forcible importation of african workers and the creation of a system of permanent bondage was a response to a growing demand for labor and to fears among whites that without slavery a black labor force would be difficult to control.
edmund morgan argued similarly in american slavery american freedom 1975 that the southern labor system was at first relatively flexible and later grew more rigid.
in colonial virginia he claimed white settlers did not at first intend to create a system of permanent bondage.
but as the tobacco economy grew and created a high demand for cheap labor white landowners began to feel uneasy about their dependence on a large group of dependent white workers since such workers were difficult to recruit and control.
thus slavery was less a result of racism than of the desire of white landowners to find a reliable and stable labor force.
in the making of new world slavery 1996 robin blackburn argued that while race was a factor in allowing whites to justify to themselves the enslavement of africans the real reasons for slavery were hardheaded economic decisions by ambitious entrepreneurs who realized early on that a slave labor system in the labor intensive agricultural world of the american south and the caribbean was more profitable than a free labor system.
slavery served the interests of a powerful combination of groups planters merchants governments industrialists and consumers.
race may have been a rationale for slavery allowing planters and traders to justify to themselves the terrible human costs of the system.
but the most important reason for the system was not just racism but the pursuit of profit and the success of the system in producing it.
blackburn concluded that slavery was not an antiquated remnant of an older world but rather a recognizably modern labor system that however ugly served the needs of an emerging market economy.
understand analyze and evaluate 1 what do historians say is the relationship between racism and slavery.
2 what are the economic arguments put forward by historians to explain the system of slave labor that developed in america.
do these arguments account fully for the development of slavery.
3 why was slavery more successful than other labor systems in meeting the labor needs of colonial americas market economy.
the first african laborers arrived in english north america before 1620 and as english seamen began to establish themselves in the slave trade the flow of africans to the colonies gradually increased.
but north america was always a much less important market for africans than were other parts of the new world especially the caribbean islands and brazil whose labor intensive sugar economies created an especially large demand for slaves.
less than 5 percent of the africans imported to the americas went directly to the english colonies on the mainland.
most blacks who ended up in what became the united states spent time first in the west indies.
not until the 1670s did traders start importing blacks directly from africa to north america.
even then however the flow remained small for a time mainly because a single group the royal african company of england maintained a monopoly on trade in the mainland colonies and managed as a result to keep prices high and supplies low.
v cunntig uuil m me nistory oi the african population in north america came in the mid 1690s when the roval african companys monopoly was finally broken.
with the trade now opened to english and colonial merchants on a competitive basis prices fell and the number of africans arriving in north america rapidly increased.
by the end of the seventeenth cen growing tury only about one in ten of the residents slave f the colonies were africans about 25 06b population in all.
but because africans were so heavily concentrated in a few southern colo nies they were already beginning to outnumber europeans in some areas.
the high ratio of men to women among african immigrants there were perhaps two males to one female in most areas retarded the natural increase of the black population.
but in the chesapeake at least more new slaves were being born by 1700 than were being imported from africa.
in south carolina by contrast the difficult conditions of rice cultivation and the high death rates of those who worked in the rice fields ensured that the black population would barely be able to sustain itself through natural increase until much later.
between 1700 and 1760 the number of africans in the colonies increased tenfold to about a quarter of a million.
a relatively small number 16 000 in 1763 lived in new england there were slightly more 29 000 in the middle colonies.
the vast majority however continued to live in the south.
by then the flow of free white laborers to that region had all but stopped and africans had become securely established as the basis of the southern workforce.
it was not entirely clear at first that the status of african laborers in america would be fundamentally different from that of white indentured servants.
in the rugged conditions of the seventeenth century south it was often difficult for europeans and africans to maintain strictly separate roles.
in uncertain status some areas south carolina for example where the number of african arrivals swelled more quickly than anywhere else whites and blacks lived and worked together for a time on terms of relative equality.
some blacks were treated much like white hired servants and some were freed after a fixed term of servitude.
a few africans themselves became land owners and some apparently owned slaves of their own.
by the early eighteenth century however a rigid distinction had become established between black and white.
see debating the past above.
masters were contractually obliged to free white servants after a fixed term of servitude.
there was no such necessity to free black workers and the assumption slowly spread that blacks would remain in service permanently.
another incentive for making the status of africans rigid was that the children of slaves provided white landowners with a self perpetuating labor force.
72 73 74 chapter 14 key terms people places eyents significant events abraham lincoln 375 antietam 391 jefferson davis 378 march to the sea 396 i860 appomattox court morrill land grant south carolina secedes from house 397 act 368 union first battle of bull robert e lee 382 run 387 shiloh 388 clara barton 378 thomas stonewall emancipation jackson 389 proclamation 373 ulysses s grant 381 fort sumter 366 u s sanitary george b mcclellan 371 commission 377 1862 gettysburg 393 william tecumseh battles of shiloh second bull greenbacks 369 sherman 394 run antietam fredericksburg homestead act of 1862 368 robert e lee named commander of confederate armies recall and reflect homestead act and morrill land grant act passed confederacy enacts military draft 1861 confederate states of america formed jefferson davis named president of confederacy conflict at fort sumter south carolina april 12 14 begins civil war first battle of bull run 1 assess the advantages of the north and those of the south at the beginning of the civil war.
how did the advantages of each side change over the course of the war.
2 how did the confederate government differ from the federal government of the united states.
3 how did the civil war affect the west.
4 how did the war affect the lives of women in the north and in the south.
5 compare lincoln and davis as heads of government and commanders in chief 6 why did lincoln issue the emancipation proclamation and what were its effects.
1864 sherman captures atlanta september 2 grant named commander of union armies battle of the wilderness may 5 7 sherman s march to the sea begins lincoln reelected president 1863 battles of chancellorsville gettysburg chattanooga lincoln issues emancipation proclamation january 1 vicksburg surrenders july 4 union enacts military draft antidraft riots break out in new york city west virginia admitted to union 1865 lee surrenders to grant at appomattox court house april 9 thirteenth amendment abolishing slavery ratified o reconstruction io and the new south looking ahead t what were the various plans for reconstruction proposed by lincoln johnson and congress.
which plan was enacted and w y.
2 what were the effects of reconstruction for blacks and whites in the south.
3 what were the political achievements and failures of the grant administration.
the genius of freedom this 1874 lithograph portrays a series of important moments in the history of african americans in the south during reconstruction among them the participation of black soldiers in the civil war a speech by a black representative in the north carolina legislature and the movement of african american workers from slavery into a system of free labor.
it also portrays some of the white leaders among them lincoln and charles sumner who had promoted the cause of the freedmen.
the library of congress lc usz62 2247 setting the stage few periods in the history of the united states have produced as much bitterness or created such enduring controversy as the era of reconstruction the years following the civil war when americans attempted to reunite their shattered nation.
to many white southerners reconstruction was a destructive experience a time when vindictive northerners inflicted humiliation and revenge on the prostrate south and unnecessarily delayed a genuine reunion of the sections.
northern defenders of reconstruction in contrast argued that their policies and forceful federal intervention were the only way to keep unrepentant confederates from restoring southern society as it had been before the war.
to most african americans at the time and to many people of all races since reconstruction was notable for other reasons.
neither a vicious tyranny as white southerners charged nor a thoroughgoing reform as many northerners claimed it was rather a small but important first step in the effort by former slaves to secure civil rights and economic power.
reconstruction did not provide african americans with either the legal protections or the material resources to assure them real equality.
when it came to an end finally in the late 1870s the freed slaves found themselves abandoned by the federal government to face a system of economic peonage and legal subordination.
yet for all its shortcomings reconstruction did help african americans create institutions and legal precedents that in the twentieth century would become the basis for their efforts to win freedom and equality.
the problems of peacemaking in 1865 as it became clear that the war was almost over no one in washington had yet formed a plan for what would happen to the defeated south.
lincoln could not negotiate a treaty with the confederate government he continued to insist that the confederate government had no legal right to exist.
yet neither could he simply readmit the southern states into the union as if nothing had happened.
devastated south the aftermath of war and emancipation the civil war was a catastrophe for the south with no parallel in americas experience as a nation.
towns had been gutted plantations burned fields neglected bridges and railroads destroyed.
the many white southerners stripped of their slaves through emancipation and stripped of the capital they had invested in now worthless confederate bonds and currency had almost no personal property.
many families had to rebuild their fortunes without the help of adult males massive numbers of whom had died in the war.
some white southerners faced starvation and homelessness.
the more than 258 000 confederate soldiers who had died in the war constituted over 20 percent of the adult white male population of the region thousands more returned home wounded or sick.
almost all surviving white southerners had lost people close to them in the fighting.
a cult myth of the f ritualized mourning developed throughout the region in the late 1860s lost cause particularly among white women many of whom wore mourning clothes and jewelry for two years or longer.
at the same time white southerners began to romanticize the lost cause and its leaders and to look back nostalgically at the south as it had existed before the terrible disruptions of war.
such confederate heroes as robert e lee stonewall jackson and later jefferson davis were treated with extraordinary reverence almost as religious figures.
communities throughout the south built elaborate monuments in town squares to commemorate their war dead.
the tremendous sense of loss that pervaded the white south reinforced the determination of many whites to protect what remained of their now vanished world.
if conditions were bad for many southern whites they were worse for most southern blacks the 4 million men and women emerging from bondage.
some of them had also seen service during he war as servants to confederate officers or as teamsters and laborers for the southern armies.
reconstruction and the new south 401 iichmond 1865 by the time union forces captured richmond in early 1865 the confederate capital had been under siege for months and much of the city lay in ruins as this photograph eveals.
on april 4 president lincoln accompanied by his son tad visited richmond.
as he walked through the streets of the shattered city hundreds of former slaves emerged from the rubble to ratch him pass.
no triumphal march of a conqueror could have equalled in moral sublimity the humble manner in which he entered richmond a black soldier serving with the union army wrote.
it tas a great deliverer among the delivered.
no wonder tears came to his eyes.
the library of congress nearly 200 000 had fought for the union and 38 000 had died.
others had worked as spies or scouts for union forces in the outh.
many more had flocked to the union lines to escape hvery.
even before emancipation thousands of slaves in nany parts of the south had taken advantage of wartime dis uptions to leave their owners and move off in search of freedom.
as soon as the war ended hundreds of thousands more ormer slaves young and old healthy and sick left their plan ations.
some went in search of family members who had been old by their former masters.
but many others had nowhere to o.
some trudged to the nearest town or city roamed the countryside camping at night on the bare ground or gathered around union occupation forces hoping for assistance.
virtually none owned any land or property.
most had no possessions except the clothes they wore.
in 1865 in short southern society was in vast disarray.
blacks and whites men and women faced a future of great uncertainty.
yet all southerners faced this future with some very clear aspirations.
for both blacks and whites reconstruction became a struggle to define the meaning of freedom.
but the former slaves and the defeated whites had very different conceptions of what freedom meant.
competing notions of freedom for african americans freedom meant above all an end to slavery and to all the injustices and humiliation they associated with it.
but it also meant the acquisition of rights and protections that would allow them to live as free men and women in the same way white people did.
if i cannot do like a white man one african american man told his former master wi am not free african americans differed with one another on how to achieve that freedom.
some demanded a redistribution of economic resources especially land because as a convention of alabama freedmen put it in a formal resolution the freedom for property which they hold was nearly all the ex slaves earned by the sweat of our brows others asked simply for legal equality confident that given the same opportunities as white citizens they 402.
chapter 3 perform it.
as a result planters in south carolina and georgia were even more dependent than those elsewhere on african slaves.
it was not only because africans could be compelled to perform difficult work that whites found them so valuable.
it was also because they were much better at it.
they showed from the beginning a greater resistance to malaria and other local diseases although the impact of disease on african workers was by no means inconsiderable.
and they proved more adept at the basic agricultural tasks required in part because some of them had come from rice producing regions of west africa.
in the early 1740s another staple crop contributed to the south carolina economy indigo.
eliza lucas a young antiguan woman who managed her family s north american plantations experimented with cultivating the west indian plant which was the source of a blue dye in great demand in europe on the mainland.
she discovered that it could grow on the high ground indigo out carolina which was unsuitable for rice planting and that its harvest came while the rice was still growing.
indigo became an important complement to rice and a popular import in england.
because of the souths early dependence on large scale cash crops the southern colonies developed less of a commercial or industrial economy than the colonies of the north.
the trading in tobacco and rice was handled largely by merchants based in london and later in the northern colonies.
few cities of more than modest size developed in the south.
northern economic and technological life more diverse economy in the north in the north agriculture was the single most important part of the economy.
but unlike in the south the northern colonies were less dominated by farming.
the northern economy was more diverse than the economy in the south in part because conditions for farming were less favorable there.
in northern new england in particular colder weather and hard rocky soil made it difficult for colonists to develop the kind of large scale commercial farming system that southerners were creating.
conditions for agriculture were better in southern new england and the middle colonies where the soil was fertile and the weather more temperate.
new york pennsylvania and the connecticut river valley were the chief suppliers of wheat to much of new england and to parts of the south.
even there however a substantial commercial economy emerged alongside the agricultural one.
r r k th sl 1 coliclilorooy i almost every colonist engaged in a certain amount of industry at home.
occasionally these home industries provided families with surplus goods they could trade or sell.
beyond these domestic efforts craftsmen and artisans established themselves in colonial towns as cobblers blacksmiths rifle makers cabinetmakers silversmiths and printers.
in some areas entrepreneurs harnessed water power to run small mills for grinding grain processing cloth or milling lumber.
and in several places large scale shipbuilding operations began to flourish.
the first effort to establish a significant metals industry in the colonies was an ironworks established in saugus massachusetts in the 1640s after iron ore deposits had been saugus discovered in the region.
iron technology ironworks was already advancing rapidly in england and the colonists attempted to transfer those skills to america.
the saugus works used water power to drive a bellows which controlled the heat in a charcoal furnace.
as the ore melted it trickled down into molds or was society and culture in provincial america 79 taken in the form of simple sow bars to a forge to be shaped into such marketable objects as plows hoes axes pots and other tools.
the saugus works was a technological success indeed it could boast technological capabilities equal to those of any ironworks in europe at the time.
but it was a financial failure.
it began operations in 1646 in 1668 its financial problems forced it to close its doors.
metalworks however gradually became an important part of the colonial economy.
the largest industrial enterprise anywhere in english north america was the ironworks of the german ironmaster peter hasenclever in northern new jersey.
founded in 1764 with british capital it employed several hundred laborers many of them imported from ironworks in germany.
there were other smaller ironmaking enterprises in every northern colony with particular concentrations in massachusetts new jersey and pennsylvania and there were ironworks as well in several southern colonies.
even so these and other growing industries did not become the basis for the kind of explosive industrial growth that great britain commerce in new england this late eighteenth century painting of the home wharves countinghouse and fleet of a prosperous new england.
commerce was expanding even in such relatively small places as duxbury massachusetts.
the owner joshua winsor was is erman gives some in i painting evidently an effort to celebrate winsors great material success and record it for posterity was by his active in the mackerel and cod risning y h r r p l cernon idi onni pqu son in law dr rufus hathaway.
i collection american folk art museum new york.
promised gift of ralph esmenan.
pl 2001 53 80 chapter 3 population thousands 575 1620 1640 1660 1680 1700 1720 1740 1760 1780 year the african population of the british colonies 1620 1780 from tiny beginnings in the seventeenth century the african population of the british colonies grew rapidly in the eighteenth century.
the growth of slavery was a result of both supply a readily available population of african workers in the caribbean islands and demand the growth of tobacco rice and cotton cultivation in larger areas of the south.
the slave population in the colonies also increased naturally in this period at a far greater rate than in the past largely because living conditions for african workers improved.
why did slaveowners invest in better conditions for their slaves.
in ulster and insisted on conformity with the anglican church.
after 1710 moreover the long term leases of many scots irish expired english landlords doubled and even tripled the rents.
thousands of tenants embarked for america.
often coldly received at the colonial ports many of the scots irish pushed out to the edges of european settlement.
there they occupied land without much regard for who actually claimed to own it whether absentee whites indians or the colonial governments.
they were as ruthless in their displacement and the pennsylvania dutch this folk art painted dish illustrates the traditional dress of the pennsylvania dutch.
the pennsylvania dutch were in fact german immigrants known to their neighbors as dutch because that was how their native word for their nationality deutsch sounded to most english speakers.
the granger collection new york scots irish suppression of the indians as they had been with the native irish catholics.
immigrants from scotland and southern ireland added other elements to the colonial population in the eighteenth century.
scottish highlanders some of them roman catholics who had been defeated in rebellions in 1715 and 1745 immigrated into several colonies north carolina above all.
presbyterian lowlanders faced in scotland with high rents in the country and unemployment in the towns left for america in large numbers shortly before the american revolution joining earlier groups of scots who had arrived in the late seventeenth century.
they became a significant influence in new jersey and pennsylvania and helped establish presbyterianism as an important religion in those colonies.
the catholic irish migrated steadily over a long period and by the time of the revolution they were almost as numerous as the scots although less conspicuous.
many of them had by then abandoned their roman catholic religion and with it much of their ethnic identity.
continuing immigration and natural increase contributed to a rapid population growth in the colonies in the eighteenth century.
in 1700 the non indian population of the colonies totaled less than 250 000 by 1775 it was over 2 million a nearly tenfold increase.
throughout the colonial period the non indian population nearly doubled every twenty five years.
the colonial economies to those who remained in europe and even to some who settled in north america the english colonies often appeared so small and isolated as to seem virtually at the end of the world.
but from the beginning almost all the english colonies were commercial ventures and were tied in crucial ways to other economies.
they developed substantial trade with the native population of north america with the french settlers to the north and to a lesser extent with spanish colonists to the south and west.
and over time they developed an even more substantial trade within the growing atlantic economy of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries of which they became a critical part.
american colonists engaged in a wide range of economic pursuits.
but except for a few areas in the west where the small white society and culture in provincial america 77 populations subsisted largely on the fur and skin trade with the indians farming dominated all areas of european and african settlement throughout the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries.
some farmers engaged in simple subsistence agriculture but whenever possible american farmers attempted to grow crops for the local intercolonial and export markets.
the southern economy in the chesapeake region tobacco quickly became the basis of the economy.
a strong european demand for the crop enabled tobacco sme planters to row enormously wealthy.
and at times allowed the region as a whole to prosper.
but production frequently exceeded demand and as a result the price of tobacco periodically suffered severe declines.
the first major bust in the tobacco economy occurred in 1640 and the boom and bust pattern continued throughout the colonial period and beyond.
growing more tobacco only made the problem of overproduction worse but chesapeake farmers never understood that.
those planters who could afford to do so expanded their landholdings enlarged their fields and acquired additional laborers.
after 1700 tobacco plantations employing several dozen slaves or more were common.
the staple of the economies of south carolina and georgia was rice.
by building dams and dikes along the many tidal rivers farmers managed to create rice paddies that could be flooded and then drained.
rice cultivation was arduous work performed standing knee deep in the mud of malarial swamps under a blazing sun surrounded by insects.
it was a task so difficult and unhealthful that white laborers generally refused to immigrant groups in colonial america 1760 even though the entire atlantic seaboard of what is now the united states had become a series of british colonies by 1760 the population consisted of people from many nations.
as this map reveals english settlers dominated most of the regions of north america.
but note the large areas of german settlement in the western chesapeake and pennsylvania the swath of dutch settlement in new york and new jersey the scots irish areas in the western regions of the south and the large areas in which africans were becoming the majority of the population even if subjugated by the white minority.
what aspects of the history of these colonies help explain their ethnic composition.
atlantic ocean sout carols wilmington g apeof charles town savannah immigrant groups english scots irish german dutch i african 200 400 km 78 chapter 27 dalton trumbo screenwriter dalton trumbo was a member of the hollywood ten he refused to testify before the house un american activities committee in its investigation of communist influences in hollywood.
as a result trumbo was blacklisted and could not find work.
while blacklisted trumbo won two academy awards one was given to a front writer who pretended to be the author of the script and the other was awarded to robert rich trumbo s pseudonym.
bettmann corbis committee huac held widely publicized investigations to prove that under democratic rule the government had tolerated if not actually encouraged communist subversion.
the committee turned first to the movie industry arguing that communists had infiltrated hollywood.
writers and producers some of them former communists were called to testify and when several of them the hollywood ten refused to answer questions about their own political beliefs and those of their colleagues they were jailed for contempt.
some writers were barred from employment in the movie industry when hollywood attempting to protect its public image adopted a blacklist of those of suspicious loyalty more alarming to much of the public was huacs investigation into charges of disloyalty leveled against a former high ranking member of the state department alger hiss.
in 1948 whittaker chambers a self avowed former communist agent who had turned vehemently against the party and become an editor at time magazine told the committee that alger hiss hiss passe classified state department documents through him to the soviet union in 1937 and 1938 when hiss sued him for slander chambers produced microfilms of the documents called the pumpkin papers because chambers had kept them hidden in a pumpkin in his garden.
hiss could not be tried for espionage because of the statute of limitations a law that protects individuals from prosecution for most crimes after seven years have passed.
but largely because of the relentless efforts of richard m nixon a freshman republican congressman from california and a member of huac hiss was convicted of perjury and served several years in prison.
the hiss case not only discredited a prominent young diplomat it also cast suspicion on a generation of liberal democrats and made it possible for many americans to believe that communists had actually infiltrated the government.
the federal loyalty program and the rosenberg case rartiy to protect itseir against republican encourage support for the presidents foreign policy initiatives the truman administration in 1947 initiated a widely publicized program to review the loyalty of federal employees.
in august 1950 the president authorized sensitive agencies to fire people deemed bad security risks by 1951 more than 2 000 government employees had resigned under pressure and 212 had been dismissed.
the employee loyalty program established a widely cited list of supposedly subversive organizations.
the director of the federal bureau of investigation fbi j edgar hoover investigated and harassed alleged radicals.
in 1950 congress passed the mccarran internal security act requiring all communist organizations to register with the government.
truman vetoed the bill.
congress easily overrode his veto.
the successful soviet detonation of a nuclear weapon in 1949 convinced many people that there had been a conspiracy to pass american atomic secrets to the russians.
in 1950 klaus fuchs a young british scientist seemed to confirm those fears when he testified that he had delivered to the russians details of the manufacture of the bomb.
the case ultimately settled on an obscure new york couple julius and ethel rosenberg members of the communist party whom the federal government claimed had been the masterminds of the mccarran internal security act the cold war 749 the conspiracy.
the case against them rested in large part on testimony by ethels brother david greenglass a machinist who had worked on the manhattan project.
greenglass admitted to channeling secret information to the soviet union through other agents including fuchs.
his sister and brother in law had he claimed planned and orchestrated the espionage.
the rosenbergs were convicted and on april 5 1951 sentenced to death.
after two years of appeals and protests by sympathizers they died in the electric chair on june 19 1953 au these factors the huac investigations the hiss trial the loyalty investigations the mccarran act the rosenberg case helped to intensify public fear of communist subversion.
by the early 1950s the fear seemed to have gripped much of the country.
state and local governments the judiciary schools and universities labor unions all sought to purge themselves anticommunist of real or imained subversives.
a perva hysteria sive ear settled on the country not only the fear of communist infiltration but also the fear of being suspected of communist subversion.
it was a climate that made possible the rise of an extraordinary public figure whose behavior at any other time might have been dismissed as preposterous.
mccarthyism mccarthyisms appeal joseph mccarthy was a relatively undistinguished first term republican senator from wisconsin when in february 1950 he suddenly burst into national prominence.
in the midst of a speech in wheeling west virginia he raised a sheet of paper and claimed to hold in my hand a list of 205 known communists currently working in the u s state department.
no person of comparable stature had ever made so bold a charge against the federal government and in the weeks to come as mccarthy repeated and expanded his accusations he emerged as the nations most prominent leader of the crusade against domestic subversion.
within weeks of his charges against the state department mccarthy was leveling accusations at other agencies.
after 1952 with the republicans in control of the senate and mccarthy the chairman of a special subcommittee he conducted highly publicized investigations of subversion in many areas of the government.
his ambitious assistants roy cohn and david schine sauntered arrogantly through federal offices and american embassies overseas looking for evidence of communist influence.
one hapless government official after another appeared before mccarthys subcommittee where the senator belligerently and often cruelly badgered witnesses and destroyed public careers.
mccarthy never produced solid evidence of actual communist subversion.
but a growing constituency adored him nevertheless for his coarse fearless assaults on a government establishment that many americans considered arrogant elitist even traitorous.
republicans in particular rallied to his claims that the democrats had been responsible for twenty years of treason that only a change of parties could rid the country of subversion.
mccarthy in short provided his followers with an issue into which they could channel a wide range of resentments fear of communism animosity toward the countrys eastern establishment and frustrated partisan ambitions.
for a time mccarthy intimidated all but a few people from opposing him.
even the highly popular dwight d eisenhower running for president in 1952 did not speak out against him although he disliked mccarthys tactics and was outraged at mccarthys attacks on general george marshall.
the republican revival public frustration over the stalemate in korea and popular fears of internal subversion combined to make 1952 a bad year for the democratic party.
truman whose popularity had greatly diminished wisely decided not to run again.
the party united instead behind governor adlai e stevenson of illinois whose dignity wit and eloquence made him a beloved figure to many liberals and intellectuals.
but republicans charged that stevenson lacked the strength or the will to combat communism sufficiently.
mccarthy described him as soft and took delight in deliberately confusing him with alger hiss.
stevensons greatest problem however was the republican candidate opposing him.
rejecting the efforts of conservatives to nominate robert taft or douglas macarthur the republicans turned to a man who had no previous identifi dwight cation with the party general dwight eisenhower d eisenhower military hero commander of nato president of columbia university in new york.
eisenhower won nomination on the first ballot.
he chose as his running mate the young california senator who had gained national prominence through his crusade against alger hiss richard m nixon.
eisenhower and nixon were a powerful combination in the autumn campaign.
while eisenhower attracted support through his geniality and his statesmanlike pledges to settle the korean conflict at one point dramatically promising to go to korea himself nixon effectively exploited the issue of communist subversion.
after surviving early accusations of financial improprieties which he effectively neutralized in a famous television address the checkers speech nixon went on to launch harsh attacks on democratic cowardice appeasement and treason eisenhower won by both a popular and electoral landslide 55 percent of the popular vote to stevensons 44 percent 442 electoral votes to stevensons 89 republicans gained control of both houses of congress for only the second time in two decades.
the election of 1952 ended twenty years of democratic government.
and while it might not have seemed so at the time it also signaled the end of some of the worst turbulence of the postwar era.
mccarthyism tit y y irj bt the american civil liberties union warned in the early 1950s at the peak of vv il jut in the anticommunist fervor that is now known as mccarthyism that the threat to civil liberties today is the most serious in the history of our country it was expressing a view with which many americans wholeheartedly agreed.
but while many americans accept that there were unusually powerful challenges to freedom of speech and association in the late 1940s and early 1950s there is wide disagreement about the causes and meaning of those challenges.
the simplest argument and one that continues to attract scholarly support is that the postwar red scare expressed real and legitimate concerns about communist subversion in the united states.
william o neill in a better world 1982 and richard gid powers in not without honor 1995 have both argued that anticommunism was a serious intelligent and patriotic movement despite its excesses.
the american communist party according to this view was an agent of stalin and the soviet union within the united states actively engaged in espionage and subversion.
the effort to root communists out of public life was both understandable and justifiable and the hysteria it sometimes produced was an unhappy but predictable by product of an essentially rational and justifiable effort.
anticommunism powers wrote expressed the essential american determination to stand against attacks on human freedom and foster the growth of democracy throughout the world to superimpose on this rich history the cartoon features of joe mccarthy is to reject history for the easy comforts of moralism.
most interpretations however have been much less charitable.
in the 1950s in the midst of the red scare an influential group of historians and social scientists began to portray the anticommunist fervor of their time as an expression of social maladjustment an argument perhaps rare book and special collections division the library of congress looking back even during world war ii when the united states and the soviet union were allies it was evident to leaders in both nations that america and russia had quite different visions of what the postwar world should look like.
very quickly after the war ended those differences became visible to almost everyone and the once fruitful relationship between the worlds two greatest powers quickly soured.
americans came to believe that the soviet union was an expansionist tyranny little different from hitlers germany that josef stalin the soviet leader was bent on world conquest.
soviets came to believe that the united states was trying to protect its own dominance in the world by encircling the soviet union and trying to limit its ability to operate as a great power.
the result of these tensions was what became known by the end of the 1940s as the cold war.
actual conflicts in the early years of the cold war were relatively few.
instead the united states engaged in a series of policies designed to prevent both war and soviet aggression.
it helped rebuild the shattered nations of western europe with substantial economic aid through the marshall plan to stabilize those nations and prevent them from becoming communist.
america announced a new foreign policy known as containment that committed it to an effort to keep the soviet union from expanding its influence further into the world.
the united states and western europe formed a strong and enduring alliance nato to defend europe against possible soviet advances.
in 1950 however the armed forces of communist north korea launched an invasion of the noncommunist south and to most americans including most importantly president truman the conflict quickly came to be seen as a test of american resolve in the cold war.
the korean war was long costly and unpopular with many military setbacks and frustrations.
in the end however the united states working through the united nations managed to drive the north koreans out of the south and stabilize the original division of the peninsula.
750 most closely associated with richard hofstadter s essay the paranoid style in american politics.
there was they argued no logical connection between the modest power of actual communists in the united states and the anticommunist hysteria.
the fear of communism they maintained was rooted in social and cultural anxieties that had only an indirect connection with the political world.
extreme anticommunism they claimed was something close to a pathology it expressed fear of and alienation from the modern world.
a person afflicted with the paranoid style hofstadter wrote believes himself to be living in a world in which he is spied upon plotted against betrayed and very likely destined for total ruin.
he feels that his liberties have been arbitrarily and outrageously invaded.
he is opposed to almost everything that has happened in american politics in the past twenty years.
other scholars writing not long after the decline of mccarthyism rejected the sociocultural argument but shared the belief that the crusade against subversion was a distortion of normal public life they saw the anticommunist crusade as an example of party politics run amok.
richard freeland in the truman doctrine and the origins of mccarthyism 1971 argued that the democrats began the effort to purge the government of radicals to protect themselves from attacks by the republicans.
nelson polsby robert griffith and others have noted how republicans seized on the issue of communism in government in the late 1940s to reverse their nearly twenty year exclusion from power.
with each party trying to outdo the other in its effort to demonstrate its anticommunist credentials it was hardly surprising that the crusade reached extraordinarily intense proportions.
still other historians have emphasized the role of powerful government officials and agencies with a strong commitment to anticommunism most notably j edgar hoover and the fbi.
athan theoharis and kenneth o reilly introduced the idea of an anticommunist bureaucracy in work published in the 1970s and 1980s.
ellen schrecker in many are the crimes 1998 argues that the red scare was at its heart directed largely against the left and that it was orchestrated by an interlocking cluster of official agencies with a deep commitment to the project.
several scholars finally have presented an argument that does not so much challenge other interpretations as complement them.
anticommunist zealots were not alone to blame for the excesses of mccarthyism they argue.
it was also the fault of liberals in politics in academia and perhaps above all in the media who were so intimidated by the political climate or so imprisoned within the conventions of their professions that they found themselves unable to respond effectively to the distortions and excesses they recognized around them.
understand analyze and evaluate 1 why did the american public feel so threatened by communism.
who exploited the public s fears and why.
2 was the public reaction to the red scare a logical response or disproportionate to the actual threat posed by communism.
3 how were party politics and mccarthyism connected.
do you find elements similar to mccarthyism in politics today.
the korean war had other effects on the domestic life of the united states.
it hardened american foreign policy into a much more rigidly anticommunist form.
it undermined the truman administration and the democratic party and helped strengthen conservatives and republicans.
it greatly strengthened an already powerful crusade against communists and those believed to be communists within the united states a crusade often known as mccarthyism because of the notoriety of senator joseph mccarthy of wisconsin the most celebrated leader of the effort.
america after world war ii was indisputably the wealthiest and most powerful nation in the world.
but in the harsh climate of the cold war neither wealth nor power could obscure deep anxieties and bitter divisions.
key terms people places events alger hiss 747 atlantic charter 733 containment 736 douglas macarthur 736 fair deal 742 george f kennan 737 house un american activities committee huac 747 joseph mccarthy 749 julius and ethel rosenberg 748 mao zedong 736 marshall plan 737 mccarthyism 749 national security act 738 north atlantic treaty organization nato 739 nsc 68 740 syngman rhee 745 taft hartley act 742 thomas e dewey 743 truman doctrine 737 united nations 734 warsaw pact 740 whittaker chambers 748 yalta conference 734 752 chapter 3 tea party in the time of george i this painting by an unknown artist dates from the 1720s and shows a prosperous virginian posing with a fashionable and expensive tea service some of it from china.
his eagerness to display his possessions in this way is a sign of the growing interest in the badges of refinement among colonial americans of means in the eighteenth century.
the colonial williamsburg foundation the growth of eighteenth century consumerism was partly a result of the increasing division of american societies by class.
as the difference between the upper and lower classes became more glaring people of means became more intent on demonstrating their own membership in the upper ranks of society.
growing t0 purchase and display con consumerism sumer goods was an important way of doing so particularly for affluent people in cities and towns.
but the growth of consumerism was also a product of the early stages of the industrial revolution.
although there was relatively little industry in america in the eighteenth century england and europe were making rapid advances and producing more and more affordable goods for affluent americans to buy.
the new manufacturing was dependent of course on customers for its products.
in an increasingly commercial society therefore there were many people committed to promoting the purchase of consumer goods as a positive social good.
consumption also grew because of an increasing tendency among colonists to take on debt to finance purchases and be cause of the willingness of some merchants to offer credit.
to facilitate the new consumer appetites merchants and traders began advertising their goods in journals and newspapers.
agents of urban merchants the first traveling salesmen fanned out through the countryside attempting to interest wealthy landowners and planters in luxury goods.
george and martha washington for example spent considerable time and money ordering elegant furnishings for their home at mount vernon goods that were shipped to them mostly from england and europe.
things that had once been considered expensive luxuries gradually became commonplace necessities among them tea household linens glassware manufactured cutlery crockery and social furniture and many others.
another result of consumerism was the association of material goods of the quality of a persons home and possessions and clothing for ex ample with virtue and refinement the ideal of the cultivated gentleman and the gracious lady became increasingly powerful throughout the colonies in the eighteenth century.
that meant striving to become educated and refined gentlemanly or ladylike in speech and behavior.
americans read books on manners and fashion.
they bought magazines about london society.
they also commissioned portraits of themselves and their families devoted large portions of their homes to entertainment built shelves and cases in which they could display fashionable possessions constructed formal gardens and lavished attention on their wardrobes and hairstyles.
the growing importance of consumption and refinement was visible in public spaces as well.
eighteenth century cities in america as in england and europe began to plan their growth to ensure that there would be elegant and gracious public squares parks and boulevards.
in the past social in teraction in american communities had largely been between neighbors and relatives or at most among members of church congregations.
now that a wider society was emerging within cities it became important to create not just private but also public stages for social display.
patterns of society although there were sharp social distinctions in the colonies the deeply entrenched class system of england failed to re social produce itself in america.
in england land mobility was scarce and the population large.
the relatively small number of people who owned property had power over the great majority who did not the imbalance between land and population became a foundation of the english economy and the cornerstone of its class system.
in early america the opposite was true.
land was abundant and people were scarce.
aristocracies emerged in america to be sure.
but they tended to rely less on landown ership than on control of a substantial workforce and they society and culture in provincial america 83 were generally less secure and less powerful than their english counterparts.
far more than in england there were opportunities in america for social mobility both up and down.
the plantation the plantation defined a distinctive way of life for many white and black southerners that would survive in varying forms until the civil war.
the first plantations emerged in the early new georgia csavannah atlantic ocean percent of population that was black per county colony in 1775 bm 61 to 71 51 to 60 31 to 50 11 to 30 0 1 to 10 100 200 km african population as a proportion of total population c 1775 this map illustrates the parts of the colonies in which slaves made up a large proportion of the population in some areas a majority.
the densest african population was in tidewater virginia but there were black majorities as well in south carolina and parts of north carolina.
the slave population was smallest in the western regions of the southern colonies and in the area north of the chesapeake although there remained a significant african population in parts of new jersey and new york some slave some free.
what explains the dense concentrations of slaves in certain areas of the south.
vagaries of the plantation economy settlements of virginia and maryland once tobacco became the economic basis of the chesapeake.
some plantations were enormous much like some of the great estates of england.
the maryland plantation of charles carroll of carrollton reputedly the wealthiest man in the colonies covered 40 000 acres and contained 285 slaves.
on the whole however seventeenth century colonial plantations were rough and relatively small estates.
in the early days in virginia most plantations were crude clearings where land owners and indentured servants worked side by side in conditions so rugged that death was an everyday occurrence.
even in later years when the death rate declined and the landholdings became more established plantation workforces seldom exceeded thirty people.
the economy of the plantation like all agricultural economies was precarious.
in good years successful growers could earn great profits and expand their operations.
but since they could not control their markets even the largest planters were constantly at risk.
when prices for their crops fell as tobacco prices did for example in the 1660s they faced ruin.
because plantations were sometimes far from cities and towns which were relatively few in the south they tended to become self contained communities.
residents lived in close proximity to one another in a cluster of buildings that included the great house of the planter a house that was usually far from great the service buildings the barns and the cabins of the slaves.
wealthier planters often created something approaching a full town on their plantations with a school for white children only a chapel and a large population.
smaller planters lived more modestly but still in a relatively self sufficient world.
in some parts of the south for example the region around charleston south carolina planters often divided their time between the city and their nearby plantations.
on the larger plantations the presence of a substantial slave workforce altered not only the economic but also the family lives of the planter class.
the wives of plantation owners unlike the wives of small farmers could rely on servants to perform ordinary household chores.
they could thus devote more time to their husbands and children than people in poorer parts of colonial society.
but there were also frequent sexual liaisons between their husbands or sons and black women of the slave community.
southern white women generally learned to pretend not to notice these relationships but they were almost certainly a source of anxiety and resentment.
black women naturally had even greater cause to resent such liaisons.
southern society was highly stratified.
within given areas great landowners controlled not only the lives of those who worked on their own plantations.
wealthy planters also shaped the livelihoods of small farmers who could not effectively compete with the wealthy planters and thus depended on them to market crops and receive credit.
small farmers working modest plots of land with few or no slaves to help them formed the majority of the southern agrarian stratified southern society 84 chapter 4 marquis de montcalm and defeated them in a battle in which both commanders died.
the dramatic fall of quebec on september 13 1759 marked the beginning of the end of the american phase of the war.
a year later in september 1760 the french army formally surrendered to amherst in montreal.
not all aspects of the struggle were as romantic as wolfes dramatic assault on quebec.
the british resorted at times to such brutal military expedients as population dispersal.
in nova scotia for example they uprooted several thousand french inhabitants whom they suspected of disloyalty and scattered them throughout the english colonies.
some of these acadians eventually made their way to louisiana where they became the ancestors of the present day cajuns.
elsewhere english and colonial troops inflicted even worse atrocities on the indian allies of the french for example offering scalp bounties to those who could bring back evidence of having killed a native.
the french and their indian allies retaliated and hundreds of families along the english frontier perished in brutal raids on their settlements.
peace finally came after the accession of george iii to the british throne and the resignation of pitt who unlike the new king wanted to continue hostilities.
the british achieved most of pitts aims nevertheless in the peace of peace of paris paris signed in 1763 under its terms the french ceded to great britain some of their west indian islands and most of their colonies in india.
they also transferred canada and all other french territory east of the mississippi except new orleans to great britain.
they ceded new orleans and their claims west of the mississippi to spain thus surrendering all title to the main land of north america.
the french and indian war had profound effects on the british empire and the american colonies.
it greatly expanded englands territorial claims in the new world.
at the same time it greatly enlarged britains debt financing the vast war had been a major drain on the treasury.
it also generated substantial resentment toward the americans among british british victory french victory 1british advance french advance v british forces led by wolfe capture quebec on sept 18 1759 french surrender montreal t on sept 8 1760 ya british trqops capture ta fort carillorr ticonderoga 13.
fort frontenac captured by on ju y 8 1758j a n the british on august 28 1758 7 colonial troops defeated m.
crown point fal.
of 175 r british surrender fortwillliam x lqy.
henry on august 9 1757 7 ft n h f t oswego niagara albany.
boston maine of mass.
british deport 6 000 acadian farmers and disperse them among the colonies summer of 1755 o c i a n braddock defeated by french and indian troops at fort duquesne on july 9 175.
new york pennsylvania washington surrenders at tjort necessity on july 4 1754 marylafsj virginia philadelphia x delaware mass.
r h z n j 4 x pi lax.
f havana a etenqbvh o sugar islands senegal 1758 france and britain pondicherry 1761 szszt in the pennsyivania backcountry he brifeh was worldwide with naval superiority providing the j french waged their final contest for supremacy in north needed edge to britain.
the empire in transition 107 leaders many of whom were contemptuous of the colonists for what they considered american military ineptitude during the war.
they were angry as well that the colonists had made so few financial contributions to a struggle waged largely for american benefit they were particularly bitter that some colonial merchants had been selling food and other goods to the french in the west indies throughout the conflict.
all these factors combined to persuade many english leaders that a major reorganization of the empire giving london increased authority over the colonies would be necessary in the aftermath of the war.
the war had an equally profound but very different effect on the american colonists.
it forced them for the first time to act in concert against a common foe.
the friction of 1756 1757 over british requisition and impressment policies and consequences of the seven years war the 1758 return of authority to the colonial assemblies established an important precedent in the minds of the colonists it seemed to confirm the illegitimacy of english interference in local affairs.
for thousands of americans the men who served in the colonial armed forces the war was an important socializing experience.
the colonial troops unlike the british regiments generally viewed themselves as part of a peoples army the relationship of soldiers to their units was the soldiers believed in some measure voluntary their army was a communal not a coercive or hierarchical organization.
the contrast with the british regulars whom the colonists widely resented for their arrogance and arbitrary use of power was striking and in later years the memory of that contrast helped to shape the american response to british imperial policies.
for the indians of the ohio valley the third major party in the french and indian war the british victory was disastrous.
those tribes that had allied themselves with the french had earned the enmity of the victorious english.
the iroquois confederacy which had allied with britain fared only slightly better.
english officials saw the passivity of the iroquois during the war a result of their effort to hedge their bets and avoid antagonizing the french as evidence of duplicity.
in the aftermath of the peace settlement the iroquois alliance with the british quickly unraveled and the iroquois confederacy itself began to crumble from within.
the iroquois nations would continue to contest the english for control of the ohio valley for another fifty years but increasingly divided and increasingly outnumbered they would seldom again be in a position to deal with their white rivals on terms of military or political equality.
the new imperialism with the treaty of 1763 england found itself at peace for the first time in more than fifty years.
but saddled with enormous debts and responsible for vast new lands in the new world the imperial government could not long avoid expanding its involvement in its colonies.
burdens of empire versus territorial imperialists the experience of the french and indian war suggested that such increased involvement would not be easy to achieve.
not only had the colonists proved so resistant to british control that pitt had been forced to relax his policies in 1758 but the colonial assemblies had continued after that to respond to british needs slowly and grudgingly.
unwilling to be taxed by parliament to support the war effort the colonists were generally reluctant to tax themselves as well.
defiance of imperial trade regulations and other british demands continued and even increased through the last years of the war.
the problems of managing the empire became more difficult after 1763 because of a basic shift in britains imperial design.
in the past the english had viewed their colonial em commercial pire primar y terms of trade they had opposed acquisition of territory for its own sake.
but by the mid eighteenth century a growing number of english and american leaders including william pitt and benjamin franklin were beginning to argue that land itself was of value to the empire because of the population it could support the taxes it could produce and the imperial splendor it would confer.
the debate between the old commercial imperialists and the new territorial ones came to a head at the conclusion of the french and indian war.
the mercantilists wanted england to return canada to france in exchange for guadeloupe the most commercially valuable of the french sugar islands in the west indies.
the territorialists however prevailed.
the acquisition of the french territories in north america was a victory for among others benjamin franklin who had long argued that the american people would need these vast spaces to accommodate their rapid and he believed limitless growth.
with the territorial annexations of 1763 the area of the british empire was suddenly twice as great as it had been and the problems of governing it were thus considerably more complex.
some british officials argued that the empire should restrain rapid settlement in the western territories.
to allow europeans to move into the new lands too quickly they warned would run the risk of stirring up costly conflicts with the indians.
restricting settlement would also keep the land available for hunting and trapping.
many colonists wanted to see the new territories opened for immediate development but they disagreed among themselves about who should control the western lands.
colonial governments made fervent and often conflicting claims of jurisdiction.
other colonists argued that control should remain in england and that the territories should be considered entirely new colonies unlinked to the existing settlements.
there were in short a host of problems and pressures that the british could not ignore.
at the same time the government in london was running out of options in its effort to find a way to deal with its staggering war debt.
landlords and merchants in england itself were objecting strenuously to increases in what they already considered 108 chapter 4 hudsons bay company carolina.
columbia k gston 6 augusta.
m claimed by spain and britain i x disputed territory georgia y harles town savannah non indian settlement before 1700 1700 1763 frontier line proclamation line of 1763 fort provincial capital t 250 500 km the thirteen colonies in 1763 this map is a close up of the thirteen colonies at the end of the seven years war.
it shows the line of settlement established by the proclamation of 1763 the red line as well as the extent of actual settlement in that year the blue line.
note that in the middle colonies north carolina virginia maryland and southern pennsylvania settlement had already reached the red line and in one small area of western pennsylvania moved beyond it by the time of the proclamation of 1763 note also the string of forts established beyond the proclamation line.
how do the forts help to explain the efforts of the british to restrict settlement.
and how does the extent of actual settlement help explain why it was so difficult for the british to enforce their restrictions.
excessively high taxes.
the necessity of stationing significant numbers of british troops on the indian border after 1763 was britains adding even more to the cost of defending staggering the american settlements.
and the half war debt hearted response of the colonial assemblies to the war effort had suggested that in its search for revenue england could not rely on any cooperation from the colonial governments.
only a system of taxation administered by london the leaders of the empire believed could effectively meet englands needs.
at this crucial moment in anglo american relations with the imperial system in desperate need of redefinition george iii became king in 1760 on the death of his grandfather.
he brought two particularly unfortunate qualities to the office.
the empire in transition 109 first he was determined unlike his two predecessors to be an active and responsible monarch.
in part because of pressure from his ambitious mother he removed from power the long standing and stable coalition of whigs who had under pitt and others governed the empire for much of the century and whom the new king mistrusted.
in their place he created a new coalition of his own through patronage and bribes and gained an uneasy control of parliament.
the new ministries that emerged as a result of these changes were unstable each lasting in office only about two years.
second the king had serious intellectual and psychological limitations that compounded his political difficulties.
he suffered apparently from a rare disease that produced intermittent bouts of insanity.
indeed in the last years of his long reign he was according to most accounts deranged george iifs confined to the palace and unable to per shortcomings form any official functions.
yet even when george iii was lucid and rational which in the 1760s and 1770s was most of the time he was painfully immature he was only twenty two when he ascended the throne and insecure striving constantly to prove his fitness for his position but time and again finding himself ill equipped to handle the challenges he seized for george hi george iii was twenty two years old when he ascended the throne in 1760 and for many years almost all portraits of him were highly formal with the king dressed in elaborate ceremonial robes.
this less formal painting dates from much later in his reign after he had begun to suffer from the mental disorders that eventually consumed him.
after 1810 he was blind and permanently deranged barred from all official business by the regency act of 1811 his son later king george iv served as regent in those years until he became king after his fathers death in 1820.
the granger collection new york himself.
the king s personality therefore contributed to both the instability and the intransigence of the british government during these critical years.
more immediately responsible for the problems that soon emerged with the colonies however was george grenville whom the king made prime minister in 1763 grenville did not share his brother in law william pitts sympathy with the american point of view.
he agreed instead with the prevailing opinion within britain that the colonists had been too long indulged and that they should be compelled to obey the laws and to pay a part of the cost of defending and administering the empire.
he promptly began trying to impose a new system of control upon what had been a loose collection of colonial possessions in america.
the british and the tribes the western problem was the most urgent.
with the departure of the french settlers and traders from the english colonies moved immediately into the upper ohio valley.
the indians of the region objected to this intrusion and an alliance of tribes under the ottawa chieftain pontiac struck back.
to prevent an escalation of the fighting that might threaten western trade the british government issued a ruling the proclamation of 1763 forbidding settlers to advance beyond a line drawn along the appalachian mountains.
proclamation the proclamation of 1763 was appealing of 1763 to the british for several reasons.
it would allow london rather than the provincial governments and their land hungry constituents to control the westward movement of the white population.
hence westward expansion would proceed in an orderly manner and conflicts with the tribes which were both militarily costly and dangerous to trade might be limited.
slower western settlement would also slow the population exodus from the coastal colonies where englands most important markets and investments were.
and it would reserve opportunities for land speculation and fur trading for english rather than colonial entrepreneurs.
although the tribes were not enthusiastic about the proclamation which required them to cede still more land to the white settlers many tribal groups supported the agreement as the best bargain available to them.
the cherokee in particular worked actively to hasten the drawing of the boundary hoping to end white encroachments.
relations between the western tribes and the british improved in some areas after the proclamation partly as a result of the work of the indian superintendents the british appointed.
john stuart was in charge of indian affairs in the southern colonies and sir william johnson in the northern ones.
both were sympathetic to native american needs and lived among the tribes johnson married a mohawk woman mary brant who was later to play an important role in the american revolution.
in the end however the proclamation of 1763 failed to meet even the modest expectations of the native americans.
it had some effect in limiting colonial land speculation in the west and 110 chapter 16 indian boy explained themselves by saying simply nits breed lice in california civilians killed close to 5 000 indians between 1850 and 1880 one of many factors disease and poverty being the more important that reduced the indian population of the state from 150 000 before the civil war to 30 000 in 1870 the treaties negotiated in 1867 brought a temporary lull to many of the conflicts.
but new forces soon shattered the peace again.
in the early 1870s more waves of white settlers mostly miners began to penetrate some of the lands in dakota territory supposedly guaranteed to the tribes in 1867 pacific ocean indian lands ceded before 1850 ceded 1850 1870 ceded 1870 1890 indian reservations 1890 battle sioux selected indian nations battle of little bighorn 1876 the indian frontier as conhict erupted between indian and white cultures in the west the government sought increasinolv to r.
a reservation concept helped unite the sioux and cheyenne traditionally enemies in the dakotas during the 1870s.
along the little biyon 00 reservatlons resls ancc he indian opponents and attacked before the supporting troops of reno and benteen were in a position to aid him.
9 what did the defeat of custer s army do for the sioux tribes.
orn river the impetuous custer underestimated the strength of his the conquest of the far west 451 indian resistance flared anew this time with even greater strength.
in the northern plains the sioux rose up in 1875 and left their reservation.
when white officials ordered them to return bands of warriors gathered in montana and united under two great leaders crazy horse and sitting bull.
three army columns set out to round them up and force them back onto the reservation.
with the expedition as col little nel famous seventh cavalry was bighorn clrful ard controversial george a custer a golden haired romantic glory seeker.
at the battle of the little bighorn in southern montana in 1876 the most famous conflict between whites and indians the tribal warriors surprised custer and 264 members of his regiment surrounded them and killed every man.
custer was accused of rashness but he encountered something that no white man would likely have predicted.
the chiefs had gathered as many as 2 500 warriors one of the largest indian armies ever assembled at one time in the united states.
but the indians did not have the political organization or the supplies to keep their troops united.
soon the warriors drifted off in bands to elude pursuit or search for food and the army eventually forced them back to the dakota reservations.
the power of the sioux was soon broken.
the proud leaders crazy horse and sitting bull accepted defeat and the monotony of life on reservations.
both were later killed by reservation police after being tricked or taunted into a last pathetic show of resistance.
chief joseph one of the most dramatic episodes in indian history occurred in idaho in 1877 the nez perce were a small and relatively peaceful tribe some of whose members had managed to live unmolested in oregon into the 1870s without ever signing a treaty with the united states.
but under pressure from white settlers the government forced them to move into a reservation that another branch of the tribe had accepted by treaty in the 1850s.
with no realistic prospect of resisting the indians began the journey to the reservation but on the way several younger indians drunk and angry killed four white settlers.
the leader of the nez perce chief joseph urged his followers to flee from the american troops.
they scattered in several directions and became part of a remarkable chase.
joseph moved with 200 men and 350 women children and elders in an effort to reach canada and take refuge with the sioux there.
pursued by four columns of american soldiers the indians covered 1 321 miles in seventy five days repelling or evading the army time and again.
they were finally caught just short of the canadian boundary.
some escaped and slipped across the border but joseph and most of his followers weary and discouraged finally gave up.
hear me my chiefs joseph said after meeting with the american general nelson miles.
1 am tired.
my heart is sick and sad.
from where the sun now stands i will fight no more forever he surrendered to miles in exchange for a promise that his band could return to the nez perce reservation in idaho.
but the government refused to honor miless promise and the nez perce were moved the battle of the little bighorn an indian view this 1898 watercolor by one of the indian participants portrays the aftermath of the battle of the little bighorn june 25 26 1876 in h an army uni.
under the command of general george armstrong custer was surrounded and wiped out by sioux and cheyenne warriors.
this grisly painting shows indians or corpses of custer and his men.
custer can be seen lying at left center dressed in yellow buckskin with his ha beside him.
the four standing men a center are sttting bull ram m the face crazy horse and kicking bear the artist.
at lower right indian women begin preparations for a ceremony to honor the returning warriors.
the granger collection new york 452.
chapter 4 the battles of lexington and concord 1775 this map shows the fabled series of events that led to the first battle of the american revolution.
on the night of april 18 1775 paul revere and william dawes rode out from boston to warn the outlying towns of the approach of british troops.
revere was captured just west of lexington but dawes escaped and returned to boston.
the next morning british forces moved out of boston toward lexington where they met armed american minutemen on the lexington common and exchanged fire.
the british dispersed the americans in lexington.
but they next moved on to concord where they encountered more armed minutemen clashed again and were driven back toward boston.
all along their line of march they were harassed by riflemen.
what impact did the battles of lexington and concord and the later battle of bunker hill also shown on this map have on colonial sentiment toward the british.
paul revere s ride night of april 18 1775 william dawes s ride april 18 1775 troop movements g american forces i british forces battles and entrenchments american victory british victory american entrenchment road adjourned they agreed to meet again the next spring thus indicating that they considered the continental congress a continuing organization.
through their representatives in philadelphia the colonies had in effect reaffirmed their autonomous status within the empire and declared something close to economic war to maintain that position.
the more optimistic of the americans hoped that this economic warfare alone would win a quick and bloodless victory but the more pessimistic had their doubts.
t expect no redress but on the contrary increased resentment and double vengeance john adams wrote to patrick henry we must fight and henry replied by god i am of your opinion during the winter the parliament in london debated proposals for conciliating the colonists.
lord chatham william pitt the former prime minister urged the withdrawal of troops from america.
edmund burke called for the repeal of the coercive acts.
but their efforts the conciliatory propositions were in vain.
lord north finally won approval early in 1775 for a series of measures known as the conciliatory propositions but they were far less conciliatory than the approaches burke or chatham had urged.
parliament now proposed that the colonies instead of being taxed directly by parliament would tax themselves at parliaments demand.
with this offer lord north hoped to divide the american moderates who he believed represented the views of the majority from the extremist minority.
but his offer was too little and too late.
it did not reach america until after the first shots of war had been fired.
lexington and concord for months the farmers and townspeople of massachusetts had been gathering arms and ammunition and training as minutemen preparing to fight on a minutes notice.
the continental congress had approved preparations for a defensive war and the citizen soldiers awaited an aggressive move by the british regulars in boston.
the empire in transition.
125 the retreat jhm i uvrd te t r ifin i f rr smu.
7fiz jhj i iritis jfyirtfc fy ihf js a r hrunan.
fld t i jkjeevttrs.
l muaar ts.
j e tt jt j arrt a jtiw rxafid jsumt fyia y m the british retreat from concord 1775 this american cartoon satirizes the retreat of british forces from concord after the battle there on april 19 1775 patriot forces are lined up on the left and the retreating british forces portrayed with dog heads perhaps because many of the soldiers were wild irish straggle off at right some fleeing in panic others gloating over the booty they have plundered from the burning homes above.
in its crude and exaggerated way the cartoon depicts the success of patriot forces at the old north bridge in concord in repulsing a british contingent under the command of lord percy.
as the redcoats retreated to lexington and then to boston they continued to encounter fire from colonial forces not arrayed in battle lines as shown here but hidden along the road.
one british soldier described the nightmarish withdrawal we were fired on from houses and behind trees the country was full of hills woods stone walls which the rebels did not fail to take advantage of.
anne s k brown military collection brown university library in boston general thomas gage commanding the british garrison knew of the military preparations in the countryside general thomas but considered his army too small to do gage anything until reinforcements arrived.
he resisted the advice of less cautious officers who assured him that the americans would never dare actually to fight that they would back down quickly before any show of british force.
major john pitcairn for example insisted that a single small action such as the burning of a few towns would set everything to rights general gage still hesitated when he received orders from england to arrest the rebel leaders sam adams and john hancock known to be in the vicinity of lexington.
but when gage heard that the minutemen had stored a large supply of gunpowder in concord eighteen miles from boston he finally decided to act.
on the night of april 18 1775 he sent a detachment of about 1 000 soldiers out from boston on the road to lexington and concord.
he intended to surprise the colonials and seize the illegal supplies without bloodshed.
but patriots in boston were watching the british movements closely and during the night two horsemen william dawes and paul revere rode out to warn the villages and farms.
when the british troops arrived in lexington the next day several dozen minutemen awaited them on the town common.
shots were fired and minutemen fell eight of them were killed and ten more wounded.
advancing to concord the british discovered that the americans had hastily removed most of the powder supply but the british burned what was left of it.
all along the road from concord back to boston farmers hiding behind trees rocks and stone fences harassed the british with continual gunfire.
by the end of the day the british had lost almost three times as many men as the americans.
the first shots the shots heard round the world as americans later called them had been fired.
but who had fired them.
according to one of the minutemen at lexington major pitcairn had shouted to the colonists on his arrival disperse ye rebels when the americans ignored the command he had given the order to fire.
british officers and soldiers told a different story.
they claimed that the minutemen had fired first that only after seeing the flash of american guns had the british begun to shoot.
whatever the truth the rebels succeeded in circulating their account well ahead of the british version adorning it with lurid tales of british atrocities.
the effect was to rally to the rebel cause thousands of colonists north and south who previously had had little enthusiasm for 126 chapter 29 harlem.
the first large race riot since the end of world war ii occurred the following summer in the watts section of los angeles.
in the midst of a seemingly routine traffic arrest a watts riot white police officer struck a protesting black bystander with his club.
the incident triggered a storm of anger and a week of violence and revealed how deeply african americans in los angeles and in other cities resented their treatment at the hands of local police.
as many as 10 000 people were estimated to have participated in the violence in watts attacking white motorists burning buildings looting stores and sniping at policemen.
thirty four people died during the watts uprising which was eventually quelled by the national guard twenty eight of the dead were black.
in the summer of 1966 there were forty three additional outbreaks the most serious of them in chicago and cleveland.
and in the summer of 1967 there were eight major outbreaks including the largest of them all a racial clash in detroit in which forty three people thirty three of them black died.
televised reports of the violence alarmed millions of americans and created both a new sense of urgency and a growing sense of doubt among many of those whites who had embraced the cause of racial justice only a few years before.
a special commission on civil disorders created by the president in response to the disturbances issued a celebrated report in the spring of 1968 recommending massive spending to eliminate the abysmal conditions of the ghettos.
only a commitment to national action on an unprecedented scale the commission concluded can shape a future compatible with the historic ideals of american society.
to many white americans however the lesson of the riots was the need for stern measures to stop violence and lawlessness.
black power shift from integration to racial distinction disillusioned with the ideal of peaceful change in cooperation with whites an increasing number of african americans were turning to a new approach to the racial issue the philosophy of black power black power could mean many different things.
but in all its forms it suggested a move away from interracial cooperation and toward increased awareness of racial distinctiveness.
it was part of a long nationalist tradition among african americans that extended back into slavery and that had its most visible civil rights vietnam and the ordeal of liberalism 791 twentieth century expression in the garvey movement of the 1920s.
perhaps the most enduring impact of the black power ideology was a social and psychological one instilling racial pride in african americans who lived in a society whose dominant culture generally portrayed african americans as inferior to whites.
it encouraged the growth of black studies in schools and universities.
it helped stimulate important black literary and artistic an increasingly divided civil rights movement movements.
it produced a new interest among many african americans in their african roots.
it led to a rejection by some blacks of certain cultural practices borrowed from white society afro hairstyles began to replace artificially straightened hair some blacks began to adopt african styles of dress and new african names.
but black power had political manifestations as well most notably in creating a deep schism within the civil rights movement.
traditional black organizations that had emphasized cooperation with sympathetic whites groups such as the naacp the urban league and king s southern christian leadership conference now faced competition from radical groups.
the student nonviolent coordinating committee and the congress of racial equality had both begun as relatively moderate interracial organizations sncc was originally a stu dent branch of the sclc.
by the mid 1960s however these and other groups were calling for radical and occasionally even violent action against the racism of white society and were openly rejecting the approaches of older more established black leaders.
particularly alarming to many whites and to some african americans as well were organizations that existed outside the mainstream civil rights movement.
in oakland california the black panther party founded by huey newton and bobby seale promised to defend black rights even if that required violence.
black panthers organized along semimilitary lines and wore weapons openly and proudly.
they were in fact more the victims of violence from the police than they were practitioners of violence themselves.
but they created an image quite deliberately of militant radicals willing to fight for justice in newtons words through the barrel of a gun malcolm x in detroit a once obscure black nationalist group the nation of islam gained new prominence.
founded in 1931 by elijah poole who converted to islam and renamed him nation of self elijah muhammad the movement slam taught african americans to take responsibil ity for their own lives to live by strict codes of behavior and to reject any dependence on whites.
the most celebrated of the black muslims as whites often termed them was malcolm little a former drug addict and pimp who had spent time in prison and had rebuilt his life after joining the movement.
he adopted the name malcolm x x to denote his lost african surname.
malcolm became one of the movements most influential spokesmen particularly among younger blacks as a result of his intelligence his oratorical skills and his harsh uncompromising opposition to all forms of racism and oppression.
he did not advocate violence as his critics often claimed but he insisted that black people had the right to defend themselves violently if necessary from those who assaulted them.
malcolm died in 1965 when black gunmen presumably under orders from rivals within the nation of islam assassinated him in new york.
but malcolms influence did not die with him.
a book he had been working on before his death with the writer alex haley the autobiography of malcolm x attracted wide attention after its publication in 1965 and spread his reputation broadly through the nation.
years after his death he was to many african americans as important and revered a symbol as martin luther king jr malcolm x malcolm x a leader of the militant nation of islam arrives in washington d c in may 1963 to set up a headquarters for the organization there.
malcolm was hated and feared by many whites during his lifetime.
after he was assassinated in 1965 he became a widely revered hero among african americans.
bettmann corbis 792 chapter 30 aboriginal territories and modern reservations of western indian tribes this map shows the rough distribution of the native american population in the western united states before the establishment of reservations by the federal government in the nineteenth century.
the large shaded regions in colors other than purple represent the areas in which the various tribes were dominant a century and more ago.
the purple shaded areas show the much smaller areas set aside for them as reservations after the indian wars of the late nineteenth century.
what impact did life on the reservations have on the rise of indian activism in the 1960s and 1970s.
the federal government withdrew all official recognition of the tribes as legal entities administratively separate from state governments and made them subject to the same local jurisdictions as white residents.
at the same time the government encouraged indians to assimilate into the larger society and worked to funnel native americans into cities where presumably they would adapt to the white world and lose their cultural distinctiveness.
to some degree the termination and assimilation policies achieved their objectives.
the tribes grew weaker and many native americans adapted to life in the cities became less able to fend off white influence.
on the whole however the new failure of policies were a disaster for the tribes and a termination failure for the reformers who had promoted them.
termination led to widespread corruption and abuse.
and indians fought so bitterly against it the crisis of authority 815 the occupation of alcatraz alcatraz an island in san francisco bay once housed a large federal prison that by the late 1960s had been abandoned.
in 1969 a group of indian activists occupied the island and claimed it as indian land precipitating a long standoff with authorities.
ap images that in 1958 the eisenhower administration barred further terminations without the consent of the affected tribes.
in the meantime the struggle against termination had mobilized a new generation of indian militants and had breathed life into the principal native american organization the national congress of american indians ncai created in 1944 the new militancy also benefited from the rapid increase in the indian population which was growing much faster than that of the rest of the nation nearly doubling between 1950 and 1970 to a total of about 800 000.
the indian civil rights movement in 1961 more than 400 members of 67 tribes gathered in chicago to discuss ways of bringing all indians together in an effort to redress common wrongs.
the manifesto they issued the declaration of indian purpose stressed the right to choose our own way of life one result of the movement was a gradual change in the way popular culture depicted indians.
by the 1970s almost no films or television westerns any longer portrayed indians as brutal savages attacking peaceful white people.
and indian activists even persuaded some white institutions to abandon what they considered demeaning references to them dartmouth college for example ceased referring to its athletic teams as the indians in 1968 a group aim f yun8 militant indians established the american indian movement aim which drew its greatest support from those indians who lived in urban areas but soon established a significant presence on the reservations as well.
the new activism had some immediate political results.
in 1968 congress passed the indian civil rights act which recognized the legitimacy of tribal laws within the reserva tions.
but leaders of aim and other insurgent groups were not satisfied and turned increasingly to direct action.
in 1968 indian fishermen clashed with washington state officials on the columbia river and in puget sound where indians claimed that treaties gave them the exclusive right to fish.
the following year members of several tribes made a symbolic protest by occupying the abandoned federal prison on alcatraz island in san francisco bay and claiming the site by right of discovery in response to the growing pressure the nixon administration appointed a mohawk sioux to the position of commissioner of indian affairs in 1969 and in 1970 the president promised both increased tribal self determination and an increase in federal aid.
but the protests continued.
in november 1972 nearly a thousand demonstrators most of them sioux forcibly occupied the building of the bureau of indian affairs in washington d c for six days.
a more celebrated protest occurred in february 1973 at wounded knee south dakota the site of the 1890 massacre of sioux by federal troops.
members of aim seized and occupied the town of wounded knee for two months demanding radical changes in the administration of the reserva tion and insisting that the government honor its long forgotten treaty obligations.
a brief clash between the occupiers and federal forces left one indian dead and another wounded.
more immediately effective than these militant protests were the victories that various tribes were achieving in the federal courts.
in united states v wheeler 1978 the supreme court confirmed that tribes had independent legal standing and could not be terminated by congress.
other decisions ratified the authority of tribes to impose taxes on businesses within their reservations and to perform other sovereign functions.
in 1985 the u s supreme court in county of oneida v oneida indian nation supported indian claims to 100 000 acres in upstate new york that the oneida tribe claimed by virtue of treaty rights long forgotten by whites.
occupation of wounded knee 816 chapter 7 reveals a nation with very few significant cities and with a population clustered largely along the eastern seaboard.
by 1900 a much larger area of the united states had consistent areas of settlement and many more of those areas consisted of towns and cities including three cities chicago new york and philadelphia with populations of over a million and a considerable number of other cities with 100 000 or more people.
also striking however is the amount of land in the west with very light settlement or no settlement.
do climate and geography help explain the variable patterns of settlement.
of the american countryside to nearby cities.
the development of large steam powered ocean liners created a highly competitive shipping industry allowing europeans and asians to cross the oceans to america much more cheaply and quickly than they had in the past.
migrations as a result of urbanization the late nineteenth century became an age of unprecedented geographic mobility as americans left the declining agricultural regions of the east at a dramatic rate.
some who left were moving to the newly developing farmlands of the west.
but many were moving to the cities of the east and the midwest.
geographic mobility among those leaving rural america for industrial cities in the late nineteenth century were young rural women for whom opportunities in the farm economy were limited.
as farms grew larger more commercial and more mechanized they became increasingly male preserves and since much of the workforce on many farms consisted of unskilled and often transient workers there were fewer family units than before.
farm women had once been essential for making clothes and other household goods but those goods were now available in stores or through catalogs.
hundreds of thousands of women moved to the cities therefore in search of work and community.
southern blacks were also beginning what would be a nearly century long exodus from the countryside into the cities.
their withdrawal was a testament to the poverty debt the age of the city.
489 population millions 76 0 69 5 63 0 56 6 50 2 45 0 39 9 9 ill sil 1 ji 11.
o ijjj 111 ill 31 5 i ill ill o ill ll.
111 111 1860 1865 1870 1 875 1 880 1 885 1 890 1 895 1 900 year population growth 1860 1900 this chart illustrates the rapid increase in the nation s population in the last forty years of the nineteenth century.
as you can see the american population more than doubled in those years.
what were the principal factors behind this substantial population growth.
violence and oppression african americans encountered in the late nineteenth century rural south.
the opportunities they found in cities were limited.
factory jobs for blacks were rare and professional opportunities almost nonexistent.
urban blacks tended to work as cooks janitors domestic servants and in other low paying service occupations.
because many such jobs were considered womens work black women often outnumbered black men in the cities.
by the end of the nineteenth century there were substantial african american communities 10 000 people or more in over thirty cities many of them in the american south but some new york city chicago communities washington d c baltimore in the north.
or in border states.
much more substantial african american migration would come during world war i and after but the black communities established in the late nineteenth century paved the way for the great population movements of the future.
the most important source of urban population growth in the late nineteenth century however was the arrival of great numbers of new immigrants from abroad 10 million between 1860 and 1890 18 million more in the three decades after that.
some came from canada mexico latin america and particularly on the west coast china and japan.
but by far the greatest number came from europe.
after 1880 the flow of new arrivals began for the first time to include large numbers of people from southern and eastern europe italians greeks slavs slovaks russian jews armenians and others.
by the 1890s more than half of all immigrants came from these new regions as opposed to less than 2 percent in the 1860s.
j j population increase thousands of persons 8 56 total immigration 8 14 immigrations contribution to population growth 1860 1920 immigration mostly from europe was responsible for about 20 percent of the nation s population growth in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries.
what factors drew so many immigrants to the united states in these years.
1861 1866 1871 1876 1881 1886 1891 1896 1901 1906 1911 1916 1865 1870 1875 1880 1885 1890 1895 1900 1905 1910 1915 1920 year m tj large waves of immigration that transformed american society in the late nineteenth jl jlt jlji and early twentieth centuries were not unique to the united states.
they were part of a worldwide movement of peoples that affected every continent.
these epic migrations were the product of two related forces population growth and industrialization.
the population of europe grew faster in the second half of the nineteenth century than it had ever grown before almost doubling between 1850 and the beginning of world war i the population growth was a result of growing economies able to support more people and productive agriculture that helped end debilitating famines.
but the rapid growth nevertheless strained the resources of many parts of europe and affected in particular rural people who were now too numerous to live off the available land.
many decided to move to other parts of the world where land was more plentiful or jobs were more available.
at the same time industrialization drew millions of people from rural areas into cities sometimes cities in their own countries but often industrial cities in other more economically advanced nations.
from 1800 to the start of world war i 50 million europeans migrated to new lands overseas people from almost all areas of europe but in the later years of the century when migration reached its peak mostly from poor rural areas in southern and eastern europe.
italy russia and poland were among the biggest sources of late nineteenth century migrants.
almost two thirds of these immigrants came to the united states.
but nearly 20 million europeans migrated to other lands to canada australia new zealand south africa argentina and other parts of south america.
many of these migrants moved to vast areas of open land in these countries and established themselves as farmers.
many others settled in the industrial cities that were growing up in all these regions.
it was not only europeans who were transplanting themselves in these years.
vast numbers of migrants usually poor desperate people left asia africa and the pacific islands in search of better lives.
most of them could not afford the journey abroad on their own.
they moved instead as indentured servants agreeing to a term of servitude in their new land in exchange for food shelter and private collection peter newark american pictures bridgeman images.
in earlier stages of immigration most new immigrants from europe with the exception of the irish were at least modestly prosperous and educated.
germans and scandinavians in particular had headed west on their arrival either to farm or to work as businessmen merchants professionals or skilled laborers in midwestern cities such as st louis cincinnati and milwaukee.
most of the new immigrants of the late nineteenth century however lacked the capital to buy farmland and lacked the education to establish themselves in professions.
so like the poor irish immigrants before the civil war they settled overwhelmingly in industrial cities where most of them took unskilled jobs.
the ethnic city by 1890 the population of some major urban areas consisted of a majority of foreign born immigrants and their children 87 percent of the population of chicago 80 percent in new york city 84 percent in milwaukee and detroit.
london the largest industrial city in europe by contrast had a population that was 94 percent native.
jew york had more irish than dublin and more germans the diverse american city than hamburg.
chicago eventually had more poles than warsaw.
equally striking was the diversity of the new immigrant populations.
in other countries experiencing heavy immigration in this period most of the new arrivals were coming from one or two sources argentina for example was experiencing great migrations too but almost everyone was coming from italy and spain.
in the united states however no single national group dominated.
in the last four decades of the nineteenth century substantial groups arrived from italy germany scandinavia austria hungary russia great britain ireland poland greece canada japan china holland mexico and many other nations.
in some towns a dozen different ethnic groups found themselves living in close proximity.
most of the new immigrants were rural people and their adjustment to city life was often painful.
to help ease the transition many national groups formed close knit ethnic communities within the cities italian polish jewish slavic chinese french canadian mexican and other neighborhoods often called immigrant ghettos that attempted to re create in the new world many of the features of the old.
j the age of the city 491 other northwestern transportation.
recruiters of indentured servants fanned out across china japan areas of africa and the pacific islands and above all india.
french and british recruiters brought hundreds of thousands of indian migrants to work in plantations in their own asian and african colonies.
chinese laborers were recruited to work on plantations in cuba and hawaii mines in malaya peru south africa and australia and railroad projects in canada peru and the united states.
african indentured servants moved in large numbers to the caribbean and pacific islanders tended to move to other islands or to australia.
the migration of european peoples to new lands was largely voluntary.
most migrants moved to the united states where indentured servitude was illegal non european migration brought relatively small numbers of people to the united states but together these various forms of migration produced one of the greatest population movements in the history of the world and transformed not just the united states but much of the globe as well.
understand analyze and evaluate 1 what were some of the negative factors that motivated european and non europeans to leave their home countries for the united states.
what were some of the positive factors in the united states that attracted them.
2 why did european empires encourage and facilitate the migration of europeans and non europeans to new lands.
3 why did more europeans than non europeans migrate to the united states.
eastern european sources of immigration from europe 1860 1900 this pie chart shows the sources of european immigration in the late nineteenth century.
the largest number of immigrants continued to come from traditional sources britain ireland germany scandinavia but the beginnings of what in the early twentieth century would become a major influx of immigrants from new sources southern and eastern europe in particular are already visible here.
immigration from other sources mexico south and central america and asia was also significant during this period.
why would these newer sources of european and other kinds of immigration create controversy among older stock americans.
some ethnic neighborhoods consisted of people who had migrated to america from the same province town or village.
even when the population was more diverse however the immigrant neighborhoods offered newcomers much that was familiar.
they could find newspapers and theaters in their native languages stores selling their native n foods churches or synagogues and fra ethnic ternal organizations that provided links communities with their national pasts.
many immi grants also maintained close ties with their native countries.
they stayed in touch with relatives who had remained behind.
some perhaps as many as a third in the early years returned to europe or asia or mexico after a short time others helped bring the rest of their families to america.
the cultural cohesiveness of the ethnic communities clearly eased the pain of separation from the immigrants native lands.
what role it played in helping immigrants become absorbed into the economic life of america is a more difficult question to answer.
it is clear that some ethnic groups jews and germans in particular advanced economically more rapidly than others for example the irish.
one explanation is that by huddling together in ethnic neighborhoods immigrant groups tended to reinforce the cultural values of their previous societies.
when those values were particularly well suited to economic advancement in an industrial society as was for example the high value jews placed on education ethnic identification may have helped members of a group to improve their lots.
when other values predominated maintaining community solidarity sustaining family ties preserving order progress could be less rapid.
assimilation despite the substantial differences among the various immigrant communities virtually all groups of the foreign born had certain things in common.
most immigrants of course shared the experience of living in cities and of adapting from a rural past to an urban present.
most were young the majority of newcomers were between fifteen and forty five years old.
and in virtually all communities of foreign born immigrants the strength of ethnic ties had to compete against another powerful force the desire for assimilation.
many of the new arrivals from abroad had come to america with romantic visions of the new world.
and however disillusioning they might find their first con americanization tact witj the united states they usually 492 chapter 30 nixon in china president richard nixon s 1972 visit to china was an important step in normalizing relations between the us and the people s republic of china.
here nixon toasts the developing relationship with prime minister zhou enlai.
universal images group getty images six day war responsibility for the future of those friends to the nations themselves.
in the middle east conditions grew more volatile in the aftermath of the 1967 six day war in which israel routed egyptian syrian and jordanian forces gained control of the whole of the long divided city of jerusalem and occupied substantial new territories on the west bank of the jordan river the gaza strip the golan heights and elsewhere.
the war also increased the number of refugee palestinians arabs who claimed the lands now controlled by israel and who dislodged from their homes became a source of considerable instability in jordan lebanon and the other surrounding countries into which they now moved.
in october 1973 on the jewish high holy day of yorn kippur egyptian and syrian forces again attacked israel.
for ten days the israelis struggled to recover from the surprise attack finally they launched an effective counteroffensive against egyptian forces in the sinai.
at that point the united states intervened placing heavy pressure on israel to accept a cease fire rather than press its advantage.
the imposed settlement of the yorn kippur war demonstrated the growing dependence of the united states and its allies on arab oil.
permitting israel to continue its drive into egypt arab oil might have jeopardized the ability of the embargo united states to purchase needed petroleum from the arab states.
a brief but painful embargo by the arab governments on the sale of oil to supporters of israel including america in 1973 provided an ominous warning of the costs of losing access to the regions resources.
the federal government and the interests of states and local communities.
in the end however economic and political crises some beyond the administrations control some of its own making sharply limited nixons ability to fulfill his domestic goals.
domestic initiatives dismantling the great society many of nixons domestic policies were a response to what he believed to be the demands of his own constituency conservative middle class people whom he liked to call the silent majority and who wanted to reduce federal interference in local affairs.
nixon tried unsuccessfully to persuade congress to pass legislation prohib iting the use of forced busing to achieve school desegregation.
he blocked the department of health education and welfare from cutting off federal funds from school districts that had failed to comply with court orders to integrate.
at the same time he began to reduce or dismantle many of the social programs of the great society and the new frontier.
in 1973 for example he abolished the office of economic opportunity the centerpiece of the antipoverty program of the johnson years.
yet nixons domestic efforts were not entirely conservative.
one of the administrations boldest efforts was an attempt to overhaul the nations enormous welfare system.
nixon proposed replacing the existing system which almost everyone agreed was cumbersome expensive and inefficient with what he called the family assistance plan fap.
it would in effect have created a guaranteed annual income for all americans 1 600 in federal grants which could be supplemented by outside earnings up to 4 000.
even many liberals applauded the proposal as an important step toward expanding federal responsibility for the poor.
nixon however presented the plan in conservative terms as something that would reduce the role of government and transfer to welfare recipients themselves daily responsibility for their own lives.
although the fap won approval in the house in 1970 concerted attacks by welfare recipients who considered the benefits inadequate members of the welfare bureaucracy whose own influence stood to be sharply diminished by the bill and conservatives who opposed a guaranteed income on principle helped kill it in the senate.
from the warren court to the nixon court of all the liberal institutions that had aroused the enmity of the silent majority in the 1950s and 1960s none had evoked more anger and bitterness than the supreme court.
not only had its rulings on racial matters disrupted traditional social patterns but its staunch defense of civil liberties had in the opinions of many americans contributed to the increase in crime disorder and moral decay.
in engel v vitale 1962 the court ruled that prayers in public schools politics and economics under nixon the nixon administration described its policies as an attempt to restore balance between the needs of the poor and the desires of the middle class between the power of the crisis of authority 829 violated the constitutional separation of church and state sparking outrage among religious fundamentalists and others.
in roth v united states 1957 the court had sharply limited the authority of local governments to curb pornography.
in gideon v wainwright 1963 the court ruled that every felony defendant was entitled to a lawyer regardless of his or her ability to pay.
in escobedo v illinois 1964 it ruled that a defendant must be allowed access to a lawyer before questioning by police.
in miranda v arizona 1966 the court confirmed the obligation of authorities to inform a criminal suspect of his or her rights.
by 1968 the warren court had become the target of americans of all kinds who felt the balance of power in the united states had shifted too far toward the poor and dispossessed at the expense of the middle class and toward criminals at the expense of law abiding citizens.
one of the most important decisions of the warren court in the 1960s was baker v carr 1962 which required state baker v carr legislatures to apportion electoral districts so that all citizens votes would have equal weight.
in dozens of states systems of legislative districting had given disproportionate representation to sparsely populated rural areas hence diminishing the voting power of urban residents.
the reapportionment that the decision required greatly strengthened the voting power of african americans hispanics and other groups concentrated in cities.
nixon was determined to use his judicial appointments to give the court a more conservative cast.
his first opportunity came almost as soon as he entered office.
when chief justice earl warren resigned early in 1969 nixon replaced him with a federal appeals court judge of conservative leanings warren burger.
a few months later associate justice abe fortas resigned after allegations of financial improprieties.
to replace him nixon named clement f haynsworth a respected federal circuit court judge from south carolina.
but haynsworth came under fire from senate liberals black organizations and labor unions for his conservative record on civil rights and for what some critics claimed was a conflict of interest in several of the cases on which he had sat.
the senate rejected him.
nixons next choice was g harrold carswell a judge of the florida federal appeals court of little distinction and widely considered unfit for the supreme court.
the senate rejected his nomination too.
nixon was careful thereafter to choose justices of standing within the legal community to fill vacancies on the supreme court harry blackmun a moderate jurist from minnesota lewis f powell jr a respected judge from virginia and william rehnquist a member of the nixon justice department.
the new court however fell short of what many conservatives had expected.
rather than retreating from its commitment to social reform the court in many areas became more committed.
in swann v charlotte mecklenburg board of education 1971 it ruled in favor of the use of forced busing to achieve racial balance in schools.
in furman v georgia 1972 the court overturned existing capital punishment statutes and established strict new guidelines for such laws in the future.
in roe v wade 1973 it struck down laws forbidding abortions.
in other decisions however the burger n court was more moderate.
although bakke v board.
of regents of iustices approved busing as a tool california for achieving integration they rejected in milliken v bradleg 1974 a plan to transfer students across district lines in this case between detroit and its suburbs to achieve racial balance.
while the court upheld the principle of affirmative action in its celebrated 1978 decision bakke v board of regents of california it established restrictive new guidelines for such programs in the future.
the election of 1972 nixon entered the presidential race in 1972 with a substantial reserve of strength.
he had made significant achievements in foreign policy and in the de escalation of the vietnam war.
his energetic reelection committee collected enormous sums of money to support the campaign.
the president himself used the powers of incumbency with great effect refraining from campaigning and concentrating on highly publicized international decisions and state visits.
agencies of the federal government dispensed funds and favors to strengthen nixons political standing in critical areas.
nixon was most fortunate in 1972 however in his opposition.
the return of george wallace to the presidential fray caused some early concern.
nixon was delighted to see wallace run in the democratic primaries and quietly encouraged him to do so.
but he feared that wallace would again launch a third party campaign.
the possibility of such a campaign vanished in may when a would be assassin shot the alabama governor during a campaign rally in maryland.
paralyzed from the waist down wallace was unable to continue campaigning.
the democrats in the meantime were making their own george contributions to the nixon cause by nom mcgovern inating for president a representative of their most liberal wing senator george s mcgovern of south dakota.
an outspoken critic of the war a forceful advocate of advanced liberal positions on most social and economic issues mcgovern seemed to embody many aspects of the turbulent 1960s that middle class americans were most eager to reject.
mcgovern profited greatly from party reforms which he had helped to draft that reduced the power of party leaders and gave increased influence to inexperienced delegates in the selection of the democratic ticket.
but those same reforms helped make the democratic convention of 1972 an unappealing spectacle to much of the public.
on election day nixon won reelection nixons by one of the iargest margins in history landslide 6q.
percent of the popular vote compared fith 37 5 percent for the forlorn mcgovern and an electoral aargin of 520 to 17 debating the past mm watergate tl dpa tt t.
c a ter watergate one of the most famous political scandals in ij jd w tt o jd w american history historians and others continue to argue about its causes and significance.
their interpretations fall into several broad categories.
one argument emphasizes the evolution of the institution of the presidency over time and sees watergate as the result of a much larger pattern of presidential usurpations of power that stretched back at least several decades.
arthur schlesinger jr helped develop this argument in his 1973 book the imperial presidency which argues that ever since world war ii americans have believed that the nation was in a state of permanent crisis threatened from abroad by the menace of communism threatened from within by the danger of insufficient will.
the belief of a succession of presidents in the urgency of this crisis and in their duty to take whatever measures might be necessary to combat it led them gradually to usurp more and more power from congress the courts and the public.
initially this expansion of presidential power came in the realm of international affairs covert and at times illegal activities overseas.
but in the postwar world domestic politics began to seem inseparable from international politics.
gradually presidents began to look for ways to circumvent constraints in domestic matters as well.
nixon s actions in the watergate crisis were in other words a culmination of this long and steady expansion of covert presidential power.
jonathan schell in the time of illusion 1975 offers a variation of this argument tying the crisis of the presidency to the pressure that nuclear weapons place on presidents to protect the nation s and their own credibility.
other commentators but few serious historical studies go even further and argue that what happened to produce the watergate scandals was not substantively different from the normal patterns of presidential behavior that nixon simply got caught where other presidents had not and that a long standing liberal hostility toward nixon ensured that he would pay a higher price for his behavior than other presidents would.
a second explanation of watergate emphasizes the difficult social and political environment of the late 1960s and early 1970s.
nixon entered office according to this view facing an unprecedentedly radical opposition that would stop at nothing to discredit the war and destroy his authority.
he found himself therefore drawn into taking similarly desperate measures of his own to defend himself from these extraordinary challenges.
nixon made this argument in his own 1975 memoirs it was this epidemic of unprecedented domestic terrorism that prompted our efforts to discover the best means by which to deal with this new phenomenon of highly organized and highly skilled revolutionaries the troubled economy for three decades the american economy had been the envy of the world.
it had produced as much as a third of the worlds industrial goods and had dominated international trade.
the american dollar had been the strongest currency in the world and the american standard of living had risen steadily from its already substantial heights.
many americans assumed that this remarkable prosperity was the normal condition of their society.
in fact however it rested in part on several advantages that were rapidly disappearing by the late 1960s above all the absence of significant foreign competition and easy access to raw materials in the third world.
inflation which had been creeping upward for several years when richard nixon took office soon began to soar it would be the most disturbing economic problem of the 1970s.
its most visible cause was a significant increase in federal deficit spending that began in the 1960s when the inflation johnson administration tried to fund the war in vietnam and its ambitious social programs without raising taxes.
but there were other equally important causes.
no longer did the united states have exclusive access to cheap raw materials around the globe not only were other industrial nations now competing for increasingly 830 scarce raw materials but third world suppliers of those materials were beginning to realize their value and to demand higher prices for them.
annual percentage change in consumer price index inflation 1960 2010 inflation was the biggest economic worry of most americans in e 1970s and early 1980s and this chart shows why.
having remained very low through the early 1960s inflation rose slowly in the second half of the decade and then dramatically in the mi and late 1970stefore beginning a long and steady decline in the early 1980s.
what caused the great spike in inflation in the 1970s.
nixon quits tourists outside the white house learn that nixon will likely resign the presidency the next day august 9 1974.
bettmann corbis understand analyze and evaluate 1 for scholars who cite social and institutional forces as explanations for watergate what are these forces.
how did they contribute to the watergate scandal.
2 many scholars see nixon as the party most responsible for watergate.
how did nixon s personality contribute to both his rise to power as president and his downfall as a result of watergate.
did nixon s resignation permanently damage the public s trust in the presidency.
3 what have been the lasting effects of watergate on people s perception of the presidency and the government.
dedicated to the violent destruction of our democratic system the historian herbert parmet echoes parts of this argument in richard nixon and his america 1990 stephen ambrose offers a more muted version of the same view in richard nixon 1989.
most of those who have written about watergate however search for the explanation not in institutional or social forces but in the personalities of the people involved and most notably in the personality of richard nixon.
even many of those who have developed structural explana tions schlesinger schell and ambrose for example return eventually to nixon himself as the most important explanation for watergate.
others begin there perhaps most notably stanley i kutler in the wars of watergate 1990 and later abuse of power 1997 in which he presents extensive excerpts from conversations about watergate taped in the nixon white house.
kutler emphasizes nixons lifelong resort to vicious political tactics and his long standing belief that he was a special target of unscrupulous enemies and had to get them before they got him.
watergate was rooted kutler argues in the personality and history of nixon himself.
a corrosive hatred he claims decisively shaped nixon s own behavior his career and eventually his historical standing.
rn the memoirs of richard nixon new york grosset dunlap 1978.
copyright 1978 by richard nixon.
the greatest immediate blow to the american economy was the increasing cost of energy.
more than any nation on earth the united states based its economy on the easy availability of cheap and plentiful fossil fuels.
domestic petroleum reserves were no longer sufficient to meet this demand and the nation was heavily dependent on imports from the middle east and africa.
for many years the organization of petroleum exporting countries opec had operated as an informal bargaining unit opec for the sale of oil by third world nations but had seldom managed to exercise any real strength.
but in the early 1970s opec began to use its oil as both an economic tool and a political weapon.
in 1973 in the midst of the yorn kippur war arab members of opec announced that they would no longer ship petroleum to nations supporting israel which meant the united states and its allies in western europe.
at about the same time the opec nations agreed to raise their prices by 400 percent.
these twin shocks produced momentary economic chaos in the west.
the united states suffered its first fuel shortage since world war ii.
and although the boycott ended a few months later the price of energy continued to skyrocket both because of opec s new militant policies and because of the weakening competi tive position of the dollar in world markets.
but inflation was only one of the new problems facing the u s economy.
another was the decline of the nations manufacturing sector.
american industry had flourished in the after math of world war ii.
by the 1970s however the climate for american manufacturing had changed significantly.
many of the great industrial plants were now many decades old much less efficient than the newer plants that japan and european industrial nations had constructed after the war.
in some industries notably steel and automobiles management had become complacent and bureaucratic.
most important american manufacturing now faced major competition from abroad not only in world trade which still constituted only a small part of the u s economy but also at home.
automobiles steel and many other manufactured goods from japan and europe established major footholds in the u s markets.
some of americas new competitors benefited from lower labor costs than their u s counterparts.
thus the 1970s marked the beginning of a long painful process of deindustrialization during which thousands of factories across the country closed deindustrialization j.
their gates and millions of workers lost their jobs.
new employment opportunities were becoming available in other growing areas of the economy technology information systems and many other knowledge based 832 chapter 30 industries that would ultimately drive an extraordinary if unbalanced economic revival in the 1980s and 1990s.
but many industrial workers were poorly equipped to move into those jobs.
the result was a growing pool of unemployed and underemployed workers the virtual disappearance of industrial jobs from many inner cities where large numbers of minorities lived and the impoverishment of communities dependent on particular industries.
some of the nation s manufacturing sectors ultimately revived but few regained the size and dominance they had enjoyed in the 1950s and 1960s.
inequality inequality in income and wealth is a characteristic of every nation but in the last four decades that inequality has become dramatically more unequal in the united states.
from the end of world war ii to the middle of the 1970s increases in incomes and to a lesser extent increases in total wealth grew at about the same rate across the range of incomes.
people in the bottom 20 percent of the income scale saw their incomes increase at about the same rate that people in the top 20 percent of the income scale did.
but beginning in about 1973 that pattern began to change dramatically.
the top 20 percent of earners saw their incomes rise at a much higher rate than did the earners below them.
the top 5 percent did even better.
and the top 1 percent did far better still earning 24 percent of total income.
at the same time people in the bottom 20 percent saw their incomes slowly decrease while the middle class earners saw their earnings remain relatively stagnant with incomes rising at about the same rate as inflation.
there are many explanations for this growing inequality.
the decline of industry in the united states has pushed many once well paid workers into much lower paid nonunion jobs.
income tax reductions have increased the incomes of the wealthiest americans much more rapidly than they have increased the incomes of lower income people.
the growth of the financial sector and the extraordinary wealth that many financiers have accumulated in recent decades has helped concentrate income and wealth at the top in unprecedented ways.
whether this inequality is a danger to american democracy as many people believe or a product of economic success that has improved or will improve the lot of everyone as many others believe it is nevertheless the case that the incomes in the united states are far more unequal today than they were a generation or more ago.
the nixon response the nixon administration responded to these mounting economic problems by focusing on the one thing it thought it could control inflation.
placing conservative economists at the head of the federal reserve board he ensured sharply higher interest rates and a contraction of the money supply.
but the tight money policy did little to curb inflation the cost of living rose a cumulative 15 percent during nixons first two and a half years in office.
economic growth in the mean time declined.
the united states was stagflation encountering a new and puzzling dilemma stagflation a combination of rising prices and general economic stagnation.
in the summer of 1971 nixon imposed a ninety day freeze on all wages and prices at their existing levels.
then in november he launched what he called phase ii of his economic plan mandatory guidelines for wage and price increases to be administered by a federal agency.
inflation subsided temporarily but the recession continued.
fearful that the recession would be more damaging than inflation in an election year the administration reversed itself late in 1971 interest rates were allowed to drop sharply and government spending grew.
the new tactics helped revive the economy in the short term but inflation rose substantially particularly after the administration abandoned the strict phase ii controls.
in 1973 prices rose 9 percent in 1974 after the arab oil embargo and the opec price increases they rose 12 percent the highest rate since the relaxation of price controls shortly after world war ii.
the value of the dollar continued to slide and the nations international trade continued to decline.
the watergate crisis although economic problems greatly concerned the american people in the 1970s another stunning development almost entirely preoccupied the nation beginning early in 1973 the fall of richard nixon.
the scandals nixons crisis was in part a result of long term changes in the presidency.
public expectations of the president had increased yhe dramatically in the years since world war changing vet t ie constraints placed on the author presidency ity f the office had grown as well.
in response a succession of presidents had sought new methods for the exercise of power often stretching the law occasionally breaking it.
nixon greatly accelerated these trends.
facing a democratic congress hostile to his goals he attempted to find ways to circumvent the legislature whenever possible.
saddled with a federal bureaucracy unresponsive to his wishes he constructed a hierarchy in which virtually all executive power became concentrated in the white house.
operating within a rigid even autocratic staff structure the president became a solitary at times brooding figure.
unknown to all but a few intimates he also became mired in a pattern of illegalities and abuses of power that in late 1972 began to break through to the surface.
early on the morning of june 17 1972 police arrested five men who had broken into the offices of the democratic national committee in the watergate office building in the crisis of authority.
833 the washington d c two others were seized bre hc in15 a shrt time later and charged with super vising the break in.
when reporters for the washington post began researching the backgrounds of the culprits they discovered that among those involved in the burglary were former employees of the committee for the re election of the president.
one of them had worked in the white house.
moreover they had been paid to execute the break in from a secret fund of the reelection committee a fund controlled by members of the white house staff.
public interest in the disclosures grew slowly in the last months of 1972 early in 1973 however the watergate burglars went on trial and under relentless prodding from federal judge john j sirica one of the defendants james w mccord agreed to cooperate both with the grand jury and with a special senate investigating committee.
mccords testimony opened a floodgate of confessions and for months a parade of white house and campaign officials exposed one illegality after another.
foremost among them was a member of the inner circle of the white house counsel to the president john dean who leveled allegations against nixon himself.
two different sets of scandals emerged from the investigations.
one was a general pattern of abuses of power involving both the white house and the nixon campaign committee which included but was not limited to the watergate break in.
the other scandal and the one that became the major focus of public attention for nearly two years was the way in which the administration tried to manage the investigations of the watergate break in and other abuses a pattern of behavior that became known as the cover up there was never any conclusive evidence that the president had planned or approved the watergate burglary in advance.
but there was evidence that he had been involved in illegal efforts to obstruct investigations and withhold information.
testimony before the senate provided evidence of the complicity of dean attorney general john mitchell top white house assistants h r haldeman and john ehrlichman and others.
as interest in the case grew to some cover up thing approaching a national obsession the investigation focused increasingly on a single question in the words of senator howard baker of tennessee what did the president know and when did he know it nixon accepted the departure of those members of his administration implicated in the scandals.
but he continued to insist that he himself was innocent.
there the matter might have rested had it not been for the disclosure during the senate hearings of a white house taping system that had recorded virtually every conversation in the president s office during the period in question.
all the groups investigating the scandals sought access to the tapes nixon pleading executive privilege refused to release them.
a special prosecutor appointed by the president to handle the watergate cases harvard law professor archibald cox took nixon to court in october 1973 in an effort to force him to relinquish the recordings.
nixon fired cox and suffered the humiliation of watching saturday night massacre both attorney general elliot richardson and his deputy resign in protest.
this saturday night massacre made the presidents predicament infinitely worse.
not only did public pressure force him to appoint a new special prosecutor texas attorney leon jaworski who proved just as determined as cox to subpoena the tapes but the episode also pre cipitated an investigation by the house of representatives into the possibility of impeachment.
the fall of richard nixon nixons situation deteriorated further in the following months.
late in 1973 vice president spiro agnew became embroiled in a scandal of his own when evidence surfaced that he had accepted bribes and kickbacks while serving as governor of maryland and even as vice president.
in return for a justice department agreement not to press the case agnew pleaded no contest to a lesser charge of income tax evasion and resigned from the government.
with the controversial agnew no longer in line to succeed to the presidency the prospect of removing nixon from the white house became less worrisome to his opponents.
the new vice president the first appointed under the terms of the twenty fifth amendment which had been adopted in 1967 was house minority leader gerald ford an amiable and popular michigan congressman.
in april 1974 in an effort to head off further subpoenas of the tapes the president released transcripts of a number of relevant conversations claiming that they proved his innocence.
but even these edited tapes seemed to suggest nixons complicity in the cover up.
in july the crisis reached a climax.
first the supreme court ruled unanimously in united states v richard m nixon that the president must relinquish the tapes to special prosecutor jaworski.
days later the house judiciary committee voted to recommend three articles of impeachment charging that nixon had first obstructed justice in the watergate cover up second misused federal agencies to violate the rights of citizens and third defied the authority of congress by refusing to deliver tapes and other materials subpoenaed by the committee.
even without additional evidence nixon might well have been impeached by the full house and convicted by the senate.
early in august however he provided at last what many wavering members of congress had begun to call the smoking gun among the tapes that the supreme court compelled nixon to relinquish were several that offered apparently incontrovertible evidence of his involvement in the watergate cover up.
only days after the burglary the recordings disclosed the president had ordered the fbi to stop investigating the break in.
impeachment and conviction now seemed inevitable.
for several days nixon brooded in the white house.
finally on august 8 1974 he announced his resignation the first president in american history ever to nixon resigns do sq at noon the next while nixon u s v richard m nixon 834 chapter 6 m tt york 1tbilf lihrarit a divided convention on the ety or order o r cons i derations cincinnati lately instituted by the major generals brigadier generals and other officers of the american army.
proving that it creates a race of hereditary patricians o r nobility.
interspersed with remarks on hi consequences to the paiteom and hanmnsis of the reroute.
addrefted to the people of south carolina and their representatives.
by a 8 8 i p mfr a slippered to he written by jedanus burke efqoire one of thv chief juffieei of the state of sautli carohiis.
jl ne tit trumftt in zlm.
phlladstpgt at mated and sold by robert bell to turi stntt.
price dtmv.
m cc trx ni.
a broadside against nobility this 1783 pamphlet was one of many expressions of the broad democratic sentiment that the revolution unleashed in american society.
the society of the cincinnati was an organization created shortly after the revolution by men who had served as high ranking officers in the patriot army.
to many americans however the society membership in which was to be hereditary looked suspiciously like the inherited aristocracies of england.
this pamphlet printed in philadelphia but intended for south carolinians warns of the dangers the society supposedly posed to the freedom and happiness of the republic fotosearch getty images fifty five men representing all the states except rhode island attended one or more sessions of the convention that sat in the philadelphia state house from may to september 1787 these founding fathers as they would later become known were relatively young their average age was forty four and only one delegate benjamin franklin then eighty one was of advanced age.
they were well educated by the standards of their time.
most represented the great propertied interests of the country and many feared what one of them called the turbulence and follies of democracy.
yet all were also products of the american revolution and retained the the founding fathers uovninrinmrv qiicnirinn nf concentrated the convention unanimously chose washington to preside over its sessions and then closed its business to the public and the press.
the members then ruled that each state delegation would have a single vote.
major decisions would not require unanimity as they did in congress but only a simple majority.
virginia the most populous state sent the best prepared delegation to philadelphia.
james madison thirty six years old was its intellectual leader.
he had devised a detailed plan for a new national government and the virginians used it to control the agenda from the moment the convention began.
edmund randolph of virginia began the discussion by proposing that a national government ought to be established consisting of a supreme legislative executive and judiciary despite its vagueness it was a drastic proposal.
it called for the creation of a government very different from the existing the virginia confederation which among other things plan had no executive branch.
but so committed were the delegates to fundamental reform that they approved this resolution after only perfunctory debate.
then randolph introduced the details of madisons plan.
the virginia plan as it came to be known called for a new national legislature consisting of two houses.
in the lower house the states would be represented in proportion to their population thus the largest state virginia would have about ten times as many representatives as the smallest delaware.
members of the upper house were to be elected by the lower house under no rigid system of representation thus some of the smaller states might at times have no members in the upper house.
the proposal aroused immediate opposition among delegates from delaware new jersey and other small states.
some responded by arguing that congress had called the convention for the sole and express purpose of revising the articles of confederation and had no authority to do more than that.
eventually however william paterson of new jersey submitted a substantive alternative to the virginia plan a proposal for a federal as opposed to a national government.
the new jersey plan would preserve the existing one house legislature in which each state had equal representation but it gave congress expanded powers to tax and to regulate commerce.
the delegates voted to table paterson s proposal but not without taking note of the substantial support for it among small state representatives.
the constitution and the new republic 163 the virginia plan remained the basis for discussion.
but its supporters realized they would have to make concessions to the small states if the convention was ever to reach a general agreement.
they soon conceded an important point by agreeing to permit the members of the upper house to be elected by the state legislatures rather than by the lower house of the national legislature.
thus each state would always have at least one member in the upper house.
but many questions remained.
would the states be equally represented in the upper house or would the large states have small states more members than the small ones.
would versus large slaves who could not vote be counted as states part of the population in determining the size of a states representation in congress or were they to be considered simple property.
delegates from states with large and apparently permanent slave populations especially those from south carolina wanted to have it both ways.
they argued that slaves should be considered persons in determining representation.
but they wanted slaves to be considered property if the new government were to levy taxes on each state on the basis of population.
representatives from states where slavery had disappeared or was expected soon to disappear argued that slaves should be included in calculating taxation but not representation.
no one argued seriously for giving slaves citizenship or the right to vote.
compromise the delegates bickered for weeks.
by the end of june as both temperature and tempers rose to uncomfortable heights the convention seemed in danger of collapsing.
benjamin franklin the great who remaineb a calm voice of conciliation compromise through the summer warned that if they failed the delegates would become a reproach and by word down to future ages.
and what is worse mankind may hereafter from this unfortunate instance despair of establishing governments by human wisdom and leave it to chance war and conquest partly because of franklins soothing presence the delegates refused to give up.
finally on july 2 the convention agreed to create a grand committee with a single delegate from each state and with franklin as chairman to resolve the disagreements.
tlie imaninpd view of the constitutional convention in 1787 for the weatherwises federal almanack whose title suggested its the grand convention the enqraver john norman created this imagin.
w whvcin iiuh i lie 9.
p iaf4e dhia where the convention took place which gave this engraving a sense of reality even though norman never pro constitution political leanings.
norman was familiar with the interior of the hall in hiilafleipnia wne attended a session of the convention.
hall of representatives washington d c the bn geman r i rary debating the past the meaning of the constitution p f c cons u on has inspired debate from the moment it was drafted.
some people argue jl h u that the constitution is a flexible document intended to evolve in response to society s evolution others argue that it has a fixed meaning rooted in the original intent of the framers and that to move beyond that is to deny its value.
historians too disagree about why the constitution was written and what it meant to some scholars the creation of the federal system was an effort to preserve the ideals of the revolution and to create a strong national government capable of exercising real authority to others the constitution was an effort to protect the economic interests of existing elites even at the cost of betraying the principles of the revolution.
to still others the constitution was designed to protect individual freedom and to limit the power of the federal government.
the first influential exponent of the heroic view of the constitution as the culmination of the revolution was john fiske.
in the critical period of american history 1888 fiske described the many problems that beset the nation under the articles of confederation economic difficulties the weakness and ineptitude of the new national government threats from abroad interstate jealousies and widespread lawlessness.
only the timely adoption of the constitution fiske claimed saved the young republic from disaster.
in an economic interpretation of the constitution of the united states 1913 charles a beard challenged fiske s view.
according to beard the 1780s had been a critical period primarily for conservative businessmen who feared that the decentralized political structure of the republic imperiled their financial position.
such men he claimed wanted a government able to promote industry and trade protect private property and make good the public debt much of which was owed to them.
the constitution was beard claimed an economic document drawn with superb skill by men whose property interests were immediately at stake and who won its ratification over the opposition of a majority of the people.
a series of powerful challenges to beards thesis emerged in the 1950s as many scholars began to argue that the constitution was not an effort to preserve property but rather an enlightened effort to ensure stability and order.
examining the debate between the federalists and the antifederalists forrest mcdonald in we the people 1958 concluded that there was no consistent relationship between wealth and property and support for the constitution.
instead opinion on the new system was far more likely to reflect local and regional interests.
the cumulative effect of these challenges greatly weakened beard s argument few historians any longer accepted his thesis without reservation.
committee produced a proposal that became the basis of the great compromise its most important achievement was resolving the difficult problem of representation.
the proposal called for a legislature in which the states would be represented in the lower house on the basis of population.
each slave would count as three fifths of a free person in determining the basis for both representation and direct taxation.
the three fifths formula was based on the false assumption that a slave was three fifths as productive as a free worker and thus contributed only three fifths as much wealth to the state.
the committee proposed that in the upper house the states should be represented equally with two members apiece.
the proposal broke the deadlock.
on july 16 1787 the convention voted to accept the compromise.
over the next few weeks the convention agreed to another important compromise on the explosive issue of slavery.
the representatives of the southern states feared that the power to regulate trade might interfere with their agrarian economy which relied heavily on sales abroad and with slavery.
in response the convention agreed that the new legislature would not be permitted to tax exports congress would also be forbidden to impose a duty of more than 10 a head on imported slaves and it would have no authority to stop the slave trade for twenty years.
to those delegates who viewed the continued 164 existence of slavery as an affront to the principles of the new nation this was a large and difficult concession.
they agreed to it because they feared that without it the constitution would fail.
the convention chose to ignore differences of opinion it was unable to resolve leaving important questions alive that would surface again in later years.
the constitution provided no definition of citizenship.
most important was the absence of a list of individual rights which would restrain the powers of the national government in the way that bills of rights restrained the state governments.
madison opposed the idea arguing that specifying rights that were reserved to the people would in effect limit those rights.
other delegates however feared that without such protections the national government might abuse its new authority.
the constitution of 1787 many people contributed to the creation of the american constitution but the single most important of them was james james madison the most creative political madison thinker of his generation.
perhaps madisons most important achievement was in helping resolve two important philosophical questions that had served as obstacles to the creation of an effective national national archives and records administration j and property and to defend the nation against the dangers of too much liberty.
but if madison and hamilton feared too much liberty they also feared too little.
and that made them receptive to the vigorous demands of the antifederalists for protections of individual rights which culminated in the bill of rights.
the constitution is not rakove argues infinitely malleable.
but neither does it have a fixed meaning that can be a reliable guide to how we interpret it today e om0erstawix amalyze amd evaluate in the 1960s a new group of scholars began to revive an economic interpretation of the constitution one that differed from beard s in important ways but that nevertheless emphasized social and economic factors as motives for supporting the federal system.
jackson turner main argued in the anti federalists 1961 that supporters of the constitution were cosmopolitan commercialists eager to advance the economic development of the nation the antifederalists by contrast were agrarian localists fearful of centralization.
gordon wood in the creation of the american republic 1969 suggested that the debate over the state constitutions in the 1770s and 1780s reflected profound social divisions and that those same divisions helped shape the argument over the federal constitution.
the federalists wood suggested were largely traditional aristocrats deeply concerned over the instability of life un der the articles of confederation and particularly alarmed by the decline in popular deference toward social elites.
the creation of the constitution wood argued was part of a larger search to create a legitimate political leadership based on the existing social hierarchy.
historians have continued to examine the question of intent did the framers intend a strong centralized political system or did they intend to create a decentralized system with a heavy emphasis on individual rights.
the answer according to jack rakove in original meanings 1996 and revolutionaries 2010 is both and many other things as well.
the constitution rakove argues was the result of a long and vigorous debate through which the views of many different groups found their way into the document.
james madison a strong nationalist believed that only a powerful central government could preserve stability in a large nation.
alexander hamilton also saw the constitution as a way to protect order 1 is the constitution a conservative liberal or radical document.
did the framers consider the constitution something finished with the exception of constitutional amendments or did they consider it a document that would evolve in response to changes in society over time.
2 which parts of the constitution suggest that the framers intent was to create a strong centralized political system.
which parts suggest that the framers intent was to create a decentralized system with heavy emphasis on individual rights.
3 although many amendments have been proposed only twenty seven have been added to the constitution.
why do you think so few have been added.
government the question of sovereignty and the question of limiting power.
the question of sovereignty had been one of the chief sources of friction between the colonies and great britain and it continued to trouble americans as they attempted to create their own government.
how could both the national government and the state governments exercise sovereignty the question at same time where did ultimate sov of sovereignty ereignty lie.
the answer madison and his contemporaries decided was that all power at all levels of government flowed ultimately from the people.
thus neither the federal government nor the state governments were truly sovereign.
all of them derived their authority from below.
the opening phrase of the constitution devised by gouverneur morris was we the people of the united statesman expression of the belief that the new government derived its power not from the states but from its citizens.
resolving the problem of sovereignty made possible one of the distinctive features of the constitution its distribution of powers between the national and state governments.
it was madison wrote at the time in strictness neither a national nor a federal constitution but a composition of both the constitution and the government it created were to be the supreme law of the land no state would have the authority to defy it.
the federal government was to have broad powers including the power to tax to regulate commerce to control the currency and to pass such laws as would be necessary and proper for carrying out its other responsibilities.
gone was the stipulation of the articles that each state shall retain every power jurisdiction and right not expressly delegated to the united states in congress assembled on the other hand the constitution accepted the existence of separate states and left important powers in their hands.
in addition to solving the question of sovereignty the constitution produced a solution to a problem troubling to americans the problem of concentrated authority.
nothing so frightened the leaders of the new nation as the prospect of creating a tyrannical government.
that fear had been one of the chief obstacles to the creation of a national government.
drawing from the ideas of the french philosopher baron de montesquieu most americans had long believed that the best way to avoid tyranny was to keep government close to the people.
a republic they thought must remain confined to a small area.
a large nation would breed corruption and despotism because the rulers would be so distant from most of the people that there would be no way to control them.
165 166 chapter 18 and universities few serious scientists any longer questioned its basic validity.
unseen by most urban americans at the time however the rise of darwinism was contributing to a deep schism between the new cosmopolitan culture of the city which was receptive to new ideas such as evolution and a traditional provincial culture located mainly although not wholly in rural areas which remained wedded to fundamentalist religious beliefs and older values.
thus the late nineteenth century saw not only the rise of a liberal protestantism in tune with new scientific discoveries but also the beginning of an organized protestant fundamentalism rejecting evolution which would make its presence felt politically in the 1920s and again in the late twentieth century and beyond.
darwinism helped spawn other new intellectual currents.
there was the social darwinism of william graham sumner pragmatism anc others which industrialists used so enthusiastically to justify their favored position in american life.
but there were also more sophisticated philosophies among them a doctrine that became known as pragmatism which seemed peculiarly a product of america s changing material civilization.
william james a harvard psychologist and brother of the novelist henry james was the most prominent publicist of the new theory although earlier intellectuals such as charles s peirce and later ones such as john dewey were also important to its development and dissemination.
according to the pragmatists modern society should rely for guidance not on inherited ideals and moral principles but on the test of scientific inquiry.
no idea or institution not even religious faith was valid they claimed unless it worked and unless it stood the test of experience.
the ultimate test for us of what a truth means james wrote is the conduct it dictates or inspires a similar concern for scientific inquiry was intruding into the social sciences and challenging traditional orthodoxies.
economists such as richard t ely and simon patten argued for a more active and pragmatic use of scientific discipline.
sociologists such as edward a ross and lester frank ward urged applying the scientific method to the solution of social and political problems.
historians such as frederick jackson turner and charles beard argued that economic factors more than spiritual ideals had been the governing force in historical development.
john dewey proposed a new approach to education that placed less emphasis on the rote learning of traditional knowledge and more on a flexible democratic approach to schooling one that enabled students to acquire knowledge that would help them deal with the realities of their society.
the relativistic implications of darwinism also promoted growth of the growth of anthropology and encour anthropology aged some scholars to begin examining other cultures most significantly perhaps the culture of american indians in new ways.
a few white americans began to look at indian society as a coherent culture with its own norms and values that were worthy of respect and preservation even though different from those of white society.
but such ideas about native americans found very little support outside a few corners of the intellectual world until much later in the twentieth century.
dempsey and firpo the artist george bellows began painting fight scenes in the first years of the twentieth century when boxing appealed primarily to working class urban communities.
by 1924 when he painted this view of the dempsey firpo fight prizefighting had become one of the most popular sports in america.
whitney museum of american art new york usa bridgeman images toward universal schooling a society that was coming to depend increasingly on specialized skills and scientific knowledge was of course a society with a high demand for education.
the late nineteenth century therefore was a time of rapid expansion and reform of american schools and universities.
one example was the spread of free public primary and secondary education.
in 1860 there spread of were only 100 public public schools in the entire united education states.
by 1900 the number had reached 6 000 and by 1914 over 12 000 by 1900 compulsory school attendance laws were in effect in thirty one states and territories.
but education was still far from universal.
rural areas lagged far behind urban industrial ones in funding public education.
and in the south many blacks had no access to schools.
educational reformers few of whom shared the relativistic views of anthropologists sought to pr vide educational opportunities for the indian tribes as well in an effort to civilize them and help the age of the city 511 william graham sumner william graham sumner was an influential scholar who was appointed the first professor of sociology at yale.
a dynamic writer and teacher he is best known for his promotion of social darwinism a now discredited theory that used the theory of evolution to explain differences among peoples.
the granger collection new york them adapt to white society.
in the 1870s reformers recruited small groups of indians to attend hampton institute a primarily black college.
in 1879 richard henry pratt a former army officer organized the carlisle indian industrial school in pennsylvania.
carlisle emphasized the kind of practical industrial education that booker t washington had urged at his school at tuskegee.
equally important it isolated indians from their tribes and tried to force them to assimilate to white norms.
the purpose pratt said was to kill the indian and save the man carlisle inspired other similar schools in the west.
ultimately the reform efforts failed both because of indian resistance and because of inadequate funding incompetent administration and poor teaching.
colleges and universities were also proliferating rapidly in the ute nineteenth century.
they benefited particularly from the morrill land grant act of the civil war era by which the federal land grant government had donated land to states for institutions the establishment of colleges.
after 1865 states in the south and west took particular advantage of the law.
in all sixty nine land grant institutions were established in the last decades of the century among them the state university systems of california illinois minnesota and wisconsin.
other universities benefited from millions of dollars contributed by business and financial tycoons.
rockefeller carnegie and others gave generously to such schools as the university of chicago columbia harvard northwestern princeton syracuse and yale.
other philanthropists founded new universities or reorganized and renamed older ones to perpetuate their family names vanderbilt johns hopkins cornell duke tulane and stanford.
education for women the post civil war era saw too an important expansion i of educational opportunities for women although such opportunities continued to lag far behind those available to men and were almost always denied to black women.
most public high schools accepted women readily but opportunities for higher education were few.
at the end of the civil war only three american colleges were coeducational.
in the years after the war some of the land grant col womens le es universities in the midwest and colleges such private universities as cornell and wesleyan began to admit women along with men.
but coeducation provided fewer opportunities than the creation of a network of women s colleges.
mount holyoke which had begun its life in 1836 as a seminary for women became a full fledged college in the 1880s.
at about the same time new female institutions were emerging vassar wellesley smith bryn mawr wells and goucher.
a few of the larger private universities created separate colleges for women on their campuses barnard at columbia and radcliffe at harvard for example.
proponents of women s colleges saw the institutions as places where female students would not be treated as second class citizens by predominantly male student bodies and faculties.
the female college was part of an important phenomenon in the history of modern american women the emergence of a distinctive women s community.
most faculty members and many administrators were women often unmarried.
and the life of the college produced a spirit of sorority and commitment among educated women that had important effects in later years as women became the leaders of many reform activities.
most female college graduates eventually married but many married at a later age than their non college educated counterparts and in some cases continued to pursue careers after marriage and motherhood.
a significant minority perhaps over 25 percent did not marry but devoted themselves exclusively to careers.
a leader at bryn mawr remarked our failures marry that was surely rhetorical excess.
the growth of female higher education clearly became for some women a liberating experience persuading them that they had roles to perform in society in addition to those of wives and mothers.
512 chapter 32 election night 2000 the electronic billboard in new york citys times square showing network coverage of the presidential contest reports george bush the winner of the 2000 presidential race late on election night.
a few hours later the networks retracted their projections because of continuing uncertainty over the results in florida.
five weeks later and then only because of the controversial intervention of the supreme court bush finally emerged the victor.
chris hondros getty images late on december 12 the u s supreme court issued a controversial 5 4 decision for bush and the long election ended.
the second bush presidency george w bush assumed the presidency in january 2001 burdened by both the controversies surrounding his election and the perception that he was ill prepared for the office.
bushs principal campaign promise had been that he would bush tax cuts use pre ictec budget surplus to finance a massive tax reduction.
he narrowly won passage of the largest tax cut in american history 1 35 tril lion over several years.
having campaigned as a moderate adept at building coalitions across party lines bush governed as a staunch 51 of electorate voting the election of 2000 the 2000 presidential election was one of the closest and most controversial in american history.
it also starkly revealed a new pattern of party strength which had been developing over the previous decade.
democrats swept the northeast and most of the industrial midwest and carried all the states of the pacific coast.
republicans swept the south the plains states and the mountain states with the exception of new mexico and held on to a few traditional republican strongholds in the midwest.
compare this map to those of earlier elections in particular the election of 1896 and ask how the pattern of party support changed over the course of the twentieth century.
conservative relying on one of the most orthodox members of his own party for support.
the presidents political adviser karl rove encouraged the administration to take increasingly conservative positions.
bush appealed to the gun lobby by refusing to support a renewal of the assault weapons ban that clinton had enacted.
he proposed a constitutional amendment to ban gay marriage.
the bush administration was part of a broad and successful effort to mobilize evangelical christians as an active part of the republican coalition.
but almost from the beginning the aftermath of the september 11 attacks dominated both bushs presidency and the nations politics.
the election of 2004 the 2004 election pitted president bush who was unopposed within his party against john kerry a democratic senator from massachusetts.
throughout the months before the election voters were almost evenly divided again.
the election itself although very close was more decisive than the election of 2000 bush won 51 percent of the popular vote to kerrys 48 the age of globalization 861 flip flopping the tradition of accusing opponents of changing their public positions for political gain called flip flopping has been a long time feature of american politics.
here a supporter of george w bush uses her footwear to ridicule his opponent senator john kerry as a flip flopper on the issue of the war with iraq.
wilfredo lee ap images candidate party electoral vote popular vote george w bush 286 62 040 606 republican 51 john f kerry 252 59 028 109 democratic 48 60 of electorate voting the economic boom the last three decades have seen remarkable changes in american life some a result of the end of the cold war some the changing character of the american population and some a product of a rapidly evolving culture.
but most of these changes were at least in part a product of the dramatic transformation of the american economy.
from stagflation to growth the roots of the economic growth of the 1980s 1990s and 2000s lay in part in the troubled years of the 1970s when the united states seemed for a time to be losing its ability to produce long term prosperity.
in the face of the sluggish growth and persistent inflation of those years however many american corporations began making important changes in the way they ran their businesses changes that contributed to both the prosperity of the last decades of the twentieth century and the growing inequality that pra tkzes accompanied it.
businesses invested heavily in new technology to make themselves more efficient and productive.
corporations began to consider mergers to provide themselves with a more diversified basis for growth.
many enterprises created more energy efficient plants and offices.
perhaps most important of all american businesses sought to reduce their labor costs which were among the highest in the world and which many economists and business leaders believed had made the united states the election of 2004 the 2004 election repeated the pattern established in 2000 the democrats led this time by massachusetts senator john f kerry swept the northeast most of the industrial midwest and the pacific coast.
the republicans led by president bush carried almost everything else.
although bush s popular and electoral margins were both larger than they had been in 2000 the election remained extremely close.
uncompetitive against the many emerging economies that relied on low wage workers.
businesses cut labor costs in many ways.
they took a much harder line against unions.
nonunion companies became more successful in staving off unionization drives.
some companies moved their operations to areas of the country where unions were weak and wages low the american south and midwest in particular.
and many companies moved much of their production out of the united states to such nations as mexico and china where there were large available pools of cheaper labor.
digital technology made possible an enormous range of new products computers the internet cellular phones digital music video and cameras personal wustries digital assistants and many other products.
the technology industries created many new jobs and produced new consumer needs and appetites.
but they did not create as many jobs as older industrial sectors had.
the american economy experienced rapid growth in the last decades of the twentieth century and into the twenty first.
the gross national product the total of goods and services produced by the united states almost quadrupled in twenty years from 2 7 trillion in 1980 to over 9 8 trillion in 2000 to 15 7 trillion by 2013 inflation was low throughout these decades never rising above 3 percent in any year.
stock prices 862 chapter 19 war.
finally the three nations agreed to share power over samoa.
the three way arrangement failed to halt the rivalries of its members and in 1899 the united states and germany divided the islands between them compensating britain with territories elsewhere in the pacific.
the united states retained the harbor at pago pago.
war with spain imperial ambitions had thus begun to stir within the united states well before the late 1890s.
but a war with spain in 1898 turned those stirrings into overt expansionism.
the war transformed americas relationship to the rest of the world and left the nation with a far flung overseas empire.
controversy over cuba the spanish american war was a result of events in cuba which along with puerto rico now represented all that remained of spains once extensive american empire.
cubans had been resisting spanish rule since at least 1868 many americans had sympathized with the cubans during that long struggle but the united states had not intervened.
in 1895 the cubans rebelled again.
this revolution produced a ferocity on both sides that horrified many americans.
cuban revolt the cubans deliberately devastated the island to force the spaniards to leave.
the spanish commanded by general valeriano weyler confined civilians in some areas to hastily prepared concentration camps where they died by the thousands victims of disease and malnutrition.
the american press took to calling the general butcher weyler the spanish had used some of these same savage methods during earlier struggles in cuba without shocking american sensibilities.
but the revolt of 1895 was reported more fully and sensationally by the american press which helped create the impression that the spaniards were committing all the atrocities when in fact there was considerable brutality on both sides.
the conflict in cuba came at a particularly opportune moment for the publishers of some american newspapers joseph pulitzer with his new york world and william randolph hearst with his new york journal.
see patterns of popular culture pp.
in the 1890s hearst and pulitzer were engaged in a ruthless circulation war and they both sent batteries of reporters and illustrators to the island with orders to provide accounts of spanish atrocities.
a growing population of cuban emigres in the united duty of the hour i his 1892 lithograph was no doubt inspired by the saying out of the fryinq pan and int r spanish misrule contemplates an even more dangerous alternative anarchy or home rule.
cartoonist louis d i.
6 a despairin9 c united states whose duty to cuba is to save her not only from spain but from a worse fate the granger z ll.
f su ests that the nly r struggling to escape from the frying pan of solution to cuba s problems is control by the from crisis to empire 539 states centered in florida new york city philadelphia and trenton new jersey gave extensive support to the cuban revolutionary party whose headquarters were in new york city and helped publicize the cuban cause as effectively as those of the yellow journalists in generating american support for the revolution.
the mounting storm of indignation against spain did not persuade president cleveland to support intervention.
but when mckinley became president in 1897 he formally protested spain s uncivilized and inhuman conduct causing the spanish government fearful of american intervention to recall weyler modify the concentration policy and grant the island a qualified autonomy.
but whatever chances there were for a peaceful settlement vanished as a result of two dramatic incidents in february 1898 the first occurred when a cuban agent stole a private letter written by dupuy de lome the spanish minister in washington and turned it over to the american press.
the letter described mckinley as a weak man and a bidder for the admiration of the crowd this was no more than many americans including some republicans were saying about their president.
theodore roosevelt described mckinley as having no more backbone than a chocolate eclair but coming from a foreigner it created intense popular anger.
dupuy de lome promptly resigned.
while excitement over the de lome letter was still high the american battleship maine blew up in havana harbor the maine wit a oss more r an peple the ship had been ordered to cuba in january to protect american lives and property.
many americans assumed that the spanish had sunk the ship particularly when a naval court of inquiry hastily and inaccurately reported that an external explosion by a submarine mine had caused the disaster.
later evidence suggested that the disaster was actually the result of an accidental explosion inside one of the engine rooms.
war hysteria swept the country and congress unanimously appropriated 50 million for military preparations.
remember the mainer became a national chant for revenge.
mckinley still hoped to avoid a conflict.
but others in his administration including assistant secretary of the navy theodore roosevelt were clamoring for war.
in march 1898 the president asked spain to agree to an armistice negotiations for a permanent peace and an end to the concentration camps.
spain agreed to stop the fighting and eliminate the concentration camps but refused to negotiate with the rebels and reserved the right to resume hostilities at its discretion.
that satisfied neither public opinion nor the congress and a few days later the united states declared war on spain.
declared in april it was over in august in part because cuban rebels had already greatly weakened the spanish resistance which made the american intervention in many respects little more than a mopping up exercise.
only 460 americans were killed in battle or died of wounds although some 5 200 others perished of disease ma mobilization aria dysentery and typhoid among oth problems ers.
casualties among cuban insurgents who continued to bear the brunt of the fighting were much higher.
and yet the american war effort was not without difficulties.
united states soldiers faced serious supply problems a shortage of modern rifles and ammunition uniforms too heavy for the warm caribbean weather inadequate medical services and skimpy almost indigestible food.
the regular army numbered only 28 000 troops and officers most of whom had experience in quelling indian outbreaks but none in larger scale warfare.
as in the civil war the united states had to rely heavily on national guard units organized by local communities and commanded for the most part by local leaders without military experience.
there were racial conflicts.
a significant proportion of the american invasion force consisted of black soldiers.
some were volunteer troops put together by african american communities although some governors refused to allow the formation of such units.
others were members of the four black regiments in the regular army who had been stationed on the frontier to defend white settlements against indians and were now transferred east to fight in cuba.
as the black soldiers traveled through the south toward the training camps they chafed at the rigid segregation to which they were subjected and occasionally resisted the restrictions openly.
african american soldiers in georgia deliberately made use of a whites only park in florida they beat a soda fountain operator for refusing to serve them in tampa white provocations and black retaliation led to a nightlong riot that left thirty people wounded.
racial tensions continued in cuba where african americans played crucial roles in some of the important battles of the war including the famous charge at san juan hill and won many medals.
nearly half the cuban insurgents fighting with the americans were of african descent and unlike their american counterparts they were fully integrated into the rebel army.
indeed one of the leading insurgent generals antonio maceo was a black man.
the sight of black cuban soldiers fighting alongside whites as equals gave african americans a stronger sense of the injustice of their own position.
seizing the philippines by an accident of history the assistant secretary of the navy during the cuban revolution was theodore roosevelt an ardent anglophile eager to see the united states join the british and other nations as imperial powers.
roosevelt was in fact a relatively minor figure in the navy department but he was a splendid little war seetary of state john hay called the spanish american con flict a splendid little war an opinion that most americans except many of the enlisted men who fought in it seemed to consider the source iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiimiimiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiitiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiitttiiimiiiiihiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiniihitiiiiiiiibiuuifhiintiiniikiiiitibhiiiifihifii public monuments are constructed for a memorializing national history variety of reasons to remember tragedy to com memorate sacrifice to celebrate specific persons or groups and to honor acts of courage heroism and endurance.
the structures differ in purpose theme and meaning but all serve to satisfy our need to reflect upon the meaning of events groups or people memorialized.
the explosion of the battleship maine in havana harbor in february 1898 resulted in the deaths of 266 men and served to propel the united states into war with spain.
twelve years after the conclusion of the short lived war work began on a monument to memorialize the maine and commemorate the men who died in the explosion.
dedicated on february 15 1915 the monument located in arlington national cemetery and pictured in the first two images below includes the main mast from the maine.
the names of those killed in the disaster are inscribed around the base of the monument which represents the turret of a battleship.
the maine 1898 1915 the library of congress 381569pu 540 understand analyze and evaluate 1 whose story does the maine memorial tell.
what information about the event does the memorial provide.
this maine memorial is located in arlington national cemetery a military cemetery near the lincoln memorial in washington d c what effect might that location have on persons seeing this memorial.
what emotions are likely to be evoked by the monument.
aristide economopoulos star ledger corbis make connections 1 what story does this memorial tell.
how does the memorial use the idea of memory and remembrance to tell that story.
2 what types of stylistic differences and differences in materials used exist between the two monuments.
what do these differences tell us about the times in which they were created.
3 do you think each event should be memorialized.
why or why not.
atiantide phototravei corbis a memorial commemorating those killed in the terrorist attacks of september 11 2001 in new york city pennsylvania and at the pentagon as well as those killed in the february 1993 bombing of the world trade center in new york opened at the site of the attack on september 12 2011 a museum dedicated to the events around the destruction of the world trade towers opened in may of 2014 the memorial consists of two pools each approximately one acre in size set within the footprints of the twin towers of the world trade center.
the names of every person killed have been inscribed around the edges of the pools.
four hundred oak trees have been planted to add to the site a sense of quiet solemnity and reminder of enduring life.
the victims of terrorism 2014 541 542 chapter 9 with little sympathy for the cherokees and little patience with the court.
he was eager to retain the support of white southerners and westerners in the increasingly bitter partisan battles in which his administration was becoming engaged.
when the chief justice announced the decision in worcester v georgia jackson reportedly responded with contempt.
john marshall has made his decision he was reported to have said.
now let him enforce it the decision was not enforced.
in 1835 the federal government extracted a treaty from a minority faction of the cherokees none of them a chosen rep cherokee resentative of the cherokee nation.
the resistance treaty ceded the tribes land to georgia in return for 5 million and a reservation west of the mississippi.
the great majority of the 17 000 cherokees did not recognize the treaty as legitimate and refused to leave their homes.
but jackson would not be thwarted.
he sent an army of 7 000 under general winfield scott to round them up and drive them westward at bayonet point.
trails of tears about 1 000 cherokees fled across the state line to north carolina where the federal government eventually provided a cherokee small reservation for them in the smoky removal mountains which survives today.
but most of the rest made the long forced trek to indian territory which later became oklahoma beginning in the winter of 1838 along the way a kentuckian observed even aged females apparently nearly ready to drop in the grave were travelling with heavy burdens attached to their backs sometimes on frozen ground and sometimes on muddy streets with no covering for their feet thousands perhaps an eighth or more of the emigres perished before or soon after reaching their unwanted destination.
indian in harsh new reservations in which they removal were now forced to live the survivors never forgot the hard journey.
they called their route the trail where they cried the trail of tears.
jackson claimed that the remnant of that ill fated race was now beyond the reach of injury or oppression apparently trying to convince himself or others that he had supported removal as a way to protect the tribes.
the cherokees were not alone in experiencing the hardships of the trail of tears.
between 1830 and 1838 virtually all the five civilized tribes were expelled from the southern states and forced to relocate in the new indian territory which the white house he ensured the few indians wouid remain oft h h exp its tribes ce dramatic removals of indian tribes ou of their traditiona a dti 7m w e se le sing there.
the result was a series of tribes had to travel.
ln west f the m ss ss ppi mostly in oklahoma.
note the very long distance many of these why os the route of the cherokees sho n in the upper portion of the map kno n os the trai of tears.
jacksonian america 241 congress had officially created by the indian intercourse act of 1834 the choctaws of mississippi and western alabama were the first to make the trek beginning in 1830 the army moved out the creeks of eastern alabama and western georgia in 1836 the chickasaws in northern mississippi began the long march westward a year later and the cherokees finally a year after that.
the government thought the indian territory was safely distant from existing white settlements and consisted of land that most whites considered undesirable.
it had the additional advantage the government believed of being on the eastern edge of what earlier white explorers had christened the great american desert land unfit for habitation.
it seemed unlikely that whites would ever seek to settle along the western borders of the indian territory and thus the prospect of whites surrounding the reservation and producing further conflict seemed remote.
only the seminoles in florida managed to resist the pressures to relocate and even their success was limited.
like other tribes the seminoles had agreed under pressure to a settlement the 1832 1833 treaties of paynes landing by which they ceded their lands to the government and agreed to move to indian territory within three years.
most did move west but a substantial minority under the leadership of the chieftain osceola refused to leave and staged an uprising beginning in 1835 to defend their lands.
joining the seminoles in their struggle was a group of runaway black slaves who had been living with the tribe.
the seminole war dragged on for years.
jackson sent troops to florida but the seminoles with their african american associates were masters of guerrilla warfare in the seminole the jungly everlades even after osceola war had been treacherously captured by white troops while under a flag of truce and had died in prison even after white troops had engaged in a systematic campaign of extermination against the resisting indians and their black allies even after 1 500 white soldiers had died and the federal government had spent 20 million on the struggle even then followers of osceola remained in florida.
finally in 1842 the government abandoned the war.
by then many of the seminoles had been either killed or forced westward.
but the relocation of the seminoles unlike the relocation of most of the other tribes was never complete.
the meaning of removal by the end of the 1830s almost all the important indian societies east of the mississippi had been removed to the west.
the tribes had ceded over 100 million acres of eastern land to the federal government they had received in return about 68 million and 32 million acres in the far less hospitable lands west of the mississippi between the missouri and red rivers.
there they lived divided by tribe into a series of carefully de fined reservations in a territory surrounded by a string o united states forts to keep them in and to keep most w ites out in a region whose climate and topography bore little re a don to anything they had known before.
eventually even t is forlorn enclave would face incursions from white civilization.
what were the alternatives to the removal of the eastern indians.
there was probably never any realistic possibility that the government could stop white expansion westward.
white people had already been penetrating the west for nearly two centuries and such penetrations were certain to continue.
but did that expansion really require removal.
there were in theory at least several alternatives to the brutal removal policy.
there were many examples in the west of white settlers and native tribes living side by alternatives side anj creating a shared if not necessarily to removal equai world.
in the pueblos of new mexico acts of t state of georgia o an act ratify and confirm certain articles of agreement and cef jion entered into ontbei tb day of april 1802 between fbe commiffwners oftbe state of georgia on tbe one part and tbe commijfioners of tbe united states on tbe other part whereas the commiffiooers of the state of georgia to wit james jackfon abraham baldwin and john milledge duly authorized and appointed by and on the part and behalf of the faid state of georgia j and the commiffioncrs of the united states james madifon albert gallatin and levi lincoln duly authorized and appointed by and on the part and behalf of the faid united states to make an amicable settlement of limits between the two sovereignties af.
ter a due examination of their refpefhve powers did on the 24th day of april laft enter into a jleed of articles and mutual ceffion in the words following to wit articles of agreement and ceffion entered into on the twenty fourth day of april one thoufand eight hundred and two between the commiffioncrs appointed on the part of the united states by virtue of an a en wded an a for an amicable fctdemtnt of limt the removal of indians from georgia on april 24 1831 georgia issued an agreement to document the forced removal of native americans from the state.
this policy forced thousands of native americans from their traditional tribal lands to new reservations west of the mississippi river.
the cherokees were among the first tribes forced to move.
the conditions of this forced displacement were harsh and many people died prompting survivors to call the route they had traveled the trail of tears.
private collection peter newark american pictures the bridgeman art library 242 chapter 20 meaning grassy meadows was a spectacular high walled valley popular with naturalists.
but many residents of san francisco worried about finding enough water to serve their growing population saw hetch hetchy as an ideal place for a dam which would create a large reservoir for the city a plan that muir and other naturalists furiously opposed.
in 1906 san francisco suffered a devastating earthquake and fire.
widespread sympathy for the city strengthened the case for the dam and theodore roosevelt who had initially expressed some sympathy for muirs position turned the decision over to gifford pinchot.
pinchot had no interest in muirs aesthetic and spiritual arguments.
he approved construction of the dam.
for over a decade a battle raged between naturalists and the advocates of the dam a battle that consumed the ener cqmfeting 8ies jhn mtm for the rest of his life conservationist ard that eventually many people be visions lieved led to his death.
dam hetch hetchy muir once said.
as well dam for water tanks the peoples cathedrals and churches for no holier temple has ever been consecrated by the heart of man to pinchot there was no question that the needs of the city were more important than the claims of preservation.
muir helped place a referendum question on the ballot in 1908 certain that the residents of the city would oppose the project as soon as light is cast upon it instead san franciscans approved the dam by a huge margin.
although there were many more delays in succeeding years construction of the dam finally began after world war i this setback for the naturalists was not however a total defeat.
the fight against hetch hetchy helped mobilize a new coalition of people committed to preservation not rational use of wilderness.
the panic of 1907 despite the flurry of reforms roosevelt was able to enact the government still had relatively little control over the industrial economy.
that became clear in 1907 when a serious panic and recession began.
conservatives blamed roosevelts mad economic policies for the disaster.
and while the president naturally and correctly disagreed he nevertheless acted coa and ron quickly to reassure business leaders that he company would not interfere with their recovery ef forts.
j p morgan in a spectacular display of his financial power helped construct a pool of the assets of several important new york banks to prop up shaky financial institutions.
the key to the arrangement morgan told the president was the purchase by u s steel of the shares of the tennessee coal and iron company currently held by a threatened new york bank.
he would he insisted need assurances that the purchase would not prompt antitrust action.
roosevelt tacitly agreed and the morgan plan proceeded.
whether or not as a result the panic soon subsided.
roosevelt loved being president.
as his years in office produced increasing political successes as his public popularity continued to rise more and more observers began to assume roosevelt and muir in yosemite john muir founder and leader of the sierra club considered theodore roosevelt a friend and ally a relationship cemented by a four day camping trip the two men took together in yosemite national park in 1903 roosevelt was indeed a friend to the national park and national forest systems and added considerable acreage to both.
among other things he expanded yosemite at muirs request.
but unlike muir roosevelt was also committed to economic development.
as a result he was not always a reliable ally of the most committed preservationists.
bettmann corbis the progressives 577 that he would run for reelection in 1908 despite the long standing tradition of presidents serving no more than two terms.
but the panic of 1907 combined with roosevelts growing radicalism during his second term so alienated conservatives in his own party that he might have had difficulty winning the republican nomination.
in 1904 moreover he had made a public promise to step down four years later.
and so in 1909 roosevelt fifty years old retired from public life briefly.
the troubled succession william howard taft who assumed the presidency in 1909 had been theodore roosevelt s most trusted lieutenant and his handpicked successor progressive reformers believed him to be one of their own.
but taft had also been a restrained and william moderate jurist a man with a punctilious howard taft regard for legal process conservatives expected him to abandon roosevelt s aggressive use of presidential powers.
by seeming acceptable to almost everyone taft easily won election to the white house in 1908 he received his partys nomination virtually uncontested.
his victory in the general election in november over william jennings bryan running for the democrats for the third time was a foregone conclusion.
four years later however taft would leave office the most decisively defeated president of the twentieth century his party deeply divided and the government in the hands of a democratic administration for the first time in twenty years.
taft and the progressives tafts first problem arose in the opening months of the new administration when he called congress into special session to payne aldrich lower protective tariff rates an old prgres tariff sive demand but the president made no effort to overcome the opposition of the congressional old guard arguing that to do so would violate the constitutional doctrine of separation of powers.
the result was the feeble payne aldrich tariff which reduced tariff rates scarcely at all and in some areas raised them.
progressives re sented the presidents passivity.
taft may not have been a champion of reform but neither was he a consistent opponent of change.
in 1912 he supported and signed legislation to create a federal childrens bureau to investigate all matters pertaining to the welfare of children and child life julia lathrop the first chief of the bureau was a veteran of hull house and a close associate of jane addams.
she helped make the childrens bureau a force for progressive change not just in federal policy but also in state and local governments.
but a sensational controversy broke out late in 1909 that helped put an end to tafts popularity with reformers.
many progressives had been unhappy when taft replaced roosevelts secretary of the interior james r garfield an aggressive william howard taft taft could be a jovial companion in small groups but his public image was of a dull stolid man who stood in sharp and unfortunate contrast to his dynamic predecessor theodore roosevelt.
taft also suffered public ridicule for his enormous size.
he weighed as much as 350 pounds at times and wide publicity accompanied his installation of an oversized bathtub in the white house.
bettmann corbis conservationist with richard a ballinger a conservative corporate lawyer.
suspicion of ballinger grew when he attempted to invalidate roosevelts removal of nearly 1 million acres of forests and mineral reserves from private development.
in the midst of this mounting concern louis glavis an interior department investigator charged ballinger with having once connived to turn over valuable public coal lands in alaska to a private syndicate for personal profit.
glavis took the evidence to gifford pinchot still head of the forest service and a critic of ballingers policies.
pinchot took the charges to the president.
taft investigated them and decided they were groundless.
but pinchot was not satisfied particularly after taft fired glavis for his part in the episode.
he leaked the story to the press and asked congress to investigate the scandal.
the president discharged him for insubordination.
the congressional committee appointed to study the controversy dominated by old guard republicans exonerated ballinger.
but ballinger plnchot dispute 578 chapter 21 having already seized control of the finances of the dominican republic in 1905 the united states established a military government there in 1916 the military occupation lasted eight years.
in neighboring haiti wilson landed marines in 1915 to quell a revolution in the course of which a mob had murdered an unpopular president.
american military forces remained in the country until 1934 and american officers drafted the new haitian constitution adopted in 1918 when wilson began to fear that the danish west indies might be about to fall into the hands of germany he bought the colony from denmark and renamed it the virgin islands.
concerned about the possibility of european influence in nicaragua he signed a treaty with that country s government ensuring that no other nation would build a canal there and winning for the united states the right to intervene in nicaragua to protect american interests.
but wilsons view of americas role in the world was not entirely similar to the views of his predecessors as became wilsons c ear in is ea in s wit mexico.
for moral many years under the friendly auspices of diplomacy the corrupt dictator porfirio diaz american businessmen had been establishing an enormous economic presence in mexico.
in 1910 however diaz had been overthrown by the popular leader francisco madero who seemed hostile to american businesses in mexico.
the united states quietly encouraged a reactionary general victoriano huerta to depose madero early in 1913 and the taft administration in its last weeks in office prepared to recognize the new huerta regime and welcome back a receptive environment for american investments in mexico.
before it could do so however the new government murdered madero shortly before woodrow wilson took office in washington.
the new president instantly announced that he would never recognize huertas government of butchers at first wilson hoped that simply by refusing to recognize huerta he could help topple the regime and bring to power the opposing constitutionalists led by venustiano carranza.
but when huerta with the support of american business interests established a full military dictatorship in october 1913 the president became more assertive.
in april 1914 an officer in huertas army briefly arrested several american sailors from the uss dolphin who had gone ashore in tampico on mexicos east coast.
the men were immediately released but the american admiral unsatisfied with the apology he received demanded that the huerta forces fire a twenty one gun salute to the american flag as a public display of penance.
the mexicans refused.
wilson used the trivial incident as a pretext for seizing the mexican port of veracruz.
wilson had envisioned a bloodless action but in a clash with mexican troops in veracruz the americans killed 126 veracruz mexican soldiers and suffered 19 casualties of their own.
now at the brink of war wilson began to look for a way out.
his show of force however had helped strengthen the position of the carranza faction which captured mexico city in august and forced huerta to flee the country.
at last it seemed the crisis might be over.
but wilson was not yet satisfied.
he reacted angrily when carranza refused to accept american guidelines for the creation of a new government and he briefly considered throwing his support to still another aspirant to leadership carranzas pancho villa and his troops pancho villa fourth from left in the front row poses with some of the leaders of his army whose members americans came to consider bandits once they began staging raids across the u s border.
he was a national hero in mexico.
the library of congress lc dig ggbain 29882 america and the great war 589 erstwhile lieutenant pancho villa who was now leading a rebel army of his own.
when villas military position deteriorated however wilson abandoned him and finally in october 1915 granted preliminary recognition to the carranza government.
by now however he had created yet another crisis.
villa angry at what he considered an american betrayal retaliated in january 1916 by shooting sixteen american mining engineers in northern mexico.
two months later he led his soldiers or bandits as the united states called them across the border into columbus new mexico where they killed seventeen more americans.
with the permission of the carranza government wilson ordered general john j pershing to lead an american expedi intervention tionary force across the mexican border in in mexico pursuit of villa.
the american troops never found villa but they did engage in two ugly skirmishes with carranzas army in which forty mexicans and twelve americans died.
again the united states and mexico stood at the brink of war.
but at the last minute wilson drew back.
he quietly withdrew american troops from mexico and in march 1917 he at last granted formal recognition to the carranza regime.
by now however wilsons attention was turning elsewhere to the far greater international crisis engulfing the european continent and ultimately much of the world.
the road to war the causes of the war in europe indeed the question of whether there were any significant causes at all or whether the entire conflict was the result of a tragic series of blunders have been the subject of continued debate for nearly a century.
what is clear is that the european nations had by 1914 created an unusually precarious international system that careened into war very quickly on the basis of what most historians agree was a relatively minor series of provocations.
the collapse of the european peace the major powers of europe were organized by 1914 in two great competing alliances.
the triple entente linked britain france and russia.
the triple alliance united germany the austro hungarian empire and italy.
the chief rivalry however was not between the two alliances but between the competing great powers that dominated them great alliances britain and germany the former long established as the worlds most powerful colonial and commercial nation the latter ambitious to expand its own empire and become at least britains equal.
the anglo german rivalry may have been the most important underlying source of the tensions that led to world war i but it was not the immediate cause of its outbreak.
the conflict emerged most directly out of a controversy involving nationalist movements within the austro hungarian empire.
on june 28 1914 archduke franz ferdinand heir to the throne of the tottering empire was assassinated while paying a state visit to sarajevo.
sarajevo was the capital of bosnia a province of austria hungary that slavic nationalists wished to annex to neighboring serbia the archdukes assassin was a serbian nationalist.
this local controversy quickly escalated through the workings of the system of alliances that the great powers had constructed.
with support from germany austria hungary launched a punitive assault on serbia.
the serbians called on russia to help with their defense.
the russians began mobilizing their army on july 30 things quickly careened out of control.
by august 3 germany had declared war on both russia and france and had invaded belgium in preparation for a thrust across the french border.
on august 4 great britain ostensibly to honor its alliance with france but more importantly to blunt the advance of its principal rival declared war on germany.
russia and the austro hungarian empire formally began hostilities on august 6 italy although an ally of germany in 1914 remained neutral at first and later entered the war on the side of the british and french.
the ottoman empire centered in turkey and other smaller nations all joined the fighting later in 1914 or in 1915 within less than a year virtually the entire european continent and part of asia were embroiled in a catastrophic war.
wilson s neutrality wilson called on his fellow citizens in 1914 to remain impartial in thought as well as deed but that was an impossible task for several reasons.
some americans sympathized with the german cause german americans because of affection for germany irish americans because of hatred of britain.
many more including wilson himself sympathized with britain.
wilson was only one of many americans who fervently admired england its traditions its culture its political system almost instinctively these americans attributed to the cause of the allies britain france italy russia a moral quality that they denied to the central powers germany the austro hungarian empire and the ottoman empire.
lurid reports of german atrocities in belgium and france skillfully exaggerated by british propagandists strengthened the hostility of many americans toward germany.
economic realities also made it impossible for the united states to deal with the belligerents on equal terms.
the british had imposed a naval blockade on germany to prevent muni economic ties tions an supp ies frm reaching the enemy.
to britain as a neutral the united states had the right in theory to trade with both britain and germany but for americans to trade with germany they would have to defy the british blockade.
a truly neutral response to the blockade would have been to stop trading with britain as well.
but while the united states could survive an interruption of its relatively modest trade with the central powers it could not easily weather an embargo on its much more extensive trade with the allies particularly when war orders from britain and france soared after 1914 helping to produce one of the greatest economic booms in the nations history.
so america 590 chapter 21 women industrial workers in world war ii such women were often called rosie the riveter.
their presence in these previously all male work environments was no less startling to americans during world war i these women are shown working with acetylene torches to bevel armor plate for tanks.
photo by margaret bourke white time life psctures getty images 1917 in response to demand from the united states war effort.
industrial production soared and manufacturing activity expanded in regions that had previously had relatively little of it.
the shipbuilding industry for example grew rapidly on the west coast enabled by the panama canal.
employment increased dramatically and because so many white men were away at war new opportunities for female african american mexican and asian workers appeared.
some workers experienced a significant growth in income but inflation cut into the wage increases and often produced a net loss in purchasing power.
the agricultural economy profited from the war as well.
farm prices rose to their highest levels in decades and agricultural production increased dramatically as a result.
one of the most important social changes of the war years was the migration of hundreds of thousands of african americans from the rural south into northern industrial cities.
it became known as the great migration like most great migrations it was a result of both a push migration and a pull the push was the poverty indebtedness racism and violence many black men and women experienced in the south.
the pull was the prospect of factory jobs in the urban north and the opportunity to live in communities where blacks could enjoy more freedom and autonomy.
in the labor scarce economy of the war years northern factory owners dispatched agents to the south to recruit african american workers.
black newspapers advertised the prospects for employment in the north.
and perhaps most important those who migrated sent word back to friends and families of the opportunities they encoun tered which explains the heavy concentration of migrants from a single area of the south in certain cities in the north.
in chicago for example the more than 70 000 new black residents came disproportionately from a few areas of alabama and mississippi.
the result was a dramatic growth in black communities in northern industrial cities such as new york chicago cleveland and detroit.
some older more established african american residents of these cities were unsettled by these new arrivals with their country ways and their revivalistic religion many people in the existing african american communities considered the newcomers coarse and feared that their presence would increase their own vulnerability to white racism.
but the movement could not be stopped.
new churches sprang up in black neighborhoods many of them simple storefronts from which self proclaimed preachers searched for congregations.
low paid black workers crowded into inadequate housing.
as race riots black communities expanded they inevitably began to rub up against white neighborhoods with occasionally violent results.
in east st louis illinois a white mob attacked a black neighborhood on july 2 1917 burned down many houses and shot the residents of some of them as they fled.
as many as forty african americans died.
for american women black and white the war meant new opportunities for employment.
a million or more women worked in a wide range of industrial jobs that in peacetime were considered male preserves steel munitions trucking public transportation.
most of them had been working in other lower paying jobs.
but whatever changes the war brought were temporary ones.
as soon as the war was over almost all of the women working in previously male industrial jobs quit or were fired in fact the percentage of women working for wages actually declined between 1910 and 1920 the government had created the women in industry board to oversee the movement of these women into the jobs left ehind by men.
after the war the board became the womens bureau a permanent agency dedicated to protecting the interests of women in the workforce.
america and the great war 599 the futile search for social unity the idea of unity not only in the direction of the economy but in the nation s social purpose as well had been the dream of many progressives for decades.
to them the war seemed to offer an unmatched opportunity for america to close ranks behind a great common cause.
in the process they hoped society could achieve a lasting sense of collective purpose.
the dream of social unity helped drive many efforts the peace movement the labor movement and even the government.
but it also drove a period of political and social oppression and an egregious violation of civil liberties.
the peace movement woman s peace party government leaders and many others realized that public sentiment about american involvement in the war had been deeply divided before april 1917 and remained so even after the declaration of war.
the peace movement in the united states before 1917 had many constituencies german americans irish americans religious pacifists quakers mennonites and others intellectuals and groups on the left such as the socialist party and the industrial workers of the world all of whom considered the war a meaningless battle among capitalist nations for commercial supremacy an opinion many others in america and europe later came to share.
but the most active and widespread peace activism came from the womens movement.
in 1915 carrie chapman catt a leader of the fight for woman suffrage helped create the womans peace party with a small but active membership.
as the war in europe intensified the partys efforts to keep the united states from intervening grew.
women peace activists were sharply divided once america entered the war in 1917 the national american woman suffrage association the largest womens organization supported the war and more than that presented itself as a patriotic organization dedicated to advancing the war effort.
its membership grew dramatically as a result.
catt who was among those who abandoned the peace cause now began calling for woman suffrage as a war measure to ensure that women whose work was essential to the war effort would feel fully a part of the nation.
but many other women refused to support the war even after april 1917 among them were jane addams who was widely reviled as a result and charlotte perkins gilman a leading feminist activist.
women peace activists shared many of the same objections to the war as did the members of the socialist party to which some of them belonged.
but some criticized the war on other grounds as well arguing that as the mother half of humanity they had a special moral and mater nal basis for their pacifism.
maternal opposition to war selling the war and suppressing dissent world war i was not as popular among the american people as world war ii would be but most of the country supported the intervention once it began.
in communities across the nation there were outbursts of fervent patriotism floods of voluntary enlistments in the military and greatly increased displays of patriotism.
women joined their local red cross in an effort to contribute to the war effort.
children raised money for war bonds in their schools.
churches included prayers for the president and the troops in their services.
and the war also gave a large boost to the wave of religious revivalism that had been growing for a decade before 1917 revivalism in turn became a source of support for the war.
billy sunday the leading revivalist of his time dropped his early opposition to intervention in 1917 and became a fervent champion of the american military effort.
nevertheless government leaders and many others remained deeply concerned about the significant minorities who continued to oppose the war even after the united states entered the conflict.
many believed that a crucial prerequisite wartime propaganda this poster one of many lurid images of imperial germany used by the u s government to generate enthusiasm for american involvement in world war shows bloodstained german boots with the german eagle clearly visible.
the demonization of germany was at the heart of government efforts to portray the war to americans.
the library of congress lc uszc4 9853 consider the source j arc rcmhcd amr much can be learned about a societys values from how it handles rhe race gender and.
r raising of an army.
in wartime nations typically clarify the terms of citizenship military service and service asking some people to fight others to stay home and appealing to the public for participation and support.
the government sets the terms of service but they must align with popular values to be successful.
during world war i as part of the broad national effort to explain justify and fight the war the government disseminated the two posters below the 1917 1918 documents.
the first poster was part of a recruiting drive for the u s navy the second was part of a campaign to sell liberty loans interest bearing bonds that funded roughly two thirds of the war s 32 billion price tag.
both images suggest that women not only served in the military and industrial sectors they also served as symbols.
by the time of the war on terrorism of the early twenty first century the landscape of military recruitment had changed dramatically.
the new war was more limited in scale than world war i and the draft had been suspended in 1973 converting the military to an allvolunteer force.
this put a high premium on recruiting and marketing and the materials used for those purposes remained just as illuminating as ever see the 2006 2014 documents.
in 2006 the u s army launched its army strong campaign to communicate the message that world war 1 1917 1918 wartime posters err.
p iwnw aman i ano do it united semes navy recruiting swno f i victory liberty l the library of congress lc uszc4 9884 the library of congress lc uszc4 1124 600 the army builds not only physical but also mental and emotional strengths in its recruits.
the second images shows the welcoming attitude of todays army.
understand analyze and evaluate 1 how do the posters use images of women or the home to encourage either enlistment or financial support for the war.
2 what do these posters say about contemporary understandings of gender roles.
what did the state and society expect from men.
what did they expect from women.
3 like almost all recruiting posters of world war i these two depict white people despite the fact that many african americans and ethnic minorities served as well.
what does that say about mainstream attitudes toward race and ethnicity during world war i.
war on terrorism 2006 2014 ke connections low do these sources portray the army.
how are they persuasive.
is the ongoing war against terrorism ivoked in any way.
hifferentlv in these documents than in the 1917 and 1918 posters.
bo bey y any kn9 oboo.
pop ttitudes.
601 602 chapter 22 mechanized of tractors on american farms for example farming quadrupled during the 1920s especially after they began to be powered by internal combustion engines like automobiles rather than by the cumbersome steam engines of the past.
they helped to open 35 million new acres to cultivation.
increasingly sophisticated combines and harvesters were proliferating helping make it possible to produce more crops with fewer workers.
agricultural researchers were already at work on other advances that would later transform food production in america and around the world the invention of hybrid corn made possible by advances in genetic research which became available to farmers in 1921 but was not grown in great quantities until the 1930s and the creation of chemical fertilizers and pesticides which also began to have limited use in the 1920s but proliferated quickly in the 1930s and 1940s.
the new technologies greatly increased agricultural productivity both in the united states and in other parts of the world.
but the demand for agricultural goods was not rising as fast as production.
the results were substantial surpluses a disastrous decline in food prices and a severe drop in farmers income beginning early in the 1920s.
more than 3 million people left agriculture in the course of the decade.
of those who remained many lost ownership of their lands and had to rent instead from banks or other landlords.
in response some farmers began to demand relief in the form of government price supports.
one price raising scheme parity in particu ar came to dominate agrarian demands the idea of parity parity was a complicated formula for setting an adequate price for farm goods and ensuring that farmers would earn back at least their production costs no matter how the national or world agricultural market might fluctuate.
champions of parity urged high tariffs against foreign agricultural goods and a government commitment to buy surplus domestic crops at parity and sell them abroad at whatever the market would bring.
the legislative expression of the demand for parity was the mcnary haugen bill named after its two principal sponsors in mcnary haugen conress and introduced repeatedly bill between 1924 and 1928 in 1926 and again in 1928 congress where farm interests enjoyed disproportionate influence approved a bill requiring parity for grain cotton tobacco and rice but president coolidge vetoed it both times.
the new culture the increasingly urban and consumer oriented culture of the 1920s helped many americans in all regions live their lives and perceive their world in increasingly similar ways.
that same culture exposed them to a new set of values that reflected the prosperity and complexity of the modern economy.
but the new culture could not of course erase the continuing and indeed increasing diversity of the united states.
consumerism growing mass consumption among the many changes industrialization produced in the united states was the creation of a mass consumer culture.
by the 1920s america was a society in which many men and women could afford not merely the means of subsistence but a considerable measure of additional discretionary goods and services a society in which people could buy items not just because of need but for pleasure as well.
middle class families purchased such new appliances as electric refrigerators washing machines electric irons and vacuum cleaners which revolutionized housework and had a particularly dramatic impact on the lives of women.
men and women wore wristwatches and smoked cigarettes.
women purchased cosmetics and mass produced fashions.
above all americans bought automobiles.
by the end of the decade there were more than 30 million cars on american roads.
the automobile affected american life in countless ways.
it greatly expanded the geographic horizons of millions of people who in the past had seldom ventured far from their homes.
rural men and women in particular found in the automobile a means of escaping the isola tion of farm life now they could visit friends or drive into town quickly and at will rather than spending hours traveling by horse or foot.
city dwellers found in the automobile an escape from the congestion of urban life.
weekend drives through the countryside became a staple of urban leisure.
many families escaped the city in a permanent sense by social impact of the automobile moving to the new suburbs that were rapidly growing up around large cities in response to the ease of access the automobile had created.
the automobile also transformed the idea of vacations.
in the past the idea of traveling for pleasure had been a luxury reserved for the wealthy.
now many middle class and even working class people could aspire to travel considerable distances for vacations which were a new concept for most men and women in this era.
many businesses and industries began to include paid vacations among their employee benefits and many employers encouraged their vacationing workers to travel on the assumption that a change of scene would help restore their energy and vigor at work.
for young people in families affluent enough to afford a car the automobile was often a means of a different kind of escape.
it allowed them to move easily away from parents and family an to develop social lives of their own.
it contributed to one o the distinctive developments of the early twentieth cen turyj t 6 emer ence f a well developed and relatively independent youth culture.
advertising u1 cui15u1i1c11o1h the flxspts1 6 fr creatins v than the advertising indus a vertising and public relations firms n w ayer the new era 623 1900 area reached in 1 hour 3 hours railroads 1900 2 hours more than paved roads 1930 3 hours unpaved roads 1930 breaking down rural isolation the expansion of travel horizons in oregon illinois this map uses the small town of oregon illinois west of chicago to illustrate the way in which railroads and then automobiles reduced the isolation of rural areas in the first decades of the twentieth century.
the gold and purple areas of the two maps show the territory that residents of oregon could reach within two hours.
note how small that area was in 1900 and how much larger it was in 1930 by which time an area of over a hundred square miles had become easily accessible to the town.
note too the significant network of paved roads in the region by 1930 few of which had existed in 1900 why did automobile travel do so much more than railroads to expand the travel horizons of small towns.
walter thompson had appeared well before world war i but in the 1920s partly as a result of techniques pioneered by wartime propaganda advertising came of age.
publicists no longer simply conveyed information they sought to identify products with a particular lifestyle to invest them with glamour and prestige and to persuade potential consumers that purchasing a commodity could be a personally fulfilling and enriching experience.
advertisers also encouraged the public to absorb the val ues of promotion and salesmanship and to admire those who were effective boosters and publicists.
one of the most the man successful books of the 1920s was the nobody an nobody knows by advertising execu zcvovvs tive bruce barton.
it portrayed jesus christ as not only a religious prophet but also a super salesman who picked up twelve men from the bottom ranks of business and forged them into an organization that conquered the world the parables barton claimed were the most powerful advertisements of all time bartons message was fully in tune with the new spirit of the consumer culture.
jesus had been a man concerned with living a full and rewarding life in this world twentieth century men and women should do the same.
life is meant to live and enjoy as you go along barton once wrote.
jesus had succeeded because he knew how to make friends to become popular to please others that talent was a prescription for success in the modern era as well.
the advertising industry could never have had the impact it did without the emergence of new vehicles of communication that made it possible to reach large audiences quickly and easily.
newspapers were being absorbed into national chains and wire services were making it possible even for independent newspapers to carry nationally syndicated material.
new or expanded mass circulation magazines also attracted broad national audiences.
the saturday evening post which began publication as a magazine in 1871 appealed to rural and small town families with its homey stories and its conspicuous traditionalism its popularity was in some respects evidence of a yearning for an earlier time.
but other magazines responded directly to the realities of modern urban life.
the readers digest founded in 1921 by dewitt and lila wallace condensed stories and even books originally published in other places in an effort to make the expanding world of knowledge and information available in a brief efficient form for people who would otherwise have no access to it.
time magazine founded in 1923 by henry luce and briton hadden set out to condense the news of the week into a brief accessible lively format for busy people who did not have the time or desire to read newspapers.
mass circulation magazines hollywood the movies and broadcasting at the same time movies were becoming an ever more popular and powerful form of mass communication.
more than 100 million people saw films in 1930 as compared to 40 million in 1922 the addition of sound to motion pictures beginning in 1927 with the first feature length talkie the jazz singer with al jolson created nationwide excitement.
an embarrassing scandal in 1921 involving the popular comedian fatty arbuckle produced public outrage and political pressure to clean up hollywood.
in response the film industry introduced standards to its films.
studio owners created the motion picture association a new trade association and hired former postmaster general will hays to head it.
more important they gave hays broad 624 chapter 23 offered them benefits far below those available to whites.
latinos generally had no access to american schools.
many hospitals refused them admission.
occasionally there were signs of organized resistance by mexican americans themselves most notably in california where some formed a union of migrant farmworkers.
but harsh repression by local growers and the public authorities allied with them prevented such organizations from having much impact.
like african american farmworkers many mexicans began as a result to migrate to cities such as los angeles where they lived in a poverty comparable to that of urban blacks in the south and northeast.
asian americans in haro times for asian americans too the depression reinforced long standing patterns of discrimination and economic marginalization.
in california where the largest japanese american and chinese american populations resided even educated asians had always found it difficult if not impossible to move into mainstream professions.
japanese american college graduates often found themselves working at family fruit stands 20 percent of chinatown new york a chinese man carries a sandwich board through the streets of new yorks chinatown bearing the latest news of the war between china and japan which in 1938 was already well under way.
chinese americans had the dual challenge in the 1930s of dealing both with large scale unemployment and with continuing news of catastrophe from china where most still had many family members.
hulton archive getty images all japanese americans in los angeles worked at such stands at the end of the 1930s.
for those who found jobs usually poorly paid in the industrial or service economy employment was precarious like blacks and hispanics they often lost jobs to white americans desperate for work that a few years earlier they would not have considered.
japanese farmworkers like chicano farmworkers suffered from the increasing competition for even these low paying jobs from white migrants from the great plains.
in california younger men and women organized japanese american democratic clubs in several cities which worked for among other things laws protecting racial and ethnic minorities from discrimination.
at the same time some japanese american businessmen and professionals tried to overcome obstacles by encouraging other japanese to become more assimilated more american they formed the japanese american citizens league in 1930 to promote their goals.
by 1940 it had nearly 6 000 members.
chinese americans fared no better.
the overwhelming majority continued to work in chinese owned laundries and restaurants.
those who moved outside the asian community could rarely find jobs above the entry level.
japanese american citizens league women and the workplace in the great depression me economic crisis served m many ways j j uullgulvll widespread belief that a womans proper place was in the home.
most men and many women believed that what work there was should go tc men.
many people believed that no woman whose husband was employed should acc ept a job.
but the widespread assumption that married women at least should not work outside the home did not stop them from doing so.
both single and married women worked in the 1930s despite public condemnation of the practice because they or their families needed the money.
in fact the largest new group of female workers consisted ol wives and mothers.
by the end of the depression 20 percent popular disapproval of womens employment increased female employment more women were working than had been doing so at the beginning.
the increase occurred despite considerable obstacles.
professional opportunities for women declined because unemployed men began moving into professions such as teaching and social work that had previously been considered womens fields.
female industrial workers were more likely to be laid off or to experience wage reductions than their male counterparts.
but white women also had certain advantages in the workplace.
the nonprofessional jobs that women traditionally held as salesclerks and stenographers and in other service positions were less likely to disappear than the predominantly male jobs in heavy industry.
nor were many men even unemployed men likely to ask for such jobs.
the great depression 649 60 20 29 10 0 1900 1 910 1 920 1 930 1 940 year women in the paid workforce 1900 1940 the participation of women in the paid workforce increased slowly but steadily in the first forty years of the twentieth century.
note however the general leveling off of the participation of single women who traditionally accounted for the vast majority of women workers after 1920 at the same time that the total number of women in the paid workforce was rising.
many more married women began entering the paid workforce in these years particularly in the 1930s.
iv iy did so many married women begin doing paid work during the great depression.
black women suffered massive unemployment because of a great reduction of domestic service jobs.
as many as half of all black working women lost their jobs in the 1930s.
even so at the end of the 1930s 38 percent of black women were employed as compared to 24 percent of white women.
that was because black women both married and unmarried had always been more likely to work than white women less out of preference than out of economic necessity.
for american feminists the depression years were on the whole a time of frustration.
although economic pressures pushed more women into the workforce those same pressures helped to erode the frail support that feminists had won in the 1920s for the idea of women becoming economically and professionally independent.
depression families the economic hardships of the depression years placed great strains on american families many of whom had become accustomed in the 1920s to a steadily rising standard of living but now found themselves plunged suddenly into uncertainty.
such circumstances forced many families to retreat from the consumer patterns they had developed in the 1920s.
women often returned to sewing clothes for themselves and retreat from l eir tumilies and to preserving their own consumerism fd rather than buying such products in stores.
others engaged in home businesses taking in laundry selling baked goods accepting boarders.
many households expanded to include distant relatives.
parents often moved in with their children and grandparents with their grandchildren or vice versa.
but the depression also eroded the strength of many family units.
there was a decline in the divorce rate but largely because divorce was now too expensive for some.
more common was the informal breakup of families particularly the desertion of families by unemployed men bent on escaping the humiliation of being unable to earn a living.
the marriage and birth rates declined simultaneously for the first time since the early nineteenth century.
the depression and american culture the great depression was a traumatic experience for millions of americans and it shook the confidence of many people in themselves or in their nation or both.
out of the crisis emerged some of the most probing criticisms of american society and the american economic system of the industrial age.
at the same time the depression produced powerful confirmations of traditional values and reinforced many traditional goals.
there was not one depression culture but many.
depression values american social values seemed to change relatively little in response to the depression.
instead many people responded to hard times by redoubling their commitment to familiar ideas and goals.
the sociologists robert lynd and helen merrell lynd who had published a celebrated study of muncie indiana middletown in 1929 returned there in the mid 1930s to see how the city had changed.
they concluded in their 1937 book middletown in transition that in most respects the texture of middletowns culture has not changed.
middletown is overwhelmingly living by the values by which it lived in 1925 above all the men and women of middle to wn and by implication many other americans remained committed to the traditional american emphasis on the individual.
in some respects the economic crisis worked to undermine the traditional success ethic in america.
many people began to look to government for assistance many blamed corporate moguls international bankers economic royalists and others for their distress.
yet the depression did not in the end seriously erode the success ethic.
persistence of the success ethic 650 chapter 12 a second and in many respects more important source was protestant revivalism the movement that had begun with the second great awakening early in the century and had by the 1820s evolved into a powerful force for social reform.
although the new light revivalists were theologically far removed from the transcendentalists and unitarians they had come to share the optimistic belief that every individual was capable of salvation.
according to charles grandison finney an evangelistic presbyterian minister who became the most influential revival leader of the 1820s and 1830s traditional calvinist doctrines of predestination and individual human helplessness were both obsolete and destructive.
each person he preached contained within himself or herself the capacity to experience spiritual rebirth and achieve salvation.
a revival of faith need not depend on a miracle from god it could be created by individual effort.
finney enjoyed particular success in upstate new york where he helped launch a series of passionate revivals in towns along the erie canal a region so prone to religious awakenings that it was known as the burned over district it was no coincidence that the new revivalism should prove so powerful charles grandison finney evangelistic presbyterian minister charles grandison finney became the most influential revival leader of the 1820s and 1830s.
he argued that each person contained within herself or himself the capacity to experience spiritual rebirth and achieve salvation.
finneys views on revivalist faith contrasted with earlier calvinist doctrines of predestination and individual human helplessness.
bettmann corbis revivalism in the burned over district finney s doctrine of personal regeneration there for this region of new york was experiencing largely as a result of the construction of the canal a major economic transformation.
and with that transformation had come changes in the social fabric so profound that many men and women felt baffled and disoriented.
it was in roughly this same area of new york that joseph smith first organized the mormon church.
in rochester new york the site of his greatest success finney staged a series of emotionally wrenching religious meetings that aroused a large segment of the community.
he had particular success in mobilizing women on whom he tended to concentrate his efforts both because women found the liberating message of revivalism particularly appealing and because finney discovered they pro vided him with access to their male relatives.
gradually he developed a large following among the prosperous citizens of the region.
they were enjoying the economic benefits of the new commercial growth but they were also uneasy about some of the social changes accompanying it among them the introduction into their community of a new undisciplined pool of transient laborers.
for them revivalism became not only a means of personal salvation but also a mandate for the reform and control of their society.
finneys revivalism became a call for a crusade against personal immorality.
the church he maintained must take right ground on the subject of temperance the moral reform and all the subjects of practical morality which come up for decision from time to time the temperance crusade evangelical protestantism added major strength to one of the most influential reform movements of the era the crusade against drunkenness.
no social vice argued some reformers including many of finneys converts in cities such as rochester was more responsible for crime disorder and poverty than the excessive use of alcohol.
women who were particularly active in the temperance movement claimed that alcoholism placed a special burden on wives men spent money on alcohol that their families needed for basic necessities and drunken husbands often abused their wives and children.
in fact alcoholism was an even more serious problem in antebellum america than it has been in the twentieth and twenty first centuries.
the supply of alcohol was growing rapidly particularly in the west farmers there grew more grain than they could sell in the still limited markets in this prerailroad era so they distilled much of it into whiskey.
but in the east too commercial distilleries and private stills were widespread.
the appetite for alcohol was growing along with the supply in isolated western areas where drinking provided a social pastime in small towns and helped ease the loneliness and isolation on farms in pubs and saloons in eastern cities where drinking was the principal leisure activity for many workers.
the average male in the 1830s drank nearly three times as much alcohol as the average person does today.
and antebellum culture and reform 323 american society for the promotion of temperance as that figure suggests many people drank habitually and excessively with bitter consequences for themselves and others among the many supporters of the temperance movement were people who saw it as a way to overcome their own prob lems with alcoholism.
although advocates of temperance had been active since the late eighteenth century the new reformers gave the movement an energy and influence it had never previously known.
in 1826 the american society for the promotion of temperance emerged as a coordinating agency among various groups it attempted to use many of the techniques of revivalism in preaching abstinence.
then in 1840 six reformed alcoholics in baltimore organized the washington temperance society and began to draw large crowds in which workers many of them attempting to overcome their own alcoholism were heavily represented to hear their impassioned and intriguing confessions of past sins.
by then temperance advocates had grown dramatically in numbers more than a million people had signed a formal pledge to forgo hard liquor.
as the movement gained in strength it also became divided in purpose.
some temperance advocates now urged that abstinence include not only liquor but beer and wine as well.
not everyone agreed.
some began to demand state legislation to restrict the sale and consumption of alcohol maine passed cultural divisions over alcohol such a law in 1851 others insisted that temperance must rely on the conscience of the individual.
whatever their disagreements by promoting abstinence reformers were attempting to promote the moral self improvement of individuals.
they were also trying to impose discipline on society.
the search for social discipline was particularly clear in the battle over prohibition laws which pitted established protestants against new catholic immigrants to many of whom drinking was an important social ritual and an integral part of the life of their communities.
the arrival of the immigrants was profoundly disturbing to established residents of many communities and the restriction of alcohol seemed to them a way to curb the disorder they believed the new population was creating.
health fads and phrenology for some americans the search for individual and social perfection led to an interest in new theories of health and knowledge.
threats to public health were critical to the sense of insecurity that underlay many reform movements especially after the terrible cholera epidemics of the 1830s and 1840s.
cholera is a severe bacterial infection of the intestines usually a result of consuming contaminated food or water.
in the nineteenth century long before the discovery of antibiotics less.
hows what temperance advocates argued was the inevitable consequence of alcohol consumption.
beginning with an apparently he drunkards progress this 1846 lithograph y a ame.
dec ines to desperation and suicide while his abandoned wife and child grieve.
the library of congress innocent glass with a friend the young man rises step by step to the summit o run e 324.

chapter 2 first encounters first conquests 1492 1607 columbus the columbian exchange and early conquests a divided europe the impact of the protestant reformation exploration and encounter in north america the spanish exploration and encounter in north america the french exploration and encounter in north america the english 1 the world before 1492 jacques le moyne an early french explorer recorded native american women cultivating crops.
within the cultures of most north american tribes women were indeed the prime cultivators of crops while men hunted.
chapter 11 chapter review manifest destiny the importance of an idea explain what manifest destiny meant and how it led the united states to involvement in texas california and oregon.
review questions 1 crafting arguments was the war that broke out in 1835 between the mexican government and american settlers in texas inevitable.
why or why not.
2 contextualization why was the status of texas such a divisive political issue in the early 1840s.
3 historical interpretation what light do the letters of narcissa whitman see the american voice feature on page 312 shed on the motives behind american settlement in the oregon territory in the 1830s.
11 1 5 contextualization what connections did opponents of the u s war with mexico make between the war and slavery.
6 historical interpretation what changes did incorporation into the united states bring to the society and economy of the former mexican provinces of new mexico and california.
west into the pacific analyze the causes and outcomes of u s expansion into the pacific region including establishing new relationships with hawaii china and japan.
review questions 7 historical interpretation what role did the whaling industry play in american expansion in the pacific in the first half of the 19th century.
8 crafting arguments how would you explain the intensification of american interest in asia in the 1840s and 1850s.
i 11j the u s war with mexico 1846 1848 1m analyze the causes strategies and outcomes of the u s war with mexico.
review questions 4 crafting arguments is it fair to describe the u s war with mexico as a war of conquest.
why or why not.
328 part iv crafting a nation people land and a national identity 1800 1848 expansion separation and a new union 1844 1877 part part outline chapter 29 a new world order 855 united states and much of the rest of the world.
the boom in technology was producing many new products and cutting the costs of items such as tvs and computers that were already on the market.
in addition easily available personal credit at low interest rates fed the consumer spending and consumer confidence even though it allowed people to pile up worrisome levels of debt.
in his last state of the union message in january 2000 clinton was able to say never before has our nation enjoyed at once so much prosperity and social progress with so little internal crisis and so few external threats no wonder the president remained popular and the people of the united states relatively happy.
bush v gore the election and the court case of 2000 the constitution prevented clinton from running for a third term in 2000 even so he still had a remarkably high approval rating despite the affair with monica lewinsky that had tarnished his reputation.
the logical candidate for the democratic nomination was vice president al gore.
during the 8 years that gore served as vice president he established a solid reputation with special expertise in government operations the use of the internet and the environment.
gores 1992 book earth in the balance described humankinds assault on the earth although gore had worked with clinton for 8 years he and the president were never especially close and gore had been deeply offended by the monica lewinsky affair.
he selected connecticut senator joseph lieberman as his running mate the first jew to be on a major partys national ticket.
lieberman had also been offended by the presidents behavior and said so on the senate floor.
the two leading candidates for the republican nomination were george w bush the governor of texas and the son of the former president and arizona senator john mccain.
mccain was considered more liberal compared with bush who called himself a compassionate conservative by march bush had wrapped up the nomination.
bush asked former secretary of defense dick cheney to handle the vice presidential selection and in the end cheney himself became the nominee.
gore made a fateful decision to distance himself from clinton and did not call on the president to do much campaigning.
he campaigned in favor of tough gun control legislation and for womens right to choose on abortion decisions and he promised to keep the social security trust fund in a lock box separate from the rest of the federal budget.
many even among his supporters found him to be stiff and wooden hardly the relaxed and at ease campaigner that bill clinton had been.
bush promised a major tax cut giving the current budget surplus back to the people.
he favored allowing people to invest some of their social security contributions in their own stock market accounts.
he promised to reform public education.
he told the country that he was a uniter not a divider and would work with democrats and end the divisive partisanship in washington.
in a not so subtle reference to the lewinsky affair he promised to restore honor and dignity to the presidency.
he talked openly about how he had overcome his own alcoholism and about his born again christian faith.
he was a surprisingly strong campaigner in spite of his tendency to mangle the english language with statements like families is where our nation finds hope where wings take dreams two other candidates also entered the race ralph nader running on the green party ticket and critiquing the power that multinational corporations had over both republicans and democrats and patrick buchanan running a conservative and antiimmigrant campaign on ross perots reform party ticket.
although nader and buchanan might take crucial votes away from either candidate no one gave them a chance of winning.
in addition several other candidates representing fringe parties entered the contest however they posed little threat even to siphon away votes from the major contenders.
as the polls closed on november 7 2000 results for several states were still up in the air but later that night the deciding vote seemed to come down to florida.
gore had clearly won a small majority in the overall vote a final count of 50 992 335 for part ix certainty uncertainty and new beginnings 1980 to the present 856 gore versus 50 455 156 for bush see map 29 3.
however american presidential contests are decided by electoral votes and at this point in the contest whoever won floridas electoral vote would win the presidency.
at one point the major tv networks using exit polls announced that gore had carried florida.
later in the evening they backed off.
at around 2 00 a m they announced that bush had won.
gore called bush to congratulate him and was about to make a public concession speech.
then as new data came in he called bush a second time to say that any announcement was premature.
by midmorning on wednesday november 8 everyone agreed that the election was too close to call.
it would stay that way for the next 36 days.
both campaigns assembled teams of attorneys to challenge votes and demand a florida recount.
problems with floridas election procedures became apparent.
some african american voters had been intimidated or turned away from the polls.
in other places where votes were counted by punch cards fed into voting machines cards with hanging chads that is cards that were not punched all the way through were not counted and in these places the gore team demanded a hand count.
when gore asked 29 1 29 2 293 electoral vote popular vote george w bush 271 50 456 169 republican 50 5 48 0 s0 996 h6 democrat map 29 3 the election of 2000 the presidential election of 2000 reflected how deeply divided the united states had become the northeast and west leaned democratic and the whole of the nation s midsection plus the south leaned republican.
for a recount in four counties where the errors seemed especially glaring the bush lawyers challenged him in court.
after the florida supreme court sided with gore the bush team took the ase to the u s supreme court.
on december 12 the supreme court ruled in a 5 to 4 decision that a recount in only four counties violated the equal protection of the law and that given the time that had elapsed all recounts in florida must cease.
the next day gore conceded the election though he said he disagreed with the courts decision with every fiber of my being all five of the justices who voted to end the recount had been appointed by reagan and herbert walker bush often referred to as bush sr to distinguish him from george w bush.
the other four justices were scathing in their dissent.
ihe courts senior justice john paul stevens who had been appointed by gerald ford said although we may never know with complete certainty the identity of the winner of this years presidential election the identity of the loser is perfectly clear.
it is the nations confidence in the judge as an impartial guardian of the rule of law 29 2 quick review were clinton s high approval ratings justified based on his domestic and foreign policy accomplishments.
why or why not.
technology dominates an era 29 3 analyze the changes in technology and their impact on u s culture.
while americans battled over elections and a host of social issues a small group of americans were transforming the world in a very different way.
in the 1990s computer use and technological innovation from connections to the internet to the use of cell phones became widespread in the united states.
the birth of new technologies during world war ii the military sought ways to speed the mathematical calculations to send a shell in exactly the right direction to hit an enemy target.
these first computers were exactly what the name implied machines that computed distance velocity and air pressure to get a shot where it was intended to go.
after the war the u s armys 1946 eniac computer known as the giant brain performed ballistic calculations in chapter 17 chapter review technology changes the nation lives of the middle class in the gilded age 17 1 explain the inventions of the late 1800s and their impact review questions 1 crafting an argument in your opinion what was the most important technological innovation of the late 1800s.
2 historical interpretation how does the rise of the automobile industry illustrate the connection between technological innovation and industrial growth and consolidation in the late 1800s and early 1900s.
173 analyze daily life popular ideas and political direction for the middle class during the gilded age.
review questions 6 contextualization how did architecture and urban design of the late 1800s reflect middle class values and aspirations.
7 synthesis what connections can you make between the growth of american business and changes in american religious life in the late 1800s.
corporations and monopolies 17 2 analyze the role of the new giant corporations in american life.
review questions 3 historical interpretation what does the panic of 1873 tell us about the role of speculation in the american economy of the late 1800s.
4 comparison compare and contrast american manufacturing in the early 1900s and the late 1900s.
what had changed.
5 historical interpretation what does j p morgans involvement in the panic of 1893 and in its resolution tell us about the nature of american industry at the turn of the century.
17 4 immigration explain the reasons immigrants came to the united states in such large numbers during the gilded age and what their experience was.
review questions 8 cause and effect what factors explain the migration of large numbers of eastern european jews to the united states at the turn of the century.
9 comparison what did immigrants hope to find in america.
how did their expectations compare with reality.
10 historical interpretation what might explain the formation of ethnic neighborhoods in the late 1800s.
what advantages did such neighborhoods provide to new immigrants.
chapter traces the reasons so many americans were angry in the years between 1877 and 1914 and the results of that anger in reshaping the political and cultural life of the nation.
chapter 12 living in a nation of changing lands changing faces changing expectations 331 chinese immigration across the pacific many young people in china were fascinated by the stories from across the pacific.
lee chew described his neighbor s return to china from the country of the american wizards explaining that the man had earned enough in a short stay in the united states to build a magnificent house and invite his fellow villagers who lived mostly on rice to a grand feast with roast pig chicken and duck.
soon after lee was on his way to california which became known as gam saan gold mountain on both sides of the pacific.
before 1840 only a few hundred chinese lived in the united states but in the 1840s and 1850s chinese immigrants came to california and to the then independent kingdom of hawaii because of a push from china and also a pull from the united states and hawaii.
those years were hard in china especially in guangdong province where most immigrants originated.
under chinese law it was illegal for anyone to leave china but in desperate times thousands did.
california was one of many destinations.
the opium wars that began in 1839 spawned great violence as british and chinese forces battled and as violent feuds erupted between chinese communities.
one chinese migrant remembered the results of a revolt we were left with nothing and in disillusion we went to hong kong to sell ourselves as contract laborers the government of the qing dynasty in beijing was rapidly losing control of events.
it was not strong enough to suppress the civil wars or to prevent the british imposition of the opium trade on china.
in addition the population of china had also grown from some 200 million in 1762 to 421 million in 1846 with this huge population land became scarce rents soared and many peasants could not maintain their meager land holdings.
for all its ancient expertise in rice cultivation china simply did not have enough land to grow rice for 421 million people.
beginning in 1810 there were terrible famines in china with some of the worst coming in the 1840s.
in those four decades 45 million people may have starved to death.
poor people begged for admission to soup kitchens or simply died on the doorsteps of the rich.
as one immigrant from guangdong remembered sometimes we went hungry for days we had only salt and water to eat with the rice under such conditions a fresh start in a new place temporary or permanent was appealing.
americans in hawaii and california saw chinese laborers as a key to solving a shortage of workers to toil on sugar plantations on maui or to clear and cultivate land in california.
the poorest chinese peasant workers had long been known as ku liy literally hard strength and the western term for chinese laborers quickly came to be coolie immediately after the conclusion of the u s war with mexico a long time presidential advisor aaron h palmer reported to congress that no people in all of the east are so well adapted for clearing wild lands and raising every species of agricultural product as the chinese at first chinese immigrants were warmly welcomed in california.
an 1852 article in the daily alta california noted scarcely a ship arrives that does not bring an increase to this worthy integer of our population as a result the chinese population in the west grew rapidly.
the initial chinese response to the gold rush was relatively small 325 immigrants from china arrived in california in 1849 and 450 more in 1850 then the numbers grew rapidly 2 716 in 1851 and 20 026 in 1852 by 1870 chinese immigrants represented nine percent of the population of california but 25 percent of the work force since most chinese immigrants were men of working age and larger percentages in oregon and washington.
the chinese also made up 29 percent of the much smaller population of idaho and 10 percent in montana.
nearly 95 percent of chinese immigrants to california before 1870 were male.
they tended to see their voyage across the pacific a harsh 8 week trip as a temporary separation from their families in china.
united states law dating from 1790 prohibited nonwhite immigrants from achieving citizenship and most chinese expected to return 12 part v expansion separation and a new union 1844 1877 home after a few years.
in the early years most male chinese immigrants joined other newcomers in the search for gold.
chinese gold miners could be seen all along the rivers of california in their blue cotton blouses and wide brimmed hats shoveling sand into pans or rockers.
these men left wives fiancees children and parents behind to find ways to support them.
chinese culture dictated that a woman should stay with her family especially her husbands parents while the man found the means of support.
cultural practices such as these and the cost of travel made immigration difficult for women though hawaii was much more welcoming of families than was the united states.
of the few chinese women who avoided the cultural prohibitions and came to california before 1870 many were forced to work as prostitutes either lured into the work by false promises or forced into the work by the absence of other ways to survive.
in 1870 2 157 of the 3 536 chinese women in california reported their profession as prostitute only later did other options open for chinese women.
as more chinese entered the gold fields they encountered growing resistance from white miners.
the cry california for americans began in the gold fields and was picked up by many including the political leaders of the state.
in 1852 the california legislature adopted a foreign miners license tax of 3 per month which was aimed specifically at the chinese.
it provided between a quarter and a half of state revenue before 1870 the tax and the growing anti chinese sentiment that it represented slowed but did not stop chinese immigration.
as the gold fields became less productive many chinese went to work building the railroads.
immediately after the civil war 12 000 chinese laborers laid the tracks of the central pacific railroad.
chinese workers also moved into agriculture mining fishing and later into urban businesses.
men from china often found work at the least desirable jobs or jobs that other men considered to be womens work including starting the ubiquitous chinese laundries that were solely a chinese american development.
although many individual chinese immigrants returned home after a few years other chinese immigrants stayed in the united states creating permanent communities in the american west.
between miners of european origin and chinese miners were severe and most chinese miners were driven frm the gold fields before long.
chapter 7 chapter 12 living in a nation of changing lands changing faces changing expectations 337 123 12 2 1231 i committees of vigilance also known as vigilantes groups of people who took on extralegal means to assert law and order.
saloon and gambling house she controlled in santa fe.
barcelo s saloon was a fixture for santa fe trail traders from the 1820s to the 1850s and a business of sufficient success to allow her to make significant bequests to charity and leave three houses and other wealth to her heirs when she died in 1852 barcelo was not alone in attending to her own interests whether the flag of spain mexico or the united states flew on the plaza near her establishment.
for many poor people in the southwest however the transfer of authority from mexico to the united states meant increased poverty and far less opportunity for justice in a court system that was operated in a strange language by people who were often filled with racial and ethnic prejudices.
not surprisingly the term vigilante meaning people who take justice into their own hands rather than rely on lawful authorities came from the committees of vigilance in the california mining camps.
vigilante groups made up of private citizens took the administration of justice into their own hands when they thought that the official government authorities were absent or too often when they did not like their decisions.
members of these groups delivered public whippings and lynched people they did not like whether or not a crime had been committed.
california mobs lynched at least 163 mexicans between 1848 and 1860 in southern california a white gang known as the el monte boys used the hysteria around a short lived mexican rebellion to settle old scores and attack mexican families regardless of whether they had been involved in the rebellion.
similar outrages happened across the west.
still in texas new mexico and arizona the latino presence remained strong.
the mexican american community fought back as it could.
one californio joaquin murrieta became a california legend feared in the white community honored in the mexican community because of his vengeance on those who had stolen his gold claim raped his wife rosa and hung his brother.
murrieta stole horses and gold and killed those who had raped and murdered his loved ones before he in turn was discovered and killed by the california rangers in 1853 kangaroo courts unauthorized and obviously biased courts and lynchings were all too common within and across all ethnic lines as traditional community relationships were destroyed by distance and greed.
quick review how did native born americans react to immigrants in the 1840s and 1850s.
how did immigrants react to their new american surroundings.
12 2 slavery in the united states 1840s and 1850s explain how the lives of slaves slaveholders and abolitionists evolved in the decades before the civil war.
the institution of slavery had existed in the united states from the nations beginning but slavery which had never been a static institution changed significantly yet again after 1820 see chapter 12 living in a nation of changing lands changing faces changing expectations 339 j 12 1 12 2 123 van buren did win some 10 percent of the popular vote in 1848 nevertheless abolitionist rhetoric and political muscle were frightening an increasingly defensive slaveholding south.
slaveholders and their political and intellectual allies responded to both the increased profit and the increased criticism.
in the past most slaveholders including all of those from the south who attended the constitutional convention had defended slavery as a necessary evil somehow they argued slavery had become an economic and social necessity that was at best unfortunate.
however after 1830 a new generation of slaveholders began to describe slavery as a positive good an institution that christianized heathen africans while providing them with food shelter and an ordered life.
these new defenders of slavery also contrasted it with work in northern factories and noted that slaves unlike factory workers were not fired when work got slow or they grew old but rather were provided for throughout their lives.
southern apologists also became increasingly angry with northern critics of slavery.
one example of the new proslavery ideology was the changing views of roger b taney who served as chief justice of the united states from 1836 to 1864 as a young attorney in maryland in 1819 taney defended a methodist preacher jacob gruber who had warned it was inevitable that slaves would rise up and kill your children their oppressors when maryland charged gruber with breaking the peace and inciting rebellion taney asserted grubers legal right to free speech and said that slavery was a blot on our national character and every real lover of freedom confidently hopes that it will be wiped away in 1857 however almost 40 years after the gruber trial and 20 years after taneys appointment to lead the supreme court he wrote in reference to the dred scott decision see chapter 12 living in a nation of changing lands changing faces changing expectations 345 l 123 12 2 123 family set out on the pretext of going to the funeral of a slave on a nearby plantation but went instead to the home of a quaker underground railroad conductor in delaware who started them on the road to freedom in new york city where each member of the family took a new name in a ceremony of baptism to liberty.
frederick douglass was born a slave in maryland around 1817 douglass remembered visits from his mother who lived on another plantation 12 miles away and made the journey on foot at night before returning for the next days work she was a field hand and a whipping is the penalty for not being in the field at sunrise 1 do not recollect of ever seeing my mother by the light of day douglass made his first attempt to run away in 1835 but was caught and sent to a former master in baltimore.
instead of giving in to the fear of capture douglass tried again 3 years later and succeeded in running away to freedom in new york in 1838 harriet tubman became famous as a slave who not only ran away but also returned to the south and guided between 200 and 300 others along the underground railroad to freedom.
by most reckonings she was responsible for freeing more slaves than any other person in the institutions long history.
tubman was born about 1820 two of her older sisters were sold to a plantation farther south and tubman never shook her own fears of a similar fate.
she almost died at the age of 14 from a severe head injury when an overseer threw a 2 pound weight at another slave but hit tubman instead.
in 1844 she married john tubman a free black who lived nearby.
marriages of slaves and free blacks were uncommon but not unknown.
the free husband thought his wife worried too much about being a slave.
in 1849 tubman made her way north to philadelphia without her husband or other help and found work as a domestic.
she recalled i was free but there was no one to welcome me to the land of freedom everyone she knew and cared for was down in the old cabin quarters with the old folks and my brothers and sisters thinking historically understanding advertisements for runaway slaves n december 22 1848 the following advertisement appeared in the baltimore sun fifty dollars reward ran away from the subscriber on the 10th inst this month a man named celus calls himself celus dorsey about 23 years old slender made about 5 feet 7 or 8 inches high dark complexion rather thick lip he has a large scar on one of his hands from a burn.
it is probable he is lurking about baltimore.
i will give the above reward if taken out of the state and 30 if taken in the state and secured so i get him again.
saml c hunt 10 miles from baltimore on baltimore and susquehanna railroad historians have found hundreds of similar advertisements in newspapers in slaveholding states from the american revolution to the middle of the civil war.
each advertisement tells a small part of the story of someone who had the opportunity and the courage to run away from slavery and the slaveholder s determination to see him or her returned.
source baltimore sun december 22 1848 thinking critically 1 contextualization what does hunt s location tell us.
what opportunity would a slave living further from a city have to run away.
why might hunt have thought that dorsey was lurking around baltimore.
was there something about a city even in a slaveholding state that might attract a slave.
2 historical interpretation why were slaveholders so willing to advertise about runaway slaves and let others know that enslaved people were running away as often as the advertisements imply.
what might be lost and what might be gained for a slave owner by posting such advertisements.
w 346 part v expansion separation and a new union 1844 1877 tubman decided that the best solution was to bring the rest of her family to freedom though she never rejoined her free husband.
having successfully brought most of her family north tubman developed a pattern that she would continue until the civil war.
she worked for a while raised some money and then made a trip south to free a group of slaves.
between 1850 and 1861 tubman made trip after trip helping slaves escape and taking them north.
as the full impact of the 1850 fugitive slave law took effect she did not stop in pennsylvania but accompanied each group to canada.
as tubmans fame grew it earned her the support of northern abolitionists and the hatred of many slaveholders.
the reward for her capture grew steadily but she kept returning south to free more people.
northern abolitionists supported her work and in 1859 the unitarian minister thomas wentworth higginson took up a collection at the massachusetts anti slavery society so that tubman could resume the practice of her profession rebels and slave revolts although slaveholders typically claimed that their slaves were happy and content the number of slaves who ran away undermined those claims.
on some level slaveholders were aware of the reality because as much as they sought to catch runaway slaves they most intensely feared the possibility of a slave revolt.
slave revolts were relatively rare but they did happen.
historians have documented over 200 slave revolts in the united states in the 60 years before the civil war.
some were little more than small scale events on a single plantation others were much larger.
on august 30 1800 gabriel prosser led over 1 000 slaves in a planned attack on richmond virginia see chapter 18 responses to industrialism responses to change 525 18 1.
i is j j j 18 3 haymarket the name given to the strike rally and bombing that took place around haymarket square in chicago in may 1886 as well as to the subsequent executions of four leaders of the incident.
haymarket 1886 on may 4 1886 many of the tensions in the united states exploded at chicagos haymarket square.
between 40 000 and 60 000 of chicagos workers went on strike on saturday may 1 chanting their demands for an 8 hour work day eight hours for work eight hours for rest eight hours for what we will the a f of l supported the strike.
so did socialists and anarchists in chicagos diverse immigrant communities.
socialism and anarchism though quite different political philosophies were both very strong in chicago.
socialists believed that the workers should own the means of production and that private ownership of factories businesses and lands should be abolished in favor of ownership by all which often meant government ownership.
anarchists deeply distrusted any government including a socialist government and disdained elections as fraudulent exercises in futility.
in place of government anarchists wanted small local voluntary organizations.
they believed that by abolishing higher authorities a new era of peace and freedom would come.
nevertheless for two anarchist leaders albert parsons and august spies the 8 hour movement was an opportunity to bring skilled and unskilled workers together as a step toward their larger goal.
as the strike continued on monday may 3 spies issued a call for a mass meeting to be held the following night at haymarket square and asked albert parsons to join him.
perhaps 3 000 people showed up at the haymarket rally.
but just as the rally was ending and parsons himself was enjoying a beer at a nearby tavern a police contingent marched into the rally to end it.
someone no one ever found out who threw a bomb into the middle of the police ranks killing one police officer.
six more officers soon died of their wounds.
as news of the haymarket bomb spread newspapers blamed anarchists and socialists for the violence.
eventually albert parsons august spies and six others were tried and convicted for being part of a general conspiracy to annihilate the police force and destroy property even though none of them could possibly have thrown the actual bomb.
appeals and a nationwide campaign for clemency ensued.
samuel gompers who certainly disagreed with anarchists nevertheless said that parsons spies and the others had been fighting for labor from different sides of the house in spite of all the appeals four including parsons and spies were hung on november 11 1887 haymarket as the strike rally bombing and executions all came to be called was a pivotal moment in american labor history.
for some the trial and executions were a validation of the rule of law.
for others the trial and execution of men who never threw the bomb and did not have any known links to whoever did provided proof that justice was not possible for those who protested in gilded age america.
lucy parsons alberts widow spent the rest of her long life speaking and writing about their cause.
emma goldman a young girl at the time traced her own career as a life long radical organizer to the stories of the haymarket martyrs.
homestead strike 1892 while the 1886 strike for an 8 hour day was a national event other strikes followed none more important than the 1892 homestead strike at andrew carnegies plant at homestead pennsylvania.
by the 1890s carnegie owned a dozen plants in western pennsylvania and northern west virginia.
workers at these huge mills turned out a quarter of the nations steel supply and earned 40 million per year in profits for carnegie.
carnegie wanted to be seen as a friend to working people but profits still came first.
in 1892 when workers at carnegies homestead steel mill went on strike carnegie left his top lieutenant henry clay frick in charge while he remained at his castle in scotland.
frick decided that the time had come to break the 24 000 member amalgamated association of iron steel and tin workers.
in june 1892 when it came time to negotiate a new contract frick offered only a cut in salary.
when the union rejected the offer frick closed the plant fired all of the workers and built an 8 foot fence around it.
he then hired new nonunion workers 526 part vi becoming an industrial world power costs benefits and responses 1865 1914 coxey s army a protest march of unemployed workers led by businessman jacob coxey demanding a public works highway program and guaranteed jobs during the depression of the 1890s.
and 300 pinkerton agents to protect them.
the pinkerton agency had been created to support the north during the civil war but turned into a quasi police force for industrial owners who were caught in conflict with unions in the late 1800s.
the homestead workers fought back.
on july 6 when two barges of pinkerton detectives came down the river to the plant strikers who had been patrolling the area rushed the pier.
no one knows who shot first but both sides kept shooting.
eventually between five and nine steelworkers and between three and ten pinkerton agents were killed.
pennsylvanias governor sent 8 000 militia troops to homestead to keep the peace and frick brought in new workers who began operating the mill.
union leaders were arrested but were acquitted it was hard to find an antiunion jury in the region.
public opinion generally blamed carnegie and frick for the bloodshed.
nevertheless frick had won his battle.
he had defeated the union and reopened the mills with nonunion workers.
unlike andrew carnegie he did not care about public opinion.
carnegie also blamed frick for the troubles and the two never spoke again but carnegie also did not reinstate the union.
coxey s army 1893 94 in 1893 a grand worlds fair the columbian exposition opened in chicago.
like earlier fairs this one displayed the nations technological marvels and industrial success including 400 buildings lit with 10 000 electric lights.
while the fair was a booming success the nations economy was collapsing in the panic of 1893 j p morgan rescued the countrys gold reserves see chapter 8 creating a new people expanding the country 215 sj 8 2 thinking historically thomas jefferson and sally hemings as a young man jefferson married martha wayles skelton like himself a wealthy young virginian.
martha jefferson died at monticello in 1782 and jefferson never remarried.
in 1787 a 16 year old slave sally hemings who was the half sister of jefferson s wife martha by her slave owning father became a servant in jefferson s paris home while he was ambassador to france.
when jefferson returned to the united states in 1789 hemings could have stayed in france and been free by french law but she returned with him.
while much is not known about their relationship jefferson seems to have promised hemings that he would free the children of their union.
hemings and many of her family lived at monticello near the older children from jefferson s marriage.
sally hemings s last child was born there in 1808 and hemings stayed at jefferson s home until he died in 1826 when she went to live with her own free children.
in her book the hemingses of monticello an american family new york w w norton 2008 historian annette gordon reed traces not only the story of sally hemings but the story of the intertwined generations of the jefferson and hemings families.
the story raises many questions for historians including questions about the relevance of jefferson s personal relationship with sally hemings in terms of judgments about his political career and as president.
thinking critically 1 contextualization was it possible for a slave woman and a powerful older free man who claimed ownership of her to form a truly consensual relationship.
why or why not.
2 historical interpretation what bearings might jefferson s relationship with sally hemings have on his complex attitudes about the institution of slavery.
what does an understanding of jefferson s family with sally hemings and her family tell us about the nature of american slavery and society in the early 1800s.
iii the ideal of religious freedom 8 2 explain how americans applied new individualist ideals in their religion and how the expansion of faith based organizations supported yet also challenged jeffersonian republicanism.
i on his first new years day in the white house thomas jefferson wrote to the members of a committee of the danbury connecticut baptist association believing with you that religion is a matter which lies solely between man and his god that he owes account to none other for his faith or his worship that the legislative powers of government reach actions only and not opinions i contemplate with sovereign reverence that act of the whole american people which declared that their legislature should make no law respecting an establishment of religion or prohibiting the free exercise thereof thus building a wall of separation between church and state.
wall of separation between church and state a phrase coined by thomas jefferson to make clear his belief that the first amendment to the constitution guaranteed that governments should not interfere with the work of churches and churches should not interfere with or expect support from government.
with the wide distribution of that letter the wall of separation between church and state became part of the american lexicon.
some have pointed out that the wall of separation is merely a phrase coined by one president and not part of the constitution or law of the land.
they are right.
but in 1802 jefferson was expressing another aspect of the republican ideal.
more and more americans believed that two of the most important arenas of american life politics and religion should stay as far away from each other as possible.
people who wanted to be treated equally with everyone else no matter what their wealth or family who wanted to be free to curse drink and fight without the laws intrusion and who wanted to be left alone on their own farms also wanted to be able to pursue their religious beliefs as they chose.
a decade before jefferson wrote to the connecticut baptists president george washington had written to the sephardic jewish congregation in newport rhode island expressing similar views see chapter 18 responses to industrialism responses to change coxey s army with their supporters marched though towns from ohio to washington dc on their way to make their demands of congress.
almost immediately after its founding the american railway union won a strike against the great northern railroad in 1894 it looked like a new force was emerging.
but then debs found himself pulled into a strike he did not want and the early successes of the american railway union turned to failure when the new union was involved in another strike at the pullman palace car company.
george pullman did not operate a railway he made railway cars the very best railway cars anywhere in the united states.
pullman cars were elegant sleeping cars that cost four times as much as other railway cars and that allowed travelers who could afford the accommodations to cross the country in comfort.
having designed and manufactured the cars pullman leased the cars and their staff to various rail lines that attached them to regular trains.
both pullman and the lines profited handsomely from the exchange.
to keep his employees out of industrial strife pullman built his own town pullman illinois 12 miles outside of chicago.
in pullman 8 000 workers and their families lived in 1 400 houses that they rented from the company.
they were provided with schools an athletic club free lectures a local theater and health care.
the housing at pullman was substantially better than housing available to most other industrial workers but the rents were high and the rules strict.
pullman did not allow alcohol and he had spotters who kept an eye on the behavior and home life of his employees.
facing the panic of 1893 pullman thought that the only prudent thing was to lay off some workers and cut wages for the rest.
he did not however reduce rents in pullman since he also expected the town to pay its own way.
nevertheless in spite of the depressed economy the pullman company paid its standard dividends to its shareholders.
in response the workers went on strike.
ninety percent of the residents of pullman did not show up for work.
they called on debs and the american railway union for support.
debs told the pullman workers that the midst of a depression was a terrible time to call a strike and urged them to postpone.
they refused and debs felt bound to support them.
the american railway union refused to handle any train that had a pullman car attached.
by june rail traffic through chicago had stopped.
the union took special 528 part vi becoming an industrial world power costs benefits and responses 1865 1914 care to keep the mail trains running so there would be no reason for federal intervention but the federal government intervened anyway.
the cleveland administration obtained an injunction ordering the strikers back to work and when they refused cleveland ordered 14 000 federal troops to chicago to end the strike.
when the army arrived in chicago there was a riot and 34 people were killed.
federal authorities not only ended the strike but also arrested debs and disbanded the union.
ihe strike and the jail term transformed debs.
he went to jail a charismatic labor leader.
he came out convinced that the american economic system was permanently stacked against workers and their unions and that the only way to bring about change was political.
he supported the populist movement in the 1896 election but then founded the socialist party in the united states.
the socialists advocated government ownership of the nations major industries and a mandate for higher salaries for workers.
in the national elections of 1904 through 1920 except 1916 debs ran for president as the partys candidate winning hundreds of thousands of votes and giving himself a platform to advocate for a completely different economic system.
miners and their unions the steel that was transforming america required two key ingredients iron ore and coal to fuel the smelting process that turned iron into steel.
coal also heated most of the nations cities and coal fired generators produced much of the nations electricity.
these two ingredients had to be mined from deep in the earth as did several other resources of great importance to the united states.
gold and silver were still the most valued forms of exchange.
lead pipes provided water to most houses.
bringing these resources to the industrial process required the backbreaking and dangerous work of miners.
as the united states industrialized the need for mines and miners grew exponentially however since every dollar paid to a miner increased the cost of finished products or reduced the profits of those who owned the manufacturing process mine owners were determined to keep the pay of miners as low as possible recruiting new immigrants who found themselves with few options.
18 1 18 j 18 3 of the pullman strike.
chapter 24 the world the war cre house committee on un american activities congressional committee 1938 1975 that investigated suspected nazi and communist sympathizers.
good for the country.
few political leaders were willing to challenge him.
however in june 1950 maines republican senator margaret chase smith and six colleagues issued a declaration of conscience saying that mccarthy was using the senate as a publicity platform for irresponsible sensationalism.
still he continued for 4 more years.
when he became president in 1953 eisenhower did not challenge mccarthy directly but helped those who wanted to undermine him.
in 1954 edward r murrow perhaps the most respected journalist in the country did an expose on mccarthy on his see it now program on cbs television.
both the senate declaration and the cbs program hurt mccarthys reputation but it was only when mccarthy decided to probe for communists in the u s army that he met his match.
as the army s attorney joseph welch grilled him mccarthy lashed out at a young attorney who was assisting welch accusing him of being a communist because he was a member of the left leaning national lawyers guild.
welch exploded until this moment senator i think i never really gauged your cruelty or your recklessness the hearing room burst into applause.
after that on december 2 1954 the senate voted to condemn mccarthy by a vote of 67 to 22 he continued to serve out his term until his death in 1957 but he was a beaten man and no longer a force in national politics.
mccarthy was hardly the only leader of the red scare of the late 1940s and early 1950s.
j edgar hoover who had been head of the federal bureau of investigation fbi since 1924 and a participant in the governments attack on radicals after world war i cultivated a reputation as the nations top crime fighter especially after fbi agents killed john dillinger public enemy number one during prohibition.
but hoover also cultivated a role as a leading anti communist seeking to expose what he claimed was communist influence in the government universities religious groups and later civil rights organizations.
he collected files on hundreds of americans from members of congress to union officials.
although president truman complained about hoover insisting we want no gestapo or secret police he did not stop hoovers search for subversives.
other politicians realized that the search for communists could lead to electoral success.
the house committee on un american activities huac became a powerful forum for those who used the fear of communism to pursue other agendas.
one of its members john rankin a democrat from mississippi linked communism jews and civil rights workers saying of the civil rights movement this is part of the communistic program laid down by stalin approximately 30 years ago.
remember communism is yiddish.
i understand that every member of the politburo around stalin is either yiddish or married to one and that includes stalin himself a young republican representative from california richard m nixon used huac to build a national reputation investigating hiss looking for communists in the government and extending the search into the entertainment industry and education.
while some in the entertainment world quickly cooperated with huac many fought back.
judy garland one of the nations most popular stars since her childhood role in the wizard of oz pleaded before every free conscience in america is subpoenaed please speak up frank sinatra asked once they get the movies throttled how long will it be before were told what we can say and cannot say into the radio microphone.
if you make a pitch on a nationwide radio network for a square deal for the underdog will they call you a commie.
are they going to scare us into silence undeterred huac continued with its hearings.
many witnesses refused to testify on the fifth amendment grounds that they could not be compelled to testify against themselves.
ten actors known as the hollywood ten took the more difficult route of claiming that the hearings threatened their first amendment rights of free speech.
the 10 and others were blacklisted and had their careers ruined in spite of efforts by the committee for the first amendment led by humphrey bogart lauren bacall katherine hepburn and danny kaye to protect them.
704 part viii fears joys and limits 1945 1980 thinking historically looking at the art of the postwar nation f.
2 u i j 24 2 in his book the unfinished city new york and the metropolitan idea historian thomas bender wrote of the radical transformation of the arts after world war ii intellectual historians have failed to grasp the variety of artistic and critical work that characterized the 1940s partly because concerns of the cold war era gave precedence to certain ideological themes and political trends.
bender argues that it is also important to pay attention to the remarkable creativity and critical discourse in the fields of painting and sculpture photography architecture music and dance.
as bender observes while many americans were focused on the cold war others were using the arts to ask different questions about american life especially as people came to terms with the threat of nuclear disaster after world war ii.
often artists were pointing to the confusions some said pointlessness of contemporary thinking as much or more than they were making overt statements about one political ideology or another.
james agee himself a very well known author was the film critic for the nation magazine in the late 1940s.
in a 1948 review he wrote several of the best people in hollywood grew noticeably during their years away at war the man who grew most impressively i thought as an artist as a man in intelligence and in an ability to put through fine work against difficult odds was film director john huston his first movie since the war has been a long time coming but it was certainly worth waiting for.
the treasure of the sierra mad re is a bout as near to folk art as a highly conscious artist can get i doubt we shall ever see a film more masculine in style or a truer movie understanding of character and of men.
as a generation of young men returned from the fighting of the war and took up their day to day lives in the civilian workforce some worried that perhaps they had left their masculinity behind on the battlefields.
artists like the film director john huston addressed these fears.
while the films of the late 1940s and early 1950s were like al films meant to entertain they also helped some in the audience think through some of their greatest hopes and fears.
the abstract artist jackson pollock painted convergence in 1952 like most abstract art the complex work leaves it to the beholder to make meaning of the lines and colors the artist offers.
source thomas bender unfinished city new york and the metropolitan idea new york new york university press 2002 pp.
135 136 james agee the treasure of the sierra mad re the nation january 31 1948 thinking critically 1 historical interpretation in your opinion what can a period s art tell us about its politics.
what sort of political ideas might one see in an abstract painting or a film about masculinity.
2 constructing an argument how would you explain the emergence of abstract art in the era of the atomic bomb after world war ii in place of the much more realistic paintings of the 1930s.
t j many labor unions purged communist members.
aspiring new leaders used the accusation of communist influence to push aside older leaders.
the united electrical workers union was replaced by a new union of electrical workers because the united electrical was considered to be communist and was expelled by the american federation of labor.
civil rights organizations including the urban league the congress of racial equality and the national association for the advancement of colored people naacp purged communist members.
many school districts and 21 states required loyalty oaths from teachers.
in 1948 the university of washington fired three professors when they refused to answer questions about the communist party.
some 31 professors were ultimately fired from the university of california under similar circumstances.
and the american federation of teachers the leading union of elementary and secondary teachers voted that communists should not be allowed to be members or teach in the nations schools.
chapter 24 the world the war crea china u.
m north korea mil south korea north korean forces united states united nations forces chinese forces capitals map 24 4 the korean war.
at the beginning and end of the korean war the peninsula was divided into two nations at the 38th parallel.
however between 1950 and 1953 the dividing line moved many times as indicated.
the wrong enemy the new commander in korea general matthew ridgway stabilized the defense lines and arranged better support and supplies for the troops.
the chinese and american governments became resigned to a partial victory.
neither wanted a larger war no matter what the two korean governments thought.
battles for places the american troops called heartbreak ridge or no name ridge described how those on the ground thought about what they were doing.
armistice negotiations began in the summer of 1951 but stalled over the fact that many chinese and north korean prisoners did not want to be returned home.
it would take 2 more years and the election of a new u s president before the final armistice was signed in july 1953 more than 36 000 americans were killed in the war many times more korean and chinese troops and probably 3 million korean civilians.
the final armistice line was not far from where the prewar line had been near panmunjom.
sixty years later korea is still a tense and divided place.
24 2 quick review how did changing attitudes toward and experiences with the soviet union between 1945 and 1949 contribute to major changes in u s foreign policy.
708 part viii fears joys and limits 1945 1980 politics 1948 and 1952 explain political developments that led to the elections of truman and then eisenhower as cold war era presidents.
when harry truman became president in april 1945 few americans knew much about him.
many expected truman to merely serve out the term to which roosevelt had been elected.
truman decided otherwise but he had a lot of time and a lot of responsibility to manage before any thought of reelection loomed.
riding a tiger truman s first term as war and foreign policy dominated trumans first months in office truman said he felt like he was riding a tiger.
the liberal wing of the democratic party included new deal activists such as secretary of commerce henry wallace and secretary of the interior harold ickes who never trusted truman viewing him as a product of missouri machine politics who had been forced on fdr by the conservative wing of the party.
truman reciprocated the distrust.
looking ahead to the postwar world truman told clark clifford one of his key advisors i don t want any experiments.
the american people have been through a lot of experiments and they want a rest from experiments but truman was not proposing any sort of warren harding normalcy on september 6 1945 just 4 days after the japanese surrender truman proposed legislation that would implement fdrs economic bill of rights expanding the federal role in public housing public utilities job creation and national health increasing the minimum wage offering social security benefits to more people while also making the fair employment practices commission permanent.
it was a sweeping agenda delighting liberals and dismaying conservatives.
southern segregationists filibustered the fair employment bill that would have continued fdrs executive order ensuring that employers with federal contracts could not discriminate among employees on the basis of race and kept it from reaching a vote.
other bills were watered down by congress.
congress turned trumans effort to launch a national system of health insurance into the hill burton act that benefitted doctors and hospitals and private medical insurers but did not guarantee health insurance.
while there was democratic as well as republican opposition to trumans domestic agenda the presidents single most powerful opponent was ohio senator robert taft the son of the former president known to many as mr.
republican taft not only opposed trumans agenda but also pushed legislation that reduced taxes forcing cuts in government programs and persuaded congress in 1947 over trumans veto to pass the taft hartley act that lifted many of the protections organized labor had enjoyed since the passage of the wagner act in the 1930s.
taft was not alone.
the republican party was strong following world war ii.
as truman understood many people in the united states were tired of experiments just as after world war i many americans simply wanted to be left alone.
in the 1946 midterm elections republicans took control of both houses of congress.
but harry truman was a fighter more of a fighter than some expected.
his goal was to win a full term in his own right and elect a democratic congress in 1948 goals many thought unrealistic in 1946 the 1948 election a four way contest in planning his campaign for 1948 truman sought to maintain the new deal coalition that had elected roosevelt four times and even sought to expand it.
he wanted to have a large plurality among white blue collar workers immigrant groups farmers and poor people.
he made special efforts to court african americans and jews.
in 1946 he appointed a presidents committee on civil rights and its report released in october 1947 led him to propose an antilynching law a permanent fair employment commission and laws against poll taxes and discrimination in transportation.
243 when the republican congress failed to pass these and other pieces of legislation truman called them the do nothing congress under pressure from civil rights leaders truman overruled the objections of some of the nations highest ranking military officers and ordered the desegregation of the nations armed forces in 1948 it would take several years before the last segregated regiments were phased out but the process was underway for a dramatic change from the segregated military of world war ii.
truman also favored the establishment of an independent state of israel.
on this issue there was deep disagreement within the administration.
secretary of state marshall threatened to resign if the united states gave support to israel and most leaders of the state army and navy departments opposed recognizing the new nation.
they feared that the united states would permanently alienate the arab world jeopardize the smooth flow of oil to the united states and europe and create a situation that would remain tense and untenable.
those on the white house staff tended to support creation of a jewish state in the middle east.
trumans own reading about the holocaust and middle eastern history led him to support israel.
he got and occasionally resented considerable pressure from american zionists.
thirty three state legislatures passed resolutions favoring the establishment of a jewish state.
truman responded to one anxious state department official i have to answer to hundreds of thousands who are anxious for the success of zionism.
i do not have hundreds of thousands of arabs among my constituents on may 14 as the last british forces left palestine zionists proclaimed the independent state of israel.
at trumans direction the united states immediately recognized the new government.
to the surprise of many israel was able to defend itself successfully against an arab attack and secure its borders and its existence.
trumans policies from fair employment to his support for israel also had an impact on american voters.
while many african americans were moving into the democratic party and most jewish voters were prepared to support truman after his may 1948 decisions the road to nomination and election that year was not easy.
many new dealers in the democratic party still hoped for a more liberal or a more popular candidate.
when it became clear that truman would win the nomination and invite senate leader alben barkley to be his running mate henry wallace former vice president and commerce secretary bolted and set up the progressive party to defeat truman end the cold war and return the country to what he saw as the roosevelt legacy.
then when truman supported a convention platform plank supporting civil rights introduced by minnesota senator hubert humphrey at the democratic convention 35 delegates from alabama and mississippi walked out of the convention waving confederate flags and proceeded to nominate south carolinas governor and future senator j strom thurmond to run against truman.
these dixiecrats were a serious threat to a party that always counted on the solid south to ensure national electoral victories.
the republicans sensing that this was their year especially with the divisions in the democrat ranks nominated governor thomas e dewey of new york the 1944 standard bearer with california governor earl warren as his running mate.
the team seemed to have everything going for it and ran a cautious campaign designed to avoid mistakes.
unfortunately for the republicans they were too cautious and dewey was too stiff.
alice longworth theodore roosevelts daughter called him the little man on the wedding cake the wallace campaign never took off and gained little support though it may have denied truman the majority in a few crucial states especially new york.
the thurmond campaign got virtually no support outside of the deep south though it did carry the electoral votes of four states alabama louisiana mississippi and south carolina.
truman waged a very tough and spirited campaign against the do nothing congress and the wall street reactionaries as he campaigned people started yelling give em hell harry he had solid support from organized labor and farmers and held most of the new deal coalition together.
still the republicans led by dewey were confident of victory.
but when the votes were counted truman won receiving 24 179 345 votes to deweys 21 991 291 and 303 electoral votes to dewey s 189 thurmond won 39 electoral votes.
wallace none.
710 part viii fears joys and limits 1945 1980 as he began his new term in january 1949 truman called his agenda the fair deal.
the truman fair deal included repeal of the taft hartley act support for family farmers a more progressive income tax federal aid to education an increase in the minimum wage national medical insurance as well as another try to broadening social security and expanded civil rights.
in his inaugural address truman also called for more u s technical assistance to developing countries.
technical assistance became known as point four because it was the fourth point in trumans speech.
even though the democrats controlled both houses of congress in 1949 virtually none of the fair deal legislation passed.
southern democrats made sure there was no movement on civil rights organized labor did not have enough support to overturn the taft hartley act urban representatives saw little value in spending federal tax money on farmers and the american medical association made sure that there was no national system of medical insurance such as most western european countries adopted after world war ii.
point four foreign aid passed but the appropriations were small and the resulting technical assistance generally insignificant.
much of trumans second term was focused on the war in korea which the congress was willing to fund and the ongoing red scare which truman did little to oppose.
many were confident of a republican victory in the 1948 election including the editors of the chicago tribune who published this erroneous early edition over which the eventual winner harry s truman delighted to gloat.
a war hero becomes president in a belated slap at franklin roosevelt the republican congress passed the 22nd amendment to the constitution prohibiting any president from serving more than two terms and a majority of states ratified the amendment.
the amendment did not apply to the sitting president and truman considered seeking a third term.
when he was defeated in the first primaries by estes kefauver a crusading senator from tennessee however truman decided that two terms was enough and dropped out of the race.
in spite of his spirited come from behind race in 1948 and his later reputation as a tough decision maker truman was not a widely popular president.
the most popular person in the united states in the early 1950s was dwight david eisenhower known to everyone as ike.
born in 1890 and raised in abilene kansas by pacifist parents eisenhower had attended west point seeing it as a free education for a career in engineering.
instead he became a long term officer in the peacetime army between the wars moving slowly through the ranks.
he was still a colonel when world war ii began but was then promoted rapidly and commanded the allied force that defeated nazi germany.
he probably could have had the presidential nomination of either party in 1948 but opted to become president of columbia university and then commander of nato forces in europe in 1951 he managed to convey a disinterested above the fray persona.
some who knew him better saw another side.
general george patton said ike wants to be president so badly you can taste it while eisenhower had served as a senior military commander under democrats roosevelt and truman and tended to agree with the anti communist wing of the democratic party on foreign policy matters he was a fiscal conservative and the new deal and fair deal programs offended his sense of the proper role of the federal government.
if he was going to run it would be as a republican.
liberals within the republican party including the 1944 and 1948 standard bearer thomas dewey and massachusetts senator henry cabot lodge were desperate to find an internationalist candidate who could stop the republican front runner senator taft an isolationist in foreign policy and a conservative on domestic issues.
they courted eisenhower who remained coy.
however primary voters made it clear that they preferred ike to taft ike defeated taft 46 661 to 35 838 in the march new hampshire primary even though he was still at nato headquarters in europe and did not campaign.
after fair deal the name president harry truman gave to his policies to continue and extend many of the new deal s domestic policies.
chapter 24 the world the war 24 j that primary the momentum was hard to stop and eisenhower was nominated by the republicans in the summer of 1952 a bitter loss for taft and his supporters.
eisenhower asked california senator richard m nixon to be his running mate.
although the two were not close and never were nixon brought balance to the ticket.
ike almost dumped nixon at one point in the campaign because of charges that nixon had a private campaign fund donated by wealthy californians.
nixon gave what became known as his checkers television speech for its maudlin promise to keep the family dog named checkers even though the dog had been a gift.
the speech was a success and nixon stayed on the ticket.
for the rest of his career even after his own presidency nixon celebrated the day of the speech.
at the age of 38 nixon was considered young while ike at 62 was considered old.
nixon had made his name with his search for communists when he was a member of the house un american activities committee.
in addition he was from the west coast while ikes strongest support was in the east.
the democrats nominated illinois governor adlai stevenson.
like eisenhower stevenson was a strong cold warrior and a known internationalist who had been one of the founders of the united nations.
he had a reputation as an honest politician in a state where democrats were often corrupt.
he was more conservative than truman on most domestic issues especially race and he selected alabama senator john sparkman as his running mate in part to ensure that there would be no dixiecrat walkout in 1952 stevenson was also very popular with many liberals mostly because of his intelligence and wit.
one said that his speeches were simply gems of wisdom and wit and sense unfortunately for stevensons vote getting this skill mattered more to the partys intellectual leaders than to many in the working class black urban coalition that had been key to the election of roosevelt and truman.
the campaign was the first in which television played a major role.
the republicans made effective use of short tv spots that carried brief comments by ike along with his famous smile.
ike also promised a nation that was desperately tired of the war i shall go to korea though it was unclear what he would do there.
in november ike won 55 percent of the vote and carried the electoral college 442 to 89 winning even florida tennessee texas and virginia states that had voted democrat for decades.
the republicans won small majorities in congress.
eisenhower fulfilled his campaign promise and went to korea.
early in his term he was able to conclude the peace treaty that had eluded truman.
korea remained divided but the conflict ended.
ike intended to create what he called modern republicanism he was a determined internationalist who kept the united states active in the un and nato.
under ike there would be no return to 1920s style isolationism.
he was determined to balance the federal budget and not likely to launch major new programs but not roll back the major new deal initiatives either.
he once said should any political party attempt to abolish social security unemployment insurance and eliminate labor laws and farm programs you would not hear of that party again in our political history he dismissed the conservative wing of the republican party saying of the conservative california senator william knowland in his case there seems to be no final answer to the question how stupid can you get with eisenhower s election a new republican administration was prepared to maintain many of the new deals domestic policies and trumans cold war internationalism.
individuals changed but surprisingly little policy changed after the inauguration.
nevertheless as the great depression and world war ii receded and a new generation grew up with no memory of that difficult past and as many americans experienced unprecedented prosperity the culture began to change.
the 1950s were staid to some surprisingly novel to others and full of surprises for most.
243 quick review aside from their political parties how different were truman and eisenhower as candidates and as presidents.
712 part viii fears joys and limits 1945 1980 conclusion the experience of world war ii had a profound effect on american culture in the decade that followed the war.
the federal government offered generous benefits to returning veterans allowing a whole generation of young men to attend college to buy homes and to live comfortable middle class lives.
men and women anxious to leave the war behind married quickly and had children a lot of children.
the population soared in what was called a baby boom.
in the postwar era the living patterns of americans changed drastically.
many middle class white americans left the cities for homes in newly created suburban communities.
at the same time the rate of migration of southern blacks to the urban centers of the north exploded.
many black migrants moved into city centers because they were excluded from suburban developments.
latinos from puerto rico and mexico moved to american cities notably new york and los angeles.
the economic gains achieved during the war continued throughout the postwar period made possible in part by the position of the united states as the only remaining economic superpower in the world.
consumers who had more money than ever purchased goods produced by american manufacturers achieved new levels of economic security and affluence buying automobiles televisions and electric appliances in the postwar economy.
the end of the world war ii also brought on new attempts at international cooperation.
in an effort to create political and economic stability and a lasting peace the united nations the international monetary fund and the world bank were ushered into being.
while enjoying the remarkable prosperity of the postwar era more and more americans became deeply concerned about the soviet union and the spread of communism.
the containment of communism became the bedrock of u s foreign policy in the truman administration.
by 1952 both the united states and the soviet union possessed hydrogen bombs and the possibility of mutually assured destruction set off a cold war between the two countries that would last 40 years.
in europe the cold war was institutionalized in the western led north atlantic treaty organization founded by the united states and great britain and the eastern warsaw pact led by the soviet union.
americas uneasy relationship with the soviet union resulted in a second red scare within the united states itself.
fueled by the fiery rhetoric of senator joseph mccarthy and others americans began to suspect communist infiltration everywhere and many personal and professional lives were ruined by accusations of treason espionage and communist party membership that often had little basis in reality.
in 1950 the american policy of containment was tested when north korea attacked south korea.
the united states with support from the united nations took up the defense of south korea even after a huge army from communist china attacked u s forces in the region.
after fierce fighting the outcome of the war was ambiguous.
the united states and china signed an armistice that left korea divided much as it had been since the end of world war ii.
with the election of a new president dwight eisenhower in november 1952 the nation that was tired of the war in korea settled into what many hoped would be a new era of peace and prosperity even as they continued to fear the soviet union and the mushroom cloud of atomic destruction.
chapter 2 chapter 13 the politics of separation 361 thinking historically uncle tom s cabin early in uncle tom s cabin stowe described her heroine eliza s decision to run away from a kentucky plantation after hearing that her young son was about to be sold away from her and the family to a new owner it is impossible to conceive of a human creature more wholly desolate and forlorn than eliza when she turned her footsteps from uncle tom s cabin.
her husband s suffering and dangers and the danger of her child all blended in her mind with a confused and stunning sense of the risk she was running in leaving the only home she had ever known and cutting loose from the protection of a friend whom she loved and revered.
then there was the parting from every familiar object but stronger than all was maternal love wrought into a paroxysm of frenzy by the near approach of a fearful danger.
her boy was old enough to have walked by her side and in an indifferent case she would only have led him by the hand but now the bare thought of putting him out of her arms made her shudder and she strained him to her bosom with a convulsive grasp as she went rapidly forward if it were your harry mother or your willie that were going to be torn from you by a brutal trader tomorrow morning if you had seen the man and heard that the papers were signed and delivered and you had only from twelve o clock till morning to make good your escape how fast could you walk.
for many americans eliza s fear and determination made the reality of slavery come alive in ways that decades of antislavery publications and true life stories had not.
what a modern reader reads as melodrama readers of the time found compelling.
source harriet beecher stowe uncle tom s cabin or life among the lowly boston j p jewett 1852.
thinking critically 1 historical interpretation how does stowe transform the slavery question from an abstract political issue into a personal tragedy.
2 contextualization how does stowe build understanding for eliza and therefore for all slaves in this short passage.
rvvl the ohio river to escape pursuing slave catchers was not only a literary but also a political phenomenon in the 1850s and 1860s.
if any one book brought home a picture of slavery to moderate or ambivalent northerners it was uncle tom s cabin.
the book also enraged the south.
de bow s southern and western review one of the nations largest proslavery publications said the novel was insulting to the south because mrs stowe wants the world to believe that all she has written is true in the turmoil of the 1850s however the book galvanized antislavery opinion not only in the north but also in england where it was credited with playing a role in keeping britain neutral during the civil war.
the book angered both southerners who rationalized slavery and northerners many of whom first saw the nature of slavery through its pages.
the kansas nebraska act of 1854 developments in the early 1850s proved how wrong president fillmore had been to think that the compromise of 1850 was a final settlement of north south tensions.
the fillmore administrations enforcement of the fugitive slave act exacerbated antislavery opinion across the north and probably cost fillmore the whig nomination for president.
in the 1852 elections the whigs deeply divided between north and south voted on 53 ballots before finally nominating another war hero general winfield scott.
an almost equally divided democratic party nominated franklin pierce of new hampshire whom many in the south considered as reliable as calhoun himself 362 part v expansion separation and a new union 1844 1877 on the issue of slavery because they thought he would win the white house for them by sweeping the south.
the democrats gamble paid off pierce won and enforced the fugitive slave act as actively as fillmore.
despite that highly tense political atmosphere senator stephen a douglas of illinois hoped to get federal support for a transcontinental railroad from chicago to the pacific coast.
a railroad did not seem to be something that would immediately stir up the tensions swirling around slavery but it soon did.
as one step toward organizing the railroad douglas and congressman william a richardson a fellow illinois democrat introduced bills into congress in 1853 that would organize the remaining land in the louisiana purchase north of the arkansas river into what they called the nebraska territory to facilitate awarding a right of way for the railroad see map 13 1.
southern senators feared an effort to create another free state out of nebraska and blocked the bill.
after several failed efforts at compromise douglas proposed to split nebraska into two territories nebraska and kansas and allow each territory to decide whether to allow slavery.
he called this approach popular sovereignty letting each state or territory decide for itself whether to allow or ban slavery in its jurisdiction.
others had used the term before him but douglas became its most prominent proponent.
the term sounded democratic as least for white voters but popular sovereignty a solution to the slavery crisis suggested by senator lewis cass of michigan by which territorial residents not congress would decide slavery s fate in any proposed new state.
c a nad a oregon territory unorganized territory minnesota territory vermont maine iowa california admitted free 1850 utah territory 1850 illinois new hampshire f sachvsetts z x.
rhode island connecticut ohio jew jersey indiana new york pacific ocean new mexico territory indian x v virginia r territory tennessee carouna delaware x maryland texas claimed 836 50 free states and territories i slave states to be decided by popular sovereignty missouri compromise line mexico texas after 1850 louis.
05 z alabama lith gulf of mexico south carolina georgia islk atlantic ocean 3.
t 1ap13 the compromise of 1850 and the kansas nebraskaact.
the compromise of.
850 admitted aiif neuompromis h new mexico and utah territories.
three years later rma as a free state and se unorganized territory between minnesota and oregon enator stephen a douglas p posed th abo t whether the territory might eventually become hat set off a firestorm in congress and the country about wrieu.
lave or free states.
chapter review 24 columbus the columbian exchange and early conquests explain the reasons behind the voyages of columbus and describe early spanish encounters with the peoples of the caribbean mexico and south america.
review questions 1 contextualization what do columbuss words and actions on arriving in the new world tell us about his motives for making his voyages.
2 crafting an argument why did native populations decline so rapidly after 1492.
which cause for this was most important.
3 historical interpretation who were the winners and losers in the shift toward an ocean focused global trade system.
a divided europe the impact of the protestant reformation explain how the protestant reformation and the development of the nation state changed europe and european ideas about how best to settle and govern america.
review question 4 historical interpretation how did political and religious developments in 16th century europe shape the course of european settlement in the americas.
exploration and encounter in north america the spanish 23 analyze early spanish exploration of america north of mexico.
review questions 5 contextualization why did the french try to colonize florida.
why did the spanish respond to these efforts as they did.
6 historical interpretation how do you account for the failure to follow up on the de soto coronado and cabrillo expeditions.
why did spanish authorities remain uninterested in the future united states for so long.
7 contextualization how did the pueblos respond to early spanish efforts to find gold in their territory.
what does their response tell us about their strategies for dealing with these newcomers.
exploration and encounter in north america the french 2 4 analyze early french exploration and claims in north america.
review question 8 comparison compare french lack of interest in a permanent settlement in the northern parts of the future united states and canada in the 1500s with french and spanish interest in settlement in florida.
how do you account for the differences.
2 5 exploration and encounter in north america the english explain english explorers privateers and reasons for settlement.
review questions 9 chronological reasoning how did events in the decades before elizabeth i came to the throne shape her religious policies.
10 contextualization why did contemporaries see most of the european expeditions in north america during the 1500s as failures.
part i contact and exploration 1491 1607 settlements old and new 1607 1754 part part outline chapter 25 complacency and cl i 1952 eisenhower defeats stevenson for president i united states tests h bomb 1953 soviet union tests h bomb eisenhower proposes atoms for peace at un u s supreme court m board of education ruling defeat of french forces at dien bien phu vietnam u s supported coup overthrows government in guatemala senate censures joseph mccarthy 1955 eisenhower khrushchev summit meeting in geneva rosa parks arrested in montgomery alabama 1956 elvis presley heartbreak hotel released khrushchev secret speech denouncing stalin eisenhower signs interstate highway act suez canal crisis hungarian uprising eisenhower defeats stevenson for a second time conclusion of montgomery bus boycott 1957 riots at central high school little rock arkansas soviet union launches sputnik satellite 1959 castro comes to power in cuba u s u 2 reconnaissance plane shot down over soviet union kennedy defeats nixon for president 1961 john f kennedy inaugurated as president newton minow speech television and the public interest 1963 march on washington for civil rights 1964 civil rights act passed mississippi freedom democratic party challenges regular mississippi delegation at democratic convention malcolm x makes pilgrimage to mecca 1965 malcolm x assassinated 25 1 massive retaliation a policy adopted by the eisenhower administration to limit the costs of the cold war.
rather than keep a large military presence the administration used the threat to use the hydrogen bomb if the soviet union expanded its grasp to new territory.
eisenhowers america americas world explain the continuation of the cold war under a new republican administration.
the successful test of a u s hydrogen bomb in november 1952 followed only months later by the successful test of a similar bomb by the soviet union united soviet socialist republic or u s s r in august 1953 meant that eisenhower and every subsequent president would govern in a world that was quite different from any of their predecessors.
while alliances like the u s led nato and the soviet led warsaw pact might position ground forces the reality was that each of the superpowers had the capacity to destroy the other in a single stroke and probably for the first time in history to destroy all life on earth.
the cold war between the united states and the soviet union was a daunting reality for every person on the planet in the 1950s and for a long time thereafter.
foreign policy in a world of hydrogen bombs early in his first term eisenhower lamented we are in an armaments race.
where will it lead us.
at worst to atomic warfare.
at best to robbing every people and nation on earth of the fruits of their own toil eisenhower tried to diffuse the situation.
in december 1953 he proposed an atoms for peace plan to the united nations by which the united states the soviet union and the united kingdom would turn over some of their nuclear material to an international agency for peaceful use.
however little came of the plan.
the distrust between the two superpowers was too great.
influential political leaders in the united states would not support a reduction in defense spending because they worried about the soviets and because military spending a total of more than 350 billion during eisenhowers two terms was key to defense industries and jobs in almost every congressional district in the country.
so the united states and the soviets continued to build.
the united states tested 203 nuclear weapons in the pacific and at nevada test sites exposing some 200 000 civilians and soldiers to radiation and even more people to the radioactive fallout in more distant areas.
the soviets conducted at least as many tests if not more.
along with his secretary of state john foster dulles eisenhower tried to craft a foreign policy that kept the financial costs of the cold war to a minimum protected u s influences in key corners of the globe and avoided war.
this foreign policy comprised two key elements.
the first was a policy of massive retaliation announced by dulles in january 1954 the united states was not prepared to take on the cost of keeping troops in every corner of the globe especially after the war in korea.
rather the united states would try to protect the noncommunist world with programs like the marshall plan and the berlin airlift where possible but also with the promise that if the soviets tried to expand their sphere of influence if they were to invade european or other countries allied with the west then said dulles the united states was prepared to retaliate instantly by means and at a place of our choosing some called the policy brinkmanship since the united states was ready to go to the brink of destruction if the soviets moved outside their sphere of influence and the soviets were being put on notice that the united states was prepared to use its h bombs and use them quickly.
the soviets might have had a larger army and navy but the united states had plenty of bombs polaris submarines as well as atlas and minuteman rockets that could hit the soviet union any time and any place.
from a force of 1 500 nuclear weapons the u s stockpile increased to 6 000 relying on those weapons the country could reduce the size of the military and overall military expenditures keep taxes relatively low and avoid inflation yet still ensure u s power around the globe.
716 partvill fears joys and limits 1945 1980 the second element in eisenhowers foreign policy depended on secret activities organized by the central intelligence agency cia.
during world war ii the united states developed the capacity to spy on and disrupt the axis countries through the office of strategic services.
at the end of the war president truman disbanded that office.
two years later he received congressional authorization to re create it now as the cia to spy and conduct covert operations in foreign countries that the united states feared might become communist.
in the summer of 1953 the cia organized a coup against the elected prime minister of iran muhammad mussadegh who had nationalized oil interests belonging to british companies and who some feared might have communist sympathies.
with the covert help of the cia he was overthrown and replaced with the pro western muhammad reza shah pahlevi who ruled the country for more than 20 years before being displaced by an anti u s islamic revolution in the late 1970s.
then in june 1954 the cia helped overthrow the democratically elected government of jacobo arbenz guzman in guatemala.
arbenz was promoting land reform by expropriating land owned by the u s based united fruit company.
although the arbenz administration had compensated united fruit for the land the company was angry and the u s government feared a communist movement until cia operatives working with local insurgents drove arbenz from office.
neither action received much publicity in the united states but the not very secret u s involvement built up significant anti u s sentiment in the middle east and latin america.
later in 1958 the cia tried unsuccessfully to overthrow the government of indonesia.
in 1959 it played a role in installing a new pro western government in laos.
while eisenhower knew of those actions he may not have known about plans to assassinate the popular elected leader of the congo patrice lumumba who was killed by dissidents before the cia reached him and the new leader of cuba fidel castro.
the eisenhower administration also found itself caught up in other world crises that could not easily be handled by massive retaliation or cia intervention.
after world war ii france sought to reclaim control of its former colonies in indochina but many there wanted independence.
in september 1945 with initial support from the united states ho chi minh proclaimed vietnamese independence using words familiar to the americans we hold these truths to be self evident that all men are created equal but the french were determined to reclaim vietnam.
they installed bao dai the former emperor of annam a part of vietnam as the leader in vietnam.
ho chi minhs forces attacked the french.
the united states fearing a communist government under ho and more worried about alienating france in cold war europe than events in asia sided with the french.
by late 1953 the french were isolated in a fortified area dien bien phu and facing defeat.
some including vice president nixon urged u s intervention even the use of nuclear weapons.
eisenhower responded you boys must be crazy.
we can t use those awful things against asians for the second time in less than ten years.
there was no u s intervention at that time.
when the french were defeated in 1954 an international conference temporarily divided vietnam into north vietnam to be led by ho chi minh and south vietnam to be led by bao dai and a pro western nationalist ngo dinh diem.
elections to unify the country were scheduled for 1956 when diem refused to participate in the 1956 elections knowing that ho a national hero would win the united states did not intervene the united states relied on the south east asian treaty organization seato a much weaker version of nato that it had helped to create in 1955 to keep communists out of southeast asia but the organization had little effect.
the next crisis also occurred in asia.
chiang kai sheks nationalist government had been defeated on the chinese mainland in 1949 and was ensconced on heavily fortified offshore islands the largest of which was taiwan then known as formosa n 1954 the communist government of china began shelling two tiny nationalist held central intelligence agency cia established by president truman and expanded by president eisenhower the cia was the nation s spy agency charged with keeping tabs on developments in other countries and with engaging in secret missions to advance american interests.
chapter 13 the politics of separation 367 dred scott v sandford a supreme court case brought by dred scott a slave demanding his freedom based on his residence in a free state and a free territory with his master.
after the supreme court s decision on the dred scott case many americans north and south concluded that slavery had to be banned everywhere or nowhere.
preacher henry ward beecher warned of the need to stand firm and collected funds for beechers bibles which were springfield rifles to be sent to kansas.
even after the nation turned to other matters few americans forgot the intense emotions kansas aroused.
the supreme court and dred scott while the battle for kansas transfixed the nation a court case was making its way through the nations slow judicial process.
ihe case dred scott v sandford resulted in one of the most far reaching decisions in the history of the supreme court.
it began in state courts in st louis missouri in 1846 when abolitionists urged dred scott a slave to sue for his freedom because his owner an army surgeon had taken him to illinois and then on to fort snelling in what is now minnesota then simply the northern tip of the louisiana purchase where the missouri compromise banned slavery.
after living for years in free territory his lawyers claimed scott had won his freedom.
in a series of trials and appeals scotts case went back and forth.
scott lost the first time but on retrial in state court in st louis he won his freedom.
the missouri supreme court then overturned the decision on appeal in 1852 and returned scott to slavery.
although the missouri high court had previously found in favor of slaves who had lived in free territory ideas were hardening across the south and the court concluded that missouri law governed the case even though scott had been in federally controlled free territory for years.
scotts lawyers appealed to the federal courts and when the district court in missouri decided against scott his lawyers appealed to the u s supreme court where the case was heard in 1856 the supreme court also decided against scott.
the justices could have based their ruling on fairly narrow grounds.
instead the majority used the case to make a larger legal point.
considerable though behind the scenes pressure was apparently brought to bear on the justices.
chief justice roger taney however did not need pressure to speak his mind.
on march 6 1857 he spoke for a majority of the court.
in a long and complex decision taney made two key points.
first as a black man presumably even a free black man taney said that scott had no rights that the united states needed to honor.
based on his reading of the constitution taney said that black people had no rights which a white man was bound to respect when two dissenting justices noted that blacks had actually been voters in five of the states that had ratified the constitution in 1789 taney countered that they might indeed have all the rights and privileges of the citizen of a state but that they were not entitled to the rights and privileges of a citizen in any other state this opinion seemed to directly contradict article iv section 2 of the constitution which said the citizens of each state shall be entitled to all privileges and immunities of citizens in the several states but taney ignored the clause and previous case law.
second taney broadened the ruling.
scott had no standing to bring the case the chief justice said and even if he did have standing he did not have a case.
fort snelling was not actually free territory because the missouri compromise was unconstitutional.
congress did not have the right to bar slavery in any federal territories.
depriving slave owners of their slaves he said violated the fifth amendment that said no one could be deprived of life liberty or property without due process of law and slaves were the private property of their owners.
he did not say anything about the lives or liberties of enslaved people.
but he did say that congress could not authorize a territorial government to exercise any power to prohibit slavery.
8 part v expansion separation and a new union 1844 1877 the court not only returned scott to slavery but also ruled that congress could not prohibit slavery in any federal territory under any circumstances.
abolitionists soon purchased scott and set him and his wife free.
but the decision seemed to lock millions of their fellow african americans either in slavery or in second class status even if they were free.
the outcome thrilled southern leaders.
the proslavery constitutionalist in augusta georgia editorialized that southern opinion upon the subject of slavery is now the supreme law of the land at the same time many northern democrats were also delighted seeing the decision as the funeral sermon of the new republican party.
many moderate northerners however were outraged.
william cullen bryant editor of the new york evening post wrote that taneys decision was a willful perversion of the constitution.
republican leaders especially seward of new york and lincoln of illinois attacked the decision as the result of a secret negotiation between the chief justice and president elect james buchanan.
lincoln also said that if the taney policy stood then the advocates of slavery would soon make it lawful in all the states north as well as south he promised that if a republican were elected president in 1860 he would find a way to undo the decision.
the lines between the pro and antislavery camps were hardening not only in congress but also in the country as a whole.
b quick review why was the dred scott case a significant turning point in public opinion north and south in the years leading up to the civil war.
133 the economy the panic of and the lincoln douglas debates explain how the economic crisis of 1857 and the growing political crises of the decade impacted each other and led the nation to divide.
historians have long debated the degree to which economic issues rather than arguments over slavery caused the civil war.
the disagreements are nearly always ones of emphasis but most agree that both issues economic factors in the nation and debates over the morality of slavery were factors.
the growth of the cotton economy between 1815 and 1860 tied the nation together creating common interests among southern slave owning producers of cotton northern mill owners and owners of ships that transported cotton to britain.
abolitionist senator charles sumner of massachusetts despaired of a country dominated by the lords of the lash and the lords of the loom.
other economic forces however were dividing the country.
ihe opening of the erie canal in 1825 created an east west trade axis from new england through new york and into the midwestern states of ohio indiana and illinois with connections through the great lakes to michigan wisconsin and even minnesota.
this trade network rivaled and then exceeded the trade down mississippi river.
in 1835 95 percent of the trade in the ohio valley flowed south through new orleans and only 5 percent through new york.
but by 1850 more trade went from the midwest to new york than to new orleans.
midwesterners who before the mid 1830s saw their economic lives connected to the states that bordered the mississippi were now much more connected to new york and new england and had little reason to care about the southern states that had once been so important to them.
as the railroads were built slowly in the 1820s and 1830s but much more rapidly in the 1840s and 1850s they also followed the newer trade routes linking the midwest to the northeast while other rail networks linked the interior of the south to charleston and new orleans.
new settlement followed the trade chapter 3 settlement alliances and resistance 1607 1718 the english settle in north america england s wars england s colonies france takes control of the heart of the continent developments in spanish colonies north of mexico chapter 25 complacency and chan the growing impact of television in 1948 wayne coy a member of the federal communications commission that regulated television and radio said make no mistake about it television is here to stay.
it is a new force unloosed in the land.
i believe it is an irresistible force.
from 104 commercial stations broadcasting to 5 million homes in 1950 television expanded to almost 600 stations received in 45 750 000 homes in 1960 almost 80 percent of all of u s homes.
some of the early television programs were impressive.
playhouse 90 the goodyear television playhouse and the kraft television theater brought serious drama to the television screen.
talented young actors including grace kelly paul newman joanne woodward and eva marie saint were seen by wider audiences than ever before.
the abc concert carried weekly concerts by the chicago symphony orchestra around the country.
television news though generally limited to a 15 minute program included the camel news caravan with john cameron swayze and the cbs television news with douglas edwards and brought current events into living rooms.
beginning with trumans 1949 inauguration and eisenhowers 1952 campaign commercials television changed politics people felt a new intimacy with candidates and leaders.
edward r murrows see it now programs brought investigative journalism to television including coverage of senator mccarthys hearings.
lighter entertainment was very successful too.
radio had been available to many since the 1930s and some programs like jack bennys comedy routines shifted from radio to television with little change.
the long running i love lucy show with lucille ball and desi arnaz was the most popular show on television.
other comedies especially the adventures of ozzie and harriet father knows best and leave it to beaver used humor to reaffirm the white middle class suburban lifestyle in which the wise sometimes befuddled father supported the family while the passive if sometimes conniving mother stayed home to happily manage the house.
a middle class white family sitting at home and watching the lone ranger on television epitomized the 1950s for some.
724 part viii fears joys and limits 1945 1980 american voices newton n minow television and the public interest 1961 25 2 s he began his presidency john f kennedy appointed attorney and long time democratic party activist newton n minow to chair the federal communications commission fcc.
although minow had little background in the media he and attorney general robert f kennedy had strong opinions about television.
in may 1961 only a few months into his tenure at the fcc minow gave this controversial speech to the national association of broadcasters declaring that television was a vast wasteland.
while many in the television industry strongly disagreed many critics thought minow was on target.
your industry possesses the most powerful voice in america.
it has an inescapable duty to make that voice ring with intelligence and with leadership.
in a few years this exciting industry has grown from a novelty to an instrument of overwhelming impact on the american people.
it should be making ready for the kind of leadership that newspapers and magazines assumed years ago to make our people aware of their world when television is good nothing not the theater not the magazines or newspapers nothing is better.
but when television is bad nothing is worse.
i invite each of you to sit down in front of your television set when your station goes on the air and stay there for a day without a book without a magazine without a newspaper without a profit and loss sheet or a rating book to distract you.
keep your eyes glued to that set until the station signs off.
i can assure you that what you will observe is a vast wasteland.
you will see a procession of game shows formula comedies about totally unbelievable families blood and thunder mayhem violence sadism murder western bad men western good men private eyes gangsters more violence and cartoons.
and endlessly commercials many screaming cajoling and offending.
and most of all boredom.
source delivered may 9 1961 national association of broadcasters washington dc downloaded from may 11 2011 thinking critically 1 documentary analysis in minow s view what was the most important negative impact of poor television programming.
2 historical interpretation what light does minow s speech shed on the nature of the growing discontent with mainstream 1950s culture.
on the ed sullivan show the poker faced ed sullivan introduced elvis presley who sullivan insisted be shown only from the waist up and later the beatles to american audiences.
daytime soap operas their original sponsors were soap companies moved from radio to television and guiding light love of life and search for tomorrow provided a dash of scandal to daytime viewers.
families gathered to eat tv dinners first marketed in 1954 on tv trays rather than around a dining room table to watch gunsmoke featuring a stronger and more silent marshal dillon than had been possible on radio plus maverick and have gun will travel as well as detective stories including dragnet 77 sunset strip and perry mason.
children s cartoons took over saturday mornings.
reruns of old movies were shown in the late evening.
while some of the first programs had a single sponsor such as the goodyear television playhouse the kraft television theater and the camel news caravan broadcasters quickly discovered that they could make higher profits with multiple advertisers and 30 second commercials urged americans always seen as white and middle class to see the usa in your chevrolet or move up to chrysler and handle their indigestion with speedy alka seltzer.
television was rocked by not only a series of scandals in the late 1950s but also significant criticism.
the most popular quiz show the 64 000 question turned out to be rigged.
charles van doren a major winner on the show had been given answers in advance.
as commercial stations focused on advertising revenue they became increasingly cautious.
one advertiser reminded the station owners a program that displeases any substantial segment of the population is a misuse of the advertising dollar since showing americans in all of their diversity could displease some television became bland.
even president eisenhower said if a citizen has to be bored to death chapter 13 the politics of separation 375 knew that the elections of 1860 were going to involve tough political contests.
no one knew they would lead to war.
while the lincoln douglas debates of 1858 established abraham lincoln as a national political leader it was by no means certain that he would be the republican nominee for president in 1860 lincoln himself had mixed feelings about a presidential nomination since he had hopes of a career in the u s senate.
the frontrunner for nomination was new york senator william henry seward a former whig and a founder of the republican party.
but seward also had many enemies people who thought he was too radical or who just did not trust him.
many including lincoln thought that if seward did not get the nomination on the first ballot his support would melt away.
two other prominent republicans were also in the field governor salmon chase of ohio one of the partys staunchest opponents of slavery and judge edward bates of missouri the candidate of the more moderate republicans.
and then there was lincoln respected by everyone an extraordinary speaker and more moderate than either seward or chase.
lincolns convention manager judge david davis reported to lincoln we are laboring to make you the second choice of all the delegations we can where we cant make you first choice the strategy worked.
while seward took the lead on the first ballot lincoln not chase or bates came in second.
by the third ballot it was all over as delegates made lincolns nomination unanimous.
of course being the nominee of a new political party did not guarantee victory.
seward chase and bates all campaigned hard for lincoln and after the election he appointed all three to his cabinet as secretaries of state and treasury as well as attorney general.
but in between the nomination and the victorious election there was a hard fought presidential campaign.
given the tensions in the country in the summer of 1860 it is not surprising that traditional political parties splintered.
a faction of the old whig party reemerged as the constitutional union party.
it nominated slaveholder john bell of tennessee for president and edward everett of massachusetts for vice president on a vague platform of the constitution the union and the enforcement of the laws presumably a reference to the fugitive slave act.
some saw this small party as the best hope to hold the country together through new compromises.
others ridiculed them as the old gentlemens party since most of those who campaigned for bell were well past age 60 the democrats who had elected the last two presidents met in charleston south carolina in april 1860 they were deeply divided.
stephen a douglas was the frontrunner for the nomination but although douglas had once been popular in the south after his opposition to admitting kansas as a slave state most southern political leaders now considered him to be a traitor to their cause.
mississippi senator jefferson davis insisted on a platform that pledged the party to protect the constitutional right of any citizen of the united states to take his slave property into the common territories.
but douglass supporters could not stomach abandoning their candidates long held commitment to popular sovereignty and would not support a platform that opened all the territories to slavery regardless of what the voters said.
after 57 ballots the convention could not agree on any nominee and adjourned to meet again in baltimore in 6 weeks to try again.
when the democrats convened again in baltimore however the same splits were evident.
one third of the delegates nearly all of the southerners and a few proslavery northerners walked out of the convention.
the remaining democrats nominated douglas and adopted a popular sovereignty platform.
the delegates who had walked out of the convention organized their own convention and nominated john c breckinridge of kentucky who was buchanans vice president adopting the platform advocated by jefferson davis.
southern democrats understood that the split in the party would benefit the republicans but they were so angry with douglas that they were willing to accept that result.
some also believed that a republican victory would build support for their real goal which was secession.
a democratic party leader and former congressman william lowndes yancey told a crowd in charleston that it was time for a new revolution and an independent southern republic part v expansion separation and a new union 1844 1877 this political cartoon published during the 1860 presidential election depicts lincoln and douglas on the left fighting over much of the country while in the center breckinridge tries to tear off the south and on the right bell with glue pot in hand tries to put the whole thing back together.
13 1 132 132 13 4 the republican ticket did not even appear on ballots in most of the south and republican candidates would have risked their lives campaigning in the region.
lincoln campaigned against douglas in the north.
breckinridge campaigned against bell in the south.
no one had ever seen a presidential election quite like it.
despite the crazy split the north with its larger population was going to settle the election.
douglas had a chance to win the election if he and the northern democrats could carry enough northern states and some of the slave states known as border states where northern influence was strongest and the attachment to slavery was weakest see map 13 2.
douglas claimed to be the only candidate who could unite the nation.
he continued to paint lincoln as a radical and tried to frighten northern voters by saying that lincoln would bring blacks into the north as the social equals of whites who would also compete with whites for jobs.
the republicans had a lot going for them.
they were new.
they attracted young first time voters.
they were united.
their economic policies appealed to many in the north.
even so some abolitionists did not trust the republicans.
william lloyd garrison said that the republican party means to do nothing can do nothing for the abolition of slavery in the slave states frederick douglass perhaps more of a realist countered saying that a republican victory must and will be hailed as an anti slavery triumph on election day in november 1860 the breadth of the republican victory was dear.
breckenridge carried most of the south.
bell won virginia kentucky and tennessee.
although douglas received far more votes than either breckenridge or bell he carried only missouri and half the electoral votes of new jersey.
lincoln received only 40 percent of the national popular vote but it was the most of any single candidate and his 180 electoral votes were a solid majority.
as cheering crowds his hometown of springfield illinois celebrated abraham lincoln who had served one term in congress and had never held an executive position became the president elect of the united states.
what his election would mean for him and for country only time would tell.
few thought it would lead to a long and bloody war.
chapter 19 progressive movements progressive politics 549 thinking historically how the other half lives 193 jacob a riis an immigrant from denmark working as a newspaper police reporter published how the other half lives in 1890 in that book riis sought to describe to the city s well off residents the housing conditions of new york s poor especially through his photographs.
he described parts of lower manhattan the death of a child in a tenement was registered at the bureau of vital statistics as plainly due to suffocation in the foul air of an unventilated apartment.
another was the case of a hard working family of man and wife young people from the old country who took poison together in a crosby street tenement because they were tired.
there was no other explanation and none was needed when i stood in the room in which they had lived.
it was an attic with sloping ceiling and a single window so far out on the roof that it seemed not to belong to the place at all.
with scarcely room enough to turn around in they had been compelled to pay five dollars and a half a month in advance.
there were four such rooms in the attic and together they brought in as much as many a handsome little cottage in a pleasant part of brooklyn.
riis said the proprietors frequently urged the filthy habits of the tenants as an excuse for the condition of their property utterly losing sight of the fact that it was the tolerance of those habits which was the real evil and that for this they themselves were alone responsible.
in pinning responsibility for poverty and misery directly on those who profited from it riis created considerable hostility toward himself but also great publicity for the book.
later riis described the difficulty he had in getting the how the other half lives published for more than a year i had knocked at the doors of the various magazine editors with my pictures proposing to tell them how the other half lived but no one wanted to know i n the church one might at all events tell the truth unhindered.
so i thought but there were cautious souls there too.
eventually riis met dr schauffler the manager of the city mission society and dr josiah strong the author of our country.
they were impressed with the photos and arranged for riis to tell the stories within how the other half lives to a group at the broadway tabernacle a congregational church associated with schauffler and strong.
riis continues the account one of the editors of scribner s magazine saw my pictures and heard their story in his church and came to talk the matter over with me.
as a result of that talk i wrote an article that appeared in the christmas scribner s 1889 under the title how the other half lives and made an instant impression it could not have been long after i wrote how the other half lives that he theodore roosevelt then police commissioner of new york city came to the evening sun office one day looking for me.
i was out and he left his card merely writing on the back of it that he had read my book and had come to help.
there is very little ease where theodore roosevelt leads as we all found out mr roosevelt was a member of the health board and sometimes it was the tenements we went inspecting when the tenants slept.
he was after the facts and learned speedily to get them as he could.
when as governor he wanted to know just how the factory law was being executed he came down from albany and spent a whole day with me personally investigating tenements in which sweating sweatshop manufacturing done at home was carried on.
source jacob a riis the making of an american new york macmillan 1901 pp.
191 225 thinking critically 1 contextualization what might have been some of the reasons riis had trouble getting his pictures published.
how do you think real estate owners responded to his pictures and his explanations of conditions.
2 comparison compare and contrast the contributions of riis roosevelt and addams to the progressive movement.
what common beliefs approaches and goals did they share.
people to do and indeed gods will.
there were many social gospel preachers but the most prominent was walter rauschenbusch whose 1917 book a theology for the social gospel broadened the definition of sin from a focus on individual flaws to include social institutions that oppressed others.
rauschenbusch was far from alone in advocating a social gospel.
george d herron was a pastor whose most famous sermon the message of jesus to men of wealth claimed simply that a rich christian is a contradiction of terms josiah strong edited a social gospel magazine the gospel of the kingdom and published a book our country pleading for missionary work within american cities and around the world.
in every city local city mission societies carried out their own social gospel mission.
part vi becoming an industrial world power costs benefits and responses 1865 1914 even more than his writing the photographs that jacob riis made like this one titled sleeping quarters areaway mulberry st showed middle class america the poverty in which the other half lived.
i 19 1 m2 wj while the social gospel was a protestant movement social issues also swept catholic america.
cardinal james gibbons the long time archbishop of baltimore and nominal leader of american catholics defended the american labor movement and the role of catholics in it to a wary vatican.
gibbons argued that the rise of monopolies with their heartless avarice demanded action.
not all religious communities shared in the social gospel movement however.
many first generation jewish immigrants put all of their religious energy into secular political reform and labor movements.
some rabbis in turn worried that the focus on secular politics would undermine the spiritual world of the immigrants.
parish priests in italian german and czech parishes in chicago tangled with the anarchists and union radicals whom they saw as taking people away from the faith.
some catholics focused on private devotional activities or large street festivals often devoted to the virgin mary seeing their faith as a refuge from the larger society rather than a way to change society.
they valued the ministry of individuals like frances xavier cabrini mother cabrini sent to the united states by an italian bishop in 1889 to serve the needs of the italian immigrants but who unlike cardinal gibbons avoided labor organizing and politics.
religious people like others had widely differing ideas about how to live well in the new urban and industrial society of the united states.
quick review how were religiously inspired progressives similar to or different from other progressive reformers.
progressive politics on the national stage analyze the three progressive presidents and their administrations.
a significant turning point in american politics came early in the morning of september 14 1901 when president william mckinley died in buffalo new york.
he had been visiting the pan american exposition when he was shot by a lone anar chist leon czolgosz on september 6 ihe president survived the bullet but died of the infection that followed.
mckinley was the third american president to be assassinated chapter 8.
once the connecticut churches lost their government support beecher embraced the new situation and supported revivals and voluntary associations for moral reform in new england and the nation.
beecher described his goal a bible for every family a school for every district and a pastor for every 1000 souls must be the motto upon the standard round which the millions who enjoy these blessings must rally for the purpose of extending them to those who do not.
lyman beecher one of the leaders of the second great awakening is shown here with his numerous children including petitioner and educator catharine to the left of her father harriet beecher stowe far right and one of the most famous ministers of the next generation henry ward beecher standing on the right.
288 part iv crafting a nation people land and a national identity 1800 1848 as the second great awakening grew in force in the 1820s and 1830s a series of voluntary societies or interdenominational organizations that beecher helped launch grew in their influence.
these societies were not owned by any one religious body but rather depended on the voluntary contributions of members of several different religious bodies.
they represented a new form of cooperation across traditional religious lines in the service of a larger goal to change the culture of the united states.
the american bible society distributed bibles the american sunday school union provided curriculum materials for church based sunday schools and the american education society supported the education of ministers.
in addition the american board of commissioners for foreign missions sent missionaries around the world including adoniram judson and his wife ann hasseltine judson whose efforts in burma became role models for generations of foreign missionaries to convert the world to christianity.
beecher included prominent members of the congregational presbyterian and episcopal churches in the leadership of these societies.
the underlying mission of all of these societies was moral reform the creation of a sober god fearing american public.
by the early 1830s beecher had become convinced that the key to transforming the nation lay in the mississippi valley.
he became president of lane theological seminary in cincinnati to fulfill this goal.
beecher helped prepare future ministers strengthened religious colleges and placed protestant pastors in hundreds of midwestern churches.
he also helped create the public school system of ohio and supported schools and teachers across the midwest.
the goal of all of this activity was to strengthen the moral sway of congregational presbyterian protestantism against the individualism of jacksonian democrats catholics and other protestants who disagreed with them.
in the world that beecher and his fellow protestant evangelists were creating the separating of church and state meant that specific denominations would not wield political power but together these protestants would help build a culture in which the churches voluntary societies and public schools would reinforce common beliefs and practices.
revivalism and moral reform movements most converts in the revivals that preachers like finney and beecher led perhaps three fourths of them were women who then prayed and lobbied for their husbands and families to convert.
finney and his closest lieutenant theodore dwight weld encouraged women to be active in their religious communities.
where new england churches had urged women to keep silent except at home the new generation of revivalists welcomed them as prayer leaders and preachers.
such speaking in promiscuous assemblies may have been familiar in baptist and even methodist churches but it was new in the more middle class presbyterian and congregational churches.
women who became religious leaders in the revivals often also became leaders in their communities.
the movement demanding womens rights that swept the united states in the 1840s sprang from the same areas of upstate new york that revivalists called the burned over district see chapter 12.
the link was not surprising.
for finney conversion meant that one needed to show ones new faith in ethical behavior and no ethical behavior was more important to him than opposing slavery.
upstate new yorks churches sent revivalist preachers into the rest of the country to preach for the abolition of slavery.
for the next 30 years the finney weld brand of revivalism spread across the country and was one of the streams of abolitionism that inspired northerners to fight a war to end slavery.
the rights of women and opposition to slavery were not the only reform causes to spring from the revivalism of the second great awakening.
other reformers inspired by the same forces began to advocate for important changes in the way prisoners were treated.
too often they said overcrowded prisons were simply schools for crime and the focus on punishment whatever the original crime did little to redeem or reclaim prisoners to reenter society.
at first reformers advocated the building of prisons in which each prisoner would be confined to a solitary cell where they would have time to reflect on their past be taught new habits and prepare to reenter society.
but too often the solitary confinement led to insanity rather than reform.
in response prison reformers built a new kind of prison in which each prisoner had a separate cell but also had access to common dining quarters workshops and a chapel.
in all of these spaces the authorities sought to teach prisoners a new way of behaving as preparation for reclaiming them.
in the 1830s the new york state penitentiary at auburn was redesigned to foster the new approach and soon thereafter a large new penitentiary at sing sing on the hudson river was built with 1 000 cells plus the common areas.
reformers hoped that the new more humane approach would change lives and ultimately society.
other states quickly followed in adopting the new models.
many mentally ill people were treated very much like prisoners before the reforms and they often found themselves in similar circumstances.
reformers quickly took up the cause of those they said were insane.
perhaps no one equaled dorothea dix as a reformer in the treatment of the mentally ill in 1843 dix told the massachusetts fegislature that she was calling their attention to the present state of insane persons confined within this commonwealth in cages closets cellars stalls pens.
chained naked beaten with rods and lashed into obedience moreover she had the facts to chapter 19 progressive movements progressive politics 5 a widely distributed cartoon showed former president roosevelt s disappointment with his hand picked but ensnarled successor president taft.
the unique election of 1912 roosevelt was not alone in his estrangement from the taft administration.
critics abounded and senator robert la follette of wisconsin was hinting broadly that he might challenge taft for the republican presidential nomination in 1912 la follette was a different kind of progressive from roosevelt.
he advocated a more open nominating process for candidates and an income tax to limit the power of the very rich.
he wanted to destroy the monopolies that roosevelt wanted only to regulate.
la follette was also appalled by concessions to the white south believing that if african americans had been fairly treated then they would have been able to take the places now denied them as farmers and businessmen.
as roosevelt waited la follette campaigned for the nomination.
then in february 1912 la follette gave a speech in philadelphia in which either exhausted or drunk he went on for over 2 hours repeating himself again and again.
he lost not only his audience but also the nomination with that speech.
a week later seven republican governors asked roosevelt to run.
tr announced my hat is in the ring and wrote i will accept the nomination for president if it is tendered to me he also set out to be sure that the 1912 nomination was in fact so tendered.
through the spring taft and roosevelt fought it out taft always reluctantly roosevelt with his usual exuberance.
in the south taft used the party machinery to control the delegates.
roosevelt defended his challenge saying if that be revolution make the most of it taft responded this wrenches my soul 1 do not want to fight theodore roosevelt but sometimes a man in a corner fights.
i am going to fight taft won in the states where delegates were controlled by caucuses while roosevelt won nearly all of the states that held primary elections including pennsylvania california minnesota nebraska maryland south dakota and even tafts home state of ohio.
after seeing the primary returns idaho senator william e borah declared there can be but one result and that is the nomination of mr roosevelt and nebraskas senator george norris happily said taft is out of the race taft however was not out of the race.
he still controlled the party machinery.
when delegates were contested and 254 convention seats were contested the republican national committee decided who should vote at the convention.
the committee awarded 235 of the contested delegates to taft and only 19 to roosevelt sealing the nomination for taft.
two months after the republican convention in early august 1912 a new progressive party held its convention in the same hall.
the 14 000 delegates were mostly middle class reformers social workers teachers and owners of small businesses.
558 part vi becoming an industrial world power costs benefits and responses 1865 1914 it was the first major political convention to include female delegates and there were many.
also attending were a few african american delegates from border states and new england none from the deep south where taft controlled the party.
few of the farmers and laborers representing past populist party conventions were there.
the plat form included support for the rights of labor unions conservation womens suffrage the 8 hour workday workplace safety as well as unemployment and old age insurance.
in a doomed effort to court white southern votes the platform was silent on the rights of african americans.
by acclamation the convention nominated theodore roosevelt for president and california governor hiram johnson for vice president.
in the first convention speech by a woman jane addams seconded roosevelts nomination.
roosevelt saying that he felt as fit as a bull moose happily accepted the nomination.
a convention like no other launched a presidential election like no other.
many democrats saw the republican split as the chance for a democratic presidency.
champ clark of missouri the speaker of the house was the frontrunner.
he was popular within the party but was a dull speaker.
oscar underwood of alabama was more conservative but perhaps a better speaker than clark.
others hoped to be kingmakers.
charles murphy the boss of tammany controlled the new york delegation while william jennings bryan controlled many other delegates.
finally the governor of new jersey woodrow wilson campaigned for the nomination.
wilson had only held elected office for 2 years.
he was an expert on constitutional law with a ph d from johns hopkins who had served as the president of princeton university from 1902 to 1910 he had sought to transform princeton from a country club for rich boys to a serious academic institution.
he battled with faculty alumni and trustees and showed little aptitude for compromise.
in 1910 just as wilson saw some of his most cherished goals defeated at princeton the political bosses who ran the democratic party in new jersey were looking for an appealing candidate for governor.
they offered wilson the nomination and he surprised even his supporters by being a magnetic candidate winning easily.
then to the surprise of the bosses wilson kept his word that he would be independent broke with those who had put him in the governors office and refused to follow their lead in patronage.
he governed as a progressive getting the state to adopt workmens compensation a commission to regulate public utilities and more open election laws winning great popularity as well as the undying hatred of political bosses.
wilson entered the democratic nominating convention as a strong candidate but not the leader.
while clark led on the first ballots wilson kept gaining on the 46 ballot exhausted delegates gave wilson their partys nomination.
with the nominations of roosevelt taft and wilson a former the current and a future president the 1912 election was unique.
in addition a fourth candidate eugene v debs was once again the candidate of the socialist party and by 1912 the socialists were a force to be reckoned with.
in local elections the year before socialist candidates had been elected as mayor in 56 cities and towns and one of the partys candidates victor berger was elected to congress from wisconsin.
the socialist party always highly factionalized enthusiastically nominated debs as their standard bearer for a fourth time.
some socialists worried that roosevelts progressive party would steal their platform but while the progressive party called for governmental oversight of the monopolies the socialists called for government ownership of all large scale industries especially the railroads.
like the progressives the socialist platform also called for shorter working hours workers compensation electoral reform and giving women the right to vote.
however unlike the progressives it also called for ensuring blacks the right to vote.
wilson wrote to a friend that roosevelts strength is altogether incalculable.
ihe contest is between him and me not between taft and me.
he was right.
it was dif ficult for wilson who was running as a progressive democrat to differentiate himself from roosevelts progressive party.
if the contest was to be one of personal popularity no one was more popular than teddy roosevelt.
boston attorney louis d brandeis chapter review 13 1 from union to disunion analyze the political jockeying in congress and how reaction to the fugitive slave act and the publication of uncle tom s cabin changed the opinions of many americans south and the north making a break between them hard to avoid.
review questions 1 historical interpretation what light does the debate over the admission of territories acquired by the united states at the conclusion of the war with mexico shed on the root issues dividing the north and south in the decades before the civil war.
2 crafting arguments how did passage of the kansas nebraska act contribute to the rise of the republican party and the demise of the whigs.
3 crafting arguments how did the fugitive slave act of 1850 affect public opinion about slavery in the north.
how would you explain the impact of the law.
bleeding kansas and dred scott v sandford analyze the causes and consequences of the battle over slavery in kansas and the supreme court s decision in the dred scott case and the impact of those events on public opinion.
review questions 4 contextualization why did both pro and antislavery forces believe that victory in kansas was critical to their cause.
132 13 3 5 crafting arguments why did the supreme court ruling in the dred scott case make a peaceful resolution of the conflict between the north and the south over slavery less likely.
the economy the panic of and the lincoln douglas debates explain how the economic crisis of 1857 and the growing political crises of the decade impacted each other and led the nation to divide.
review question 6 contextualization what light do the lincoln douglas debates shed on lincoln s views on slavery and race in 1858.
from john brown to the secession of the south analyze the political impact of john brown s raid and why lincoln won the presidential election of 1860 and southern states then vote to leave the union.
review questions 7 historical interpretation how did john browns 1859 raid on harpers ferry help radicalize public opinion in both the north and the south.
8 crafting arguments defend or refute the following statement after lincolns election in november 1860 war between the north and the south was inevitable 13 4 384 part v expansion separation and a new union 1844 1877 demonstrate an understanding of the strategies involved in fighting a civil war and the impact of the war on american life north and south.
1861 1865 north and south men volunteered with enthusiasm to serve in their respective armies these new confederate soldiers like their northern counterparts reflect a commitment that did not always last as the long years of fighting the war continued.
homer winslow 1836 1910.
prisoners form the front.
1866 oil on canvas 24x38 in.
61 x 96 5 cm.
gift of mrs frank b porter 1922 22 207.
metropolitan museum of art new york ny u s a image copyright the metropolitan museum of art.
image source art resource ny once fort sumter had been fired on large patriotic rallies were held north and south.
of course what it meant to be patriotic varied depending on where one lived.
calls for volunteers by confederate and union authorities were quickly oversubscribed.
young men did not want to miss out on the fun and glory of what everyone thought would be a short war and an easy victory.
a confederate volunteer from mississippi wrote home in june 1861 that he was ready to fight the yankees all fun and frolic on the union side a new york volunteer wrote i and the rest of the boys are in fine spirits feeling like larks.
letters from new recruits also showed seriousness of purpose.
a new jersey soldier wrote that he joined the army because our glorious institutions are likely to be destroyed while a midwestern recruit said that his service was a duty i owe to my country and to my children to do what i can to preserve this government sentiment among soldiers in the confederacy was equally patriotic.
mississippis lucius lamar who would achieve high rank in the confederate army said thank god.
we have a country at last to live for to pray for to fight for and if necessary to die for an enlisted man in the confederate army gave a simple answer when he was asked after his capture why he a nonslaveholder fought for the south im fighting because youre down here soldiers were sent off in new uniforms with cheering parades.
the war did not long remain so lighthearted.
learning objectives fort sumter to antietam 1861 1862 explain how the early battles of the war shaped future events.
the road to emancipation analyze how the war influenced attitudes toward slavery in white and black communities leading to the emancipation proclamation and to black soldiers in the union army.
the home front shortages opposition riots and battles explain how the war s death toll and civilian shortages affected life north and south during the war.
from gettysburg to appomattox and beyond analyze the strategies and costs of fighting a long and terrible war.
14 1 14j 14 3 14 4 chapter 21 a unique prosperous and discontented time 1919 1929 the prelude the red summer of 1919 the 1920s the exuberance of prosperity the 1920s the conflicts about american ideals harding coolidge and hoover national politics and policies in the 1920s chapter 25 chapter 25 complacen lives changed this widely publicized picture of an antiwar demonstrator putting a flower in the end of a rifle at the october 1967 march on the pentagon reflects some of the deepest divisions of the 1960s.
chapter 14 and the war came the civil war 411 14 4 grant arranged for lees starving army to receive military rations.
at 4 30 p m grant telegraphed secretary of war stanton that general lee surrendered the army of northern virginia this afternoon the long and terrible war essentially over.
grant wrote of a sense of sadness at the downfall of a foe who had fought so long and valiantly and had suffered so much for a cause though that cause was i believe one of the worst for which a people ever fought lees surrender did not quite end the war.
jefferson davis fled south hoping to regroup his government perhaps in texas until he was captured in georgia on may 10 he was held in custody for 2 years at fortress monroe before being released on bail.
davis was indicted for treason but the charges were never pressed although he was barred from ever holding a federal office again.
during the next 2 decades he tried various business ventures and wrote his defense of the cause he had led.
isolated confederate units carried on the fight in remote areas especially texas until may.
but after the april 9 surrender at appomattox almost everyone knew that the war was over.
washington dc was draped with flags people fired salutes embraced and sang.
soldiers on both sides found their weary way home.
those in the north were welcomed with grand parades most of those in the south simply made it home.
lincoln s legacy on january 31 1865 even before lees surrender the house of representatives voted 119 to 56 to add a thirteenth amendment to the constitution neither slavery nor involuntary servitude except as a punishment for a crime whereof the party shall have been duly convicted shall exist within the united states or any place subject to their jurisdiction.
the floor of the house and visitors watching in the gallery erupted into cheers and applause.
many of those in the gallery were african americans people who had not been even admitted to the house gallery until 1864 the senate and the states quickly followed and the amendment became part of the constitution on december 18 1865 the war that began over slavery ended with its abolition in every part of the united states.
after visiting richmond virginia on april 4 and 5 and receiving the news of lees surrender on april 9 president lincoln gave what came to be known as his last speech at the white house on april 11 1865 of course he did not know it was to be his last.
reviewing the presidents speech the new york world said mr.
lincoln gropes like a traveler in an unknown country without a map in fact the administration the congress and the country were all groping to find their way through several extraordinarily difficult issues as the civil war ended.
among the most contentious were those related to defining the rights of newly freed slaves did they have the right to vote.
did they have other political rights.
did they have a right to some of the land they had worked for so long.
there were equally contentious arguments about the rights of the former confederate states had they actually left the union in which case did they needed to be readmitted perhaps after a time as territories.
or had they never left the union in which case could they could simply renew their place in the country and make their own laws.
no one really knew the answers or how to get answers.
as lincoln said on april 11 unlike a case of a war between independent nations there is no authorized organ for us to treat with.
no one man has authority to give up the rebellion for any other man.
we simply must begin with and mold from disorganized and discordant elements lincoln also called the question of whether the confederate states had left the union a pernicious abstraction he did not want to debate whether the 12 part v expansion separation and a new union 1844 1877 v thinking historically abraham lincoln second inaugural address 1865 as lincoln took the oath of office for the second time everyone knew that the civil war was about to end.
no one of course knew that the president had only weeks to live.
but it was the occasion of one of the most memorable speeches in american history.
lincoln said on the occasion corresponding to this four years ago all thoughts were anxiously directed to an impending civil war.
all dreaded it all sought to avert it both parties deprecated war but one of them would make war rather than let the nation survive and the other would accept war rather than let it perish.
and the war came.
one eighth of the whole population were colored slaves not distributed generally over the union but localized in the southern part of it.
these slaves constituted a peculiar and powerful interest.
all knew that this interest was somehow the cause of the war.
to strengthen perpetuate and extend this interest was the object for which the insurgents would rend the union even by war while the government claimed no right to do more than to restrict the territorial enlargement of it.
neither party expected for the war the magnitude or the duration which it has already attained.
neither anticipated that the cause of the conflict might cease with or even before the conflict itself should cease.
each looked for an easier triumph and a result less fundamental and astounding.
both read the same bible and pray to the same god and each invokes his aid against the other.
it may seem strange that any men should dare to ask a just god s assistance in wringing their bread from the sweat of other men s faces but let us judge not that we be not judged.
the prayers of both could not be answered that of neither has been answered fully fondly do we hope fervently do we pray that this mighty scourge of war may speedily pass away.
yet if god wills that it continue until all the wealth piled by the bond man s two hundred and fifty years of unrequited toil shall be sunk and until every drop of blood drawn with the lash shall be paid by another drawn with the sword as was said three thousand years ago so still it must be said the judgments of the lord are true and righteous altogether.
with malice toward none with charity for all with firmness in the right as god gives us to see the right let us strive on to finish the work we are in to bind up the nation s wounds to care for him who shall have borne the battle and for his widow and his orphan to do all which may achieve and cherish a just and lasting peace among ourselves and with all nations.
source congressional globe march 4 1865 senate 39th congress 4th session pp.
1424 1440 thinking critically 1 historical interpretation what does this speech tell you about lincoln s views on the root causes of the war.
was his interpretation universally accepted.
2 historical interpretation what sort of postwar reconstruction do you think lincoln had in mind with his with malice toward none with charity for all with firmness in the right statement.
does it offer any hint of the possible nature of reconstruction under lincoln.
in states had really left the union and therefore needed to be readmitted or whether they had simply been in rebellion and therefore with the end of the rebellion were back in their old places.
the issue for him he said was much simpler we all agree that the seceded states so called are out of their proper practical relation with the union and that the sole object of the government civil and military in regard to those states is to again get them into that proper practical relation in fact the issue was not so simple.
if the states had actually left the union then congress could impose conditions on their readmission such as granting blacks the right to vote.
if they had never left then it was more difficult to impose such conditions.
in april 1865 lincoln began to give more attention to the postwar era.
some thought he had decided that guaranteeing former slaves the right to vote should be a key element in the integration of the confederate states back into the union but he did not announce his policy.
on the morning of april 14 he met with the cabinet to discuss what he was now calling reconstruction he directed secretary chapter traces the many changes that some americans embraced others rejected but few ignored as the united states experienced the decade known to many simply as the sixties 748 part viii fears joys and limits 1945 1980 26 1 new voices new authorities explain the growing social protest in books films and student movements starting in the early 1960s.
though it was formative for many the civil rights movement was only one of many challenges to american culture in the 1960s.
writers and artist had often been uncomfortable with the conformity of the 1950s and their uneasiness took on new forms as the new decade began.
small political movements burst onto a larger stage.
the result was a number of books films and songs that reflected and helped shape a rapidly changing culture while wide ranging protest movements often led by students changed not only college campuses but also the country.
books films music jane jacobs was a writer and activist in new yorks greenwich village when she wrote the death and life of great american cities in 1961 in the opening line of that book jacobs said this book is an attack on current city planning and rebuilding indeed it was an amazingly successful attack.
reflecting on the books impact one urban planner wrote when an entire field is headed in the wrong direction then it probably took someone from outside to point out the obvious after jacobs city planners in new york and most cities turned away from massive highway development sprawling suburbs and isolated urban high rise buildings to focus on smaller more neighborhood friendly options.
projects to bulldoze slums and build highways were replaced in the 1960s by the redevelopment of existing urban neighborhoods.
jacobs did not bring about this change single handedly but her book was a guidebook to a new generation of urban planners.
two books published in 1962 played a similar role in other movements.
rachel carsons silent spring is often called the bible of the conservation movement.
other people dating back to theodore roosevelt talked about conserving rather than taming nature but carson gave the preservation movement a new voice in the 1960s.
while most earlier conservation efforts focused on protecting land from development carson described in graphic detail what pesticides were doing to birds and animals.
michael harringtons the other america also published in 1962 is sometimes credited with launching the kennedy johnson era war on poverty.
harringtons was far from the only voice urging a new look at the urban and rural poverty that had gone unnoticed in the affluent 1950s but harringtons book sold over a million copies and the critic dwight mcdonald convinced president kennedy to read it.
in his own way harrington like carson and jacobs put a human face on an otherwise easily ignored domestic issue.
describing the way poverty was hidden in modern america cities harrington wrote the poor still inhabit the miserable housing in the central area the failures the unskilled the disabled the aged and the minorities are right there across the tracks where they have always been.
but hardly anyone else is they have no face they have no voice the war on poverty began to change that situation in 1964 and 1965 betty friedans the feminine mystique published in 1963 played an equally central role in the development of the new womens movement of the late 1960s and early 1970s see chapter 25.
although johnson was a supporter of civil rights he was concerned that if the regular mississippi delegates were unseated by the mississippi freedom delegates and walked out and those from 762 part viii fears joys and limits 1945 1980 cl changed 763 one of the most effective political advertisements of all time began with a little girl pulling petals off of a daisy and as she finishes the screen morphs into a nuclear explosion and ends vote for president johnson on november 3.
the ad was part of an effective campaign in which democrats painted the republican nominee barry goldwater as ready to lead america into nuclear war.
alabama and other nearby states joined them then it would threaten the democrats hold on several southern states.
johnson did not want to risk a repeat of the 1948 dixiecrat revolt.
neither johnson nor other party leaders understood the depth of anger that stirred the mfdp protest nor did they see as the mfdp leaders did the way in which the movement represented a new form of grass roots democracy.
neither the choice of running mate nor the mfdp challenge hurt johnsons election chances but both illustrated deep divides in american politics that even johnsons masterful negotiating skills could not bridge.
the republican party was also deeply divided in 1964 the original front runner for the republican nomination new yorks liberal governor nelson rockefeller had left his wife of many years to marry a younger woman.
at that point the country had never elected a divorced person as president.
there was also further opposition to rockefellers nomination.
many conservative republicans were determined that in 1964 the party would nominate a real conservative and rockefellers main opponent for the nomination was a true conservative arizona senator barry goldwater.
goldwater an affable and tolerant individual had friends across the political spectrum and spurned personal racial prejudice.
however he opposed civil rights legislation as an invasion of personal freedom.
he felt the same way about the graduated income tax and most other government programs.
further he called for a more aggressive opposition to communism than that taken by eisenhower kennedy or johnson even in places where communist regimes were well established saying that america could lob one into the mens room at the kremlin he won most of the primary contests and when the republican convention met in san francisco the delegates were so committed to him that they shouted down nelson rockefeller.
when goldwater spoke he said let me remind you that extremism in defense of liberty is no vice and that moderation in pursuit of justice is no virtue it was just what the delegates wanted to hear.
it was less popular however with the wider electorate.
the democrats made good use of goldwaters statements developed a sophisticated television advertising campaign and painted goldwater as a dangerous man.
johnson won in a landslide.
as he left the inaugural ball in january 1965 johnson told his staff dont stay up late.
theres work to be done.
were on our way to the great society the next day that work started.
in the spring of 1965 the triumphant johnson pushed four major pieces of legislation through congress in addition to a raft of other bills that on their own would have been considered significant with any other congress.
the core great society legislation of 1965 included federal aid to education medicare and medicaid immigration reform and a voting rights act.
johnson knew that federal aid to education had been blocked for many years by civil rights activists out of the fear that aid might go only to segregated schools and by a deadlock between catholic representatives who would not support aid unless it went to parochial as well as public schools and many protestant representatives who would never support aid to catholic schools.
johnson was determined to break the deadlock.
the civil rights act of 1964 solved the first issue since it made it illegal for any segregated institution to receive federal aid.
johnson solved the divide on religion with a policy by which federal education funds would follow the child whichever school the 25 1 j j 1 i 262 5 263 child was in.
the elementary and secondary education act was submitted to congress in january 1965 and passed in 3 months.
johnson signed it at a ceremony in front of a school that he had once attended with one of his former teachers sitting beside him.
every democratic president since franklin roosevelt had also sought to provide federal health insurance especially for the elderly.
a coalition led by the american medical association fearing government control of medical practices stopped every effort.
however half of all americans over 65 had no health insurance and they too were a powerful constituency.
within months of being proposed congress created medicare offering basic medical insurance to everyone over 65 arkansas congressman wilbur mills a close johnson ally added a provision to the medicare bill creating medicaid which provided federal funding for medical insurance to americans living in poverty.
for some old and poor people the resulting medicare and medicaid legislation enabled the first visit to a medical doctor in their lives.
even though there was not a lot of pressure to reform the nation s immigration laws in the 1960s johnson was determined to make immigration reform a part of the great society.
the highly restrictive laws of 1921 and 1923 drastically limited immigration virtually cutting off anyone from eastern europe africa or asia see chapter 4 creating the culture of british north america 97 as their dress and the picture s background illustrate charles and anne byrd carter of virginia were among the colonial elite when these pictures were painted in the 1730s.
occasionally scottish descent.
they were being joined by other europeans especially immigrants from ireland and germany along with increasing numbers of unwilling and unfree africans.
the british economy on both sides of the atlantic was changing and people were prospering.
although many people were still poor the desperate starving time in virginia and similar early struggles elsewhere were far behind.
in british cities on both sides of the atlantic and on the great plantations developing in the southern colonies a growing social and economic elite lived comfortable lives largely made possible by the slave trade and the backbreaking work of african slaves.
the wealthiest colonial residents were those who lived on the tobacco rice and indigo plantations of virginia and the carolinas including people like charles and anne byrd carter whose families owned thousands of acres as well as many slaves and produced some of the goods most in demand in great britain and britains other colonies around the world.
nevertheless colonial life was still full of uncertainty.
the hysteria that led to the salem witch trials in the 1690s reflected these deep seated fears that were just under the surface of much of colonial society.
rural women were often isolated and even urban women were confined to domestic worlds which could be boring and lonely.
fears and uncertainties were often shaped by information about events that took place in another colony.
the ever present danger of indian raids continued to threaten british colonies just as raids by settlers were a constant danger for tribes living near the colonies.
the wealthy elite whose wealth depended on slaves feared slave revolts.
in addition wars in europe often led to battles in north america.
by the early 1700s england was the worlds dominant sea power bringing great financial benefits to those who controlled the trade in goods and people across the atlantic and bringing prosperity to those who lived in port cities on both sides of the ocean.
as trade and prosperity grew the quest for commercial success began to replace religious devotion as the prime focus of many peoples lives.
the salem witch trials of 1692 underlying tensions in colonial life surfaced in massachusetts during the harsh unrelenting winter of 1691 1692 the residents of salem and the surrounding massachusetts communities also lived in fear because new england was under siege from indians allied with french canada.
in midwinter indians killed 50 residents of york maine and took another hundred hostage.
residents of other maine communities fled in terror and were living in or near salem.
exiles from maine may have been especially traumatized but all of the residents feared further attacks.
moreover other 98 part ii settlements old and new 1607 1754 tensions were brewing in the port city of salem.
many poorer residents resented their neighbors who formed a more prosperous commercial elite.
in addition women in salem like in all english colonies lived often unwillingly within strict submissive gender roles women who were unusually assertive especially women who lived alone or were of non english backgrounds were not trusted.
as these tensions simmered salem fell into a kind of mass hysteria late that winter.
two young girls in the home of reverend samuel parris of salem village his daughter betty and her cousin abigail began to suffer fits.
they seemed to be bitten and pinched by invisible agents.
the town doctor wondered if their disease might be a result of witchcraft.
in march the girls accused tituba the familys indian slave of bewitching them.
thus began the salem witch trials one of the best known episodes of mass hysteria in the english colonies.
soon other young women came forward with tales similar to those of betty and abigail.
as a result formal charges were brought and court proceedings began.
in time some of those accused including tituba confessed to being witches.
witnesses turned against one another and convictions for witchcraft became common.
between february 1692 and may 1693 legal action was taken against 144 people 106 women and 38 men.
six men and 14 women including tituba were executed.
that so many people in salem believed their illnesses and troubles were the work of witches was not strange in the 1600s.
most people in europe believed that there were witches people who had made a compact with the devil and could appear as ghosts and make other people and animals sick.
hundreds of supposed witches were executed in england in that century and many other accusations of witchcraft had surfaced in new england although never on the scale of what happened in salem.
in salem the whole community became involved as the accusations spread quickly from one household to another.
virtually all of the accusers were young women under age 25 and most of the victims were also women though often older.
the hysteria ended almost as quickly as it had begun.
by the fall of 1692 massachusetts authorities clergy and political leaders were starting to have doubts about the trials and executions.
most people in the colony probably still believed in witchcraft but they were increasingly uneasy about what was happening in salem.
by spring 1693 it was all over.
one of the judges samuel sewall publicly apologized for his role and asked gods pardon.
reverend parris was forced to leave salem and the massachusetts authorities voted compensation for victims and families.
the salem witch trials were one of the last times that people were executed for explicitly religious reasons in north america.
women s lives by the middle of the 1700s the white culture of british north america was generally divided between the public and private realms.
because women were generally relegated to the private realm many of them lived cut off from society.
urban women had much more opportunity for social contact with other women and men than those living in more isolated regions.
in williamsburg virginia two women anne shields and jane vobe both ran their own taverns.
mary channing ran a large store in boston and lydia hyde had her own shop in philadelphia.
while these women may have been the exception city women did have many opportunities to interact.
however more than 90 percent of the british residents of north america lived on farms sometimes very isolated farms and the lives of rural women could be frighteningly lonely.
in more settled communities especially in southern new england women could often find limited contact with other women in ways that allowed them to build some friendships such as gathering to trade soap candles cheese and butter or attending church.
growing commercial prosperity also meant that some women were able to purchase imported goods including tea china and for a few even silk.
an illustration from the book full and plain evidence concerning witches and apparitions published in london in 1681 represented beliefs on both sides of the atlantic about the powers of those who made a pact with the devil.
salem witch trials the 1692 1693 hysteria in salem massachusetts during which women and men were accused of being witches who had made a pact with the devil some of whom were executed for the crime.
chapter objective demonstrate an understanding of the changes in the u s economy brought about by the rapid expansion of cotton production other commercial and financial developments and the impact of these changes on u s political life.
creating the cotton economy explain the role of cotton in transforming the land and the lives of diverse people in the united states.
commerce technology and transportation analyze the technological and financial changes that led to the emergence of a new market economy in the united states.
from the era of good feelings to the politics of division this picture of large bales of cotton being loaded onto steamships by slave labor reflects much of the economic development of the nation in the decades after the end of the war of 1812 the end of the war of 1812 andrew jacksons victory at new orleans the american takeover of florida and the monroe doctrine were all far from primary concerns of many americans in the years after 1815 something much closer to home cotton was transforming their lives.
the rapid growth of cotton production changed the lives of more americans whether or not they were directly involved in cotton production than any other development between 1800 and the civil war.
cotton transformed the nations physical commercial and political landscape.
henry bibb a former slave described what cotton meant to him and his fellow slaves on a louisiana cotton plantation that had only recently been developed the object of blowing the horn for them two hours before day was that they should get their bit to eat before they went to the field that they need not stop to eat but once during the day i have often heard the sound of the slave drivers lash on the backs of slaves and their heart rending shrieks i have known the slaves to be so much fatigued from labor that they could scarcely get to their lodging places from the fields at night.
creating the cotton economy 9 3 jyiuiilauum ui me ever expaiw cotton growing regions of the nation knew little respite from the fati ing labor.
they had to clear the land before they could plant and o planted the cotton plants needed almost constant care.
the harvest part iv crafting a nation people land and a national identity 1800 1848 explain the role of cotton in transforming the land and the lives of diverse people in the united states.
cottons dominant role in the economy came about quickly.
in 1800 a few southern plantations grew enough cotton to make cloth for their own use and ship a few bags to england but the dominant plantation cash crops were rice indigo tobacco and in southern louisiana sugar.
but after the war of 1812 cotton quickly outstripped every other american export and remained a major american industry until the 1930s.
demand and technology two developments in the late 1790s set the stage for the rapid expansion of cotton production in the united states.
first during this period many europeans came to prefer cotton clothing to the wool or linen that had clothed them for generations.
cotton was cooler and more comfortable than wool and it was getting cheaper.
most of europes cotton came from india via great britains east india company but india could not produce enough cotton to meet europes growing demand.
the second development was a set of technological changes that launched the worldwide expansion of cotton.
in england in 1733 john kay invented a flying shuttle that made weaving cloth much faster and allowed a single weaver to handle a loom that previously required many weavers.
in 1764 james hargreaves invented the spinning jenny which could run multiple spindles each spinning cotton into thread.
by 1800 a single jenny could be seen operating up to 120 spindles at once.
in 1769 richard arkwright patented a water frame that used waterpower to drive the spin ning process a major step toward mass production while james watts coal powered chapter.
federal reconstruction policy 15 1 radical republicans a shifting group of republican congressmen who favored abolishing slavery and advocated full rights for former slaves in the south.
explain the political development of federal reconstruction policy.
in december 1864 senator charles sumner of massachusetts thought lincoln had agreed that former confederate states must grant all citizens the same right to vote as whites which meant the right of males to vote to be readmitted to the union.
but while lincoln had come to believe that blacks who fought in the union army had won the right to vote he also believed that the constitution gave states the right to determine who voted and he did not yet seem ready as far as anyone knew to interfere.
when lincoln died in april 1865 his own party was divided on the question of the vote for african americans and on how best to handle the readmission of the confederate states within the nation.
with the war just ending the majority of republicans in and out of congress were still moderates.
many had begun the civil war with the intention only to save the union and had been won over in the course of the war to believing that the end of the war had to mean the end of slavery.
still that revised intention was just a single goal they were not committed to voting rights or the award of land for newly freed african americans.
other republicans who were coming to be known as radical republicans often called simply the radicals in congress were determined that the norths victory in the civil war meant that the country should give formerly enslaved people not only their freedom but also the right to vote and to hold office.
in addition they believed the country should provide land to those who had previously worked other peoples land as their slaves.
in other words formerly enslaved people should be given all the rights of white americans.
418 partv expansion separation and a new union 1844 1877 american voices jourdon anderson letter to colonel p h anderson 1865 15 1 fter jourdon anderson and his wife mandy were freed from slavery on a tennessee plantation belonging to colonel p h anderson they moved north and settled in dayton ohio.
a year later with the war over and the confederate army disbanded colonel anderson wrote to his former slaves asking them to return as employees.
jourdan anderson responded to his former master as to my freedom which you say i can have there is nothing to be gained on that score as i got my free papers in 1864 from the provost marshall general of the department at nashville.
mandy says she would be afraid to go back without some proof that you are sincerely disposed to treat us fairly and justly and we have concluded to test your sincerity by asking you to send us our wages for the time we served you.
this will make us forget and forgive old scores and rely on your justice and friendship in the future.
i served you faithfully for thirty two years and mandy twenty years.
at 25 a month for me and 2 a week for mandy our earnings would amount to 11 680.
add to this the interest for the time our wages has been kept and deduct what you paid for our clothing and three doctors visits to me and pulling a tooth for mandy and the balance will show what we are in justice entitled to if you fail to pay us for faithful labors in the past we can have little faith in your promises in the future.
we trust the good maker has opened your eyes to the wrongs which you and your fathers have done to me and my fathers in making us toil for generations without recompense.
here i draw my wages every saturday night but in tennessee there was never any pay day for the negroes any more than for the horses and cows.
surely there will be a day of reckoning for those who defraud the laborer of his hire.
jourdon anderson p s.
say howdy to george carter and thank him for taking the pistol from you when you were shooting at me.
source john david smith black voices from reconstruction 1865 1877 gainesville university press of florida 1997 pp.
43 44 thinking critically 1 documentary analysis what examples can you find in the document of jourdon anderson s sense of humor.
2 historical interpretation why would colonel anderson invite jourdon anderson back to work on the plantation where he had been a slave.
how do you think the former slave owner responded to this letter from jourdon anderson.
a similar kind of split existed over the proper ways to readmit states to the union.
lincoln and many other republicans had argued throughout the war that the southern states had never left the united states after all preserving the union had been the initial reason that the north went to war in 1861 if the southern states had never left there was little to do at wars end but for them to conduct elections for local and national office and resume their place in the nation.
others however especially the radical republicans argued that after 4 years of fighting against the union the states of the former confederacy were effectively out of the country and could be readmitted only after some period in which the federal government sought to reconstruct state governments to ensure that those who led the rebellion traitors as the radicals always called them would not lead the new state governments and that the full civil rights of african americans would be ensured.
the difference of opinion was significant and compromise was not easy.
while lincoln pondered the question of the vote and argued that the debate over the term readmission was a distraction from the work at hand he did take another step that would have far reaching significance in what was to come.
lincoln proposed establishing a federal bureau of freedmen refugees and abandoned lands.
chapter 15 reconstruction 421 black codes laws passed by states and municipalities denying many rights of citizenship to free blacks and to control black labor mobility and employment.
had the clearest agenda for what they wanted to see happen and every act of postwar southern resistance tended to strengthen their hand.
in 1864 johnson had said treason must be made odious and traitors must be punished and impoverished and he repeated similar views to members of congress who met with him right after lincolns assassination.
ohio senator benjamin f wade said by the gods there will be no trouble now in running the government another was overheard saying i believe that the almighty continued mr lincoln in office as long as he was useful and then substituted a better man to finish the work when johnson announced his plans for reconstruction on may 29 1865 there was widespread disappointment.
johnson supported the thirteenth amendment already passed by congress and ratified by several states and insisted that support for the amendment be a condition for the readmission of any confederate state to the union.
but johnson refused to go beyond that.
he made it clear that he had little interest in political rights for former slaves.
in contrast to his earlier claims johnson declared a full amnesty and pardon for most of those who had taken part in the rebellion as long as they were willing to pledge loyalty to the union and support the end of slavery.
the amnesty included restoration of all land taken by the union army.
there were exceptions to johnsons amnesty however.
major confederate officials and individuals who owned more than 20 000 in taxable property had to seek individual presidential pardons.
at first glance the policy seemed tough on the south or at least on the former slaveholders of the south perhaps tougher than lincoln would have been and consistent with johnsons pledge to keep slaveholders out in the cold but soon many wondered how many individual presidential pardons would be granted as they realized that johnson was granting many more than they had expected.
blacks though now free seemed destined to be excluded from most of the rights of citizenship in the johnson plan.
if former slaveholders were to be given back their land what land would there be for former slaves.
illinois congressman elihu b washburne said i have grounds to fear president johnson may hold almost unconquerable prejudices against the african race while the radical republicans in congress were terribly disappointed many southern whites were delighted at the opportunity to create a white mans government if they accepted the end of slavery.
under johnsons plan former confederate states were readmitted as soon as they ratified the thirteenth amendment and the new state governments that were quickly organized in the south were recognized by johnson as the legitimate government of these states.
since most republicans continued to insist that the rebellious states had never left the union there was no official way or time for them to be readmitted.
once recognized these state governments dominated by many of the same people who had been in power before the civil war began passing laws strictly limiting black rights most of all the right to vote.
in addition hunting fishing free grazing of livestock which whites all assumed were their rights and which some slaves had enjoyed were now declared illegal for blacks in a series of what were known as black codes passed by states across the south beginning with mississippis code passed in november 1865 one part of the mississippi code said all freedmen free negroes and mulattoes in the state over the age of eighteen found on the second monday in january 1866 or thereafter with no lawful employment or business or found unlawful assembling themselves together either in the day or nit time and all white persons assembling with freedmen free negroes or mulattoes or unusually associating on terms of equality shall be deemed vagrants.
422 part v expansion separation and a new union 1844 1877 in many states black codes either made it illegal for an african american to own a gun or taxed guns at high rates.
in cities new urban police forces like the one in mississippi in 1865 were designed to keep good order and discipline amongst the negro population.
police patrols not only enforced the law but also often terrorized blacks especially those who refused to sign long term labor contracts with former slave masters.
any former slave who ran away from a labor contract could be either arrested and returned to the plantation holding that contract or sentenced to a chain gang to pay off the fine for running away.
african americans in louisiana noted how similar the contracts were to slavery and how similar the new police were to the old slave patrols.
they also asked why men who but a few months since were in armed rebellion against the government should now have arms put in their hands.
johnson s amnesty especially his expectation that these states would reassume all the rights of any other state made these oppressive developments almost inevitable.
15 1 j j congressional radical reconstruction 1867 1869 the new congress that was elected with lincoln in november 1864 did not assemble until december 1865 8 months after his death.
this congress had an overwhelming republican majority including many who had become disillusioned with johnson by the time they met especially as they saw what was happening in the states that had so recently been at war with the union.
the new president they thought was clearly siding with the former slaveholders rather than the former slaves.
those in congress most unhappy with johnson the radical republicans were led by charles sumner in the senate and thaddeus stevens in the house.
stevens told the house the whole fabric of southern society must be changed and never can it be done if this opportunity is lost for stevens the core values of the republican party remained as the partys campaign slogan said free labor by free men who earned their livelihoods by the sweat of their own brows.
but with johnson moving quickly to recognize the new state governments in the old confederacy and those governments passing rigid black codes the moment seemed to be quickly slipping away.
johnson focused on the constitutional clause giving each state the right to set up its own government and arrangements for voting.
stevens and the radicals focused on a different part of the constitution the clause guaranteeing each state a republican form of government.
most of the republicans in congress were not as radical as stevens or sumner.
in 1865 a majority probably still had reservations about black voting rights.
even so nearly all were disappointed at johnsons easy amnesty of so many former confederate leaders and the way southern states were coming back into the union with their old leaders in power.
they discredited johnson s version of reconstruction because the results resembled the antebellum south in far too many ways.
in particular the fact that 58 members of the confederate congress six confederate cabinet officers andthe vice president of the confederacy were all elected to congress in 1865 and 1866 symbolized the failure of johnsons policy to bring about meaningful change.
however the constitution also gave congress its own specific ways of asserting its authority.
pennsylvania congressman thaddeus stevens wanted reconstruction to mean a thorough reordering of southern society in which former slaves would receive land and guaranteed voting rights from the federal government.
chapter 15 reconstruction 423 soon after convening in december 1865 congress created a joint committee on reconstruction.
moderate senator william pitt fessenden of maine was appointed chair and most of the radicals including stevens were excluded.
nevertheless congress undermined presidential reconstruction by refusing to seat the congressional delegates from the former confederate states even though johnson considered those states to be fully restored to the union.
johnsons use of restoration rather than reconstruction irked many in congress who wanted to see at least some change rather than restoring states to the place they had held in 1860.
despite johnsons insistence that the states had a right to be represented in congress the reality was that the constitution made each house of congress sole judge of the qualifications of its members and neither house was ready to seat former confederate leaders.
senator ben wade demanded that no southern state be given a vote in congress until african americans had the right to vote in that state.
others called for the creation of territorial governments in the former confederate states which would be under the control of congress so that both voting rights and land redistribution could be assured.
but congress itself was divided and action beyond rejecting the delegates from the south was hard to come by.
even legislation to give blacks in the district of columbia the right to vote something congress clearly had authority to do could not make it through both houses especially after a december 1865 referendum of white voters in the district rejected black voting rights 6 951 to 35 early in 1866 illinois senator lyman trumbull proposed two new pieces of legislation.
unlike the more radical republicans trumbull still maintained a good working relationship with johnson and worried about the federal government exceeding its authority.
but given developments in the south trumbull felt congress had the authority even the duty to protect the rights of newly freed african americans under the thirteenth amendment which included language giving congress the power to pass laws to enforce the amendment.
first trumbull proposed extending the life of the freedmens bureau.
when lincoln signed the legislation creating the bureau it was envisioned as a 1 year transitional body.
however through late 1865 and early 1866 the freedmens bureau was the key federal agency distributing food to former slaves supporting the establishment of schools and in some cases even helping former slaves gain their own land.
after consulting with the head of the bureau general o o.
howard trumbull became convinced that its work would take many years and proposed extending it to 1870 he also proposed giving it new authority to ensure that blacks had all civil rights belonging to white persons and giving bureau agents the authority to press charges against state officials who denied those rights.
trumbull then proposed the far reaching civil rights bill of 1866 that defined all persons born in the united states except indians as citizens permanently ending the dred scott distinctions between whites and blacks.
although the bill was silent on the issue of voting given that many of the citizens it referred to women and children for example could not vote it explicitly guaranteed rights to make contracts bring lawsuits and have the equal benefit of the laws without regard to race.
the law declared that such provisions were fundamental rights belonging to every man as a free man it also authorized federal authorities to prosecute violations in federal courts a significant provision since southern state courts were quickly reverting to their white dominated ways.
424 part v expansion separation and a new union 1844 1877 both of trumbull s bills would have appeared radical a year or two earlier but in 1866 they were seen as moderate proposals from a moderate senator and everyone expected smooth sailing for them.
then after they passed congress easily president johnson vetoed both bills.
he called the freedmens bureau an immense patronage system that exceeded the constitutional authority of the federal government and he characterized the civil rights bill an as unwarranted concentration of all legislative powers in the national government in his veto of the civil rights bill johnson also went out of his way to say that giving blacks citizenship rights was wrong and that the distinction of race and color is by the bill made to operate in favor of the colored and against the white race the vetoes ended congressional efforts to work with the president on reconstruction.
trumbull attacked the president.
senator william pitt fessenden up to then considered a moderate predicted that johnson would veto every other bill we pass johnson was prepared to do just that.
he wanted to court northern democrats and southern whites in his bid for a second term.
congress passed both pieces of legislation over johnsons vetoes and began to use a veto proof two thirds majority to pass similar legislation in spite of presidential opposition.
the era of presidential led reconstruction was fast coming to an end.
after passing trumbulls two major bills over the presidents veto in the spring of 1866 congress proposed another amendment to the u s constitution.
amendments to the constitution proposed in congress are not subject to a presidential veto although three fourths of the state legislatures need to agree to them.
so in 1866 congress set out to put the civil rights law into the constitution itself.
agreement to do so came quickly however agreement on the other provisions of the amendment came much more slowly.
congress was not yet ready to give all black males the same voting rights that all white males had but sumner and some other radicals would never support an amendment that did not guarantee such rights.
when their opposition was combined with the democratic minority who did not want any new rights inscribed in the constitution crafting the amendment became a major hurdle.
many members of congress wanted to punish any state that withheld the vote from black males but they did not want to punish those states currently all of them that withheld the vote from women or those states including several in the north that made it hard for recent immigrants to vote.
all of these issues led to months of wrangling but the compromise that emerged as the fourteenth amendment guaranteeing rights of citizenship to former slaves and others born or naturalized in the united states was nevertheless significant.
the key provision of the fourteenth amendment said all persons born or naturalized in the united states and subject to the jurisdiction thereof are citizens of the united states and of the state wherein they reside.
no state shall make or enforce any law which shall abridge the privileges or immunities of citizens of the united states nor shall any state deprive any person of life liberty or property without due process of law nor deny to any person within its jurisdiction the equal protection of the laws.
other clauses of the fourteenth amendment stated changes drastically different from the three fifths clause and other previously accepted parts of the constitution.
they included language saying that any state that limited the voting rights of male chapter 15 rea iction 427 these traits set the stage for an even more serious collision between the president and the congress.
while congress took charge of reconstruction johnson became convinced that he had public opinion on his side and began to encourage opponents of reconstruction in the north and south.
he also removed several of the tougher military commanders in the south and replaced them with officers who were willing to let events take their own course which meant letting former confederates take control of local governments and use their power to undermine black rights.
then in february 1868 after the senate refused johnsons request to remove stanton the president in violation of the tenure of office act fired him.
it was a clear challenge to congressional authority.
under the u s constitution a president can be removed only for high crimes and misdemeanors terms the constitution does not define.
but the procedure for impeachment is clear.
the house of representatives is required to act as a sort of grand jury deciding whether or not to bring charges called impeachment against the president.
then the senate with the chief justice of the supreme court presiding acts as a jury to hear and vote on the charges.
only with a senate vote to convict can a president be removed from office.
led by thaddeus stevens the house with every republican voting positively agreed on a long list of charges most having to do with johnsons violation of the tenure of office act but also a charge saying that the president had tried to bring congress into disgrace however the trial in the senate did not go as well for the radicals.
removing a president was very serious business and it was unclear that johnsons obstructionism met the level of a high crime it was also not clear that the tenure of office act was constitutional.
johnson claimed that he meant the firing of stanton to be tested in the supreme court.
if johnson were removed then senator ben wade president pro tern of the senate would become president since there was no vice president and many who disliked johnson also disliked wade.
when the senate finally voted in mid may of 1868 johnson survived by one vote.
johnson could serve out his term in relative peace although his chances for the democratic nomination and reelection were slim.
the right to vote grant s election and the fifteenth amendment after johnsons impeachment was resolved both parties turned to selecting nominees for the presidential election in the fall of 1868 for the republicans the choice was easy.
ulysses s grant as commander of the army had supported the republicans in congress on the issues of reconstruction his own attitudes on race had been significantly reshaped by the courage shown by black troops during the civil war and he was the nations war hero.
ihe republicans easily nominated him along with the speaker of the house schuyler colfax of indiana as his running mate.
grant ran on a cautious platform that nevertheless embraced extending voting rights to former slaves.
his slogan was let us have peace democrats were divided on issues of personality on their opposition to congressional reconstruction and on fiscal policies whether to continue to authorize the printing of money or greenbacks based on the federal promise to pay.
after 21 ballots in which a number of candidates including andrew johnson failed to win the nomination they chose former new york governor horatio seymour who had flirted with supporting the confederacy during the war and who had called protesters in the new york draft riot my friends for vice president 428 part v expansion separation and a new union 1844 1877 they nominated a former union general from missouri francis blair who called for an end to reconstruction which he called the rule of aa semi barbarous race ofblacks while neither party articulated a fully developed economic policy the lines between the parties were drawn on the issues of race.
august belmont one of the nation s leading bankers said that in the 1868 election financial matters paled in comparison with black voting rights.
in november grant carried most of the north and the parts of the south under federal control including north and south carolina and alabama.
seymours home state of new york along with new jersey georgia and louisiana favored seymour.
the state governments in florida mississippi and texas had not yet been recognized and those states did not vote.
grant won 53 percent of the popular vote but an overwhelming 73 percent of the electoral vote for an easy victory.
with grant about to become president republicans in congress moved quickly on the issue of voting rights.
in february 1869 congress passed the fifteenth amendment which stated the right of citizens of the united states to vote shall not be denied or abridged by the united states or by any state on account of race color or previous condition of servitude.
harper s weekly carried many illustrations of the changes happening in the south to northern audience.
this issue of july 1868 showed the enthusiasm with which african americans many of whom had been slaves only a few years before were taking to electoral politics.
chapter 9 new industries new politics 261 missouri statehood bill to prohibit the introduction of new slaves into the state and gradually free those who were already there.
tallmadges amendment created a huge crisis in which southern representatives and senators attacked it and its author.
in language that prefigured the heated debates of the next four decades georgia representative thomas w cobb told tallmadge you have kindled a fire which all the waters of the ocean cannot put out which seas of blood can only extinguish tallmadge responded in kind if a dissolution of the union must take place let it be so.
if civil war which gentlemen so much threaten must come i can only say let it come threats of disunion were as old as the constitutional convention of 1787 but this language was harsher than congress had heard in a long time.
the reasons were clear.
when the constitution was adopted many from both the south and the north believed that slavery was dying even its defenders tended to describe the institution as a sad though necessary evil.
when george washington and others of his generation freed their slaves the economic impact was limited since slaves were not of great value.
but that period was before cotton transformed the economics of slavery.
a slave in the prime of life who might be sold for 400 or 500 in 1814 could be sold for 800 1 100 in 1819 and though the price of slaves as of land decreased with the panic of 1819 values in both cases recovered and then kept rising.
slaves had become valuable whether as workers or as products to be sold.
if virginia and carolina planters could not use all the slaves they owned instead of freeing them they could now sell them to cotton growers in georgia mississippi and alabama at a substantial profit.
missouri had few slaves but by 1820 slave owners were not about to allow an attack on the institution of slavery.
although much of the debate about missouri was spoken in the language of popular will and the sovereign right of white people there to decide their own policies it took place as economic and racial realities were changing quickly.
in the north hostility to slavery was growing.
many northerners including many whose pre revolutionary parents and grandparents had owned slaves now hated the whole idea of human slavery and disliked a constitutional system that protected it.
even before 1820 some people were starting to call themselves abolitionists those committed to completely ending slavery.
many other northerners had more strategic objections to the constitutional protection of slavery.
ihe three fifths clause in the constitution gave the slaveholding south 17 more seats in the house of representatives and thus 17 more electoral votes in presidential elections than an allocation of representatives based on only free people would have done.
as a result four of the five u s presidents who had served by 1820 had come from virginia.
ihe nation was becoming divided between a commercial north and an agricultural south and although neither region was purely for or against slavery the fact that slavery gave the south a political edge came across to many northerners as being unfair.
the debates about missouri despite all the anger voiced by tallmadge and cobb were not as vitriolic as future debates would be.
there were not yet many radical abolitionists in the north and so far few in the south were saying that slavery was a positive good.
but already in 1819 neither side would back down and congress adjourned without doing anything about missouri.
before congress reassembled in 1820 president monroe and henry clay of kentucky the speaker of the house of representatives designed a compromise to resolve the issue.
while the north had a solid and growing majority in the house the senate was evenly divided between slave and free states.
since each state had two senators no matter what its population 11 free states and 11 slave states meant a senate that was split 22 22 on the issue of slavery.
in addition while congress had debated what to do about missouri the region known as the district of maine within the commonwealth of massachusetts was also petitioning for statehood with the blessing of the massachusetts legislature.
the compromise proposed that if maine and missouri were admitted at the same time and if missouri was allowed to be a slave state then the balance in the senate would be maintained.
however this proposed compromise iv crafting a nation people land and a national identity 1800 1848 would also restrict the spread of slavery while missouri would be admitted as a slave state all other states north of the 36 30 north parallel that is the southern border of missouri would be admitted as free states.
although most northerners in the house and senate voted against it some supported the compromise as did almost all of those from the south and the missouri compromise passed congress allowing missouri and maine to be admitted to the union.
the crisis had been averted.
the success would be the first of many such compromises for which henry clay would become known as the great compromiser over the next 3 decades.
however the need for this compromise signaled more clearly than ever before that slavery had become a divisive issue that would not go away see map 9 5.
the contested election of 1824 as president monroe came to the end of his second term the political good will that had marked his tenure disappeared.
although no constitutional limitation had yet been set on presidential terms washington had set a precedent for stepping down after two terms which others had followed.
in 1824 as the nation sought a new president missouri compromise a compromise in congress in 1820 that admitted missouri to the union as a slave state and maine as a free state as well as prohibited slavery in the rest of the louisiana purchase territory above 3630 north latitude.
9 3 i los angeles russian territory british north america oregon country us and great britain spanish territory missouri ft michigan unorganized territory xjy territory michigan territory ar sas r illinois st.
louis ohio ohio pacific ocean 1 arkansas territory 1819 36 tied r 7 j u hatchez nacogdoches san antonio de bejar kentucky tennessee v.
alabama free states and territories slave states and territories open to slavery by missouri compromise closed to slavery by missouri compromise missouri compromise line virginia pennsylvania washington d c new hampshire massachusetts rhode island connecticut new jersey delaware maryland north carolina south carolina georgia louisfc na orleans gulf of mexico st augustine florida t ritory atlantic ocean map 9 5 the missouri compromise line.
this map shows the way the nation was divided in an equal lumber of free and slave states by the missouri compromise.
596 part vii war prosperity and depression 1890 1945 the prelude the red summer of 1919 21 1 significant dates explain how events at the end of world war i shaped the decade that followed.
when the guns of world war i fell silent on november 11 1918 the world celebrated.
while the united states had been spared much of the wars cost many americans were not sure what to make of the postwar world.
some americans had talked of socialism even communism since the strikes of the 1870s but most did not follow their lead.
as a result of world war i communists had seized control of russia.
some americans celebrated the new russian government but many more feared it and wondered whether there might be links between americas homegrown radicals and russia.
for african americans who had fought in the war had risked their lives for democracy and had seen different cultures the idea of returning to a united states with rigid segregation generated new tensions and determination.
other african americans had moved north to take war time jobs and they had no intention of returning to the segregated south.
to the surprise of some within months of the armistice the country quickly became a very tense place.
with the coming of peace american workers wanted a part of the new postwar prosperity and tried to gain back the money they had lost from stagnant wages in an era of wartime inflation.
in january 1919 35 000 shipyard workers went on strike in seattle washington and a month later 60 000 workers in other industries joined them.
the week long seattle general strike when virtually no one in the city went to work stands as the largest citywide strike in u s history and it frightened many.
the seattle strike was the largest but hardly the only strike in 1919 textile workers in lawrence massachusetts the scene of the 1912 bread and roses strike see chapter 5 the making of a revolution 1754 1783 prelude to revolution the revolution was in the minds of the people the war for independence chapter 6 creating a nation 1783 1789 the state of the nation at war s end creating a government writing the u s constitution chapter 15 reconstruction 435 15 2 sharecropping labor system that evolved during and after reconstruction whereby landowners furnished laborers with a house farm animals tools and advanced credit in exchange for a share of the laborers crop.
blacks across the south quickly began farming their own plots.
johnson overrode howards order issued pardons to former plantation owners and ordered howard to restore the land to them which meant taking it away from those who were currently using it.
once land had been returned to its former owners there was very little chance that former slaves would regain their parcels.
in october 1865 general howard made a painful journey to edisto island in south carolina to announce the presidents order.
a committee of freedmen drafted their response general we want homesteads if the government having concluded to befriend its late enemies and to neglect to observe the principles of common faith between its self and us its allies in the war you said was over now takes away from them all right to the soil they stand upon save such as they can get by again working for your late and their all time enemies you will see this is not the condition of really freemen.
redistribution of land it seemed was not going to be part of reconstruction.
in a few places however former slaves were able to purchase or win government land.
having spent their lives in unpaid labor few slaves had any resources to buy land even when it was being sold very cheaply in the aftermath of the war.
in south carolina which had an exceptionally strong reconstruction government the legislature established a state land commission that provided grants of land to some 14 000 black families perhaps one seventh of the states black population in various parts of the state.
they also created the town of promised land which continues as a black led community to the present.
the primary economic opportunity open to slaves was to return to the plantations where they had worked in the past but do so as paid employees.
neither former slaves nor former slave owners found the prospect encouraging.
one georgia planter complained that once we had reliable labor controlled at will.
now it is both uncertain and unreliable when railroads or new enterprises offered jobs blacks left the plantations to take other work.
during the johnson dominated reconstruction southern landowners not only reclaimed their lands but also ensured the passage of vagrancy laws made it a crime to be without a job which meant former slaves had to take whatever was offered or be jailed.
some landowners agreed to hire only their own former slaves making it extremely difficult for newly free people to bargain for wages or move to better opportunities.
many in washington were pleased to see blacks become wage earners paid for raising the cotton sugar rice and tobacco they had previously raised without pay as slaves.
but former slaves did not like working for wages especially the low wages that were offered for work in the same places where they had once labored as slaves.
wageearning blacks resented their status as what some called wage slaves they wanted land of their own and if they could not get land and in most parts of the south they could not they wanted a share in the profits of their work.
given the dissatisfaction that both white landowners and black workers felt a new economic arrangement was born sharecropping.
sharecropping meant just what the name implied.
instead of working for wages former slaves worked as independent entrepreneurs who were guaranteed a share of the crop in return for their labor.
at the same time landowners who provided the land the seeds and the loans to get through the year also received a share of the crop.
as this agricultural economy developed after the civil war the owner of a large tract of land almost always a former plantation owner who had the land returned 436 part v expansion separation and a new union 1844 1877 edisto island off the coast of south carolina was one of the first places where the government provided land and mules and mule carts.
former slaves quickly used the opportunity to become independent farmers.
by the johnson administration agreed to provide crude housing a short term loan for living expenses known as the furnish and usually provided at the beginning of the growing season in march seed fertilizer tools and the right to grow cotton on a specified piece of land 15 to 40 acres in area.
landless tenants almost always former slaves agreed to work the land plant weed or chop the cotton through the growing season and bring in a crop.
landowner and sharecropper would then split the profits after the harvest.
once the harvest was done just before christmas at the settle the landowner would provide the sharecropper with a statement of accounts showing the value of the cotton harvest the cost of the furnish and any other loans or purchases at the commissary on the plantation usually the only place the sharecropper could buy goods and often a place where prices were very high and the difference or profit due to the sharecropper.
everyone knew that many planters cheated their often illiterate tenants.
asking for a detailed accounting meant risking ones home and perhaps ones life.
few took the risk though many sharecroppers were privately furious when the end of year payments were finally made and somehow the results for those who had worked all year were so modest.
sharecropping began on the sugar plantations of louisiana and quickly spread to the rest of the agricultural south.
with sharecropping black workers had a significant new incentive to work since they retained a portion of the profits they created.
women and children who had resisted work in the field for wages now returned to the fields as families sought to make a living.
at first landowners were far from enthusiastic about sharecropping.
while it meant that they no longer needed to supervise employees they did not like the sense chapter 19.
while the wctu sought to persuade people to give up drink a new organization the anti saloon league sought to banish alcohol by law in the 1910s.
the male dominated league had a solid financial base greatly helped by john d rockefeller and relied on professional experts to organize campaigns lobby legislators and attack opponents.
in political campaigns the anti saloon league supported dry supporting prohibition candidates of any party and attacked any politician it considered either wet opposing prohibition or insufficiently dry.
as elected officials saw colleagues elected or defeated because of the leagues political acumen they started to support prohibition whatever their personal feelings or drinking habits.
the campaign to prohibit alcohol can be understood as no small part of a larger effort by native born white protestants especially those living on farms and small towns to retake control of a national culture that they saw increasingly under the sway of recent immigrants.
as native born protestant america became more and more hostile to drink many immigrants did not appreciate the campaign for moral conformity that they saw in the prohibition movement.
the protestant evangelist charles stelzle though a prohibition leader was more understanding of the role of the neighborhood saloon than many of his compatriots.
while many prohibitionists described saloons as dens of iniquity stelzle remembered growing up on new yorks lower east side where the working men held their christening parties their weddings their dances their rehearsals for their singing societies and all other social functions in the neighborhood tavern.
saloons were often where ethnic groups could maintain language and tradition.
in the evening germans could have their beer italians their wine and irish their whiskey while enjoying the company of others like themselves.
for people who gathered over a drink prohibition was an attack on the freedom and acceptance they had come to america to find.
anti saloon league leader william anderson condemned immigrant resistance to prohibition.
the board of temperance prohibition and public morals of the methodist church said if it is true that foreign born laborers are rebellious against the country because of prohibition it may be said that the country is not being run for their benefit.
if they do not like the way things are being done let them go back part vii war prosperity and depression 1890 1945 to europe.
as a result of statements like that many recent immigrants experienced prohibition as an attack on their cultures and some of prohibitions strongest advo cates did little to discourage such an assumption.
with the coming of world war i the anti saloon league had made support for prohibition a test of patriotism.
the league had successfully inserted a clause into the lever food and fuel control act banning the use of grain for hard liquor while giving the president authority to regulate wine and beer production.
wilson was no fan of prohibition but it was hard for him to reject a call for national sacrifice in support of the war.
in december 1917 congress with intensive lobbying by the anti saloon league passed the eighteenth amendment to the u s constitution prohibiting the manufacture transport and sale of liquor.
the league worked quickly to ensure that the required three quarters of the state legislatures acted and in january 1919 nebraska became the 36 state to ratify putting the amendment over the line.
in october 1919 congress passed the volstead act sponsored by minnesota representative andrew j volstead banning not only hard liquor which many even among the amendments supporters thought was its purpose but also wine and beer anything with more than xh of 1 percent alcohol.
violating the law carried as much as a 1 000 fine.
the u s treasury was given authority for enforcement.
like the eighteenth amendment the volstead act did not ban the possession of alcohol only its manufacture transportation and sale a loophole that made enforcement extremely difficult.
the act also allowed doctors to prescribe whiskey for medical needs and drugstores to dispense it and it allowed sacramental wine for religious purposes and industrial use of alcohol all loopholes that would be exploited in the 1920s.
when prohibition took effect on january 16 1920 americans observed the day in widely different ways.
liquor stores sold out.
people who could afford to do so filled their basements with bottles since possession remained legal and that night saloons hotels and private clubs gave one last grand party.
assistant secretary of the navy franklin d roosevelt drank champagne with former harvard classmates at the metropolitan club in washington.
other americans held very different celebrations.
the best known evangelist of the day billy sunday told worshipers in norfolk virginia the reign of tears is over the slums will soon be only a memory.
we will turn our prisons into factories and our jails into storehouses and corncribs.
men will walk upright now women will smile and children will laugh.
hell will be forever for rent in fact prohibition unleashed a crime wave not only because illegal liquor produced great profits emboldening criminals to new levels of creativity and violence but also because so many average americans were willing to disobey the law.
a scandalous age bootleg ponzi and teapot dome as prohibition began in 1920 a chicago gangster known as big jim colosimo owned saloons and brothels across the city.
colosimos nephew and business manager johnny torrio had moved from brooklyn to chicago to work for him in 1909 and both men had become millionaires.
prohibition meant they had to change some of their ways but they certainly planned to continue expecting increased profits.
one day torrio asked colosimo to meet a load of whiskey that torrio was having delivered to one of their cafes.
colosimo showed up on schedule and as he walked through the dining room someone emerged chapter 9 new industries new politics 263 thinking historically the missouri compromise when he heard about the missouri compromise the aging thomas jefferson who had been infuriated by the tallmadge amendment because it interfered with the rights of states wrote to john holmes a massachusetts congressman i had for a long time ceased to read the newspapers or pay any attention to public affairs confident they were in good hands and content to be a passenger in our bark to the shore from which i am not distant.
but this momentous question like a fire bell in the night awakened and filled me with terror.
i considered it at once as the knell of the union.
it is hushed indeed for the moment.
but this is a reprieve only not a final sentence.
a geographical line coinciding with a marked principle moral and political once conceived and held up to the angry passions of men will never be obliterated and every new irritation will mark it deeper and deeper.
while clay was being hailed as a national hero for crafting the compromise jefferson perhaps had a better sense of what lay ahead.
the former president and slaveholder who also wrote passionately against slavery knew that in the long term no issue would so greatly divide the nation s citizens and as he grew old he saw the division become increasingly intense.
thinking critically 1 contextualization how would you characterize pro and antislavery forces in 1820.
what might explain the widespread belief that the issue of slavery had been resolved with the passage of the missouri compromise.
2 historical interpretation in hindsight it is clear that jefferson was correct and the missouri compromise was only a reprieve.
what evidence was available in 1820 to support jefferson s point of view.
what trends had already begun to emerge that would lead the intensification of the conflict over slavery in the decades to come.
mi the united states experienced one of the most contested and confusing presidential elections in its history.
for citizens of a nation that had elected james monroe almost unanimously in 1816 and 1820 the ill will of 1824 was a surprise.
in one sense the election of 1824 proceeded just as the writers of the constitution who hated the idea of political parties envisioned a contest in which members of the house with each states delegation having one vote would decide on a president from among several of the nations leading citizens who had been identified by the votes of the electoral college.
with the demise of the federalists the democratic republican party was the only party in the nation.
it had been as that partys candidate that monroe had been elected by an almost unanimous vote since the federalists did not nominate a candidate in 1820 or anytime after that.
by 1824 however the usual process in which a party caucus within congress would select a presidential nominee had broken down and three members of monroes cabinet along with the speaker of the house of representatives all sought the presidency.
a fifth candidate from the same democratic republican party senator andrew jackson the national war hero from tennessee also joined the race.
in this type of contest personal animosity and political intrigue were inevitable.
at first many thought secretary of the treasury william h crawford of georgia was the obvious choice.
crawford had stepped out of the way to support monroe s election and he and many of his supporters thought it was now his turn.
the congressional caucus that traditionally nominated presidential candidates in fact did choose crawford.
however in what was clearly a warning of trouble to come less than a fourth of the members of congress showed up to vote in the caucus.
others in congress and outside of it would find other candidates and other ways to support them.
secretary of state john quincy adams of massachusetts had a good claim to consideration.
many considered the office of secretary of state as the natural stepping stone to the presidency.
monroe had been madisons secretary of state as madison had been part iv crafting a nation people land and a national identity 1800 1848 jefferson s and jefferson had been washingtons.
in addition adams had served the nation well.
he had acquired florida for the united states arranged treaties that opened vast new lands to settlement and handled south american revolutions and potential european interference skillfully.
as a former ambassador senator son of a former president and favorite of the antislavery north adams had much going for him.
secretary of war john c calhoun from south carolina was another candidate.
calhoun had not yet become the fierce advocate of states rights that he was later.
in 1824 he was a strong nationalist.
he advocated for a strong army and for using army engineers to conduct a national survey that would lead to federally supported roads bridges and canals connecting all parts of the nation.
he also supported the bank of the united states.
calhoun initially backed adams but when he became convinced after the missouri crisis that southern and border state electors would never support a new englander his own ambition was fired up and he campaigned actively.
henry clay of kentucky also a contender was speaker of the house of representatives and an ardent nationalist.
like calhoun he supported an expansive federal government that controlled the currency through a strong national bank and that built roads and bridges as well as supported commerce.
from his political base in kentucky clay hoped to be the first president from west of the alleghenies.
he was also shrewd enough to guess that with so many candidates in the race the house of representatives which he controlled might make the final decision.
finally there was andrew jackson of tennessee.
at first jackson seemed an unlikely candidate for president.
unlike any president after washington jackson had never served in the cabinet or represented the nation abroad.
instead he was the hero of the battle of new orleans.
he had served for 1 year in the senate and in other government posts but his primary public role was as a military leader and in the 1820s the military was not always a popular institution.
his wife rachel jackson strongly opposed his seeking the presidency.
in 1822 however the tennessee legislature formally nominated jackson as a candidate for president primarily as a way to block the then frontrunner crawford.
at that point jackson probably supported adams in part because adams had supported jacksons actions in florida while crawford and clay had not.
no one including jackson counted on how popular he would be with the electorate.
when a tavern keeper in pennsylvania wrote asking whether jackson would indeed seek the presidency the canny general knowing that his response would be published replied that it was his undeviating rule neither to seek or decline public invitations to office his response seemed the height of statesmanship to a country that had seen monroes almost unanimous election in the era of good feelings replaced by a divisive contest for the presidency.
the constitution allows each state to decide how to choose presidential electors.
by 1824 most states allowed voters to select electors pledged to a specific candidate thus greatly democratizing the presidential selection process.
that electorate had changed since the constitution was adopted in 1789 since 1808 when new jersey retracted its decision to give women the right to vote only men voted.
property restrictions on voting still common when washington was elected were long gone in most states so nearly all white men could now vote and in some northern states so could free black men.
in new york city free blacks sometimes held the balance of power among various factions.
excluded from voting were women of all races most blacks including all slaves and indians.
nevertheless this broad male electorate valued widespread popularity as more important in selecting a president than the voice of a few members of the social and economic elite.
by 1824 the white male popular will was coalescing behind jackson far more than anyone expected.
in a nation increasingly divided by sectional issues a nationally respected war hero had great appeal.
in addition a fierce opponent of banks like jackson was popular with many people who were convinced at least partially rightly that the bank of the united states had brought on the panic of 1819 in places like mississippi 9 3 chapter 10 democracyinthe age of andrew jackson 273 nullification a constitutional doctrine holding that a state has a legal right to declare a national law null and void within its borders.
martin van buren architect of jacksons 1828 campaign for president became secretary of state.
but jacksons other cabinet officers were less talented and jackson often ignored them.
instead he surrounded himself with informal advisors who came to be known as his kitchen cabinet longtime friends and advisors who worked closely with the president particularly to accomplish removing indians from wanted lands revoking the charter for the second bank of the united states and preserving the authority of the federal union against radical supporters of states rights.
jackson s presidential agenda jackson had several interlocking but not entirely consistent priorities.
he distrusted government at all levels but had unbounded trust in his own ability to govern.
he meant not only to be an activist president john quincy adams and other presidents had also followed strong agendas but also to make the presidency the center of the american government.
he would not defer to congress in ways that all of his predecessors had done.
he vetoed more congressional bills than all of his predecessors combined and made it clear that congress would have to reckon with him.
as he had announced before the election he was determined to force the indians who lived in northern georgia alabama and mississippi to move west to clear the land for white settlement.
although he supported a modified tariff he meant to scale back the size of the federal government.
he hated the bank of the united states and was determined to destroy it.
he saw its charter as an inappropriate use of federal authority and was convinced probably rightly that the bank had contributed to adamss campaign.
and perhaps most of all jackson was determined to preserve the union at a time when southern leaders were insisting that each state had the right of nullification the right to declare that specific federal legislation was null and void within its borders.
jackson was a slaveholder and a defender of slavery but if slaveholders threatened national unity they would have to deal with him.
in his two terms as president jackson realized most of his goals despite fierce opposition.
he established permanent precedents for presidential authority.
he was a hero to some and an evil genius to others.
for most historians he remains one of the most complex american leaders expanding the roles of poor and working class whites in the political process and of the presidency in american life while reducing the rights of indians slaves federal employees bankers and indeed anyone who disagreed with him.
five civilized tribes the cherokees chickasaws choctaws creeks and seminoles who had established treaty agreements with the united states in the late 1700s or early 1800s lived in peace with their neighbors and adopted more of the ways of the whites than most native americans.
the indian removal act the trail of tears and the settlement of oklahoma for some white americans indian removal jacksons policy of forcing the cherokee nation and other tribes to move to reservations in distant oklahoma or indian territory as it was called was a great achievement.
for the tribes caught in jacksons web the policy led to war within the tribes terrible losses resistance resignation and reinvention.
their white supporters though passionate were ineffective against jackson.
known as the five civilized tribes the cherokees chickasaws choctaws creeks and seminoles had for generations lived in the region known as the old southwest georgia alabama mississippi as well as in arkansas and florida.
these tribes had traded and fought with spanish french and english settlers and had sold or ceded much of their land but based on treaties with the u s government they still owned huge tracts of land in the heart of the cotton growing south.
far more than the indians of the northwest or the west the five civilized tribes had adopted many white ways and customs intermarried with whites and created a unique culture based on farming and trade.
of the five tribes the cherokee nation had the most sophisticated political economic and cultural institutions.
stretching over northwest georgia alabama tennessee and north carolina 274 part iv crafting a nation people land and a national identity 1800 1848 the cherokees expected to be treated as a sovereign country.
the cherokees who had supported the british during the revolution had signed a treaty with the new united states government in 1785 and never again waged war against the united states.
they supported jackson in his battle with the creeks and lived at peace with their neighbors but that did them little good once jackson determined his course of action.
after making peace with the united states in the 1780s the cherokees took well to the european style of communication and farming.
in 1821 a cherokee warrior sequoyah intrigued by what he called the markings of written english invented an 86 character alphabet that represented the syllables of spoken cherokee.
the new alphabet caught on quickly not only in handwritten form but also in typeface for printing.
the cherokee phoenix published in both english and cherokee became an important means of communication.
sequoyah who never learned english created a similar alphabet for the choctaw language.
his achievement to invent a written language while being illiterate in all languages had never before been done.
in addition the cherokees set up a large and effective trading network with other tribes and the white community.
in 1827 they adopted a written constitution for the cherokee republic.
beginning in the 1790s christian missionaries came to live among the cherokees.
the cherokees welcomed them though most never became christians.
using sequoyahs alphabet the missionaries translated the bible into cherokee and later became some of the most heroic defenders of cherokee rights.
cherokees also cultivated cotton as their white neighbors did and some owned african slaves.
an 1825 census counted 13 563 cherokees 220 whites some of whom were married to cherokees and 1 277 african slaves in the cherokee republic.
of all the american indian tribes the cherokees were the model of assimilation that presidents from washington to jefferson claimed to want.
but white settlers and president jackson decided to ignore the assimilation.
they wanted the land.
georgia took the lead in seizing indian land.
in 1824 governor george troup announced that he was ending treaty rights for the cherokee and creek tribes.
when president john quincy adams opposed him citing the tribes treaties with the u s government troup and his successor john forsyth campaigned for jackson in 1828 in december 1828 the georgia legislature declared that starting in june 1830 georgia state laws would extend to all parts of the cherokee republic despite federal treaty agreements to the contrary.
white georgians then began moving onto cherokee lands and jackson withdrew u s troops that had been protecting the cherokees.
it was in this context that jackson addressed congress advocating an indian removal act to protect the cherokees from georgia laws.
the president gave the tribes what seemed like a choice voluntarily move west to new lands where their independence would be honored or choose to stay where they were.
but if they chose to stay they would be subject to the laws of georgia laws that said indians could not vote own property testify against a white person in court or obtain credit.
it was not much of a choice as jackson himself said in private.
the land that the government offered the tribes was completely unfamiliar to the tribes of the old southwest.
most people thought of it as simply a desert where farming would be impossible.
indian territory which eventually became the state of oklahoma was a portion of the louisiana purchase just north of texas.
the land was not empty though the government tended to treat it that way.
some of the plains tribes the wichitas kiowas kiowa apaches and especially osages had lived there for generations.
some tribes from the ohio illinois area shawnees delawares lenapes miamis kickapoos sacs and fox had been relocated to that territory after defeats by the u s army.
in addition there were a few white settlers and some slaves and former slaves seeking refuge in the region.
nevertheless under jacksons plan the government was now offering the territory to the cherokees and others of the five civilized tribes see map 10 1.
while cherokee creek chickasaw choctaw and seminole leaders had long feared just such a move and had been protesting against it many whites now rallied to their side.
in congress and the national press indian removal became a major fight.
chapter 16 conflict in the west 16 1 major battles trails cattle trail chief josephs route railroads hmmmnmm map 16 1 the plains indian wars.
as trails and then railroads brought more settlers the great battles between the u s army and the plains indians erupted all across the great plains.
cheyenne and arapaho allies.
in the 1868 treaty of fort laramie the lakota sioux led by red cloud promised to avoid war and the army agreed to abandon three provocatively placed forts.
an earlier fort laramie treaty of 1851 was negotiated simply to keep peace between the tribes and give the u s army and settlers rights of way across the plains to california and oregon.
although the 1868 fort laramie treaty could be seen as a victory for the sioux one faction led by sitting bull derided the treaty reservation life and the government annuities that were promised saying to those who signed you are fools to make yourselves slaves to a piece of fat bacon some hard tack and a little sugar and coffee indeed the treaty that sitting bull criticized did not protect the lakota or the other tribes involved.
less than a decade after the treaty was signed when gold was discovered in the black hills and miners and settlers descended on the region the government ordered the lakota to leave winter camps and settle near the agency headquarters.
the lakota resisted.
the great sioux war of 1876 77 had begun.
general george armstrong custer led a battalion of troops in an attack on the sioux who were refusing to move.
at the little bighorn river on june 25 1876 custer and his troops were surrounded by a much larger force of sioux and cheyennes.
none of the army troops survived.
it was perhaps the most famous indian victory but that success was soon followed by defeat.
less than a month after the little bighorn battle general philip sheridan led a huge force that attacked and defeated the sioux.
the government then broke up the great sioux reserve in the black hills of dakota territory creating six much smaller reservations standing rock cheyenne river lower brule crow creek pine ridge and rosebud while giving some of the best land now declared surplus to white settlers and miners.
456 part vi becoming an industrial world power costs benefits and responses 1865 1914 general william tecumseh sherman led the u s delegation in negotiations with tribal leaders which led to the fort laramie treaty of 1868 the defeats of 1876 77 along with the destruction of the great buffalo herds led to an era of depression disease and poverty for the sioux.
a little more than a decade later in 1890 the religious phenomenon that had been seen among other tribes appeared among the sioux.
a spiritual leader wovoka initiated the ghost dance movement promising a return of the buffalo and the disappearance of white people if only the sioux would take up the dance and return to their ancient ways freeing themselves of dependence on white culture.
the rise of the ghost dance frightened the white community and the army was sent to pine ridge to investigate.
a former indian agent valentine mcgillycuddy appealed for calm saying i should let the dance continue if the seventh day adventists prepare their ascension robes for the second coming of the savior the united states army is not put in motion to prevent them.
why should not the indians have the same privilege mcgillycuddy also warned that if the troops remain trouble is sure to come he was right.
one band of sioux under the leadership of big foot left the reservation while the ghost dance continued and u s troops went after them.
when big foot and his band were caught they returned to pine ridge without a fight but maintained their freedom.
the next day however those who had followed big foot were asked to surrender themselves as prisoners.
ghost dance leaders convinced them to make a stand.
it was a fatal move.
gunfire erupted on the reservation and between 100 and 200 some estimate as high as 300 indians were killed.
armed indian resistance in the west ended at wounded knee.
the sioux faced a bleak future after 1890 and it was decades before they made some of the same adjustments as the navajos and comanches.
government policy the grant peace plan and the dawes act the rapid expansion of the nation after the civil war added complex new issues to the government s indian policy.
the u s army represented the u s government to indians west of the mississippi.
before the civil war the armys goal was to limit warfare with and among the tribes while allowing white settlers transit across the great plains to california and oregon.
few whites settled on the great plains before the 1860s and the government was content to leave the plains indian tribes to themselves unless like the comanches they fought directly with the army.
the first treaty of fort laramie in 1851 did not limit indian land use except to try to keep the peace by keeping tribes ghost dance part of a religious awakening among the lakota sioux in 1890 in which they believed that if they returned to their traditional ways and ceremonies the whites would be driven from their land.
chapter 5 the making of a revolution 143 sarah franklin bache unlike her half brother william was a staunch defender of the patriot cause.
she led an effort to raise funds for the troops in the continental army and later led an effort in which philadelphia women made 2 200 shirts for the soldiers.
across new york and pennsylvania.
the attacks on farms threatened a crucial colonial food supply.
in response in the summer of 1779 washington sent perhaps a third of his army to attack the iroquois and lay waste all the settlements around that the country may not be merely overrun but destroyed from washingtons perspective the iroquois had to be stopped.
for the iroquois washingtons fierce response was proof that the american leadership would always be an implacable enemy.
both sides adopted brutal scorched earth tactics that left long lasting hatreds.
british loyalists colonists who remained loyal to britain formed their own militia and in the carolinas an army of over a thousand loyalists challenged rebel forces.
other loyalists joined british regiments.
american rebels had nothing but contempt for them.
in the new york new jersey area catherine and phillip van cortland one of the areas leading families remained loyal to britain.
when washington gained control of their part of new jersey he ordered that the van cortland house be used as an army hospital.
with her husband away catherine and her children were told to leave.
she described their february 1777 departure our youngest children could not pass a far yard where they were milking cows without wishing for some.
my little willing was almost in agonies springing in my arms and calling for milk.
i therefore rode up and requested the good man to let me have some from one of his pails the man stopped asked who we were and swore bitterly he would not give a drop to any tory bitch.
i offered him money my children screamed and as i could not prevail i drove on.
in some cities including newark new jersey in 1777 and philadelphia in 1780 the wives of missing loyalists were exiled by the american forces.
some loyalist families were able to blend back into their old homes after the war but many left for canada or england and never returned.
womens support for washingtons army in 1780 at a par ticularly bad time for the continental troops esther de berdt reed wife of the governor of pennsylvania and sarah franklin bache benjamin franklins daughter asked patriot women to give up all luxuries and contribute to a fund for the continental army.
eventually the women raised 300 000 a huge sum at the time.
the womens goal was to give 2 in hard currency to every soldier.
washington refused the offer and asked the women instead to buy cloth and sew shirts for the soldiers.
the women agreed and produced thousands of shirts for the ill clad troops.
the experience also led to the creation of the ladies association the first intercolonial organization of women in america and a model for future national organizations of women.
women throughout the colonies found additional ways to support the cause.
in fishing creek south carolina young girls went from farm to farm asking is the owner out with the fighting men if the answer was yes then they harvested the land.
in five or six weeks they had completed the harvest for the whole county saving patriot farmers from economic ruin and providing food stores for the revolutionary cause.
stories of similar efforts abounded.
the war in the south from charleston to yorktown after capturing savannah georgia in december 1778 the british attacked charleston south carolina in 1780 and on may 12 1780 that city surrendered.
the loss was significant.
if the british took control of georgia and the carolinas it would be hard to continue the resistance in the name of the united colonies and the strategy seemed to be working.
144 part iii a new birth of freedom creating the united states of america 1754 1800 as the battle for control of the south continued washington named one of his generals nathaniel greene to lead a southern campaign.
greene divided the american forces taking command of half and assigning others a contingent of maryland and virginia militias to daniel morgan an experienced officer from virginia.
the british commander lord cornwallis also divided his army between himself and lieutenant colonel banastre tarleton who had a reputation for exceptional cruelty.
while the two armies maneuvered smaller independent units fought their own battles.
not every resident of south carolina supported independence and local loyalists fought against colonial units.
throughout 1780 and 1781 the south carolina backcountry was filled with ugly and often personal conflicts.
unlike other colonies the civilian death toll was high in south carolina as a result.
morgan made a stand against the british forces in a south carolina pasture known as cowpens in january 1781 in one of the last full scale battles of the war the american troops defeated tarletons army and captured some 800 british soldiers a crucial american victory.
although the british still held charleston and small units loyal to the british harassed the revolutionaries after cowpens the americans were in control of the south carolina countryside.
cornwallis saw little chance of further success in the carolinas and marched into virginia in may 1781 he decided to fortify yorktown on the york river where he thought he could count on being resupplied by water.
as cornwalliss troops dug in at yorktown washington was in the north planning another attack on new york city.
greenes army was far to the south.
at the prodding of the french washington moved quickly to take advantage of the situation.
in september the french navy blockaded the york river and cut cornwallis off from resupply.
then supported by french troops under the count de rochambeau washington marched his own army from new york 450 miles south at surprising speed.
on september 28 washingtons 16 000 troops attacked yorktown.
the siege continued for the next 2 weeks but after failing at an attempted escape cornwallis surrendered on october 17 1781.
5 1 5j 5 3 pleading illness cornwallis actually failed to show up for the surrender ceremony which was handled by junior british officers.
but everyone knew how significant the event was.
without the army that cornwallis led british efforts to defeat the continental army were at a standstill.
chapter objective demonstrate an understanding of the changes in government and in the larger society in the times known as the reagan revolution.
a rapidly changing u s government explain reagan s impact on the united states and the world.
the changing nature of the american economy explain international economic developments that shaped the united states.
changes in the rest of the country explain cultural changes in the united states during the 1980s.
chapter 5 the making of a revolution 147 chapter 5 chapter 10 democracy in the age of andrew jackson chapter 6 creating a nation 155 6 1 5 2 6 miles 6 5 4 3 2 1 7 8 9 10 11 12 18 17 t 14 13 19 20 21 22 23 24 30 29 28 27 26 31 32 33 34 35 the survey system a township 36 square miles income from section 16 reserved for school support hone section 1 sq.
quarter quarter sections 40 acres half quarter sections pa 1 northwest territory r disputed boundary british fort superior north canada 0837 fort detroit osgrvz i z 4 all pojflf au fer p ontri0 z t c neyjf 1 fort niagara york maine mass.
iy dutclyrtan s poirtt new hampshire z massachusetts 5 vt rhode p a island 4 connecticut s s indiana b j w3 fw jnots.
f i8w7 mr 1 abm 7 f kelutky p c 0 792 x i blsk v z z m 9 t f iv tlw see 17 6 z pennsylvania 7 j no fw carolina delaware iyland atlantic ocean map 6 3 the northwest territory grid system.
the northwest ordinance divided the territory into what would become five states.
it also created a survey system in which the land would be divided into townships made up of 36 sections 35 of which would be available to settlers and one of which would be reserved to support schools.
even further south the land west of georgia that would eventually become the northern two thirds of alabama and mississippi was organized as the mississippi territory in 1798 but the territorial government there was ineffective and georgia did not give up its own claims until 1802.
the southern third of alabama and mississippi was known as west florida part of the spanish controlled territory on the countrys southern border.
while the congress tried to settle conflicting claims to the western lands the indians who had the oldest claim to the land had no inclination to give it up.
for american indians for the federal congress the greatest threat to the new united states came from american indians.
for most of the tribes who lived between the atlantic coast and the mississippi river the end of the american revolution was one more disaster among many.
despite the loyalty of the iroquois to the british during the revolution the kings government agreed to the treaty of paris in 1783 which ceded all the lands between the atlantic coast and the mississippi and south of the great lakes and canada to the new united states without consulting with their old allies.
the proclamation line limiting white settlement was gone.
among the many indian tribes even among the iroquois there were differing responses to the british failure to honor their loyalty.
many indian leaders saw no reason to honor a treaty in which they had played no part and continued to act as if much of new york and pennsylvania and all lands west of the ohio river belonged to them.
under the leadership of joseph brant the mohawks who had fought so hard for the british between 1776 and 1781 petitioned the british authorities in quebec for land on the british side of the new border and were granted a large tract in canada.
but they like other tribes did not let an international boundary limit their range of hunting or living.
new york and pennsylvania petitioned the congress for help with the indian tribes on their western frontiers and the new york legislature considered expelling all the tribes of the six nations because of their alliance with the british during the war see map 6 4.
156 part iii a new birth of freedom creating the united states of america 1754 1800 6 1 map 6 4 ohio in the 1780s.
the land that would later become the state of ohio was a battlefield in the 1780s.
while great britain included the land as part of the newly independent united states in 1783 in reality native american tribes were the dominant force in the region and they often received aid from their canadian based british allies.
through the treaty of paris the british also promised to withdraw from all forts south of the great lakes.
as a result a power vacuum was looming in the region though the british were slow to honor their commitment to leave their western forts.
rather than depend on state militia congress in 1783 began to create the u s army to occupy fort niagara near todays buffalo new york and fort pitt todays pittsburgh.
although congress could create an army its difficulty in raising funds meant that the secretary of war former general henry knox had to beg for money to keep the army paid fed and supplied which strengthened the hand of indian leaders committed to resisting white expansion.
and many meant to resist.
the iroquois were far from the only indians who began to resist american expansion violently.
these tribes had never formally agreed to peace with the new nation and they attacked both the army and the settlers.
the small battles individual attacks kidnappings and destruction of property continued as they had during the revolution.
the u s army was far too small ill trained and ill supplied to be much of a deterrent.
given how weak the army was the indians held the upper hand in the northwest territory and kentucky.
a temporary peace along the new york border was secured in october 1784 by the treaty of fort stanwix between some of the iroquois and the u s government.
but many including sagoyewatha red jacket of the seneca and joseph brant opposed the treaty and it did not hold.
in fact the indians of the northwest territory would remain virtually at war with the united states from 1785 until 1795 treaty of fort stanwix a 1784 treaty between one faction of the iroquois and the u s government that sought to end the violent battles over land in new york pennsylvania and the ohio river valley to the west.
chapter 6 creating a nation 159 r 6 1 6 2 after massachusetts new hampshire and vermont abolished slavery other northern states with more slaves moved exceedingly slowly toward gradual emancipation table 6 1.
the pennsylvania law of 1780 declared slavery disgraceful to any people but then set up a system in which the first slaves would not be freed until 1808 and the last would not be emancipated until 1847 new yorks abolition law of 1799 and new jerseys of 1804 as well as similar laws in connecticut and rhode island were equally slow in their operations.
although every northern state had started the process of ending slavery before 1800 it was almost 1850 before slavery disappeared in the north.
free blacks sometimes found work in the same households where they had been slaves.
black men worked on merchant ships whaling vessels or even in the navy.
the racially diverse crew of the whaling ship pequod in herman melvilles 1851 novel moby dick was not unusual.
in philadelphia new york providence and boston many blacks worked on the docks.
throughout the northern states more and more free blacks referred to themselves as africans or as the free african society of philadelphia said free africans and their descendants in the region encompassing delaware maryland virginia and north carolina slavery did not die out but slave life changed after the revolution.
some masters heeded the revolutionary language of freedom.
james madison freed one slave named billy because he came to fear that billys love of freedom meant he was no longer a fit companion for fellow slaves george washington wrote often of his wish that slavery could be gradually abolished and left instructions in his will that all his slaves should be free after he and martha died.
other planters in the region also freed slaves.
slaves who had run away during the war managed to establish new identities and maintain their freedom especially in cities like baltimore richmond and the new district of columbia.
by 1810 almost a quarter of the african americans in maryland a third in the district of columbia and six or seven percent in virginia and north carolina were free.
a thriving community of free people of african descent emerged.
as a sign of their growing confidence in 1792 thomas brown a black revolutionary war veteran in baltimore ran although unsuccessfully for the maryland legislature promising to represent so many hundreds of poor blacks table 6 1 the free black population in the early united states state free black population in 1790 total black population in 1790 percentage of free blacks in total black population free black population in 1810 total black population in 1810 percentage of free blacks in total black population new hampshire 630 788 80 970 970 100 vermont 255 271 94 750 750 100 massachusetts 6 001 6 001 100 7 706 7 706 100 connecticut 2 808 5 572 50 6 453 6 763 95 rhode island 3 407 4 355 78 3 609 3 717 97 new york 4 654 25 978 18 25 333 40 350 63 new jersey 2 762 14 185 19 7 843 18 694 42 pennsylvania 6 537 10 324 63 22 492 23 287 97 delaware 3 899 12 786 30 13 136 17 313 76 maryland 8 043 111 079 7 33 927 145 429 23 virginia 12 866 305 493 4 30 570 423 088 7 north carolina 4 975 105 547 5 10 266 179 090 6 kentucky 114 12 544 1 1 713 82 274 2 tennessee 361 3 778 10 1 317 45 845 3 district of columbia 2 549 7 944 32 south carolina 1 801 108 895 2 4 544 200 919 2 georgia 398 29 662 1 1 801 107 019 2 partlll american voices prince hall from slavery to equality 1797 born a slave prince hall was freed before the revolution and after the war he played a leading role in abolishing slavery in massachusetts.
hall helped create the african lodge of the masons in boston and delivered the following speech to that group.
he makes it clear that although african americans in his city are free they are far from equal still he urges his audience to take heart at the promise of freedom seen in the revolution in haiti.
now my brethren nothing is stable all things are changeable.
let us seek those things which are sure and steadfast and let us pray god that while we remain here he would give us the grace of patience and strength to bear up under all our troubles which at this day god knows we have our share of.
patience i say for were we not possessed of a great measure of it we could not bear up under the daily insults we meet with in the streets of boston much more on public days of recreation.
how at such times are we shamefully abused and that to such a degree that we may truly be said to carry our lives in our hands and the arrows of death are flying about our heads.
helpless women have their clothes torn from their backs i was told by a gentleman who saw this filthy behavior in the common that in all places he had been in he never saw so cruel behavior in all his life and that a slave in the west indies on sundays or holidays enjoys himself and friends without molestation my brethren let us not be cast down under these and many other abuses we at present are laboring under for the darkest hour is just before the break of day.
my brethren let us remember what a dark day it was with our african brethren six years ago in the french west indies.
nothing but the snap of the whip was heard from morning to evening.
hanging breaking on the wheel burning and all manner of tortures were inflicted upon those unhappy people.
but blessed be god the scene is changed.
they now confess that god hath no respect of person and therefore receive them as their friends and treat them as brothers.
thus doth ethiopia stretch forth her hand from slavery to freedom and equality.
source prince hall thus doth ethiopia stretch forth her hand from slavery to freedom and equality 1797 in manning marable and leith mullings editors let nobody turn us around voices of resistance reform and renewal lanham md rowman littlefield 2000 pp.
16 18 thinking critically 1 documentary analysis what light does hall s speech shed on race relations in boston in the late 1700s.
2 historical interpretation what connection did hall make between the revolts that would produce an independent haiti and the situation confronting african americans.
how might his analysis of events in the french west indies have differed from that of many white observers.
in this region slaves and free blacks worked in an economy that was more diverse than before the war.
by 1790 slaves in virginia and maryland for example were increasingly engaged in growing wheat a crop that required horses that needed tending plows and fertilizer.
they also worked in flour mills and the ironworks blacksmith shops and other enterprises that were springing up in the region.
some slaves were rented out and moved from job to job giving them a chance to learn more skills travel short distances make a little money and gain a taste of freedom.
other slaves from the region were far less fortunate.
in the years after the revolution with the plantations of virginia and maryland stabilized in size slave owners needed fewer slaves.
so they increased their wealth by developing a new internal market in humans.
they encouraged slaves to have more children and then as those children reached adolescence sold them as they sold other agricultural products for transport to places that needed more and more slave labor.
slaves were taken to join the white settlers who established the new states of kentucky and tennessee.
other slaves were transported to south carolina and georgia.
further south in south carolina and georgia life for slaves was very different.
some of the fiercest fighting of the revolution had disrupted almost every aspect of life in south carolina and georgia and slaves had more opportunities to run away.
with the coming of peace however the planter elite in these states was determined to reestablish a way of life that depended on slavery.
slaves represented between 40 and a new birth of freedom creating the united states of america 1754 1800 chapter 6 creating a nation 171 federalists supporters of the constitution those who favored its ratification.
antifederalists opponents of the constitution those who argued against its ratification.
participated in drafting the new document were in no mood for a fight.
they simply sent the proposed constitution to the states for their consideration even though they understood that it replaced rather than amended the articles of confederation and were aware that the constitution itself stated the conditions for its national launch ratification by only 9 of the 13 states.
however the members of congress did require that the battles about whether to adopt this radical new experiment in government would be fought on a state by state basis in conventions of specially elected delegates who would choose to ratify or not ratify the constitution.
this approach would increase the power of the voters in each state to decide instead of representatives in the political bodies of the legislatures.
in the fall of 1787 the outcome was by no means clear.
to ensure that the document they had worked so hard to create actually became the fundamental law of the united states delegates from the constitutional convention quickly went to work.
james madison one of the chief architects of the new constitution set out to persuade the state conventions to adopt it.
in the fall of 1787 he along with alexander hamilton and john jay three leaders who did not normally get along with one another wrote 85 newspaper articles to support the constitution later published as the federalist papers.
in these articles the three argued passionately that the new nation needed a strong national government and described the problems that they believed the constitution addressed.
the constitutions advocates who called themselves federalists entered the state conventions with important advantages.
they had a specific document and specific arguments on how theirs was a clear plan for improving the government.
the new constitution addressed the fears of many who would vote for delegates to the conventions and sit in them.
for those afraid of another shayss rebellion for those wanting a strong u s army to protect them from indians along the allegheny frontier and for those worried about the nations credit rating the constitution provided reassurances not found in the articles of confederation.
in contrast for those known as antifederalists people who worried that a strong national government would trample on the rights of sovereign states and the liberties of individual white male citizens the constitution offered little to calm their fears.
the constitution which lacked a bill of rights and shifted significant powers from the states to the federal government provoked attacks by many who had fought hardest against british authority in the revolution.
like many antifederalists virginias richard henry lee feared that a new consolidated government had been created and would be dominated by a coalition of monarchy men military men aristocrats and drones ratification would not be easy.
the pennsylvania legislature which met upstairs in the same building as the one the constitutional convention had met in ordered the election of delegates even before congress officially sent the constitution to the states.
although backcountry farmers in pennsylvania resisted strong government in any form the majority of delegates to the pennsylvania convention wanted to ratify the document and if possible be the first state to do so possibly securing the seat of the national government in pennsylvania.
but while pennsylvanians debated a convention in delaware unanimously adopted the constitution after only 5 days of discussion beating pennsylvania as the first state to ratify.
delegates to new jerseys convention who liked the idea that taxes on imports arriving through new york harbor would now be paid to the federal government instead of to the state of new york also ratified quickly.
they were joined by georgia which wanted immediate protection from indian raids and by connecticut which had a strong federalist party.
decisions among other states got more difficult.
172 partlll a new birth of freedom creating the united states of america 1754 1800 american voices james madison the federalist papers 1787 and patrick henrys response 1788 6 2 james madison alexander hamilton and john jay published their federalist papers as individual pieces in newspapers in the fail and winter of 1787 7 788 hamilton wrote 51 of them madison 29 jay only 5 madison s were among the most articulate arguments for a strong federal government including his argument in federalist no.
7 0 that a national government would reduce the danger of a political faction trampling on the liberties of others.
these articles were later collected as a book the federalist papers and remain one of the most often cited descriptions of the meaning of the new constitution.
but not everyone was convinced by the arguments put forward by the constitution s defenders in the federalist papers and in the various state conventions.
there was opposition to adopting the constitution in almost every state.
in virginia patrick henry one of the constitution s staunchest opponents gave a stirring speech against the proposed new form of government.
where madison placed his faith in a strong federal government henry trusted state governments as more accountable to the people and therefore more likely to protect their liberty.
james madison federalist no.
10 november 22 1787 among the numerous advantages promised by a well constructed union none deserves to be more accurately developed than its tendency to break and control the violence of faction a zeal for different opinions concerning religion concerning government and many other points as well of speculation as of practice an attachment to different leaders ambitiously contending for pre eminence and power or to persons of other descriptions whose fortunes have been interesting to the human passions have in turn divided mankind into parties inflamed them with mutual animosity and rendered them much more disposed to vex and oppress each other than to co operate for their common good.
so strong is this propensity of mankind to fall into mutual animosities that where no substantial occasion presents itself the most frivolous and fanciful distinctions have been sufficient to kindle their unfriendly passions but the most common and durable source of factions has been the various and unequal distribution of property.
those who hold and those who are without property have ever formed distinct interests in society.
those who are creditors and those who are debtors fall under a like discrimination.
a landed interest a manufacturing interest a mercantile interest a moneyed interest with many lesser interests grow up of necessity in civilized nations and divide them into different classes a rage for paper money for an abolition of debts for an equal division of property or for any other improper or wicked project will be less apt to pervade the whole body of the union than a particular member of it in the same proportion as such a malady is more likely to taint a particular county or district than an entire state.
in the extent and proper structure of the union therefore we behold a republican remedy for the diseases most incident to republican government.
and according to the degree of pleasure and pride we feel in being republicans ought to be our zeal in cherishing the spirit and supporting the character of federalists.
patrick henry speech against the federal constitution june 5 1788 patrick henry a firebrand during the revolution spoke to the virginia convention called in 1788 to consider ratifying the constitution.
although madison tried hard to persuade him to support the document henry was adamant in his opposition.
here is a resolution as radical as that which separated us from great britain the rights of conscience trial by jury liberty of the press all your immunities and franchises all pretensions to human rights and privileges are rendered insecure if not lost by this change so loudly talked of by some and inconsiderately by others.
is this tame relinquishment of rights worthy of freemen.
is it worthy of that manly fortitude that ought to characterize republicans.
guard with jealous attention the public liberty.
suspect everyone who approaches that jewel.
unfortunately nothing will preserve it but downright force.
whenever you give up that force you are inevitably ruined we are come hither to preserve the poor commonwealth of virginia if it can be possibly done something must be done to preserve your liberty and mine.
the confederation this same despised government merits in my opinion the highest encomium it carried us through a long and dangerous war it rendered us victorious in that conflict with a powerful nation it has secured us a territory greater than any european monarch possesses and shall a government which has been thus strong and vigorous be accused of imbecility and abandoned for want of energy.
i am not well versed in history but i will submit to your recollection whether liberty has been destroyed most often by the licentiousness of the people or by the tyranny of rulers.
i imagine sir you will find the balance on the side of tyranny before you abandon the present system i hope you will consider not only its defects most maturely but likewise those of that which you are to substitute for it.
may you be fully apprized of the dangers of the latter not by fatal experience but by some abler advocate than i.
thinking critically 1 documentary analysis according to madison what led to the emergence of political factions.
why did he think a strong federal government would limit the impact of factions.
2 historical interpretation compare and contrast madison s and henry s views on the new constitution.
what do they tell you about how each man saw the challenges and dangers facing the new nation.
chapter 28 the reagan revolution 28 1 28 2 28 1 the sign at this vigil in echo park los angeles reads this fruit is the product of immigrants labor.
members of the city s latino community bless fruit baskets as they protest a state crack down on illegal immigration and the increase of border patrol guards.
many immigrants also came to the united states without official approval.
the borders with mexico and canada were hard to guard and many simply walked across.
others came on tourist visas and never left.
in 1986 congress passed legislation that president reagan signed giving anyone who had been in the united states since 1982 the right to seek amnesty and 1 7 million people most from mexico took advantage of the law.
debates about immigration became intense.
in campaigning for the republican presidential nomination in 1992 patrick buchanan staked out the anti immigrant views in the strongest terms.
he said our own country is undergoing the greatest invasion in its history a migration of millions of illegal aliens yearly from mexico a nation that cannot control its own borders can scarcely call itself a state any longer in 1986 almost three quarters of california voters approved a law that made english the official language of the state.
while the law had little formal meaning it was a slap at those who spoke other languages.
some labor union leaders and workers white and black complained that new immigrants were taking their jobs or depressing wages in whole industries.
on the other hand defenders of immigration argued that the american economy was dependent on immigrants who were willing to take jobs in restaurants agriculture and home health care that few native born americans were willing to do.
would the crops get harvested the meat packaged the dishes washed and the elderly cared for if immigrants documented and undocumented were forced to leave.
immigrants are generally younger than the average population pay taxes and contribute to the social security system though in the case of those who are undocumented they may never collect benefits.
some studies they argued indicate that immigrants are more highly educated more likely to be in stable families and less likely to be engaged in crime though other scholars disputed those numbers.
while the arguments continued people kept coming.
american indians in the 1980s casinos and rebirth while their numbers were drastically reduced by war and disease american indian tribes have survived and sometimes thrived in spite of the difficulties.
as restrictions on teaching american indian languages culture and religion were lifted in the 1940s 1950s and 1960s a surprising reservoir of an earlier cultural heritage resurfaced.
for 832 part ix certainty uncertainty and new beginnings 1980 to the present american voices caridad rios adela aguirre and sasa savic talk about their immigrant experiences in the united states o single immigrant experience stands for the hundreds of thousands of people who have moved from crisis poverty or war to make new lives in the united states.
these brief interviews with caridad rios a 40 year old native of lake chapala jalisco mexico adela aguirre also from mexico and sasa savic from the former yugoslavia describe some common experiences.
caridad rios i don t believe i ll ever return to my country because of them her children.
because how could i leave them.
for better or worse they need their mother here even if they re grown this country is made up of immigrants.
from the earliest times immigrants came this country belongs to the whole world i have worked now i am receiving food stamps but who cares.
i have worked i have contributed here.
adela aguirre speaking of chinese immigrant women at the workshop she attended the first time that i began to notice that i said that yes they also feel bad they also have problems.
they also go through what i m going through so adela what are you complaining about.
that was when i began to get more interested in everything.
it was when i began to pay more attention to them.
because i said i have to learn from them.
i have to learn a lot from all my companeras but even more from them the chinese women.
first of all because they are another they are another nationality they have other customs they have another language.
and maybe the nicest thing they made me learn was just that that i realized that there are people of whatever origin or whatever nationality that will help you will motivate you.
sasa savic basically i was raised in a middle class family in the former yugoslavia.
my father was an officer in the army.
so when i finished high school i served in the army because it was mandatory for everybody to serve for 1 year.
so i did that and coming out of the army there was a lot of political problems in the country.
the country was in turmoil everybody wanted to separate from each other.
so since i m from a mixed marriage my father is serbian and my mother croatian it was impossible to choose a side and say okay i want to fight in the serbian army against croatians or the croatian army against serbian.
so we decided to elope my girlfriend at the time and i decided to get married and to try to come to this country.
it was very hard to get a visa at the time because we said we wanted to go there on our honeymoon we were granted a visitor visa.
source kathleen m coll remaking citizenship latina immigrants new american politics stanford stanford university press 2010 katherine hanson dream a new world lanham md rowman littlefield forthcoming.
thinking critically 1 documentary analysis what challenges and opportunities did these three immigrants associate with living in the united states.
2 craft an argument defend or refute the following statement the essential motives experiences and expectations of immigrants to the united states have changed very little over the centuries.
ib some tribes coyote is the perfect symbol of indian life.
coyote is the trickster who disappears and reappears as he needs to in order to survive and thrive in new contexts.
at the spirit mountain casino which is operated by the grand ronde reservation in western oregon state a picture of coyote dominates the gambling hall and the tribal logo.
it is a fitting symbol.
gambling transformed many american indian communities in the 1980s.
while often a subject of derision gambling brought prosperity to many tribes that had experienced only poverty since their first engagement with europeans.
two federal court cases seminole tribe of florida v butterworth in 1981 and californio v cabazon band of mission indians in 1987 made it difficult for states to limit gambling on indian reservations.
some of those who controlled the gambling industry did not like the idea of new competitors and donald trump complained about equal treatment under the law but the united states had always used a different set of laws for indians and treaty rights created a unique situation.
in the court cases tribes and their attorneys argued that the treaty rights creating the reservations gave them all the powers of any sovereign state to handle their own affairs.
to regularize the new industry that was emerging congress passed the indian gaming regulatory act igra in 1988 and reagan signed it.
while the court cases and legislation did not give the tribes unlimited control over their own affairs a new industry was born one that brought prosperity to some though not to others.
283 by 1994 72 tribes were operating gambling operations in half of the states and many more were planned.
the gross income of these operations 1 5 billion was only a tiny fraction of the 330 billion the americans spent on gambling but it was a huge new source of income for tribes that had existed for generations on the economic margins.
the pequots foxwoods casino produced almost 900 million in 1994 and the tribal council used the money to create other job producing enterprises including a silica mine and a printing plant.
they bought the former electric boat shipyard that helped maintain the u s nuclear submarine fleet.
their goal was long term economic development that was not dependent only on the gambling industry.
other tribes did the same.
the oneida tribe of wisconsin used the income from its slot machine complex near green bay to open a chain store and a high tech research and development firm.
the choctaws of oklahoma used income from a bingo parlor in durant to build a manufacturing plant hotels and the choctaw nation travel plaza that earned 1 4 million per month in 1992 the new wealth allowed tribes to design their own museums support retention of tribal languages and maintain aspects of their culture that were otherwise being lost.
they also allowed tribes to expand schools provide new job training programs and health services and generally support their members at a higher level.
promises of wealth also led some to rediscover their indian identity.
indians who had drifted away from reservations were now returning a change since the 1950s when a government urban relocation program had led perhaps half of all american indians to move from reservations to cities.
others who were part indian were now claiming their indian ties.
determining who was and was not a member of a specific tribe became a complex issue for some.
r david edmunds an ethnohistorian who himself is part cherokee wrote that traditionally no one questioned tribal membership if the shawnees said you were shawnee you were shawnee by the 1990s however such issues had become more complex and tribes sometimes had to make difficult decisions.
nevertheless the new prosperity was significant.
aids and the gay community in 1980 acquired immune deficiency syndrome aids was an unknown disease.
in june 1981 the center for disease control cdc the u s governments key agency for monitoring the spread of disease reported aids for the first time.
later studies found that aids may have infected people in the united states as early as 1969 but only in the 1980s did americans learn about what would quickly become a terrible new scourge first identified among gay men.
by may 1982 the new york times carried a story new homosexual disorder worries officials at first health officials did not know what the disease was.
they were starting to discover that a cluster of symptoms were appearing in certain groups of people especially homosexual men and intravenous drug users but it took some time to understand what was happening.
the symptoms were terrible tumors breathing difficulty difficult digestion and eventually death.
by 1984 researchers discovered the infectious agent the human immunodeficiency virus hiv and understood that they were not dealing with a few isolated cases but rather a growing worldwide pandemic.
in 1985 the cdc recorded 5 600 deaths from aids.
three years later 61 816 died of aids.
by then researchers had also concluded that hiv was spread through contact with bodily fluids especially but not exclusively through sex or through sharing needles or even blood transfusions that brought the blood of an infected person into contact with another.
people with many sexual partners and people who routinely shared needles were especially susceptible.
hiv they also concluded could not be spread by a hug by touching the same material or through the air but many people panicked and would not come near anyone suspected of carrying the disease.
as hiv aids spread the cdc confirmed 98 835 cases by 1988 the famous and the unknown were afflicted.
the actor rock hudson who often played tough 834 part ix certainty uncertainty and new beginnings 1980 to the present heterosexual male roles but was gay announced in july 1985 that he had been suffering from aids since 1984 many including hudsons good friend ronald reagan were stunned.
hudson died in 1985 arthur ashe a famous tennis star announced in april 1992 that he had contracted aids through a blood transfusion in the mid 1980s and he died in february 1993 in 1987 a previously unknown teenager ryan white became a national voice for aids victims.
white who suffered from hemophilia had contracted aids from blood treatments but was then ostracized and expelled from school in his hometown of kokomo indiana.
he died in april 1990 whites gentle personality made him a hero.
in addition to white ashe and hudson thousands of other americans were suffering and dying.
in some communities with large groups of gay men especially san franciscos castro district and new york citys greenwich village it seemed as if a whole community was dying and those who survived spent their time caring for the sick and attending funerals.
as people understood more about the disease they also turned to the federal government for action.
the government could not stop aids but it could fund research that might lead to treatment and cure.
the government could also spread information more effectively than any other agency especially as it became known that using condoms during sex resulted in significantly safer if not completely safe sex and that using sterilized needles and not sharing them offered significant protection for drug users.
but the call for government action crashed into the ideology of many of the leading players in the reagan administration.
the presidents director of communications patrick buchanan had once said the poor homosexuals.
they have declared war on nature and now nature is exacting an awful retribution other reagan supporters including secretary of education william bennett may not have agreed with buchanan but they strongly opposed supporting condom use.
requests by scientists at the cdc for more research funds were routinely denied.
when the u s surgeon general c everett koop himself very conservative on matters of sex education decided that it was his duty to get information out to the public on the dangers of aids and how to reduce those dangers he said he realized i would have to skate fast on thin ice to get by political appointees who placed conservative ideology over saving lives after koop issued his first report members of the domestic policy council suggested revisions that koop believed would undermine its effectiveness.
only in 1987 did reagan speak publically about aids for the first time.
breaking a silence that had irritated many including nancy reagan the president called aids public enemy number one but he continued to refuse to acknowledge or meet ryan white or mention condoms until after he left office in 1989 gay activists became increasingly militant.
in the fall of 1987 act up aids coalition to unleash power staged a massive demonstration of 500 000 people in new york city.
in addition act up and other organizations including the american foundation for aids research continued to lobby for better public education which in the 1990s was very effective.
eventually in 1992 congress appropriated approximately 2 billion for aids research.
while no cure or medical prevention has yet been discovered important advances in the treatment of aids came as a result.
aids had once been a death sentence but by 2000 many with aids were living long and full lives as long as they continued to monitor their treatments carefully.
in combining issues of medical science health sexuality and drug use the aids epidemic illustrated a tangle of cultural issues facing the nation as it entered the 1990s.
mbhmkhhhk across the country gay and lesbian organizations especially act up shown here demonstrated to demand more funding for research into the causes and cures for aids as well as support for immediate help to aids victims.
283 quick review how did cultural and technological changes in the united states in the 1980 impact each other and government policy.
chapter 23 living in a world at war 23 1 23 2 selective service system federal agency that coordinated military conscription the draft beginning in world war ii.
and other coastal cities refused to turn their lights off and the submarines used the bright city lights to target shipping.
in 3 months the germans sunk 216 ships half of them tankers with essential oil for britain.
burned out ships littered the american beaches.
in the summer of 1942 german forces were besieging the soviet union while their planes bombed britain.
the german submarine fleet shifted from the u s coast to atlantic convoys hitting them especially hard in midocean where little help was possible.
in july 1942 a convoy of 34 allied ships headed for the russian ports of murmansk and archangel was attacked in the norwegian sea and 23 of the 34 ships were sunk.
german admiral donitz was confident and the americans british and russians fearful that the allied forces simply could not continue in the face of such losses.
japan controlled the whole of the western pacific see map 23 2.
in august 1942 u s forces invaded the tactically important island of guadalcanal in the solomon islands and renamed its airfield henderson field.
a counter invasion from japan came close to success.
the reporter john hersey staying with the troops on the island told readers the uniforms the bravado the air of wearing a knife in the teeth these were just camouflage.
the truth was all over their faces.
these were just american boys.
they did not want that valley or any part of its jungle.
they were ex grocery clerks ex highway laborers ex bank clerks ex schoolboys t hey had joined the marines to see the world or to get away from a guilt or most likely to escape the draft not knowingly to kill or be killed.
but there they were.
with navy support the marines on guadalcanal held their position.
the japanese forces were beaten back until in february 1943 in a move they seldom made during the war the japanese abandoned guadalcanal.
men in the military volunteers and draftees as the war began young men quickly found themselves in uniform.
sixteen million men had registered for the draft when the war began more soon after and others volunteered in anticipation of an expanding draft.
the draft was administered by the selective service system through 6 443 local draft boards that decided who was eligible for various deferments for married men for those with children for those in crucial war work that were granted less and less often.
lloyd kilmer began life on a dairy farm but was working as a bellhop at a hotel in rochester minnesota when he heard the news of pearl harbor.
six months later kilmer enlisted in the army air corps and flew combat missions over europe until he was shot down in june 1944 u s troops liberated his prisoner of war camp in april 1945 growing up in the immigrant neighborhood of east boston massachusetts during the depression al fossett ascribed his success on the high school track team to pretending that he was running after something to eat.
when war came he was stationed in british india where he served as a gunner on planes that flew supplies from india to beleaguered chinese forces.
woodrow w crockett was born in texarkana arkansas and joined the army as a private in 1940 in 1942 he was assigned to the tuskegee airmen an african american unit that achieved considerable distinction in world war ii.
he flew 149 combat missions during the u s invasion of italy and received the distinguished flying cross.
most of those who served were white males like kilmer and fossett.
the great depression shaped their childhood and they liked the food and security of the army even when they were frightened.
only a minority were enthusiastic about serving while most were willing to do a job they believed needed to be done.
in the process they met a greater diversity of people than any previous generation of americans and saw more of the world and its people.
660 part vii war prosperity and depression 1890 1945 soviet n r 500 1 000 kilometers map 23 2 japanese power in the pacific.
in the early months of world war ii japan extended its reach through much more of the pacific region from the aleutian islands off alaska to borneo and new guinea in the south pacific.
guadalcanal aug 1942 feb 1943 j new x hebrides br.
z fiji xc br.
coral new caledonia m sea br.
u s air strikes major battles allied advances allied air offenses japanese territory at surrender farthest extent of japanese control 1942 i allied nations i l neutral nations limit of japanese control after pearl harbor deferments alternative service and war work not everyone served in the military.
the selective service allowed local draft boards considerable discretion.
throughout most of the south draft boards which were nearly all white showed a deep aversion to putting black men in uniform and giving them guns with the result that they had to dip much deeper into the pool of white men offering whites few deferments.
congress allowed young men to complete college so that as one draft board member reported fathers in their middle thirties were being inducted from their stores garages and other businesses while they saw younger single men sitting in classrooms.
a november 1942 law the tydings amendment exempted agricultural workers from the draft.
men in key war industries and some who would not fight for religious reasons were also sometimes exempted.
other americans found themselves in new jobs they had never before imagined.
charles briscoes family left the dust bowl for california where he learned sheet metal work.
in 1940 he took a job at boeing aircraft in wichita kansas building the supersecret b 29 long range bomber.
briscoe remembered we knew the b 017s and b 24s didnt have the range to get to japan.
we had to have the b 29 to win the war and get the men home from over there at 14 ed powers was too young for the military but chapter 23 living in a world at war 21j i i t 23 2 111 3 1 1 21 he joined his father who was too old to serve in patrolling their hometown to be sure that everyone was honoring the blackout to avoid a german bombing.
joseph bullock was among the 43 000 conscientious objectors who in the words of selective service regulations by reason of religious training and belief is conscientiously opposed to participation in war in any form the largest number of cos as they were called some 25 000 served as noncombatants in the military providing first aid to troops under extraordinarily dangerous conditions or behind the lines logistical support.
those who for religious reasons could not support the war effort in any form were allowed to work in civilian public service.
bullock and the 12 000 cps men worked on forestry projects planting trees and building roads or staffing mental hospitals.
they received no pay had to cover their own expenses and did not receive veteran benefits at the end of the war.
a final group of some 6 000 refused out of conscience to have anything to do with the selective service system and these men were sent to federal prison.
some of them like david dellinger became lifelong antiwar activists.
in some areas cos were treated with respect in others they met deep hostility.
harry van dyck remembered being told you goddamn cos should all be shot after the war bullock was told that he could not teach sunday school because his wartime service made him an inappropriate role model for christian children.
when 40 percent of the 21 year olds who signed up for the first draft registration in late 1940 then got married general hershey announced that he would consider that recent marriages might have been for the purpose of evading the draft when the draft was expanded to include married men most fathers were still exempted leading one young couple to name their new child weatherstrip because he kept his father out of the draft.
however as the need grew fathers were also drafted and by 1945 nearly a million fathers were in the service.
women in military service early in the war there was some talk of conscripting women if not for the military then for wartime industrial work.
in the end however the united states unlike great britain or the soviet union left it up to individual women to decide whether they wanted to serve.
each of the branches of the military enlisted women in special noncombat units that freed men for combat the u s army established the womens auxiliary army corps or waacs later the auxiliary was dropped and they became the wacs the young women begin their service as wacs during world war ii.
662 part vii war prosperity and depression 1890 1945 u s navy created the women accepted for voluntary emergency service or waves the army air corps set up the womens auxiliary service pilots or wasps the coast guard launched the womens reserve of the coast guard nicknamed the spars and the marines organized an unnamed womens branch.
some 350 000 women compared with over 15 million men served in uniform during world war ii.
claudine scottie scott remembered her freshman year at the university of kansas in the fall of 1940 as a fun and exciting time but by the following year the world had become a much more serious place.
scott volunteered for the waves and was assigned to the joint chiefs of staff to deliver the log of fighting going on all over the world to the white house every day.
she was at the white house and saw president roosevelt on the day of the allied invasion of europe in 1944 but her focus was on the fate of her boyfriend who was part of the invading force.
he was wounded but returned home and they were married in the veterans hospital in richmond virginia.
martha settle grew up in norristown pennsylvania.
as an african american she experienced racism within the war manpower commission.
she applied and was selected by mary mcleod bethune for one of the few officer slots allowed to african american wacs.
margaret ray grew up in indiana and was recruited into a small elite unit of wasps within the army air force that handled domestic military flying so men could be freed up to fly overseas.
here i was this farm girl ray remembered and it was so exciting mary louise roberts became a nurse with the army.
she commanded a field operating room for troops during the landings in casablanca north africa in 1943 and on anzio beach in italy in 1944 rosie the riveter and her friends just before the attack on pearl harbor 12 million women in the united states held jobs a dramatic increase from the depths of the depression.
middle class white women tended to be teachers nurses social workers or secretaries.
in the course of the war more than 6 million more women entered the workforce.
some 2 million women went to work in previously all male defense plants where they sometimes made up half of the workforce.
women also constituted a quarter of the workers in the converted auto industry that was producing tanks and trucks.
on the west coast 500 000 women worked in the aircraft industry and 225 000 in shipbuilding.
they made more money than most women had ever made.
they took on hard jobs that before the war people thought only men could handle or from which tradition law and all male unions had excluded them.
but even during wartime women were often relegated to the lower rungs of the industrial order while men took on the highest skilled highest paying jobs.
drilling rivets was high skill and high pay work and in spite of the rosie the riveter name and public relations posters far more women worked in routine production jobs.
women working in industrial plants had to develop a new fashion style that provided room for safe movement including pants which made movement much easier than a skirt and short hair which was essential around dangerous machinery.
in addition they had to develop a tough attitude in the face of catcalls and wolf whistles.
delana jensen made 155 millimeter howitzers for the army.
she was hired when the plant was still not sure whether women could handle the work but within months she was training men.
it was exacting work and had to be perfect within 1 1 000th of an inch.
she liked the denim coveralls and remembered we were living in a special time and place.
there was an energy in the air and in the people.
we were wanted and needed and important to the war effort.
i women working at the douglas aircraft plant in long beach californj gender diversity was common as women often constituted half of tl labor force in the industrial plants.
racial diversity was less common.
chapter 17 the gilded age building a technological and industrial giant and a new social ordei 112 173 of j.
however by the time the two met morgan informed cleveland since morgan always had the most up to date financial information that there was but 9 million in gold still available and that a 10 million draft was on its way.
the banker told the president you cant meet it.
it will be over before three oclock morgan also had a solution to offer.
he reminded the president and the treasury secretary of a long forgotten piece of civil war legislation that said the secretary of the treasury may purchase coin with any of the bonds or notes of the united states authorized by law at such rates and upon such terms as he may deem most advantageous to the public interest he then offered 65 million in gold in return for 30 year government bonds.
the president asked morgan whether he could promise that the deal which not only provided gold but put the full faith and credit of the house of morgan behind the credit of the united states would end the rush on the treasury and morgan said yes sir i will guarantee it the deal worked.
european bankers who had lost faith in the united states had faith in morgan.
they bought the bonds and stopped demanding payments in gold.
the government had been protected from going the way of national cordage and the reading railroad.
the publisher joseph pulitzer called the deal an excellent arrangement for the bankers but f or the nation it means a scandalous surrender of credit and a shameful waste of substance morgan made a fortune on the deal but also saved the u s economy.
in the absence of any federal bank the house of morgan essentially served that role until the federal reserve bank was created in 1916 no project of j p morgans was as great however as the one he launched in 1900 it began with the kind of competition that morgan always hated.
illinois steel which morgan had helped finance was making a direct run at carnegie steel for control of the market.
charles schwab one of carnegies partners organized a holiday dinner with morgan to see whether they could work out a deal to end the competition.
carnegie had talked of retiring and his wife was anxious for him to enjoy life and devote himself full time to his charities.
carnegie was asked his price and after a nights sleep offered to sell carnegie steel for 480 million.
morgan agreed and later shook carnegies hand saying mr.
carnegie i want to congratulate you on being the richest man in the world morgan schwab and elbert gary the head of illinois steel then negotiated with rockefeller whom morgan disliked personally to buy out rockefellers ownership of iron deposits in the mesabi range and the ore boats that went with them.
in march 1901 morgan announced the creation of the u s steel corporation bringing together carnegies formidable assets illinois steel the rockefeller iron mines and other assets worth a total of 1 4 billion the largest corporation ever seen at the time.
the giant monopoly corporation was now the dominating fixture of the u s economy.
quick review how did the businessmen of the gilded age and their tactics revolutionize american industry.
whom do you think had the greatest impact.
lives of the middle class in the gilded age analyze daily life popular ideas and political direction for the middle class during the gilded age.
173 during the gilded age what came to be known as middle class values emerged in the united states.
more americans than ever before achieved a level of comfort and social respectability that while it was a long way from the wealth of the rockefellers carnegies and morgans was also a long way from the poverty of most of rural america or those who worked on the railroads or in the refineries.
as americans moved from farms to towns some of the urban residents became comfortable professionals and managers and in the process created a set of norms for middle class respectability that had not been known before.
part vi becoming an industrial world power costs benefits and responses 1865 1914 middle class life and expectations john lewis came to the united states from great britain before the civil war and got a job in the wholesale grocery business in new york city by the 1870s lewis was the proprietor of his own store and a solid member of americas emerging urban middle class.
while achieving a middle class life for himself and his family lewis wrote letters to his brother in england describing his life.
for the christmas of 1875 lewis took the train to visit relatives in philadelphia.
in addition to the feasting which greatly impressed lewis he also noted the christmas tree decorations as large and fine a tree as can be accommodated being procured and set up it is covered with every conceivable shape into which coloured and gilt paper and card can be cut and little pictures glass balls chains garlands c anything to make a gay and imposing display.
lewis also noted that the enjoyment of the trees seemed to be a prime adult occupation while the children wanted candy.
he noted the candy stores are among the gayest and most prosperous and the consumption of their wares by women and children all the year round is enormous and is often spoken of by writers as a great national failing in maintaining his own store traveling easily from city to city celebrating holidays with feasts decorations and parties lewis was participating in the emerging middle class culture of the late 1800s.
before the civil war christmas celebrations among american protestants were limited affairs but after the war the fondness for that holiday and the economic resources to celebrate more grandly than ever before grew rapidly.
a larger group of people had the resources to own homes decorate them and travel to visit relatives than in any previous generation in the united states.
those in the rising urban middle class were redesigning not only their private homes but also their expectations particularly for city buildings and services that supported their emerging tastes and desires.
huge new department stores offered the opportunity to shop for the things that middle class people like john lewis wanted in their lives.
the architect daniel burnham the leading voice of what came to be known as the city beautiful movement designed public buildings in a classical style that showed a permanence and beauty that this emerging class expected.
city beautiful planned major revitalization efforts in washington dc cleveland san francisco and chicago designing buildings such as the grand new boston public library based on the model of a renaissance palazzo the new building for the library of congress which was completed in 1897 and the new new york stock exchange that opened in 1903 classical style that characterized the movement.
chapter objective demonstrate an understanding of the changes in the united states as the threat of communism ended new foreign problems arose and new economic and technological issues shaped the country.
learning objectives the bush administration 1989 1993 explain the new world order that george bush described.
the clinton presidency analyze the impact of the clinton presidency and the clinton gingrich conflict on the country.
technology dominates an era analyze the changes in technology and their impact on u s culture.
on inauguration day january 20 1989 as ronald reagan left the white house the nation was prosperous his loyal vice president was replacing him and perhaps even more significant the long cold war with the soviet union seemed to be coming to an end.
george h w.
bush would lead the nation in a very different international context than any predecessor since world war ii.
in april 1989 just after bushs inauguration the communist government of poland with gorbachevs permission legalized the prodemocracy solidarity and agreed to free elections.
in june for the first time in history a communist government was voted out of office and yielded power peacefully to its non communist successor.
that fall hungary followed the same course and ousted its communist government.
demonstrations in east germany led to a change in leadership and on november 9 the berlin wall that had divided the city and europe for almost 30 years came down.
with the fall of the berlin wall berliners who had never met each other embraced and celebrated.
leaders of east and west germany talked of unification which came 2 years later.
in december czechoslovakia inaugurated a non communist government.
what had begun as a conversation between two leaders in a house in iceland in 1986 had become by 1989 what the new president called a new world order the end of the cold war drastically changed u s foreign policy and allowed 838 part ix certainty uncertainty and new beginnings 1980 to the present significant dates at the berlin wall which had divided the city for almost 30 years people from east and west greeted each other and celebrated a new freedom.
1989 1991 1993 29 1 29 1 people to see the world differently.
tracing the changes in u s foreign policy and politics in the post cold war world as well as the domestic changes especially those brought about by technology in the decade after the cold war ended is the focus of this chapter 2.
after hard fighting mexico city surrendered in september 1847 polk still worried about military heroes then removed scott from command in early 1848 the united states had lost 12 518 soldiers and spent almost 100 million in the war.
mexico had lost many more lives soldiers and civilians and its economy was devastated.
from new mexico to alta california and the bear flag revolt while the major focus of the fighting in the u s war with mexico took place on the texas border and in the heartland of mexico new mexico and california were not exempt from battles though they were of smaller scale than anything seen elsewhere.
the initial u s conquest of new mexico was easy.
in the summer of 1846 general stephen watts kearny marched 850 miles from fort leavenworth kansas to santa fe.
the mexican governor had already fled and kearny took silence and sullenness among the people for support or at least acceptance of the american takeover.
he raised the u s flag in santa fe and promised that the government would respect the residents property and religious freedom as well as protect them from indian raids.
kearny appointed charles bent an american already living in taos as territorial governor.
then in september 1846 a month after he had arrived kearny marched most of his troops off to secure the us.
victory in california.
although a bloody rebellion against u s rule by hispanics and indians broke out later that year and bent himself was killed by the rebels u s troops soon suppressed it and most armed resistance to annexation ended.
emboldened by this show of support a group of armed american immigrants in the inland town of sonoma arrested general mariano vallejo the man they considered the symbol of mexican authority in sonoma and jailed him at fort sutter near sacramento.
vallejo had retired from active duty with the mexican government and was quite friendly to a possible american takeover.
but to the americans vallejo symbolized mexican authority.
with no other mexican leader in sight the rebels organized what they called the bear flag revolt by declaring california to be an independent republic.
they also designed a flag and raised it in the town square in sonoma.
the flag displayed a large star next to a grizzly bear atop a bottom border stripe and the words california republic to the mexicans like vallejo the bear flag was a symbol that these new immigrants were the bears who came as a thief to take their cattle and their land.
soon after vallejos arrest sloats u s navy squadron sailed into monterey bay and proclaimed u s conquest of california as a victory in the war with mexico.
the independent california republic was a short lived convenience.
the rebels replaced the bear flag now the state flag of california with the stars and stripes.
the american conquest of california was much easier than the war along the rio grande in texas.
the mexican government was much less interested in california than in texas a reality that had allowed a unique californian culture to develop in the early decades of the 19th century.
mexican citizens of california the products of this culture had a decidedly ambivalent attitude toward annexation by the united states.
nevertheless some native californians opposed the american takeover and fought against the bear flag rebels and the american forces led by navy commodore robert stockton who had replaced sloat and captain fremont.
those californians saw themselves as citizens of the republic of mexico even if sometimes disgruntled citizens and they saw the americans as an invading army.
in a series of skirmishes between 1846 and 1847 35 of those fighting on the american side died in battle while an estimated eight californios those fighting for the mexican cause were killed.
later the californios suffered much greater losses in property and indeed their way of life.
chapter 7 practicing democracy 181 180 part iii a new birth of freedom creating the united states of america 1754 1800 73 the constitution had replaced a weak national government with a strong one but the amendments meant that the new government would operate within clear limits.
7 1 quick review why was the bill of rights added to the constitution.
7 2 73 creating an economy alexander hamilton and the u s economic system analyze the enduring argument begun by hamilton s economic vision for the united states and the alternative vision of jefferson and madison.
7 2 president washington faced difficult problems many of them economic.
the inability of the federal government under the articles of confederation to collect taxes meant that federal debts were not being paid and that the financial status of the united states was in serious trouble.
the government could not afford an army sufficient to protect the frontier.
tensions with britain were made worse because britain had not withdrawn its troops from western forts as promised in the treaty of paris and because london merchants who were owed large sums from americans were angry.
although the continental congress had adopted the dollar as the national currency in 1785 there was no official currency congress state governments and private banks had printed a variety of paper notes all of which could be easily counterfeited and the ease with which they were put into circulation led to inflation.
in the new united states as during much of the colonial era people bought and sold with an amazing variety of paper notes and coins from around the world especially spanish gold and silver.
solving the financial crisis and regulating the currency was essential for national prosperity.
in the summer of 1789 congress adopted a five percent customs tax on all imports into the united states creating a solid financial footing for the new government.
it also set up a system of federal courts and approved the establishment of four senior positions within the executive branch secretaries of state war and the treasury and an attorney general.
these four officials became the first presidential cabinet.
washington quickly appointed thomas jefferson then u s ambassador to paris as his secretary of state general henry knox his deputy in command throughout the revolution as secretary of war and his friend the former governor of virginia edmund randolph as attorney general.
but given the nations financial problems the most important and powerful position would be secretary of the treasury and to that office washington appointed new yorker alexander hamilton.
a brilliant and ruthless political infighter hamilton could handle the economic crisis better than anyone else even if washington also knew from bitter experience that he could never completely trust hamilton who had served as washingtons chief aide during the revolution and had sometimes gone behind his commanders back or quarreled directly with him.
the secretary of the treasury s key role on his first full day on the job secretary hamilton negotiated a 50 000 loan from the bank of new york to keep the new government solvent.
he also set about creating a customs service to collect the five percent import tax that congress had already passed and he organized what would become the u s coast guard to be sure that imports were not smuggled into the country without being taxed.
hamilton had once said i hate procrastination in business and he was not about to make a slow start on the new job.
ten days after his appointment the house of representatives asked him for a report on the public credit of the united states the most pressing national issue m virtually everyones view and gave him until january to prepare it.
182 part iii a new birth of freedom creating the united states of america j 754 1800 debt and taxes hamiltons report relative to a provision for the support of public credit was the foundation of the economic development of the new nation.
hamilton had read widely in philosophy and economics as if preparing for the moment when he would be asked to design a new economic system.
as he looked at the crushing debt that the nation faced from the revolution 54 million in federal debt and 25 million more in state debts he knew that radical action was required.
few people including foreign and domestic investors and foreign governments trusted the new countrys ability to pay its bills.
as a result neither the state and federal governments nor private businesses could borrow money.
the government could not finance desperately needed activities including the creation of an army.
private businesses could not restart commerce which had been mostly frozen since the revolution.
revolutionary war veterans who had been paid in government promissory notes had sold them for as little as 15 cents on the dollar rather than trust a government that seemed untrustworthy to pay what it had promised.
in this crisis hamilton saw only one solution.
the federal government he believed needed to assume all of the revolutionary war debt state and federal and promise to pay it all off dollar for dollar while establishing a tax policy that would show wary observers that the government would meet its obligations.
credit is the entire thing hamilton argued.
not everyone in congress agreed.
to hamiltons surprise his close ally in the fight over adopting the constitution james madison led the opposition to debt assumption in the house and more quietly secretary of state jefferson led similar opposition within the administration.
states like virginia and north carolina that had paid off most of their own war debts were unhappy with the idea that they would pay taxes to cover the debts of what they considered less responsible states like massachusetts and south carolina.
veterans who had sold their government promissory notes at highly depreciated rates during the 1780s to eat and live were appalled that the civilian speculators to whom they had sold them would get rich on the 100 percent payment of the debt.
and for those who shared jeffersons view of a democratic nation of small farmers hamiltons plan created a national government that was too big would raise too much in taxes sustain a standing army and shift power from farmers to urban and commercial interests.
they would have none of it.
in the spring of 1790 the house led by madison rejected hamiltons proposals each of four times he submitted it.
ever the wily politician hamilton sought a compromise and secretary of state jefferson made it happen.
many years later jefferson told the story of how he hosted a dinner at his home in new york at which he madison and hamilton struck a deal by which each one got something that he considered important.
hamilton wanted new york city his home and the nations commercial center to be the permanent u s capital.
but others especially jefferson and madison wanted to locate the capital further south.
they disliked the difficult travel to new york and they also disliked urban life.
they feared that a northern capital would fuel northern antislavery tendencies in congress.
not incidentally madison like george washington owned land on the potomac river that would become more valuable if the capital were nearby.
if hamilton would agree to support jefferson and madison on the location of the capital then the two virginians would support hamiltons economic plan.
in july congress made the compromise official.
philadelphia not new york was designated as the new temporary capital and the law also stipulated that a 10 square mile site on the potomac river between maryland and virginia should become the nations permanent capital.
they gave president washington a free hand to select the specific site and plan the new center of government.
congress also passed hamiltons financial plan including the assumption of state debts by the federal government.
henceforth the new nation would have a government on a solid financial footing with a guaranteed credit rating just as hamilton wanted.
this painting of alexander hamilton ca.
1804 was done by the artist john trumbull after hamilton had left office.
hamilton s fiscal program was controversial from the beginning but it launched the nation s economy in a commercial direction and also created political division that continued for decades in the united states.

chapter you read about tensions that developed between settlers and american indians in the west after the civil war.
the nez perce for centuries nez perce indians had roamed the area where oregon washington and idaho come together today.
the nez perce saved the lewis and clark expedition from starvation in 1805 as settlers moved west american indians were pushed off their lands and onto reservations.
in 1877 when the nez perce resisted relocation the u s army chased them and their leader chief joseph almost to canada.
the indians surrendered and were sent to a barren reservation where many died.
the homestead act and the pacific railway act during the civil war two government acts aroused new interest in the west.
the homestead act of 1862 gave homesteaders a plot of land to cultivate.
the pacific railway act of 1862 resulted in the building of a transcontinental railroad that made it easier for settlers to travel westward.
railroad builders miners ranchers and cowboys and homesteaders the completion of the first transcontinental railroad built by chinese and irish immigrants ex soldiers mexicans and freed slaves in 1869 opened the west to a flood of new settlers.
miners came in search of gold and silver.
ranchers and cowboys introduced large scale cattle ranching to the great plains.
homesteaders turned the great plains into the most productive wheat producing region in the world.
war on the plains the flow of settlers led to changes in federal policy toward american indians.
under the indian removal act of 1830 indians had been promised lands in the great plains in exchange for giving up their homelands in the east.
in 1867 congress tried to force american indians onto reservations promising them food farm tools and schools in exchange for their land.
ongoing wars between settlers soldiers and plains indians came to a head in the battle of the little big horn also known as custer s last stand in june 1876 the indians won the battle but the u s army soon tracked them down and forced them onto reservations.
most american indians had been moved onto reservations by 1887 they would never again freely roam across the west.
settlers rush to claim land in the oklahoma territory in 1893 tensions in the w reading further bo forjansas.
brethren friends fellowcitizens i feel thankful to inform you that the real estate and homestead association will leave here the 15th ol april 1878 in pursuit of homes in the southwestern lands of america at transportation kates cheaper than ever was known before.
for full information inquirt f benj.
singleton better known as old pap jsro.
e rrortia fbontstbeet.
beware of speculator and adventurer os it ia a dangeom thing to fall in their hand.
nashville tenn march 18 1878 promotional fliers urged migration to kansas in the 1870s.
some of these fliers made exaggerated claims which helped to promote kansas fever.
black exodus in the 1870s the end of reconstruction and the return of white man s rule caused many african americans to flee the south.
thousands moved west hoping to start a new life as homesteaders on the great plains.
what they found there was not a paradise but it did give them a taste of freedom.
in 1879 a remarkable event took place across the south.
thousands of african americans left their homes and set out on a great migration.
some of them traveled on foot following roads leading west.
others crowded onto the banks of the mississippi to catch riverboats bound for st louis.
from there they moved on to kansas and other western states.
the migrants called exodusters were part of a migration known as the exodus of 1879 the exodusters were trying to escape hardship and oppression in the south.
after reconstruction conditions had worsened for southern blacks.
white leaders restricted black voting rights and imposed segregation through jim crow laws.
they passed black codes laws that restricted african americans freedoms.
some of the laws prevented blacks from buying or leasing land thus keeping them under the control of white landowners.
whites also used violence to terrorize black communities.
although slavery had ended most african americans in the south still did not feel free.
as one black texan c p hicks noted in 1879 there are no words which can fully express or explain the real condition of my people throughout the south nor how deeply and keenly they feel the necessity of fleeing from the wrath and long pent up hatred of their old masters.
me migrants were not only being pushed out of the south by h conditions.
they were also being pulled out by the prospects of a bri er future elsewhere.
for many that future seemed to lie in kansas.
many southern bl believed that kansas was the promised land a place where they cc own their own land and live as free men and women.
this dream c not turn out quite the way they imagined.
but despite great challer many of the migrants would still find a better life outside the soutl black pioneers the 1879 exodus was not the first time african americans had gone west.
black explorers trappers and missionaries had roamed the west had gone west to seek their fortune in the early 1800s.
black miners during the california gold rush.
484 chapter 1 1 3 the first americans adapt to the environment american indians lived in a variety of places from snowy forests to dry deserts and vast grasslands.
each of these kinds of places is an environment.
an environment includes everything that surrounds us land water animals and plants.
each environment also has a climate or longterm weather pattern.
groups of american indians survived by adapting or changing their style of living to suit each environment its climate and its natural resources.
using natural resources american indians learned to use the natural resources in their environments for food clothing and shelter.
in the frigid regions of the far north early americans survived by hunting caribou in the summer and sea mammals in the winter.
they fashioned warm hooded clothing from animal skins.
to avoid being blinded by the glare of the sun shining on snow they made goggles out of bone with slits to see through.
the people of the north lived most of the year in houses made from driftwood and animal skins.
in winter hunters built temporary shelters called igtus ig looz out of blocks of snow.
in warmer climates american indians gathered wild plants.
then about 7 000 years ago they learned to raise crops such as squash chili peppers beans and corn.
growing their own food enabled them to settle in one place instead of following animals or searching for edible plants in the wild.
these early farmers built the first villages and towns in america.
the tents in this inuit in oo it camp in northern alaska were made from seal and caribou skins.
the inuit used the inflated sealskins hanging from the poles as floats.
american indian cultural regions over generations groups of american indians developed their own cultures or ways of life.
many became part of larger groupings that were loosely organized under common leaders.
groups living in the same type of environment often adapted in similar ways.
forest dwellers often lived in houses covered with tree bark while many desert peoples made shelters out of branches covered with brush.
using such artifacts items made by people historians have grouped american indian peoples into cultural regions.
a cultural region is made up of people who share a similar language and way of life.
by the 1400s between 1 and 2 million american indians lived in ten major cultural regions north of mexico.
later in this chapter 13 cultured and in the eyes of northerners lazy.
the frontier settlers who sought their fortunes in the west were seen as rugged hardy and in the eyes of people on the east coast crude.
many of the countrys leaders knew they would have to overcome geographical obstacles and stereotypes to truly unite the country.
one idea they favored was an ambitious program of building roads and canals to make transportation easier and faster.
symbols and values uniting the nation required more than building roads and waterways.
citizens needed to feel american.
one way to accomplish this was to build on americans pride in their government.
after the british burned washington d c during the war of 1812 congress hired architects to rebuild the white house and the capitol in a style that would equal the grand stately buildings of europe.
congress complained about the cost but not about the result.
these magnificent buildings are admired to this day as national symbols.
another national symbol was born during this period uncle sam.
legend has it that the name came from sam wilson a new york butcher.
uncle sam it was said had provided the army with meat during the war of 1812 more likely the name was made up to match the initials u s for united states.
after the war uncle sam became a popular nickname for the federal government.
a national identity requires more than symbols.
citizens need to share values as well.
white american men saw themselves as devoted to individualism and equality.
their commitment to these values may not have extended to enslaved african americans american indians or women.
still they were united in the belief that they were different and better than europeans.
alexis de tocqueville sensed this feeling just four days into his visit.
the americans carry national pride to an altogether excessive length he noted.
by the end of his trip however he had come to admire this distinctly american spirit.
that spirit was reflected in every aspect of life from politics to art music and literature.
the u s capitol shown here in an 1824 painting after the structure was rebuilt following the war of 1812 is a powerful symbol of national unity.
a growing sense of nationhood 245 james monroe was the last president to have fought in the american revolution.
when he ran for reelection no one opposed him.
he won the electoral college vote 231 to 1 capitalism an economic system based on the private ownership of farms and businesses american system a proposal to the government that called for taxes on imports federally funded transportation projects and a new national bank 13 3 politics the era of good feelings after being elected president in 1816 janies monroe went on a goodwill tour.
huge crowds greeted him so warmly that a newspaper proclaimed an era of good feelings monroes eight years as president are still known by this name today.
to many americans at the time it seemed that a new period of national unity had dawned.
economic nationalism the swelling of nationalist spirit was reflected in proposals that the federal government take a more active role in building the national economy.
one of the leading supporters of such measures in congress was henry clay of kentucky.
clay was a persuasive speaker full of charm and intelligence.
driven by ambition clay wanted to be president.
he campaigned for the office five times but was never elected.
clay believed that americas future lay in capitalism an economic system in which individuals and companies produce and distribute goods for profit.
most supporters of capitalism agreed that government should have a limited role in the economy.
but clay believed that the national government had a role to play in encouraging economic growth.
clay supported an economic plan called the american system.
this plan called for taxes on imported goods to protect industry as well as federal spending on transportation projects like roads and canals.
a third part of clays plan was a new national bank to standardize currency and provide credit.
congress adopted this idea in 1816 when it created the second bank of the united states.
the first national bank had lapsed in 1811.
the bank was a private business but the government owned one fifth of it and deposited government funds there.
another early champion of economic nationalism was south carolinas john c calhoun.
in congress calhoun supported the national bank a permanent road system and a tax on imports.
yet in other ways he resisted federal power.
by the 1830s he would become the leading spokesman for states rights largely to protect slavery in the south.
his career illustrates the tensions between nationalism and the pull of regional differences.
a third proponent of nationalism was daniel webster of massachusetts.
webster served several terms in both the house and senate.
unlike clay who was a war hawk webster bitterly opposed the war of 1812 after the war however he voiced strong support for clay s american system.
let us act under a settled conviction and an habitual feeling that these twenty four states are one country webster urged in 1825 later he would strongly challenge calhouns claim that states had the right to defy the federal government.
judicial nationalism both nationalism and commerce had a friend in the supreme courts chief justice john marshall.
appointed by john adams in 1801 marshall wrote some of the most important court decisions in u s history.
46 chapter chapter 26 like most european immigrants the antins entered the united states by way of new york harbor.
wealthier passengers in first class and second class cabins were questioned briefly before being admitted to their new country.
but the majority of arrivals were taken on crowded barges to the immigration station on ellis island.
offen they had to wait for hours while inspectors and doctors examined each person.
fortunately most new arrivals spent less than a day on the island before proceeding to shore and the beginning of their new life in america.
jewish life in america from ellis island jews headed for new york citys lower east side neighborhood.
there they established shops newspapers religious schools and synagogues community centers and places of worship.
the lower east side became the most densely populated neighborhood in the city.
people lived packed into cheap tenements often sleeping three or four to a room.
some jews worked as street vendors using pushcarts to sell everything from coal to secondhand clothes.
pushcart vendors saved their money to buy horse drawn carts and then small stores.
although most jews were poor they arrived in the united states with a wide range of skills.
jews worked as cobblers butchers carpenters and watchmakers.
almost half found jobs in the citys garment factories.
jewish immigrants did whatever they could to keep their children in school.
in europe jews had honored educated people but schooling had cost money.
as a result many jews had never learned to read and write.
in america mary antin wrote education was free it was the one thing that my father was able to promise us when he sent for us surer safer than bread or shelter parents who made a little money often sent their sons and sometimes their daughters to the citys inexpensive public colleges.
by 1910 more jewish youths over the age of 16 were still in school than were young people of any other ethnic group.
like other immigrant groups jews faced prejudice and discrimination.
most private schools and clubs refused to accept jews.
hospitals would not hire jewish doctors.
the new york bar association would not admit jews as lawyers.
many ads for jobs stated simply christians only.
still eastern european jews were grateful to be in their new country.
one immigrant recalled there were markets groaning with food and clothes there was no military on horseback and no whips immigrants took work into their own homes or labored in differenttypes of factories.
here garment workers sew clothes in a tenement apartment.
the great wave of immigration chinese immigrants were sometimes detained for several months on angel island before they were allowed to enter the united states.
some carved poems on the wooden walls of the crowded barracks.
26 5 chinese immigrants the first chinese immigrants came to the united states to seek gold in california.
later many helped to build the countrys first transcontinental railroad.
some of these immigrants returned to china with money they had earned.
their good fortune inspired 16 year old lee chew to leave his poor village for the united states in 1880 traveling to california lee paid 50 dollars for a bunk on a crowded steamship to make the month long voyage to san francisco california.
on the ship he got his first taste of foreign food and marveled at machinery he had never seen before.
the engines that moved the ship were wonderful monsters he wrote strong enough to lift mountains lee arrived just in time.
in the united states discrimination against the chinese had been growing ever since whites had pushed chinese off their mining claims.
as the number of chinese immigrants increased u s labor leaders warned of chinese workers who would work for less pay than whites and take away their jobs.
in 1882 congress passed the chinese exclusion act which banned chinese laborers from immigrating to the united states.
the law also denied chinese immigrants the right to become citizens.
as a result of the chinese exclusion act chinese immigration slowed to almost nothing.
then in 1906 an earthquake and fire destroyed much of san francisco including most birth records.
suddenly many chinese men could claim to be native born citizens.
as citizens they were allowed to bring their wives and children to the united states.
chinese claiming american birth started arranging for people in c ma to immigrate to the united states as their relatives.
on the long i if the newcmers studied hundreds of pages describing amilies.
when they reached san francisco bay they threw the papers overboard.
these paper relatives landed at angel island in san francisco bay.
me immigration officials locked us up like criminals in com p ii e ca8es 1 zoos said one chinese immigrant.
chinese usua y remained on the island for three to four weeks but sometimes noernf tyiont ls or even years there.
to pass the time they carved halls.
one wrofct siiverware smuggled from the dining andmv f s on because my country is weak new m.
tsp0k mypar s wait at the door in vain for with lonenn themselves w their stshins 518 chapter 27 when carnegie wrote about the law of competition in business he was borrowing an idea from the british naturalist charles darwin.
darwin had observed that in nature animals and plants compete for food and living space.
those that are best adapted to their environments are the most likely to survive.
this idea was popularized as survival of the fittest before long some people began to apply darwins idea to human society.
the result was social darwinism.
according to this theory people and societies compete for survival just as plants and animals do.
the most fit become wealthy and successful.
the least fit struggle just to survive.
social darwinism seemed to provide a scientific justification for huge differences in peoples wealth and power.
it also lent support to the economic concept of laissez faire the idea that businesses should operate with a minimum of government interference.
the best possible economy will then emerge naturally.
by this line of thinking it is misguided for government to try to correct such problems as child labor poor working conditions and unfair business practices.
social darwinism the theory that people and societies compete for survival with the fit becoming wealthy and successful while the weak struggle to survive john d rockefeller s standard oil company controlled 90 percent of the oil refined in the united states atthe start of the 20th century.
his business methods were considered ruthless by his critics and brilliant by his supporters.
giving away wealth in 1901 andrew carnegie sold his steel company for 250 million.
then he retired to devote his life to philanthropy or generosity to charities.
carnegie believed that rich people have a responsibility to use their wealth to help others.
he who dies rich he wrote dies disgraced carnegie used his wealth to build concert halls universities and hospitals.
most of all however he loved building libraries.
a library he said outranks any other one thing that a community can do to benefit its people before 1880 few americans had access to free public libraries.
just one generation later 35 million people a day were using libraries that carnegie had helped to build.
your example will bear fruits john d rockefeller wrote to carnegie.
the time will come when men of wealth will more generally be willing to use it for the good of others.
rockefeller used his own fortune to fund universities medical research the arts and education for all.
during his lifetime he contributed about 182 million to the rockefeller foundation a charitable organization he established to promote the well being of mankind throughout the world.
ihe progressive era the granger collection newyork teddy roosevelt is shown here vigorously shaking the railroad trust.
roosevelt tried to break up monopolistic trusts to make american business fair for all.
regulation the enforcement of laws that control conduct or practices for example government regulations control the way goods food and drugs are produced and sold to the public 27 4 theodore roosevelt trust busting president not everyone admired big business the way rockefeller and carnegie did.
many thought big businesses took unfair advantage of workers and consumers.
in 1890 congress passed the sherman antitrust act to prohibit any form of business monopoly.
the law was so vague and big business so powerful however that for years the law was not enforced.
the sherman antitrust act got its first real test only after theodore roosevelt became president in 1901 breaking a railroad trust roosevelt came into the white house with a reputation as a reformer.
as president he attacked business monopolies with great energy.
we do not want to destroy corporations he assured the public but we do wish to make them serve the public good roosevelt s first target was a railroad monopoly called the northern securities company.
this company controlled nearly every rail line between chicago and the pacific northwest.
roosevelt had the justice department sue northern securities for violating the sherman antitrust act.
the supreme court ordered the monopoly to be broken up into smaller railroad companies.
trust busting expands just after roosevelt filed suit against northern securities mcclures magazine began publishing ida tar bells history of the standard oil trust.
in her report tarbell documented how rockefeller had driven his competitors out of business.
she told about secret deals he had made with railroads to ship his oil at lower prices than other oil companies paid.
she explained how rockefeller had cut his oil prices below what the oil cost to produce.
this attracted customers away from other oil companies.
after his o petitors went ut of business rockefeller raised prices again s ocked public demanded action.
roosevelt filed suit against n but a8ainst 44 other trusts as well.
in 1911 i was busted broken up into five major oil companies and several smaller ones.
ent rosevelt thought that government regulation or behtcem tk aws was a 8d lonterm solution to bad business that tt1 c skeat develpment of industrialism he said means governm mcrease ln the supervision exercised by the government over business enterprise 540 chapter 16 life in the west what were the motives hardships and legacies of the groups that moved west in the 1800s.
16 1 introduction the vast region that stretches from the mississippi river to the pacific ocean is one of the most extraordinary landscapes on earth.
tourists come from all over to see its mountains canyons deserts and plains.
to american settlers east of the mississippi river this great expanse of grasslands mountains and deserts was the west.
for all its beauty the west was a challenging environment.
look at the names that settlers gave to its features.
where else in the united states can you find a mountain range called the crazies a scorching desert named death valley a blood red canyon called flaming gorge or a raging river known as the river of no return.
despite its geographic challenges the west was never empty.
perhaps as many as 3 million american indians lived there before europeans arrived.
these first westerners were far more diverse in language and culture than the europeans who claimed their land.
for most americans in the early 1800s however the west was mostly a blank map.
by 1850 it had become the land of opportunity.
the west boasted wide open spaces and great wealth in timber gold silver and other natural resources.
it became a magnet for immigrants and for easterners looking for a new start in life.
as americans began their westward trek they created new markets for eastern merchants.
in time the west changed the nations economy and politics.
it also created folklore of rugged individualism that has become a lasting part of american culture.
newspaperman horace greeley captured the growing enthusiasm for going west when he wrote if you have no family or friends to aid you and no prospect opportunity opened to you turn your face to the great west and there build up a home and fortune in this chapter 27 27 5 robert la follette fighter for political reform in 1890 robert la follette of wisconsin ran for reelection to congress and lost.
still a young man he returned to his work as a lawyer.
then in 1891 senator philetus sawyer a powerful republican party boss reportedly offered la follette a bribe to fix a court case.
sawyer thought that he could pay la follette to guarantee that he would win the case.
an insulted la follette reported the bribery attempt to the newspapers.
an equally insulted sawyer decided to crush la follette.
but battling bob was not an easy man to put down.
sawyer had made him so mad that la follette decided to run for governor of wisconsin.
as governor he could work to put the party bosses out of business.
in wisconsin and other states political machines or groups run by party bosses controlled local and state governments.
to make sure their candidates were elected corrupt bosses were known to bribe voters and stuff ballot boxes with fake votes.
thus the bosses not the people chose each partys candidates for office.
the candidates men like lumber millionaire sawyer usually represented powerful business interests.
without the partys support upstart reformers like la follette had little chance of reaching voters.
la follette was defeated twice by wisconsins powerful republican machine but finally won election as governor in 1900 once he took office la follette pushed reforms that put the people in charge of politics.
wisconsin became the first state to adopt the direct primary.
this election system allowed party members not bosses to choose party candidates.
by 1916 more than half the states had adopted the wisconsin idea with the people choosing their leaders in primary elections reform governors were swept into office across the nation.
oregon introduced three other reforms that put political power into the hands of the people.
the initiative allowed citizens to enact laws by a popular vote.
the referendum allowed voters to overturn an existing law.
the recall allowed voters to remove an elected official from office.
what all these reforms had in common wrote la follette was a belief that each state could become a place where the opportunities of all its people are more equal.
and human life is safer and sweeter.
robert la follette bui party bosses controlled the u s political system through a corrupt system of bribery.
reformers like robert la follette soughtto take power out of the hands of the bosses and return it to the people.
ipail in is ai the progressive era i mother jones 27 6 mother jones champion of workers rights in 1903 labor leader mary harris jones known as mother jones went to pennsylvania to support a strike by 75 000 textile workers.
about 10 000 of the strikers were children.
jones wrote of these young workers every day little children came into union headquarters some with their hands off some with the thumb missing some with their fingers off at the knuckle.
they were stooped little things round shouldered and skinny.
many of them were not over ten years of age.
child labor laws the situation mother jones found in pennsylvania was not unusual.
in the early 1900s more than 1 million children under the age of 16 worked in mines and factories for up to 13 hours a day.
to publicize their plight jones led a march of the mill children from pennsylvania all the way to oyster bay new york to petition president roosevelt to support child labor laws.
ihe childrens march prompted stories and photographs of child workers in newspapers and magazines.
across the country reformers demanded an end to child labor.
employers claimed that abolishing child labor would produce a nation of sissies by 1909 however 43 states had passed laws that outlawed the hiring of children.
atthe turn of the century school age children worked long hours for meager wages in america s mines and factories.
improving work conditions progressive reformers also worked to improve the lives of adult workers.
in 1903 for example oregon passed a law that limited women workers to a ten hour workday.
maryland set up a program to assist workers who had been injured on the job.
new york responded to the tragic 1911 triangle shirtwaist factory fire by setting up a state committee to investigate conditions in factories.
based on the committees work the state legislature passed 56 worker protection laws.
many of these laws called for improvements in factory safety.
one permitted women workers to take pregnancy leaves.
a leave is time away from work.
another required employers to provide garment workers with chairs that had backs rather than simple stools.
mother jones saw progress for the worker in such reforms.
slowly his hours are shortened giving him leisure to read and to think she wrote.
slowly the cause of his children becomes the cause of all 542 chapter you read about the settlement of the 13 english colonies in the future united states.
settlers and slaves settlers had many reasons to come to america in the 1600s and 1700s.
two important reasons were freedom of religion and the chance to start a new life.
however even though colonists treasured freedom for themselves they had africans brought to america by force to work as slaves.
regional development the new england middle and southern colonies had distinctive geographies and natural resources.
as a result different ways of life developed in each region.
colonies also varied in their form of government but all were democratic to some degree.
new england colonies religion and geography were key influences in these colonies.
although puritans sometimes disagreed they hoped to establish model communities based on their religious faith.
new englands forests and coastline made lumbering shipbuilding and trade very important to the regions economy.
middle colonies these colonies were geographically culturally and religiously diverse.
catholics quakers anglicans and members of other protestant faiths all found homes in this region.
southern colonies in these colonies climate and geography encouraged the planting of cash crops and the development of large plantations.
in time slave labor would become a major part of this regions economy.
nova dritann ia offering most excellent fruitcs byplantinein v i r 5 qi n i a exciting all lucli as be well affected to further the fame.
r sign of the bul head 1 tf 5.
handbills like this one lured colonists from europe to the american colonies.
the english colonies in north america 59 reading further in this painting william bradford and other passengers sign the mayflower compact.
the colonists agreed to unite and form a government based on common interests.
a colonial cast of characters many kinds of people settled the english colonies of north america.
there were pilgrims and planters merchants and craft workers enslaved africans and indentured servants.
some came seeking freedom and opportunity.
others came because they had no choice.
all of them contributed to life in the colonies.
here are four of their stories.
william bradford was worried.
it was november 1620 and he had just arrived in america on the mayflower.
he and his fellow passengers had survived a long and difficult voyage.
but they had not reached their intended destination and trouble was brewing.
bradford was one of the leaders of a group of separatists on the mayflower.
the separatists had broken away from the church of england and were seeking religious freedom in america.
they called themselves pilgrims.
they had been granted a patent a royal permit to settle in virginia.
but violent storms had blown their ship off course.
now they sat off the coast of what would become massachusetts hundreds of miles from virginia.
winter was coming so the pilgrims decided to found their colony there.
they would call it plymouth after a coastal city in england.
but another group of people on board had different ideas.
they had not come to america for religious reasons but to own land.
since they had not reached virginia they argued that they were not bound by the terms of the patent.
they said that no one had the power to command them facing a possible rebellion bradford and the other pilgrim leaders came up with a plan to unite the colony.
they drew up an agreement we call the mayflower compact.
by signing this document the members of the new colony agreed to form a civil body politic or a form of representative government.
they agreed to obey just and equall laws created for the generall good of the colonie this was the first written framework for self government in the english colonies.
bradford would later become governor of plymouth colony.
he had never lived under any form of self government.
he had always been ruled by kings.
but he did have a strong belief in his rights as an englishman.
this idea of the rights of englishmen would be a foundation for self rule in the colonies.
the idea was rooted in magna carta a 13th century document limiting royal power and the english bill of rights.
margaret hardenbroeck dutch trader yir bradford came to america to practice his religion.
he wanted o ui a new society based on religious principles.
margaret harden ec came for a very different reason.
she moved to the colonies to do business and she became very successful.
0 chapter summary in this chapter 4 chapter 16 an irish immigrant s story thomas kerr also found life in california a challenge.
unlike the wilsons he never enjoyed much success.
in fact he never even made it to the gold country.
kerr left his native ireland during the great famine of 1845 1850 a disease had destroyed the irish potato crop causing hunger hardship and death.
along with many other irish kerr decided to try his luck in america.
he said goodbye to his wife and child and sailed to san francisco arriving in march 1850 kerr tried to earn money to pay his passage to the goldfields.
but work was hard to find in san francisco and costs were high.
he eventually got a job building a house near sacramento.
that was as close as he would get to the gold country.
the job paid very little.
in addition the work was hard and the conditions were tough.
kerr wrote in his journal god knows any money a man earns in calafornia its dearly won for he deprives himself of all the comforts in addition to being burned up with a scurching sun.
and eaten alive by muskeatoes mosquitoes kerr returned to san francisco where his wife and child joined him in 1852 he continued to get odd jobs ending up in the grocery business.
but he never made the fortune he imagined.
people may talk about the gold of calafornia he wrote but its very difficult to obtain it women were rare in gold rush towns and even rarer in the goldfields.
some cooked meals and washed clothes for miners.
in return the miners paid them well and treated them with respect.
a chilean migrant s tale many other foreigners also came to california hoping to strike it rich among these immigrants were approximately 7 000 chileans.
many had already worked as miners in chile.
one of these men was vicente perez rosales.
perez came from a wealthy landowning family that had lost its fortune in the 1820s.
he had tried his hand at various jobs since then including gold mining and cattle ranching with little success.
then he learned of the gold strikes in california.
late in 1848 he left chile with several partners on a ship bound for san francisco.
perez was not confident that his group would find gold but he did believe they could profit from the gold rush.
we felt sure only a lazy man could fail to make money he wrote in his journal and we were willing to work hard.
but little did we know what we faced perez and his party soon headed for the gold country.
they worked at various gold diggings and had some success but not enough to justify their efforts.
there was plenty of gold perez wrote but not enough for all the men in california looking for it competition for gold claims was fierce and violence often broke out.
much of this violence was directed at foreign miners particularly mexicans chileans and chinese.
eventually perez and his party fled the goldfields.
seeking another way to earn a living they set up a stand on a street in sacramento and sold such goods as cheese peaches and beef jerky.
but an epidemic of disease struck the city and once again they had to flee.
perez recalled almost overnight the gold rush changed san francisco from a sleepy village into a bustling city.
money flowed freely to those who were skilled at running businesses.
banking trade and investment flourished.
we had been miners and had failed at that.
then we had become merchants and that too as they say came tumbling down.
we had begun to think that with our luck if we started a hat factory we could expect men would be born without heads.
vicente perez rosales diary of a journey to california 1848 1849 after that perez started a restaurant in san francisco.
but after initial success that failed too.
he and his partners had already decided to return to chile in late 1850 when a fire broke out in san francisco and burned down their building.
they barely escaped with their lives.
two months later they were back in chile.
a black forty niner s success although the gold rush did not pan out for many forty niners some did find gold and achieve their dreams.
this was the case for hundreds of enslaved african americans who came west to work in the goldfields and managed to win their freedom.
among these black miners alvin coffey stands out as a particular success.
in april 1849 he set out from missouri with his owner dr bassett who put him to work digging for gold.
in his memoirs coffey recalled we dug and dug to the first of november.
at night it commenced raining and rained and snowed pretty much all the winter.
we had a tent but it barely kept us all dry by the next year coffey had dug up 5 000 in gold.
bassett kept the money and took coffey back to missouri where he sold him to another man.
the new owner was kinder however.
he agreed to let coffey buy his way to freedom.
in 1854 coffey returned to california and earned 7 000 in the goldfields enough to free himself and his family.
coffey settled down in northern california and became a prosperous farmer.
his children and grandchildren prospered too.
for alvin coffey the gold rush had lived up to its promise.
the results for california the gold rush also brought statehood to california.
vicente perez rosales was there to witness the election of the new california legislature.
he saw parades campaign speeches and even fistfights between rival candidates.
overall though he was impressed by the peaceful nature of the election.
there was no pistol shooting he recalled.
arms on that day were silent and he went on how different it all was from the way these things are handled in other countries.
not only that but once the election was over all the voters accepted the man elected they dropped the private preferences to hail the majority s choice and showed as much enthusiasm as if they had contributed to his triumph themselves.
the gold rush had helped lay the foundation for californias political and economic future.
and it appeared in 1850 that that future would be very bright indeed.
by 1852 when this photograph was taken more than 2 000 african americans were living in california.
most lived and worked in the goldfields.
even today california s gold rush history is an important part of the state s image.
the state s motto eureka a greek word meaning i have found it reflects the excitement of the successful miners.
life in the west 315 chapter 18 stanton was 25 years old and newly married.
she had never spoken in public.
as a young girl she had overheard women beg her father a judge to protect them from husbands who had beaten them.
he had to tell them that there was no law against it.
later she attended troy female seminary the nations first high school for girls.
she knew from her history studies that the united states did not treat women fairly.
when she met mott in london she readily agreed that something had to be done about the injustices suffered by women.
unequal treatment of women even a fine education like stantons did not mean women would receive equal treatment.
when lucy stone graduated from oberlin college in 1847 the faculty invited her to write a speech.
but a man would have to give the speech since the school did not allow women to speak in public.
stone refused.
after graduation she spoke out for womens rights.
because women could not vote she refused to pay property taxes.
women suffer taxation she said and yet have no representation stones sister in law elizabeth blackwell wanted to be a doctor.
she had studied mathematics science and history.
yet she was rejected by 29 medical schools before one finally accepted her.
in 1849 she graduated at the top of her class becoming the countrys first female doctor.
still no hospitals or doctors would agree to work with her.
to overcome such barriers women would have to work together.
by the time stanton and mott left london they had decided to hold a convention and form a society to advocate the rights of women.
lucretia mott on the left and elizabeth cady stanton on the right met at an anti slavery convention in 1840 their friendship helped spark the organized movement for women s rights.
an era ofreforin seneca falls convention the gathering of supporters of womens rights in july 1848 that launched the movement for womens right to vote declaration of sentiments a formal statement of injustices suffered by women written by the organizers of the seneca falls convention.
sentiments means beliefs or convictions the seneca falls convention eight years passed before stanton and mott met again.
over afternoon tea at the home of motts sister they decided to send a notice to the local newspaper announcing a womens convention in seneca falls new york.
the organized movement for womens rights was about to begin.
on july 19 1848 nearly 300 people including 40 men arrived for the seneca falls convention.
many were abolitionists quakers or other reformers.
some were local housewives farmers and factory workers.
the convention organizers modeled their proposal for womens rights the declaration of sentiments on the declaration of independence.
we hold these truths to be self evident the document began that all men and women are created equal just as the declaration of independence listed king georges acts of tyranny over the colonists the new declaration listed acts of tyranny by men over women.
man did not let woman vote.
he did not give her the right to own property.
he did not allow her to practice professions like medicine and law.
stantons presentation of the declaration at the convention was her first speech.
a few other women also spoke.
one of them charlotte woodward was a 19 year old factory worker.
every fibre of my being she said rebelled against all the hours that i sat and sewed gloves for a miserable pittance small amount of money which as it was earned could never be mine debate about the right to vote the conven tion passed resolutions in favor of correcting the injustices listed in the declaration of sentiments.
then stanton proposed that women demand the right to vote.
for many this step was too much.
even mott cried thou will make us ridiculous.
we must go slowly at this point stanton received powerful support from another participant at the convention frederick douglass.
everyone who believed that black men should have the right to vote douglass argued must also favor giving black women the right to vote.
and that meant all women should have this important right.
inspired by douglasss speech the convention voted narrowly to approve this last resolution.
elizabeth cady stanton on the left and susan b anthony on the right worked together in the campaign for women s rights.
stanton wrote powerful speeches which anthony traveled from town to town to deliver.
the legacy of seneca falls the seneca falls convention helped to create an orgamzed campaign for womens rights.
sojourner truth who would later mesmerize an audience with her aint i a woman speech became an active campaigner in the movement.
stanton didn t like speaking at conventions but she could write powerful speeches.
she befriended susan b anthony a reformer with a flair for public speaking.
while stanton stayed in seneca falls to raise her children anthony traveled from town to town speaking for womens rights.
of their lifelong teamwork stanton said i forged the thunderbolts she fired them slowly reformers for womens rights made progress.
new york gave women control over their property and wages.
massachusetts and indiana passed more liberal divorce laws.
elizabeth blackwell started her own hospital which included a medical school to train other female doctors.
other reforms including the right to vote in all states would take decades to become reality.
of all the women who signed the declaration at seneca falls just one would live to vote for president legally charlotte woodward.
chapter 5 13 colonies proclamation line of 1763 0 500 1 000 miles 1 j 6 500 1 000 kilometers lambert azimuthal equal area projection i i.
a a t i oceax idies s i h h c u r s vv the stamp act the british government had other problems besides keeping colonists and american indians from fighting each other.
one problem was how to pay off the large debt from the french and indian war.
the solution seemed obvious to prime minister george grenville the leader of the british government.
people in great britain were already paying taxes on everything from windows to salt.
in contrast americans were probably the most lightly taxed people in the british empire.
it was time said grenville for the colonists to pay their fair share of the cost of protecting them from indians.
in 1765 grenville proposed a new act or law called the stamp act.
this law required colonists to buy a stamp for every piece of paper they used.
newspapers had to be printed on stamped paper.
wills licenses and even playing cards had to have stamps.
once again the colonists sensed tyranny.
one newspaper the pennsylvania journal said that as soon as this shocking act was known it filled all british america from one end to the other with astonishment and grief it wasnt just the idea of higher taxes that upset the colonists.
they were willing to pay taxes passed by their own assemblies where their representatives could vote on them.
but the colonists had no representatives in parliament.
for this reason they argued parliament had no right to tax them.
they saw the stamp act as a violation of their rights as british subjects.
no taxation without representation they declared.
some colonists protested the stamp act by sending messages to parliament.
loyalists simply refused to buy stamps.
patriots however took more violent action.
mobs calling themselves sons of liberty attacked tax collectors homes.
protesters in connecticut even started to bury one tax collector alive.
only when he heard dirt being shoveled onto his coffin did the terrified tax collector agree to resign from his post.
after months of protest parliament repealed or canceled the stamp act.
americans greeted the news with great celebration.
church bells rang bands played and everyone hoped the troubles with great britain were over.
the stamp act required colonists to buy stamps like this one for all paper products.
the colonists reacted angrily to the act.
this illustration shows them hanging effigies or dummies of british officials.
the colonists protests forced parliamentto repeal the act.
repeal to take back or to cancel a law toward independence 91 boycott to refuse to buy one or more goods from a certain source.
an organized refusal by many people is also called a boycott.
the quartering act as anger over the stamp act began to fade americans noticed another law passed by parliament in 1765 called the quartering act this law ordered colonial assemblies to provide british troops with quarters or housing.
the colonists were also told to furnish the soldiers with candles firing bedding cooking utensils salt vinegar and beer or cider of course providing for the soldiers cost money.
new jersey protested that the new law was as much an act for laying taxes on the colonists as the stamp act.
new yorkers asked why they should pay to keep troops in their colony.
after all they said the soldiers just took up space and did nothing.
in 1767 the new york assembly decided not to approve any funds for salt vinegar and liquor for the troops.
the british government reacted by refusing to let the assembly meet until it agreed to obey the quartering act.
once again tempers began to rise on both sides of the atlantic.
5 4 the townshend acts the next british leader to face the challenge of taxing the colonies was charles townshend.
he was known as champagne charlie because of his habit of making speeches in parliament after drinking champagne.
townshend believed that the colonists bad behavior made it even more important to retain an army in the british colonies.
once he was asked in parliament whether he would dare to make the colonists pay for that army.
stamping his foot townshend shouted i will i will townshend kept his promise.
in 1767 he persuaded parliament to pass the townshend acts.
the new laws placed a duty or tax on certain goods the colonies imported from great britain.
these goods included such popular items as glass paint paper and tea.
a boycott of british goods to many colonists the townshend duties were unacceptable.
once again colonists were determined not to pay taxes that their assemblies had not voted on.
a boston patriot named samuel adams led the opposition to the townshend acts.
adams was not an attractive man and he was a failure at business.
but he was gifted at stirring up protests through his speeches and writing.
the governor of massachusetts once complained every dip of his pen stung like a horned snake adams wrote a letter protesting the townshend acts that was sent to every colony.
the letter argued that the new duties violated the colonists rights as british citizens.
to protect those rights the colonies decided to boycott british goods.
this was a peaceful form of protest that even loyalists could support.
one by one all of the colonies agreed to support the boycott.
women were very important in making the boycott work since t ey did most of the shopping.
the virginia gazette wrote that one woman could do more for the good of her country than five hundred ter 5 i noisy sons of liberty with all their mobs and riots women found many ways to avoid buying british imports.
they sewed dresses out of homespun cloth brewed tea from pine needles and bought only american made goods.
in 1768 the british government sent soldiers to boston to enforce the townshend acts.
this engraving made by paul revere shows the troops landing.
repeal of the townshend acts meanwhile a new leader named lord north became head of the british government.
described by townshend as a great heavy booby looking man lord north embarrassed his supporters by taking naps in parliament.
but he was good with numbers and he could see that the townshend duties were a big money loser.
the duties didnt begin to make up for all the money british merchants were losing because of the boycott.
early in 1770 north persuaded parliament to repeal all of the townshend duties except for one the tax on tea.
some members of parliament argued that keeping the duty on tea was asking for more trouble.
but king george wasnt ready to give up on the idea of taxing americans.
i am clear that there must always be one tax to keep up the right the king said.
and as such i approve the tea duty 5 5 the boston massacre on the same day that parliament repealed most of the townshend duties a fight broke out between soldiers and colonists in boston.
when the dust cleared five bostonians were dead and ten were injured.
patriots called this incident the boston massacre.
a massacre is the killing of defenseless people.
what really happened was a small riot.
toward independence 93 trouble had been brewing in boston for months before the riot.
to the british boston patriots were the worst troublemakers in the colonies.
in 1768 the british government had sent four regiments of troops to keep order in boston.
bostonians resented the british soldiers.
they made fun of their red uniforms by calling them lobsterbacks samuel adams even taught his dog to nip at soldiers heels.
despite such insults the troops were forbidden to fire on citizens.
knowing this only made bostonians bolder in their attacks.
general thomas gage the commander of the british army in america wrote that the people were as lawless after the troops arrived as they were before paul revere s famous engraving of the boston massacre stirred up deep colonial resentment against great britain.
mob violence breaks out on march 5 1770 a noisy mob began throwing rocks and ice balls at troops guarding the boston customs house.
come on you rascals you bloody backs they shouted.
fire if you dare some patriot leaders tried to persuade the crowd to go home.
so did captain thomas preston the commander of the soldiers.
but their pleas had no effect.
as the mob pressed forward someone knocked a soldier to the ground.
the troops panicked and opened fire.
two bullets struck crispus attucks a black man at the front of the crowd.
he was the first to die but not the last.
the enraged crowd went home only after receiving a promise that the troops would be tried for murder.
massacre or self defense.
samuel adams saw this event as a perfect opportunity to whip up anti british feeling.
he called the riot a horrid massacre and had paul revere a local silversmith engrave a picture of it.
reveres engraving shows soldiers firing at peaceful unarmed citizens.
prints of reveres engraving were distributed throughout the colonies.
patriots saw the boston massacre as proof that the british should remove all of their troops chapter 18 although visitors paid for their stay on the farm they did not contribute labor.
the farm had to add new buildings to house them.
this placed a burden on the farms finances.
the end of the dream in fact brook farms finances had never been solid.
in the beginning ripley had asked members to invest in the farm but few had done so.
he had also hoped to sell farm products but few residents had any farming experience.
furthermore the farms soils were not very good for growing crops.
as a result the farm was always short of money.
residents began to drift away from the farm.
some complained of financial difficulties.
others tired of farmwork.
even nathaniel hawthorne lost his enthusiasm for farm life.
he left after six months saying he feared his soul might perish under a dung heap concerned about the future in 1844 ripley and other residents decided to reorganize the farm.
they established a new set of principles to promote small industry and put the farm on a firmer footing.
they invited new members to join including a number of craft workers and laborers.
they also began construction of a new much larger building and bought a steam engine to power new machinery.
to pay for these improvements the farm took out new loans.
before long however tensions developed in the community.
some members insisted on holding religious services which others opposed.
also some of the new members complained of poor treatment by the original members.
creditors began to demand repayment of loans.
i difficulties were mounting when disaster struck.
on march 3 1846 a fire broke out in the new building bbs and burned it to the ground.
after that more people chose to leave the community.
the ripleys and a handful of others stayed on until the fall of 1847 then they too abandoned the farm.
despite its short history brook farm was not a total failure.
it changed the lives of many of its members and influenced various reform movements including the abolition and womens rights movements.
it also inspired many people 1 with its ideals of workplace equality and a simpler more sustainable life.
those ideals live on today.
unlike brook farm the utopian oneida community of new york developed various communal industries.
atthis sewing bee men and women make traveling bags.
from their profits the community members built a large mansion.
i l an era of reform 3e chapter 19 19 6 transportation in the north factory owners needed fast inexpensive ways to deliver their goods to distant customers.
south carolina congressman john c calhoun had a solution.
let us bind the republic together he said with a perfect system of roads and canals calhoun called such projects internal improvements.
building better roads in the early 1800s most american roads were rutted boneshakers.
in 1806 congress funded the construction of a national road across the appalachian mountains.
the purpose of this highway was to connect the new western states with the east.
with its smooth gravel surface the national road was a joy to travel.
as popular as the national road was in 1816 president james monroe vetoed a bill that would have given states money to build more roads.
monroe argued that spending federal money for a states internal improvements was unconstitutional.
fast ships and canals even with better roads river travel was still faster and cheaper than travel by land.
but moving upstream against a rivers current was hard work.
to solve this problem inventors in both the united states and europe experimented with boats powered by steam engines.
in 1807 robert fulton showed that steamboats were practical by racing the steamboat clermont upstream on new yorks hudson river.
said fulton i overtook many boats and passed them as if they had been at anchor a dutchman watching the strange craft from the shore shouted the devil is on his way up river with a sawmill on a boat by the 1820s smoke belching steamboats were chugging up and down major rivers and across the great lakes.
many new and fasterforms of transportation were put to use in the north how many of them can you identify in this painting.
the worlds of north and south of course rivers werent always located where people needed them.
in 1817 the state of new york hired engineers and workers to build a 363 mile canal from the hudson river to lake erie.
the erie canal provided the first all water link between farms on the central plains and east coast cities.
it was so successful that other states built canals as well.
overseas traders also needed faster ways to travel.
sailing ships sometimes took so long to cross the pacific ocean that the goods they carried spoiled.
in the 1840s sleek clipper ships were introduced that cut ocean travel time in half.
the clipper ships led to increased northern trade with foreign ports around the world.
this map shows the locations of railroads in 1860 notice thatthe railroad lines in the north connectto one another more than those in the south.
how might this difference have affected the growth of trade and industry in the two areas.
traveling by rail the future of transportation however lay noton water but on rails.
inspired by the success of steamboats inventors developed steam powered locomotives.
these trains traveled faster than steamboats and could go wherever tracks could be laid even across mountains.
so many railroad companies were laying tracks that by the 1840s railroads were the norths biggest business.
by 1860 more than 20 000 miles of rail linked northern factories to cities hundreds of miles away.
u s railroads 1860 364 chapter 6 jeffersons job was to explain to the world why the colonies were choosing to separate from britain.
when in the course of human events he began if one group of people finds it necessary to break its ties with another a decent respect to the opinions of mankind requires that they explain their actions.
principles on which to base a new government jeffersons explanation was simple but revolutionary.
loyalists had argued that colonists had a duty to obey the king whose authority came from god.
jefferson reasoned quite differently.
he based his arguments on the principle of natural rights.
all people are born equal in gods sight he reasoned and all are entitled to the same basic rights.
in jeffersons eloquent words we hold these truths to be self evident that all men are created equal that they are endowed by their creator with certain unalienable rights that among these are life liberty and the pursuit of happiness.
governments are formed jefferson said to secure these rights their power to rule comes from the consent of the governed if a government fails to protect peoples fundamental rights it is the right of the people to alter or abolish it the people can then create a new government that will protect their safety and happiness.
after thomas jefferson wrote the first draft of the declaration of independence benjamin franklin and john adams suggested changes.
the king s crimes king george jefferson continued had shown no concern for the rights of colonists.
instead the king s policies had been aimed at establishing an absolute tyranny over these states the colonies.
as proof jefferson included a long list of the king s abuses.
in all these actions jefferson claimed george iii had shown he was unfit to be the ruler of a free people the time had come jefferson concluded for the colonies ties to great britain to be broken.
these united colonies are he declared and of right ought to be free and independent states.
natural rights rights common to everyone as opposed to those given by law the declaration of independence 111 6 5 the final break on july 1 1776 the second continental congress met in philadelphias state house to debate independence.
by noon the temperature outside had soared into the nineties and a thunderstorm was gathering.
inside the state house emotions were equally hot and stormy.
by the end of the day the issue was still undecided.
the next day was cooler and calmer.
on july 2 all but one of the 13 colonies voted for independence.
new york cast no vote.
no delegate was more excited about the colonies decision than john adams.
he wrote to his wife abigail the second day of july will be celebrated by succeeding generations with pomp and parade with shews shows games sports guns bells bonfires and illuminations from one end of this continent to the other from this time forward forever more any mention of slavery was removed from the declaration of independence because the slave trade was important to the economy of many colonies.
in the triangular trade shown here rum and iron were shipped from new england to africa.
in africa these products were exchanged for slaves.
the slaves were taken to the west indies where many were traded for molasses and sugar.
finally molasses sugar and remaining slaves were broughtto new england.
debate over slavery adams was wrong about the date that would be celebrated as americas birthday but only because congress decided to revise jeffersons declaration.
the delegates liked most of what they read except for a passage on slavery.
jefferson had charged king george with violating the sacred rights of life and liberty of a distant people by carrying them into slavery almost no one liked this passage.
southerners feared that it might lead to demands to free the slaves.
enslaved african americans provided much of the labor used on southern farms.
northerners worried that new england merchants who benefited from the slave trade might be offended.
even delegates who opposed slavery felt it was unfair to blame the king for enslaving africans.
the passage was removed.
triangular trade and the enslavement of africans 112 chapter 19 new england farms.
if they stayed on the farms most of them could count on marrying having children and working on the farm their whole lives.
and farming in new england challenged even the hardiest workers.
the population was growing making land scarce.
the soil was rocky and the growing season was short.
more and more people were looking elsewhere for work to crafts to the west or to the cities.
answering the call of the factory recruiter promised something new different and profitable.
one young woman sally rice left her family in vermont eventually to work in a factory in connecticut.
in a letter written in 1839 she explained her reasons for leaving home.
i can never be happy there in among so many mountains i am aljmost 19 years old.
i must of course have something of my own before many years have passed over my head.
and where is that something coming from if i go home and earn nothing you may think me unkind but how can you blame me for wanting to stay here.
i have but one life to live and i want to enjoy myself as well as i can while i live.
many other women shared sally rices feelings and like her they went to work in the factories.
while most of the women who first staffed the factories came from farms some girls came for other reasons.
harriet hansons mother moved to lowell from boston with her four small children after her husband died.
harriet started working at the mills when she was ten years old.
after lucy larcoms mother was widowed she moved the family to lowell from a nearby town.
lucy started working in a factory when she was 11 at the very least life in the mills offered girls and women survival.
at the most it promised a chance to have something of their own in cluding adventure before they settled down and married.
this lowell mil girl was photographed at her loom in 1850 on 10 000 looms like this one mill workers produced more than 500 miles of cloth every week.
8 1 h monthly magazine the lowell offering published the writings of the factory girls.
the writers told of their lives and the working conditions in lowell.
a mill girl s life in the 1830s it would not have been considered proper for a young woman to move to a city alone without an adult chaperone.
the mill owners had to find a way to make the move to factory life feel safe for their workers and to reassure the workers parents.
they also wanted to make sure the workers were well disciplined so that they would be efficient.
for those reasons the manufacturing companies built boarding houses.
the young women lived there under the protective watch of an older woman.
they ate their meals at the boarding house slept there and often became friends with other boarders.
one lowell mill worker wrote to her father in new hampshire that i have a very good boarding place the girls are all kind and obliging.
the girls that i room with are all from vermont and good girls too the mill girls had opportunities in lowell that they would never have had on the farm.
they could attend lectures and plays and join literary discussion groups and libraries.
and their wages allowed them to shop.
one woman whose sister worked in lowell described how the women who went to the factories came home changed they went in their plain country made clothes and after working several months would come home for a visit or perhaps to be married in their tasteful city dresses and with more money in their pockets than they had ever owned before young women in lowell even started their own magazine the lowell offering.
from 1840 to 1845 the girls wrote essays stories and poems.
some of their writing told about how much they liked their lives in lowell.
other pieces told stories about women coming to work in the mills so they could help their families out of financial problems.
but when historians looked at other sources like bank accounts they discovered that most of the mill girls were not helping their families at all.
instead they were saving money to use later for school clothes or a dowry money they would bring to a marriage.
chapter 7 7 3 british strengths and weaknesses in contrast to the american colonies great britain entered the war from a position of strength.
yet despite both their real and their perceived advantages the british forces encountered many problems.
british strengths with a professional army of about 42 000 troops at the beginning of the war british forces greatly outnumbered the continental army.
in addition george iii hired 30 000 mercenaries from germany.
these hired soldiers were known as hessians heh shenz because they came from a part of germany called hesse cassel.
the british were also able to recruit many loyalists african americans and american indians to fight on their side.
british and hessian troops were well trained in european military tactics.
they excelled in large battles fought by a mass of troops on open ground.
they also had far more experience firing artillery than americans had.
the british forces were well supplied as well.
unlike the pitifully equipped continental army they seldom lacked for food uniforms weapons or ammunition.
british weaknesses even so the war presented great britain with huge problems.
one was the distance between great britain and america.
sending troops and supplies across the atlantic was slow and costly.
news of battles arrived in england long after they had occurred making it difficult for british leaders to plan a course of action.
a second problem was that king george and his ministers were never able to convince the british people that defeating the rebels was vital to the future of great britain.
the longer the war dragged on the less happy the british taxpayers became about paying its heavy costs.
a third problem was poor leadership.
lord george germain the man chosen to direct the british troops had no real sense of how to defeat the rebels.
how could he.
he had never set foot in north america.
nor did it occur to him to go see for himself what his army was up against.
if he had germain might have realized that this was not a war that could be won by conquering a city or two.
to end the revolution germains forces would have to crush the patriots will to fight state by state.
instead germain kept changing plans and generals hoping that some combination of the two would bring him an easy victory.
british soldiers were trained professionals.
they were well equipped with plenty of ammunition good muskets adequate food and uniforms.
the american revolution 121 1a great britain almost wins the war after the british abandoned boston in the spring of 1776 germain came up with his first plan for winning the war.
british forces in america led by general william howe were ordered to capture new york city.
from that base british troops would then move north to destroy the rebellion at its heart massachusetts.
to block the british invasion washington hurried with his army from boston to new york.
it was there that he heard the good news by signing the declaration of independence congress had finally declared the colonies to be free and independent states.
washington had the declaration of independence read aloud to his troops.
the time had come he said to show our enemies and the whole world that free men contending for their own land are superior to any mercenaries on earth ihe declaration made it clear that the troops had the support of all the colonies who agreed that independence was a prize worth fighting for.
african americans faced a difficult decision during the revolution.
which country was more likely to give them freedom atthe end of the war america or great britain.
many blacks chose to fight with the americans.
with their help the continental army defeated the british atthe battle of cowpens in south carolina pictured below.
african americans and the war for african americans however the declaration of independence raised both hopes and questions.
did jeffersons words all men are created equal apply to them.
would independence bring an end to slavery.
should they join the revolution.
even before independence was declared a number of african americans had joined the patriot cause.
black militiamen both free and slave fought at lexington concord and bunker hill.
early in the war however blacks were banned from the continental army.
washington did not want the army to become a haven for runaway slaves.
in contrast the british promised freedom to all slaves who took up arms for the king.
as a result thousands of runaways became loyalists and fought for great britain.
a shortage of volunteers soon forced washington to change his mind.
by 1779 about 15 percent of the soldiers in the continental army were african americans.
large numbers of black sailors also served in the continental navy.
as black americans joined the war effort some whites began to question their own beliefs.
how could they accept slavery if they truly believed that all people are created equal with the same rights to life liberty and happiness.
by the wars end vermont connecticut massachusetts new hampshire rhode island and pennsylvania had all taken steps to end slavery.
122 chapter 7 defeat in new york on august 27 1776 the american and british armies met in brooklyn new york for what promised to be a decisive battle.
ihe americans began their defense of the city in high spirits.
but the inexperienced americans were no match for the british with their greater numbers and superior training.
in two days of fighting the british lost only 377 men while the americans lost 1 407 satisfied that the war was nearly won howe ordered a halt to the british attack.
washington he assumed would do what any self respecting european general would do in a hopeless situation.
he would surrender honorably.
and so howe waited.
washington had no intention of giving up.
but for his army to survive he would have to retreat.
even though washington knew this he could not bring himself to utter the word retreat.
an officer named thomas mifflin rescued him from his pride.
what is your strength mifflin asked.
nine thousand washington replied.
it is not sufficient said mifflin bluntly.
we must retreat fading hopes ihe battle for new york city was the first of many defeats for the americans.
in the weeks that followed british forces chased the americans out of new york through new jersey and finally across the delaware river into pennsylvania.
for joseph martin and his comrades this was a trying time.
there was little food to eat and the soldiers grew weak from hunger.
as the weather turned cold muddy roads and icy streams added to their misery.
with their terms of enlistment nearly up many soldiers headed for home.
along the way they spread the word that anyone who volunteered to risk his life in the continental army had to be crazy.
by the time washington reached pennsylvania only a few thousand men were still under his command.
many of his remaining troops he reported were entirely naked and most so thinly clad clothed as to be unfit for service more troops had to be found and found quickly he wrote his brother.
otherwise i think the game will be pretty well up while chasing the retreating conti.
nental army british soldiers looted the.
homes of americans both patriots and loyalists.
such actions turned many former supporters into enemies.
j i the american revolution 123 7 5 a pep talk and surprise victories by the end of 1776 the british also thought the war was just about over.
general howe offered to pardon all rebels who signed a statement promising to remain in peaceful obedience to the king.
thousands took him up on his offer.
with morale low and his soldiers threatening to return home george washington planned a daring attack on the hessians at trenton.
crossing the ice choked delaware river at night he surprised the enemy overwhelming them completely.
the crisis washington knew he had to do something quickly.
gathering his last troops together he read to them from thomas paines new pamphlet the crisis.
these are the times that try mens souls.
the summer soldier and the sunshine patriot will in this crisis shrink from the service of their country but he that stands it now deserves the love and thanks of man and woman.
next washington outlined a daring plan to attack hessian troops who were camped for the winter in trenton new jersey.
heartened by thomas paines words his men did not shrink from the service of their country victory in trenton late on december 25 1776 washingtons army crossed the ice choked delaware river in small boats.
on the new jersey shore washington gave his men the password for the long nighttime march ahead victory or death as the american troops made their way toward trenton a driving snow chilled them to the bone.
ice and rocks cut through their worn out shoes.
one officer reported to washington that the troops guns were too wet to fire.
use the bayonets the general replied.
the town must be taken when the americans reached trenton they found the hessians happily sleeping off their christmas feasts.
caught completely by surprise the mercenaries surrendered.
washington took 868 prisoners without losing even a single man.
a week later the americans captured another 300 british troops at princeton new jersey.
these defeats convinced howe that it would take more than capturing new york city and issuing pardons to win the war.
news of washingtons victories electrified patriots.
a few days ago they had given up their cause for lost wrote an unhappy loyalist.
their late successes have turned the scale and they are all liberty mad again the game was not yet up.
4 chapter 7 baron friedrich von steuben free drik von stu bin in charge of training.
a military officer from prussia in modern day germany von steuben arrived in december 1777 and set to work turning the continental army into an organized fighting force.
the prussian s method wrote martin was continual drill it worked wonders.
the army grows stronger every day wrote one officer.
there is a spirit of discipline among the troops that is better than numbers another foreign volunteer the marquis de lafayette mar kee duh la fey et also helped raise the troops spirits.
although he was one of the richest men in france lafayette chose to share the hardships of valley forge.
he even used his own money to buy the men warm clothing.
the patient fortitude courage of the officers and soldiers lafayette wrote was a continual miracle when at last spring arrived washington received news that the british were about to abandon philadelphia.
the time had come to put his newly trained army to the test.
the battle of monmouth by this time sir henry clinton had replaced general howe as commander of the british forces in north america.
in clintons view taking over philadelphia had gained the british nothing.
he ordered his army to retreat to new york city where the royal navy could keep it supplied by sea.
now it was washingtons turn to chase an army across new jersey.
on june 28 1778 he caught up with the retreating british near monmouth new jersey.
in the battle that followed washington seemed to be everywhere constantly rallying his men to stand and fight.
cheering them by his voice and example wrote lafayette never had i beheld seen so superb a man late that night the british slipped across the hudson river to safety in new york city.
washington camped with his army nearby.
it was pleasing he wrote that after two years maneuvering both armies are brought back to the very point they set out from.
neither army knew it yet but the war in the north was over.
at the battle of monmouth in new jersey george washington led his troops in an attack on retreating british forces although the americans won the british were able to slip away during the night and sail safely to new york.
the american revolution 127 this engraving shows francis marion crossing the pee dee river in south carolina.
marion known as the swamp fox because of his tactic of ambushing the british from the marshes of the south never led a force of more than 70 men.
7 7 the war moves south after failing to conquer any state in the north the british changed strategies yet again.
their new plan was to move the war to the south.
there they believed thousands of loyalists were just waiting to join the kings cause.
clinton began his southern campaign with a successful attack on savannah georgia.
from georgia he moved north to take control of north and south carolina.
at that point clinton returned to new york city leaving lord charles cornwallis to control the war in the south.
saving the south cornwallis soon learned that he did not really control the carolinas after all.
guerrillas soldiers who are not part of a regular army kept the american cause alive.
one of them was francis marion who was also known as the swamp fox marions band of rebels harassed the british with hit and run raids.
they attacked and then faded into the swamps and forests like foxes.
late in 1780 washington sent general nathanael greene to slow the british advance through the south.
greenes army was too small to meet cornwallis in a major battle.
instead greene led cornwalliss troops on an exhausting chase through the southern backcountry.
he wrote of his strategy we fight get beat rise and fight again greenes strategy worked wonderfully.
in april 1781 cornwallis wrote that he was quite tired of marching about the country he moved his army to yorktown a sleepy tobacco port on chesapeake bay in virginia for a good rest.
er7 a trap at yorktown by the time cornwallis was settling into yorktown france had sent nearly 5 000 troops to join washingtons army in new york.
in august washington learned that another 3 000 troops were scheduled to arrive soon in 29 french warships.
washington used this information to set a trap for cornwallis.
secretly he moved his army south to virginia.
when they arrived they joined the french and surrounded yorktown on land with more than 16 000 troops.
meanwhile the french warships showed up just in time to seal off the entrance to chesapeake bay.
their appearance was crucial to the american victory.
now cornwallis was cut off from the british navy and any hope of rescue by sea.
the trap was sprung on october 6 1781 joseph martin watched as a flag was raised to signal that american and french gunners should open fire on yorktown.
i confess i felt a secret pride swell in my heart he wrote when i saw the star spangled banner waving majestically the shelling went on for days until most of the guns in the enemys works were silenced three groups the british the americans and the french were involved in the battle of yorktown.
the americans with the aid of the french were able to surround the british by using forces on both land and sea.
battle of yorktown the american revolution 129 this painting by john trumbull shows the british surrender at yorktown.
at the center is general benjamin lincoln leading the british.
general washington is on the right in front of the american flag.
on the left are french polish and prussian soldiers.
cornwallis surrenders at first cornwallis clung to the hope that the british navy would come to his rescue even as yorktown was exploding around him.
when no ships arrived he finally agreed to surrender.
on october 19 1781 american and french troops formed two long lines that stretched for more than a mile along the road to yorktown the french on one side and the americans on the other.
the two lines could not have looked more different.
the french were dressed in elegant uniforms that gleamed with gold and silver braid in the afternoon sun.
the americans uniforms and not everyone even had uniforms were patched and faded.
behind the lines stood civilians who had traveled for miles to witness the surrender.
after hours of waiting the crowd watched as 8 000 british troops left yorktown to lay down their arms.
the defeated troops moved with slow and solemn step they were accompanied by a slow tune known as the world turned upside down this same sad tune had been played at saratoga after the british surrender.
cornwallis did not take part in this ceremony saying that he was ill in reality the british commander could not bear to surrender publicly to an army that he looked down on as a contemptible and undisciplined rabble mob while cornwallis sulked in his tent his men surrendered their arms.
many of them wept bitter tears.
to the watching americans there was nothing sad about that day.
it was a noble sight to us wrote martin and the more so as it seemed to promise a speedy conclusion to the contest 0 chapter 21 chapter 21 meanwhile as secretary of state john quincy adams recognized the compromise had not settled the future of slavery in the united states as a whole.
i have favored this missouri compromise believing it to be all that could be effected accomplished under the present constitution and from extreme unwillingness to put the union at hazard risk wrote adams in his diary.
if the union must be dissolved slavery is precisely the question on which it ought to break.
for the present however the contest is laid asleep 21 4 the missouri compromise unravels as john quincy adams predicted for a time the contest over slavery was settled.
but a powerful force was building that soon pushed the issue into the open again the second great awakening.
leaders of the religious revival of the 1820s and 1830s promised that god would bless those who did the lords work.
for some americans the lord s work was the abolition of slavery.
the gag rule during the 1830s abolitionists flooded congress with antislavery petitions.
congress they were told had no power to interfere with slavery in the states.
then what about the district of columbia.
asked the abolitionists.
surely congress had the power to ban slavery in the nations capital.
rather than confront that question congress voted in 1836 to table or set aside indefinitely all antislavery petitions.
outraged abolitionists called this action the gag rule because it gagged or silenced all congressional debate over slavery.
in 1839 the gag rule prevented consideration of an antislavery proposal by john quincy adams who was now a member of congress.
knowing that the country would not agree on abolishing slavery altogether adams proposed a constitutional amendment saying that no one could be born into slavery after 1845 congress however refused to consider his proposal.
emancipator extra new york september 3 1839 american anti slavery almanac for 1840 the seven cuts following are selected from thirteen which may be found in the anti slavery almanac for 1810 they represent well authenticated facts and illustrate in various ways the cruelties daily inflicted upon three millions of native born americans by their fellow countrymen.
a brief explanation follows each cut.
many northern periodicals and newspapers detailed the horrors of slavery.
southern fears abolitionists were far from silenced by the re fusal of congress to debate slavery.
they continued to attack slavery in books in newspapers and at public meetings.
white southerners deeply resented the abolitionists attacks as an assault on their way of life.
after nat turners slave rebellion in 1831 resentment turned to fear.
southern states adopted strict new a control the movement of slaves.
many states tried to keep abolition ist writings from reaching slaves.
mississippi even offere a re 5 000 for the arrest and conviction of any person who shall utter publish or circulate abolitionist ideas.
a dividing nation 405 fugitive slaves nat turners rebellion was the last large scale slave revolt.
but individual slaves continued to rebel by running away to freedom in the north.
these fugitives from slavery were often helped in their escape by sympathetic people in the north.
to slaveholders these northerners were no better than bank robbers.
they saw a slave as a valuable piece of property.
every time a slave escaped it was like seeing their land vanish into thin air.
slaveholders demanded that congress pass a fugitive slave law to help them recapture their property.
in this painting northerners help a group of fugitive slaves make their escape.
the assistance northerners gave to escaped slaves angered many southern slaveholders.
slavery in the territories the gag rule kept the slavery issue out of congress for ten years.
then in 1846 president james polk sent a bill to congress asking for funds for the war with mexico.
pennsylvania representative david wilmot added an amendment to the bill known as the wilmot proviso.
a proviso is a condition added to an agreement.
the wilmot proviso stated that neither slavery nor involuntary servitude shall ever exist in any part of the territory that might be acquired from mexico as a result of the mexican american war.
southerners in congress strongly opposed wilmots amendment.
they maintained that congress had no right to decide where slaveholders could take their property.
the wilmot proviso passed the house but it was rejected by the senate.
statehood for california for the next three years congress debated what to do about slavery in the territory gained from mexico.
southerners wanted all of the mexican cession open to slavery.
northerners wanted all of it closed.
as a compromise southerners proposed a bill that would extend the missouri compromise line all the way to the pacific.
slavery would be banned north of that line and allowed south of it.
northerners in congress rejected this proposal.
fugitive a person who flees or tries to escape for example from slavery wilmot proviso a proposal made in 1846 to prohibit slavery in the territory added to the united states as a result of the mexican american war then late in 1849 california applied for admission to the union a free state.
northerners in congress welcomed california with oper arms.
southerners however rejected californias request.
making california a free state they warned would upset the balance betwee slave and free states.
the result would be unequal representation of slave states and free states in congress.
the year ended with congress deadlocked over californias requc for statehood.
once again southerners spoke openly of withdrawin from the union.
and once again angry northerners denounced slave as a crime against humanity.
406 chapter 8 creating the constitution 159 reading further the scholarly james madison finished college in two years and then studied law.
by the time he arrived atthe constitutional convention he was experienced in state and national politics.
james madison and the long hot summer of 1787 james madison is often called the father of the constitution.
although many people had a hand in shaping the constitution most scholars agree that madison was the main driving force behind the document s creation.
it was a process that took more than 100 days of complex negotiation and compromise.
even so it did not turn out quite as madison had wanted.
in the first week of may 1787 james madison stood alone in the east room of the pennsylvania state house.
within a few weeks many of the nations political leaders would gather there.
although few of them knew it at the time their task would be to create a new plan of government for the united states.
madison knew it though and he wanted to be ready.
madison had thought long and hard about the great challenges facing the nation.
under the articles of confederation the united states was floundering.
madison believed that a stronger national government was needed to keep the country on course.
other leaders also agreed on the need for reform.
however many of them had fears of a strong central government.
madison would have to work hard to change those ideas.
madison had arrived early in philadelphia to prepare for the convention.
he had checked in to one of the citys finest boarding houses run by mrs mary house.
soon most of his fellow delegates from virginia would be there also.
that would give them a chance to make plans before the convention began.
unfortunately it was not a fine time to be in philadelphia.
it had been a wet and rainy spring.
now as summer neared it was becoming increasingly hot and humid.
to make matters worse the city was plagued with dense clouds of black flies.
residents had to sleep with their windows closed or be tormented by swarms of buzzing biting insects.
shutting their windows however meant they had to spend their nights sweltering in the heat.
madison had bigger concerns though.
as he looked around the east room of the state house he imagined the events that would soon unfold there.
the room was large with a 20 foot high ceiling and tall windows.
but it would be crowded once all the delegates were seated.
madison decided to sit up front where he could get a clear view of the proceedings.
he planned to take notes and wanted to be able to see and hear everything that took place at the convention.
er 8 madison leads the way madison was 36 years old at the time of the convention.
he was a small man just five and a half feet tall with pale skin and thinning hair.
he typically dressed in black.
he was shy and spoke in a soft voice that was often hard to hear.
nevertheless he had great energy.
he walked with a bounce in his step and could get by on just a few hours of sleep a night.
although he rarely showed personal warmth or charm he was a brilliant conversationalist who knew how to win others to his side.
madison was well prepared to play a leading role at the convention.
he had spent several years as a member of congress.
he had studied the writings of great political thinkers and understood how political systems worked.
he had also helped write the virginia constitution of 1776 this document established a state government with separation of powers and a two house legislature.
it was an important model of democratic government.
madison would bring all this past experience to bear at the convention.
over the next two weeks the other delegates began to arrive.
they were all wealthy educated white men.
most were lawyers or large land owners.
there were no workers or tradesmen.
there were also no women african americans or american indians.
the delegates took rooms at various boarding houses and inns.
one of these inns the indian queen was the largest in the city.
soon it would be filled with leaders from around the nation.
here they would gather to eat drink and swap stories.
it was a center of social activity during the convention.
by mid may most of the virginia delegation had arrived.
this group included three major political figures george washington george mason and edmund randolph.
these men met with madison late into the night.
together they came up with a plan for a new government a set of 15 proposals now known as the virginia plan.
this plan embodied madisons ideas on the kind of government the nation needed.
with a population of more than 40 000 in 1787 philadelphia was the nation s largest city.
it was filled with inns and taverns like the city tavern the unofficial meeting place forthe convention.
now called independence hall this philadelphia building is the birthplace of our nation s independence.
the declaration of independence was signed here in 1776 the articles of confederation were adopted here in 1781 and the u s constitution was created here in 1787 the convention begins on may 14 the convention was due to begin but many delegates had still not arrived.
travel was difficult in those days.
the roads were bad and coaches often got stuck in the mud or broke an axle.
a trip that normally took a week might take much longer because of problems on the road.
finally on may 25 the convention got underway.
for the next four months the delegates would gather in the east room to debate the issues.
to maintain secrecy they agreed to bolt the doors and shut the windows.
as the summer wore on the heat increased.
many of the men wore wigs and wool suits and with the doors and windows closed the room was stifling.
in this hothouse atmosphere arguments were often intense.
through it all madison sat at his table near the front scribbling away at his notes.
in the evening he took these notes back to his room and laboriously copied them out word for word.
it was an ordeal that almost killed him he said.
but he was determined to keep a complete and accurate record of the convention.
debating the virginia plan from the start the convention focused much of its attention on the virginia plan.
on may 29 edmund randolph presented the various points of the plan.
the next day he summed up its main idea in a bold proposal that a national government ought to be established consisting of a supreme legislative executive judiciary amazingly randolph s proposal was approved with little debate.
madison had j 62 chapter 8 achieved his first major goal without a struggle.
the convention had agreed to form a new government.
but winning support for the plans details would prove much more difficult.
the toughest issues involved the national legislature.
the delegates all agreed that congress was a key part of government.
but they disagreed on how the people and the states should be represented in congress.
convention leaders like madison knew that this dispute could derail the convention.
so they focused on what they thought would be a simpler issue the executive branch.
but this turned out to be a tough issue too.
should there be one executive or three.
how long should the executive serve.
should the executive be elected or appointed.
for a week the debate circled around and around these questions.
delegates would vote on a question discuss it some more and vote again.
crafting a final document frustrated by this seemingly endless debate on june 9 the delegates decided to tackle the thorny problem of representation in the legislature.
the month long debate was so fierce that at times it looked like the convention would fall apart.
but the delegates always pulled back from the brink.
finally on july 16 they approved the great compromise which set different forms of representation for the two houses of congress.
depressed madison realized that he had lost his battle for a legislature based solely on representing the people rather than the states.
but with the greatest battle behind them the framers could work toward a final plan for the new government.
by late august the delegates formed the committee on postponed matters to take up the few issues that remained to be resolved.
a few days later the committee reported back with its findings.
more debate followed.
but by early september a committee on style consisting of madison and four others was formed to prepare a final draft to present to the full convention.
ever mindful of the importance of this plan for the nation the delegates made a few more changes.
finally gouverneur morris of new jersey handwrote the final document 4 300 words in all.
on the question to agree to the constitution as amended madison recorded in his notes all the states ay yes and so at last on september 17 1787 most of the delegates signed the constitution.
it was ready to go to the states for ratification.
the exhausted delegates had finally completed their monumental task.
the constitution was not everything james madison had hoped for.
in his view it left too much power in the hands of the states.
but he had done what he could and was prepared to live with the outcome.
now he would turn to the fight for ratification and the task of creating a new government.
visitors to the national constitution center in philadelphia can make a choice the framers once made to sign or not to sign a copy of the constitution.
in signers half bronze statues of the framers stand together.
visitors are encouraged to consider the choices that each man made in 1787 creating the constitution 163 chapter you will learn more about the enduring quality of this ingenious document.
more than 200 years after the constitution was created for a new nation a vastly different united states is still governed by this document.
life size bronze statues atthe national constitution center commemorate the drafting of the constitution.
the constitution a more perfect union 165 popular sovereignty the idea that the governments authority comes from the people 9 2 the preamble tells the goals of government the delegates who crafted the constitution chose each word carefully some of their best known words are in the introduction which is called the preamble.
the preamble explains the reasons for the new government.
the constitution begins with the memorable phrase we the people with these words the delegates announced that the constitution based its authority on the people themselves.
the power to form the government did not come from the states or the existing government.
it did not come from a sovereign ruler appointed by god.
instead the power came from ordinary americans.
this concept is known as popular sovereignty.
the preamble then lists the goals of the new government.
first the delegates wanted to form a more perfect union what did the delegates mean by this.
they wanted the states to cooperate with each other.
they also wanted to create a strong relationship between the states and the national government.
the constitution also aims to establish justice americans wanted to be ruled by laws not by the might of soldiers or the decisions of kings.
the same laws would apply to all people.
the delegates hoped that the new government would insure domestic tranquility by domestic they meant within the country.
by tranquility they meant peace and order.
it was the governments job to keep peace and maintain order within the country.
the new government would provide for the common defence in other words the national government would be responsible for protecting the nation against foreign enemies.
this would allow for stronger protection than would be possible if each state had its own army and navy.
the delegates wanted the new government to promote the general welfare this meant that the government could support an economy and a society in which people could prosper.
finally the delegates hoped to secure the blessings of liberty to ourselves and our posterity by posterity the delegates meant the generations that would come after them.
they wanted the government to protect the freedoms gained in the american revolution and preserve them for americans to enjoy in the future.
the delegates knew that these goals required a national government.
however based on their experience with a king many people were suspicious of a strong central government.
for this reason the delegates tried to create a balanced framework that people could trust.
visitors can viewthe constitution at the national archives in washington d c where it is permanently on display.
16 chapter 22 the civil war what factors and events influenced the outcome of the civil war.
sjsil bmm8 22 1 introduction the confederate bombardment of fort sumter in charleston south carolina ended months of confusion.
the nation was at war.
the time had come to choose sides.
for most whites in the south the choice was dear.
early in 1861 representatives from six of the seven states that had seceded from the union met to form a new nation called the confederate states of america.
southerners believed that just as the states had once voluntarily joined the union they could voluntarily leave it now.
the men who fought for the south were proud defenders of southern independence.
for many northerners the choice was just as clear.
there can be no neutrals in this war declared senator stephen douglas after the attack of fort sumter only patriots or traitors most northerners viewed the secession of southern states as a traitorous act of rebellion against the united states.
they marched off to war eager to defend what they saw as their union their constitution and their flag.
choosing sides was harder for the eight slave states located between the confederacy and the free states.
four of these so called border states virginia arkansas tennessee and north carolina joined the confederacy.
the western counties of virginia however remained loyal to the union.
rather than fight for the south they broke away to form a new state called west virginia.
the other four border states delaware maryland kentucky and missouri remained in the union although many of their citizens fought for the south.
as americans took sides they began to see why a civil war a conflict between two groups of citizens in one country is the most painful kind of war.
this conflict divided not only states but also families and friends.
in this chapter 9 margaret brent requested voting rights declared independence.
in 1648 she asked the maryland assembly to grant her two votes one for owning land and one for being lord baltimore s legal representative.
the governor refused her request.
women s votes would affect election outcomes in their favor.
whatever the reasons women voted in new jersey until the law was repealed in 1807 it would take more than 100 years and a hard fight to pass an amendment to the constitution that granted women the right to vote.
the rights of african americans when the war ended many african americans left the united states.
they feared that the new democracy would not include them.
some went to england.
others went to canada or the west indies.
most of those who left were fugitive slaves.
by some accounts 30 000 african americans left virginia.
another 25 000 left south carolina.
the majority of the african americans who stayed were slaves.
but some were not.
the 1790 census reported that there were about 59 000 free blacks living in the united states.
among them was benjamin banneker.
banneker was a maryland tobacco farmer a scientist and a surveyor.
he wrote a well known almanac.
he also wrote a letter to thomas jefferson.
in it he explained why african americans should have the same rights as whites.
banneker wrote the letter in 1791 the year in which he surveyed the land for the new national capital.
at the time jefferson was secretary of state.
banneker explained that both blacks and whites were created by god.
however variable we may be in society or religion he wrote however diversified in situation or color we are all of the same family he went on to quote the declaration of independence to the man who wrote it.
we hold these truths to be self evident that all men are created equal that they are endowed by their creator with certain unalienable rights and that among these are life liberty and the pursuit of happiness banneker explained that african americans deserved those rights just as whites did.
he even went so far as to accuse jefferson of using fraud and violence to keep blacks enslaved.
although a slaveholder himself jefferson wrote back that no body wishes more than i do to see such proofs as you exhibit that nature has given to our black brethren talents equal to those of the other colors of men but slavery continued in the south until the civil war.
the freedoms guaranteed by the constitution would not be extended to african americans for many years.
african american men gained the right to vote in 1870 it would take another 50 years before all women including african americans were granted voting rights.
and not until the 1960s were laws passed giving all african americans the legal protection to exercise their right to vote.
the words we the people still begin our constitution.
more than 200 years later their meaning has changed in ways that mum bett abigail adams and benjamin banneker would approve.
benjamin bannakers pennsylvania delaware mao land and virginia almanac for the year of onr lord 1 95 i besig the third after leap year printed for willusf bbons cherry a benjamin banneker published six almanacs between 1792 and 1797 a self educated scientist he included information on tides astronomy and eclipses that he calculated himself.
the constitution a more perfect union 181 chapter 22 environmental destruction wrought by the war.
croplands lay in ruins two fifths of the souths livestock had been destroyed.
many historians have called the civil war the first truly modern war.
it was the first war to reflect the technology of the industrial revolution railroads the telegraph armored ships more accurate and destructive weaponry.
it also introduced total war war between whole societies not just uniformed armies.
as devastating as it was the civil war left many issues unsettled.
ihe old society of the south had been destroyed but the memory of it lingered.
thousands of white southerners clung to a romantic picture of the prewar south.
decaying plantation houses became shrines.
in the years to come many in the south would try to re create their vanished way of life.
secession and slavery were gone but conflicts over states rights and the status of african americans would continue long into the future.
chapter 24 chinese laborers were recruited to do the backbreaking work required to lay rails across the sierra nevada.
the central pacific builds east in california the central pacific railroad faced different problems.
soon after the company began laying track many of the workers dashed off to newly discovered silver mines in nevada.
construction practically stopped.
in desperation charles crocker the head of construction hired 50 chinese workers.
he doubted that the chinese were big enough to do heavy construction.
but the chinese surprised him.
they could do as much work in a day as any other crew and often more.
crocker was so impressed that he sent agents to china to hire more workers.
the agents were lucky.
war and unrest had driven millions of chinese into poverty and debt.
young men jumped at the chance of going to america to build a railroad.
most of them planned to save their money and return to china as wealthy men.
more than 12 000 chinese laborers worked for the central pacific.
they cleared trees shoveled dirt blasted tunnels and laid tracks.
at least 1 000 chinese workers lost their lives in explosions snow slides and other accidents.
despite these losses the workers managed to lay up to ten miles of track in a day.
the two lines meet on may 10 1869 the two lines came together at promontory summit in utah territory.
a golden spike was driven in to complete the 1 800 miles of track.
in time a network of railroads would bring new settlers encourage the construction of towns and cities and allow mail and supplies to be shipped clear across the country.
the chinese workers who had contributed so much to building the railroad were not acknowledged at the celebration.
their reward for their years of hard work was to lose their jobs.
a few of them fulfilled their dream of returning to china.
but most stayed on in america helping to build new farms and businesses across the west.
tensions in the west 4 the discovery of gold or silver often resulted in instant towns throughout the west.
pictured here is leadville colorado in the 1870s.
24 5 miners a second group of pioneers the miners dreamed of striking it rich.
the discovery of gold in california in 1848 set off a great treasure hunt in the mountains and deserts of the west.
by 1874 gold or silver had been found in what are now the states of california oregon washington nevada montana colorado arizona and new mexico.
although some immigrants also came to seek their fortunes most miners were young white american males who dreamed of striking it rich.
boomtowns and ghost towns mining in the west followed a predictable pattern.
first came the discovery of gold or silver.
soon fortune seekers from around the world flocked to the site.
almost overnight mining camps grew into fast growing settlements called boomtowns.
newspaper reporter j ross browne described the birth of one such town gila city in present day arizona enterprising men hurried to the spot with barrels of whiskey and billiards tables.
traders crowded in with wagons of pork and beans.
gamblers came with cards.
there was everything in gila city within a few months but a church and a jail.
boomtowns had no government no law and little order.
robbery an murder were common.
miners fought back by forming vigilant committees to control crime.
the members of these committees called 476 chapter 12 12 9 president monroe s dilemma a new foreign policy challenge james monroe became president in 1817 after the excitement of the war of 1812 he was relieved to return the nation to its policy of isolationism.
americans began to turn their attention away from europe however and direct it to events happening in latin america.
from mexico to the tip of south america latin americans were rising up in revolt against spain.
latin america s revolutions in mexico the revolt against spanish rule was inspired by a catholic priest named miguel hidalgo me ghell heh dahl goh.
on september 16 1810 hidalgo spoke to a crowd of poor indians in the town of dolores.
my children hidalgo said will you make an effort to recover from the hated spaniards the lands stolen from your fore fathers three hundred years ago.
death to bad government hidalgos speech remembered today as the cry of dolores inspired a revolution that lasted ten years.
in 1821 mexico finally won its independence from spain.
two other leaders liberated south america.
in 1810 a venezuelan named simon bolivar see mohn buh lee var launched a revolution in the north with this cry spaniards you will receive death at our hands.
americans you will receive life jose de san martin ho zay de san mar teen a revolutionary from argentina led the struggle for independence in the south.
by the end of 1825 the last spanish troops had been driven out of south america.
new latin american nations many americans were excited by independence movements in latin america.
the british also supported the revolutions for their own reasons.
spain had not allowed other nations to trade with its colonies.
once freed from spanish rule the new latin american nations were able to open their doors to foreign trade including trade with great britain.
other european leaders were not so pleased.
some even began to talk of helping spain recover its lost colonies.
in 1823 great britain asked the united states to join it in sending a message to these leaders telling them to leave latin america alone.
president james monroe asked former presidents thomas jefferson and james madison for advice.
should the united states do something to support the new latin american nations.
if so what.
a catholic priest miguel hidalgo lower center inspired an independence movement in mexico.
in his upraised hand hidalgo holds the flames of revolution that spread throughout latin america in the early 1800s.
foreign affairs in the young nation 235 monroe doctrine president james monroes declaration in 1823 that the western hemisphere was no longer open to european colonization with the monroe doctrine by his side.
uncle sam warns foreign powers to keep their hands off the americas.
even though the monroe doctrine is more than 180 years old it still guides u s presidents as they make foreign policy decisions.
mfihrcfe doctrine proclaimed 12 10 what happened the monroe doctrine both thomas jefferson and james madison liked the idea of joining with great britain to send a warning to the nations of europe.
jefferson wrote to james monroe our first and fundamental maxim principle should be never entangle ourselves in the broils fights of europe.
our second never to suffer europe to intermeddle interfere with america north and south president monroes secretary of state john quincy adams agreed with jefferson.
but adams insisted that it would be more candid honest as well as more dignified for the united states to speak boldly for itself.
president monroe agreed.
in 1823 monroe made a speech to congress announcing a policy that became known as the monroe doctrine.
monroe stated that the nations of north and south america were free and independent and were not to be considered as subjects for future colonization by any european powers.
the united states he said would view efforts by europeans to take over any portion of this hemisphere as dangerous to our peace and safety europeans denounced monroe s message as arrogant.
by what right asked a french newspaper did the united states presume to tell the other nations of the world what they could do in north and south america.
americans however cheered monroes message.
it made them proud to see the united states stand up for the freedom loving people of latin america.
er 12 in the years ahead the monroe doctrine joined isolationism as a basic principle of u s foreign policy.
the doctrine asserted that the united states would not accept european interference in american affairs.
it also contained another hidden message.
by its very boldness the monroe doctrine told the world that the united states was no longer a weak collection of quarreling states.
it had become a strong and confident nation a nation to be respected by the world.

consider how knowledge of the effects of railroad expansion and business consolidation might influence ones opinion of the industrial age.
then write a newspaper editorial about the great strike of 1877 see page 247 supporting the position of either the railroad owners or the striking workers.
use mywritesmart in your ebook to write your editorial.
j wrltesmart imagine you are a union leader in a factory.
if your demands for better working conditions are not met all of the employees will stop work and go on strike.
write a persuasive letter in which you urge your employer to adopt specific reforms to improve working conditions.
use mywritesmart in your ebook to write your letter.
tcehtury in a small group read and discuss the feature on pages 234 235 consider the following question what are the qualities of effective leadership.
choose a political or social leader from the chapter 4 the union in peril 1850 1877 johrerolbct as you read this textbook you will encounter various historical eras.
7ou will use your knowledge of these eras the unit s content and the major characteristics of u s history to create a webpage that identifies the eras in this unit and describes their defining characteristics.
use pages 192 197 to help you organize your thoughts.
sigdng of the constitution by howard chandler christy to 1877 ir te 1.
r yir and skills teks section 1 the americas west africa and europe main idea on the eve of their interaction native american west african and european peoples lived in complex societies.
is founded.
corresponds to b c e or before the common era a d corresponds to c e or common era 2 chapter to answer the following questions.
postwar america pages 634 640 1 how did the gl bill of rights help world war ii veterans.
2 what domestic and foreign issues concerned voters during the 1952 presidential election.
the american dream in the fifties pages 641 649 3 what shift in employment trends had occurred by the mid 1950s.
4 how did life in the suburbs provide the model for the american dream.
popular culture pages 652 657 5 what strategies did radio stations use to counteract the mass popularity of television.
using your notes in a web like the one below show the postwar technological advances you consider most influential.
hypothesizing during americas first two centuries the national character was marked by individualism.
why do you think conformity became the norm in the 1950s.
analyzing causes and effects what factors caused the economic prosperity of the 1950s.
what were the effects of that prosperity.
did all americans benefit equally.
h highways and affordable homes make suburban living desirable.
equal rights remains a problem.
the cold war creates fear and anxiety.
life in postwar america 1945 1960 rock n roll and jazz pave the way for minority representation.
the beat movement rejects conformity.
recreation and consumerism flourish.
television portrays an idealized white america.
urban areas fall into decay.
minorities experience prejudice and discrimination.
1 minorities establish organizations to improve civil rights.
culture 664 chapter 25 the profits from those illegal arms sales to the contras in nicaragua in direct violation of the boland amendment.
president reagan held a press conference to explain what had happened.
a personal voice ronald reagan i am deeply troubled that the implementation of a policy aimed at resolving a truly tragic situation in the middle east has resulted in such controversy.
as ive stated previously i believe our policy goals toward iran were well founded.
presidential press conference november 25 1986 in the summer of 1987 special committees of both houses of congress conducted a dramatic inquiry into the iran contra affair during a month of joint televised hearings.
among those testifying was lieutenant colonel oliver north a member of the national security council staff who played a key role in providing aid to the contras.
north appeared in military uniform adorned with service ribbons and badges.
in defending his actions north talked about patriotism and love of country.
he asserted that he thought he was carrying out the president s wishes and that the end of helping the contras justified almost any means.
after a congressional investigation special prosecutor lawrence e walsh early in 1988 indicted various members of the reagan administration who were involved in the scandal.
oliver north was found guilty of aiding the cover up.
he was fined and sentenced to perform community service.
his conviction was later overturned because he testified under a grant of limited immunity.
on christmas eve of 1992 president bush pardoned a number of reagan officials.
the persian gulf war regardless of the scandal surrounding the iran contra affair conflict with iraq which was iran s long standing enemy and its leader saddam hussein soon eclipsed u s problems with iran.
during the 1980s iran and iraq had fought a prolonged war and hussein found himself with enormous war debts to pay.
several times hussein had claimed that the oil rich nation of kuwait was really part of iraq.
on august 2 1990 iraqi troops invaded kuwait.
the iraqi invaders looted kuwait then they headed toward saudi arabia and counterpoint the united states must occasionally intervene militarily in regional conflicts proponents of u s military intervention abroad agreed with general norman schwarzkopf that as the only remaining superpower we have an awesome responsibility to the rest of the world the united states must take the lead in promoting democracy urged morton h halperin former director of the aclu american civil liberties union.
to say let the un do it is a cop out stated adviser robert g neumann.
political scientist jane sharp expressed a similar sentiment.
she asked can any nation that has taken no action in bosnia to stop the serbian practice of ethnic cleansing continue to call itself civilized thinking critically connect to today comparing and contrasting what do you think are the strongest arguments for and against military intervention in regional conflicts.
connect to history hypothesizing with at least one partner research the events leading up to u s involvement in one of these countries lebanon grenada panama or kuwait.
then negotiate to resolve the conflict.
the united states should not intervene militarily in regional conflicts a foreign policy analyst at the cato institute barbara conry stated that intervention in regional wars is a distraction and a drain on resources whats more she argued it does not work.
recalling the presence of american troops in lebanon conry argued that intervention not only jeopardized american soldiers it often obstructed what it sought to achieve.
the internal freedom of a political community can be achieved only by members of that community agreed professor stephen r shalom.
he added that using military action encourages quick fix solutions that ignore the underlying sources of conflict the conservative tide 853 geography skillbuilder 1 region what did un coalition forces probably hope to achieve by moving forces into southern iraq.
2 movement how did the movements of coalition ground forces show that the intention of the coalition in the gulf war was ultimately defensive not offensive.
main idea drawing conclusions what issue led to the conflict in the middle east.
its oil fields.
if iraq conquered saudi arabia as well as kuwait it would control one half of the world s known oil reserves which would severely threaten u s oil supplies.
for several months president bush and secretary of state james baker organized an international coalition against iraqi aggression.
with the support of congress and the un president bush launched operation desert storm to liberate kuwait from iraqi control.
on january 16 1991 the united states and its allies staged a massive air assault against iraq.
on february 23 they launched a successful ground offensive from saudi arabia.
on february 28 1991 president bush announced a cease fire.
operation desert storm was over.
kuwait was liberated.
millions of americans turned out for the victory parades that greeted returning soldiers.
after the debacle in vietnam they were thrilled the war was over with fewer than 400 casualties among un coalition forces.
however there were subsequent reports that gulf veterans were suffering from disabilities caused by chemicals used in the war.
by contrast iraq had suffered an estimated 100 000 military and civilian deaths.
during the embargo that followed many iraqi children died from outbreaks of cholera typhoid enteritis and other diseases.
bushs domestic policies despite his great achievement in the persian gulf war president bush was not as successful on the domestic front.
he was hurt by rising deficits and a recession that began in 1990 and lasted through most of 1992 bush was forced to raise taxes despite his campaign pledge.
his approval rating had dropped to 49 percent by 1992 the weak economy and the tax hike doomed bush s reelection campaign and 12 years of republican leadership came to an end.
key playefl h norman schwarzkopf 1934 in 1988 norman schwarzkopf shown above became commander in chief of forces in asia and africa.
during the persian gulf war more than 540 000 men and women served under the command of stormin norman schwarzkopf said of saddam hussein that he was neither a strategist nor is he schooled in the operational art nor is he a tactician nor is he a general nor is he a soldier.
other than that he is a great military man.
1 terms names for each term or name write a sentence explaining its meaning.
mikhail gorbachev perestroika tiananmen square inf treaty sandinistas contras operation desert storm main idea using your notes use a chart like the one below to describe u s involvement in world affairs.
foreign policy europe central america and caribbean critical thinking analyzing causes what factors caused the end of the cold war.
think about events in the soviet union events in germany and eastern europe how u s leaders responded to those events including reagans peace through strength policy middle east forming generalizations what factors do you think determined whether or not the united states intervened militarily in other nations.
5 hypothesizing is it possible for an authoritarian government to make economic reforms without also making political reforms.
support your answer with details from the text.
now write a paragraph in which you describe a trouble spot in one of these regions.
the conservative tide assessment terms names for each term or name below write a sentence explaining its significance.
1 entitlement program 2 affirmative action 3 moral majority 4 ronald reagan 5 supply side economics 6 geraldine ferraro 7 aids 8 mikhail gorbachev 9 contras 10 operation desert storm main ideas use your notes and the information in the chapter 13 main idea analyzing effects a how did the influx of african americans change northern cities.
vocabulary oratory the art of public speaking themselves from their homes in the south and moved north to the big cities in search of jobs.
by the end of the decade 5 2 million of the nation s 12 million african americans over 40 percent lived in cities.
zora neale hurston docu merited the departure of some of these african americans.
a personal voice zora neale hurston some said goodbye cheerfully.
others fearfully with terrors of unknown dangers in their mouths.
others in their eagerness for distance said nothing.
the daybreak found them gone.
the wind said north quoted in sorrow s kitchen the life and folklore of zora neale hurston however northern cities in general had not welcomed the massive influx of african americans.
tensions had escalated in the years prior to 1920 culminating in the summer of 1919 in approximately 25 urban race riots.
41 african american goals founded in 1909 the national association for the advancement of colored people naacp urged african americans to protest racial violence.
w e b du bois a founding member of the naacp led a parade of 10 000 african american men in new york to protest such violence.
du bois also used the naacp s magazine the crisis as a platform for leading a struggle for civil rights.
under the leadership of james weldon johnson poet lawyer and naacp executive secretary the organization fought for legislation to protect african american rights.
it made antilynching laws one of its main priorities.
in 1919 three antilynching bills were introduced in congress although none was passed.
the naacp continued its campaign through antilynching organizations that had been established in 1892 by ida b wells.
gradually the number of lynchings dropped.
the naacp represented the new more militant voice of african americans.
marcus garvey and the unia although many african americans found their voice in the naacp they still faced daily threats and discrimination.
marcus garvey an immigrant from jamaica believed that african americans should build a separate society.
his different more radical message of black pride aroused the hopes of many.
in 1914 garvey founded the universal negro improvement association unia.
in 1918 he moved the unia to new york city and opened offices in urban ghettos in order to recruit followers.
by the mid 1920s garvey claimed he had a million followers.
he appealed to african americans with a combination of spellbinding oratory mass meetings parades and a message of pride.
a personal voice marcus garvey in view of the fact that the black man of africa has contributed as much to the world as the white man of europe and the brown man and yellow man of asia we of the universal negro improvement association demand that the white yellow and brown races give to the black man his place in the civilization of the world.
we ask for nothing more than the rights of 400 million negroes.
speech at liberty hall new york city 1922 playr james weldon johnson 1871 1938 james weldon johnson worked as a school principal newspaper editor and lawyer in florida.
in 1900 he wrote the lyrics for lift every voice and sing the song that became known as the black national anthem.
the first stanza begins as follows lift every voice and sing till earth and heaven ring ring with the harmonies of liberty let our rejoicing rise high as the listening skies let it resound loud as the rolling sea in the 1920s johnson straddled the worlds of politics and art.
he served as executive secretary of the naacp spearheading the fight against lynching.
in addition he wrote well known works such as gods trombones a series of sermon like poems and black manhattan a look at black cultural life in new york during the roaring twenties.
the roaring life of the 1920s 453 marcus garvey designed this uniform of purple and gold complete with feathered hat for his role as provisional president of africa garvey also lured followers with practical plans especially his program to promote african american businesses.
further garvey encouraged his followers to return to africa help native people there throw off white colonial oppressors and build a mighty nation.
his idea struck a chord in many african americans as well as in blacks in the caribbean and africa.
despite the appeal of garvey s movement support for it declined in the mid 1920s when he was convicted of mail fraud and jailed.
although the movement dwindled garvey left behind a powerful legacy of newly awakened black pride economic independence and reverence for africa.
je the harlem renaissance flowers in new york many african americans who migrated north moved to harlem a neighborhood on the upper west side of new york s manhattan main idea summarizing jpwhat approach to race relations did marcus garvey promote.
in the 1920s harlem became the world s largest black urban community with residents from the south the west indies cuba puerto rico and haiti.
james weldon johnson described harlem as the capital of black america.
a personal voice james weldon johnson 44 harlem is not merely a negro colony or community it is a city within a city the greatest negro city in the world.
it is not a slum or a fringe it is located in the heart of manhattan and occupies one of the most beautiful.
sections of the city.
it has its own churches social and civic centers shops theaters and other places of amusement.
and it contains more negroes to the square mile than any other spot on earth.
harlem the culture capital like many other urban neighborhoods harlem suffered from overcrowding unemployment and poverty.
rut its problems in the 1920s were eclipsed by a flowering of creativity called the harlem renaissance a literary and artistic movement celebrating african american culture.
african american writers above all the harlem renaissance was a literary movement led by well educated middle class african americans who expressed a new pride in the african american experience.
they celebrated their heritage and wrote with defiance and poignancy about the trials of being black in a white world.
w e b du bois and james weldon johnson helped these young talents along as did the harvard educated former rhodes scholar alain locke.
in 1925 locke published the new negro a landmark collection of literary works by many promising young african american writers.
claude mckay a novelist poet and jamaican immigrant was a major figure whose militant verses urged african americans to resist prejudice and discrimination.
his poems also expressed the pain of life in the black ghettos and the strain of being black in a world dominated by whites.
another gifted writer of the time was jean toomer.
his experimental book cane a mix of poems and sketches about blacks in the north and the south was among the first full length literary publications of the harlem renaissance.
missouri born langston hughes was the movement s best known poet.
many of hughes s 1920s poems described the difficult lives of working class african americans.
like mckay hughes wrote of black defiance but he also wrote of hope.
some of his poems moved to the tempo of jazz and the blues.
imagine that you are working as a speechwriter for ronald reagan in 1980 use mywritesmart to write a speech that explains why americans should vote for reagan.
include some of the key terms that you encountered in the chapter 13 harlem in the 1920s the fletcher henderson orchestra became one of the most influential jazz bands during the harlem renaissance.
here henderson the bands founder sits at the drums with louis armstrong on trumpet third from left.
at the turn of the century new yorks harlem neighborhood was overbuilt with new apartment houses.
enterprising african american realtors began buying and leasing property to other african americans who were eager to move into the prosperous neighborhood.
as the number of blacks in harlem increased many whites began moving out.
harlem quickly grew to become the center of black america and the birthplace of the political social and cultural movement known as the harlem renaissance.
1 ii nmi i iljt ljf j l jl nl jln jlasthj st cott bn club new ycll ciiv r e ronx harlem room jan johnson.
homk izzo tusthstj in the mid 1920s the cotton club was one of a number of fashionable entertainment clubs in harlem.
although many venues like the cotton club were segregated white audiences packed the clubs to hear the new music styles of black performers such as duke ellington and bessie smith.
zos central park justh sk ioc il e l st.
predominantly i black neighborhoods rnicnnzn if if n 1 mile 1 kilometer u 11 sstfffiw.
ist v in 1927 harlem was a bustling neighborhood.
theoaring l the hot five included from left louis armstrong johnny st cyr johnny dodds kid ory and lil hardin armstrong.
in many of her novels short stories poems and books of folklore zora neale hurston portrayed the lives of poor unschooled southern blacks in her words the greatest cultural wealth of the continent.
much of her work celebrated what she called the common person s art form the simple folkways and values of people who had survived slavery through their ingenuity and strength.
african american performers the spirit and talent of the harlem renaissance reached far beyond the world of african american writers and intellectuals.
some observers including langston hughes thought the movement was launched with shuffle along a black musical comedy popular in 1921.
it gave just the proper push to that negro vogue of the 20s he wrote.
several songs in shuffle along including love will find a way won popularity among white audiences.
the show also spotlighted the talents of several black performers including the singers florence mills josephine raker and mabel mercer.
during the 1920s african americans in the performing arts won large followings.
the tenor roland hayes rose to stardom as a concert singer and the singer and actress ethel waters debuted on broadway in the musical africana.
paul robeson the son of a one time slave became a major dramatic actor.
his performance in shakespeare s othello first in london and later in new york city was widely acclaimed.
subsequently robeson struggled with the racism he experienced in the united states and the indignities inflicted upon him because of his support of the soviet union and the communist party.
he took up residence abroad living for a time in england and the soviet union.
african americans and jazz jazz was born in the early 20th century in new orleans where musicians blended instrumental ragtime and vocal blues into an exuberant new sound.
in 1918 joe king oliver and his creole jazz band traveled north to chicago carrying jazz with them.
in 1922 a young trumpet player named louis armstrong joined oliver s group which became known as the creole jazz band.
his talent rocketed him to stardom in the jazz world.
famous for his astounding sense of rhythm and his ability to improvise armstrong made personal expression a key part of jazz.
after two years in chicago in 1924 he joined fletcher henderson s band then the most important big jazz band in new york city.
armstrong went on to become perhaps the most important and influential musician in the history of jazz.
he often talked about his anticipated funeral.
a personal voice louis armstrong theyre going to blow over me.
cats will be coming from everywhere to play.
i had a beautiful life.
when i get to the pearly gates ill play a duet with gabriel.
well play sleepy time down south he wants to be remembered for his music just like i do.
quoted in the negro almanac jazz quickly spread to such cities as kansas city memphis and new york city and it became the most popular music for dancing.
during the 1920s harlem pulsed to the sounds of jazz which lured throngs of whites to the showy exotic nightclubs there including the famed cotton club.
in the late 1920s edward kennedy duke ellington a jazz pianist and composer led his ten piece main idea synthesizing in what ways did writers of the harlem renaissance celebrate a rebirth.
chapter 1 exploration and the colonial era section 2 spanish north america main idea beginning with the voyage of christopher columbus the spanish built a vast colonial empire in the americas.
section 3 early british colonies main idea beginning in the early 1600s the english established colonies along the eastern shore of north america.
section 4 the colonies come of age main idea even though both northern and southern colonies prospered many colonists began to question british authority.
c 20 000 bdh asian peoples migrate to america americas world 20 000 1000 history mexico s ancient civilizations 7 video i nt eragt you live in the 15th century.
your society hunts freely grows crops of great variety and trades with nearby cultures.
now you sense that your world is about to change the ships you see approaching are like nothing you have encountered before.
as you read the chapter you will learn about three complex societies that met in north america in the late 1400s the european the west african and the native american.
however it is with the ancient peoples of the americas that american history actually begins.
ancient cultures in the americas no one knows for sure when the first americans arrived but it may have been as long as 22 000 years ago.
at that time the glaciers of the last ice age had frozen 4 chapter 7 critical thinking 3 summarizing explain how settlement house workers expanded economic opportunities for ethnic and religious minorities.
analyzing issues why would urban problems inspire followers of the social gospel to work toward reform.
analyzing effects what effects did the migration from rural areas to the cities in the late 19th century have on urban society.
think about why people moved to cities the problems caused by rapid urban growth the differences in the experiences of whites and blacks teks 3a main idea politics in the gilded age local and national political corruption in the 19th century led to calls for reform.
why it matters now political reforms paved the way for a more honest and efficient government in the 20th century and beyond.
terms names x ihkiimu nutc5 use the graphic organizer online to take notes about political corruption in the gilded age.
one americans story political machine james a garfield graft chester a arthur boss tweed pendleton civil patronage service act civil service grover cleveland.
r rutherford b.
benjamin 1 i t hayes harrison mark twain described the excesses of the late 19th century in a satirical novel the gilded age a collaboration with the writer charles dudley warner.
the title of the book has since come to represent the period from the 1870s to the 1890s.
twain mocks the greed and self indulgence of his characters including philip sterling.
a personal voice mark twain and charles dudley warner there are many young men like him philip sterling in american society of his age opportunities education and abilities who have really been educated for nothing and have let themselves drift in the hope that they will find somehow and by some sudden turn of good luck the golden road to fortune.
he saw people all around him poor yesterday rich to day who had come into sudden opulence by some means which they could not have classified among any of the regular occupations of life 99 the gilded age twain s characters find that getting rich quick is more difficult than they had thought it would be.
investments turn out to be worthless politicians bribes eat up their savings.
the glittering exterior of the age turns out to hide a corrupt political core and a growing gap between the few rich and the many poor.
a luxurious apartment building rises behind a new york city shantytown in 1889 the emergence of political machines the late 19th century cities experienced rapid growth under inefficient government.
in a climate influenced by dog eat dog social darwinism cities were receptive to a new power structure the political machine and a new politician the city boss.
immigrants and urbanization 267 the political machine an organized group that controlled the activities of a political party in a city the political machine also offered services to voters and businesses in exchange for political or financial support n t e eca es after the civil war political machines gained control of local government in baltimore new york san francisco and other major cities.
the machine was organized like a pyramid.
at the pyramid s base were local precinct workers and captains who tried to gain voters support on a city block or in a neighborhood and who reported to a ward boss.
at election time the ward boss worked to secure the vote in all the precincts in the ward or electoral district.
ward bosses helped the poor and gained their votes by doing favors or providing services.
as martin lomasney elected ward boss of boston s west end in 1885 explained there s got to be in every ward somebody that any bloke can come to.
and get help.
help you understand none of your law and your justice but help.
at the top of the pyramid was the city boss who controlled the activities of the political party throughout the city.
precinct captains ward bosses and the city boss worked together to elect their candidates and guarantee the success of the machine.
main idea summarizing in what way did the structure of the political machine resemble a pyramid.
the role of the political boss whether or not the boss officially served as mayor he controlled access to municipal jobs and business licenses and influenced the courts and other municipal agencies.
bosses like roscoe conkling in new york used their power to build parks sewer systems and waterworks and gave money to schools hospitals and orphanages.
bosses could also provide government support for new businesses a service for which they were often paid extremely well.
it was not only money that motivated city bosses.
by solving urban problems bosses could reinforce voters loyalty win additional political support and extend their influence.
immigrants and the machine many precinct captains and political bosses were first generation or second generation immigrants.
few were educated beyond grammar school.
they entered politics early and worked their way up from the bottom.
they could speak to immigrants in their own language and understood the challenges that newcomers faced.
more important the bosses were able to provide solutions.
the machines helped immigrants with naturalization attaining full citizenship hous ing and jobs the newcomers most pressing needs.
in return the immigrants provided what the political bosses needed votes.
big jim pendergast an irish american saloonkeeper worked his way up from precinct captain to democratic city boss in kansas city by aiding italian african american and irish voters in his ward.
by 1900 he controlled missouri state politics as well.
a personal voice james pendergast ive been called a boss.
all there is to it is having friends doing things for neo soinx at d y people 7 l st y0u u ke hem v 1 ce e l anybody in my life.
wherever you see a man bulldozing anybody he dont last long quoted in the pendergast machine a corrupt 19th century boss robs the city treasury by easily cutting government red tape or bureaucracy.
main idea analyzing motives why did immigrants support political machines.
68 chapter 27 on page 894.
new foreign policy challenges conflicts and confused alliances grew in the wake of the cold war.
the question of u s intervention overseas and the globalization of the economy presented the united states with a host of new challenges.
relations with former cold war foes maintaining strong relations with russia and china became major goals for the clinton administration.
throughout the 1990s the u s and russia cooperated on economic and arms control issues.
still russia criticized u s intervention in yugoslavia where a bloody civil war raged.
meanwhile u s officials protested russian attacks on rebels in the russian region of chechnya.
u s relations with china were strained as well.
clinton had stressed that he would lean on china to grant its citizens more democratic rights.
as president however he put greater emphasis on increasing trade with china.
despite concerns that chinese spies had stolen u s defense secrets clinton supported a bill passed in 2000 granting china permanent trade rights.
troops abroad with the cold war over the united states turned more of its attention to regional conflicts.
president clinton proved willing to use troops to end conflicts overseas.
in 1991 military leaders in haiti forced the elected president from office.
thousands of refugees fled the military leaders harsh rule.
in 1994 president clinton dispatched american troops to haiti and the military rulers were forced to step down.
other interventions occurred in the balkans.
in 1991 yugoslavia broke apart into five nations.
in bosnia one of the new states some serb militias under slobodan milosevic began ethnic cleansing killing or expelling from their homes people of certain ethnic groups.
in 1995 the united states helped negotiate a peace agreement in bosnia.
clinton sent u s troops to join nato troops to help ensure the deal.
about three years later serb forces attacked ethnic albanians in the serb province of kosovo.
the u s and its nato allies launched air strikes against serbian targets in 1999 forcing the serbs to back down.
american troops followed up by participating in an international peace keeping force.
the united states in today s world 81 main idea jfjjf f in both bosnia and kosovo the administration promised early withdrawal.
however the u s troops stayed longer than had been intended drawing criticism of clinton s policies.
trade and the global economy seeing flourishing trade as essential to u s prosperity and to world economic and political stability president clinton championed the north american free trade agreement nafta this legislation would bring mexico into the free trade zone that the united states and canada already had formed.
the political battle over nafta demonstrated the dynamic relationship between the u s free enterprise system and its international trade policies.
opponents believed nafta would cost american jobs.
they argued that because mexican factories paid lower wages they could make and sell goods at a lower cost.
without tariffs to make mexican goods more expensive than american goods many feared american factories would go out of business.
clinton and the other supporters of nafta believed the agreement would increase trade which would help the u s economy.
clinton fought for and won passage of nafta in 1993 when the treaty was ratified by all three countries legislatures.
once the treaty took effect on january 1 1994 trade with mexico increased.
critics of free trade have remained vocal.
in late 1999 protestors gathered in seattle at a meeting of the world trade organization wto an organization that promotes free trade and economic development.
demonstrations at summit of the americas meetings in quebec city canada in 2001 miami in 2003 and mar del plata argentina in 2005 ended violently.
such protests helped to halt plans to launch the free trade area of the americas ftaa an enlarged version of nafta covering the 34 countries in the western hemisphere.
partisan politics and impeachment analyzing causes why did the united states send troops to yugoslavia and kosovo.
while clinton and congress worked together on deficit reduction and nafta relations in washington became increasingly partisan.
in the midst of political wrangling a scandal rocked the white house and bill clinton became the second president in u s history to be impeached.
republicans take control of congress in 1994 after the failure of president clinton s health care plan recurring questions regarding his leadership began to surface.
the new president had failed to deliver on several campaign promises.
this discontent helped contribute to a major republican victory in the 1994 midterm elections.
many republican candidates led by representative newt gingrich of georgia campaigned with a document they called the contract with america ten items republicans promised to enact if they won control of congress.
they included congressional term limits a balanced budget amendment tax cuts tougher crime laws and welfare reform.
many of the ideas that comprised the contract with america originated with the heritage foundation.
founded in 1973 the heritage foundation was one of the key organizations in the conservative resurgence of the 1980s and 1990s.
its mission is to develop and advocate conservative public policy within the united states.
in the november 1994 election the republicans gained 54 seats in the house and 8 in the senate handing the democrats a humiliating defeat.
republicans took control of both houses of congress for the first time since 1954 newt gingrich was chosen as the new speaker of the house.
vocabulary partisan devoted to or biased in support of a party group or cause summarizing what were some of the provisions of the contract of america.
864 chapter 13 section 2 pages 440 443 take notes on the causes and effects of the changing role of women in the 1920s.
make a diagram like the one shown above to organize the information you find.
1 causes look for reasons behind the events.
what was the common role of women before the 1920s.
what events happened that may have changed attitudes towards women.
2 effects look for the results or consequences.
how did new appliances change life.
3 look for multiple causes and multiple effects.
what happened as a result of the booming industrial economy.
4 notice that an effect may be the cause of another event.
why did women experience a greater equality in marriage as their spheres of activity and influence expanded.
461 sk2 1930 1933 more than 40 of the nations banks fail.
section 1 the nations sick economy main idea as the prosperity of the 1920s ended severe economic problems gripped the nation.
section 2 hardship and suffering during the depression main idea during the great depression americans did what they had to do to survive.
section 3 hoover struggles with the depression main idea president hoovers conservative response to the great depression drew criticism from many americans.
usa world i 1929 1930 army officers led by jose uriburu seize control of the government of argentina.
1931 1931 jane 8 02 million addams shares the americans are j nobel peace prize.
unemployed.
chapter 1 data file who married.
puritans 98 of males and 94 of females married grooms were usually a few years older than brides discouraged marriages between first cousins virginians 25 of males never married most females married grooms nearly 10 years older than brides allowed first cousin marriages quakers 16 of women single at age 50 forbade first cousin marriages the south many african slaves married in a jumping the broomstick ceremony in which the bride and groom jumped over a broomstick to seal their union.
although there is disagreement among african american scholars some suggest that the above painting depicts a slave wedding on a south carolina plantation in the late 1700s.
frontier people almost all women and most men married ages of bride and groom about the same youngest group to marry virginia in virginia marriage was a sacred union.
since the marriage often involved a union of properties and love was not necessary parents were heavily involved in the negotiations.
in this illustration from a dance manual above a young upper class couple work to improve their social graces by practicing an elaborate dance step.
average age at marriage group males females puritan 26 23 virginians 26 19 quakers in delaware 31 29 in penn.
n j 26 22 philadelphians 26 23 frontier people 21 19 modern americans 27 25 i review unit 41 review chapter 26 analyzing political cartoons j vacation 2000 by the end of the 20th century millions of americans owned any number of personal communication devices.
people were able to speak to or correspond with each other instantaneously almost anytime almost anywhere.
the cartoon suggests that americans are dependent on their communication devices and that the once relaxing and peaceful family vacation has given way to the hustle and bustle of constant access.
skillbuilder analyzing political cartoons 1 what modern day communication devices are being used in this cartoon.
2 in what ways do the characters in this cartoon seem trapped by modern day communications technology.
entering the information age in the 1980s the computer industry transformed the world.
instead of giant mainframes and minicomputers desktop workstations now ruled business.
home computers became widely available.
the information superhighway a network of communication devices linking people and institutions across the nation and the world promised to advance the revolution further.
in 1994 vice president al gore began to oversee the government s participation in developing this superhighway.
even though private industries would build the superhighway the government would keep access democratic ensure affordable service for everyone protect privacy and property rights and develop incentives for investors.
vocabulary interface the point of communication between a computer and any other entity such as a printer or human operator the 1990s enjoyed explosive growth of the internet an international network linking computers and allowing almost instant transmittal of text images and sound to users around the world.
use of the network was further popularized by the world wide web which provided a simple visual interface for words and pictures to be seen by an unlimited audience.
through an electronic connection such as a tv cable or phone line users could access an array of media from streaming video to research archives from online shopping catalogs to customized news broadcasts.
as businesses schools and organizations began to use the web as a primary form of communication new forms of social interaction emerged.
users developed online communities such as myspace and facebook to meet and communicate with one another.
by 2009 nearly 228 million americans used the internet regularly to send email to network to share music and photos or to browse through pages on the web.
business and marketplace applications the late 20th century advances in computers and communications have had an impact on american society and business comparable to the industrial developments of the late 1800s.
the desire to capitalize on these innovations for profit drove several companies to enter the marketplace with technology products developed for personal use.
as a result consumers now clamor for the most current technology in cell phones laptop computers and tablets and other personal electronic devices.
the united states in today s world these innovations have affected the workplace as well.
because of cell phones fax machines the internet wireless connectivity and overnight shipping people can more readily telecommute or work from a location of their choice instead of going to an office every day computer based management techniques have also allowed many businesses to streamline.
for instance some manufacturers have implemented just in time jit systems in which they bring in only as many raw materials as are needed to produce the goods their customers demand.
such efficiencies allow them to use their resources elsewhere.
legislating technology in the 1980s the government was slow to recognize the implications of the new communications technology.
in 1994 however the federal communications commission fcc began to auction the valuable rights to airwaves and collected over 9 billion.
then with the rapid growth in the communications industry the federal government took several steps to ensure that consumers received the best service.
congress passed the telecommunications act of 1996 removing barriers that had previously prevented one type of communications company from starting up or buying another related one.
while it increased competition in the industry the law also paved the way for major media mergers.
when capital cities abc inc joined the walt disney company industry watchdogs noted that this reflected the trend toward concentrating media influence in the hands of a few powerful conglomerates.
the passage of the telecommunications act won applause from the communications industry but only mixed reviews from the public.
consumer activists worried that the law would fail to ensure equal access to new technologies for rural residents and poor people.
civil rights advocates contended that the communications decency act part of the telecommunications act restricted free speech because it barred the transmission of indecent materials to minors via the internet.
since the early 2000s the issue of network neutrality has created considerable controversy.
supporters of network neutrality want regulations established that would prevent service providers or the government from restricting access to or content delivered on the internet.
main idea summarizing explain the revolutionary nature of communicating via the internet.
scientific advances enrich lives main idea analyzing effects how might the telecommunications act affect consumers.
at nasa langley research center in virginia an aerospace engineer wearing stereo glasses sees a 3 d view of a space station simulation as shown in the background.
the exciting growth in the telecommunications industry in the 1990s and early 2000s was matched by developments that revolutionized robotics space exploration and medicine.
the world witnessed marvels that for many echoed science fiction.
simulation robotics and machine intelligence visual imaging and artificial intelligence a computer s ability to perform activities that require intelligence were combined to provide applications in industry medicine and education.
for example virtual reality began with the flight simulators used to train military and commercial pilots.
today with a headset that holds tiny video screens and earphones and with a data glove that translates hand movements to a computer screen a user can navigate a virtual landscape.
doctors have used virtual reality to take a computerized tour of a patient s throat and lungs to check for medical problems.
surgeons have performed longdistance surgery through telepresence systems gloves computers and robotic elements specially 878 chapter 20 why it mattered miranda was one of four key criminal justice cases decided by the warren court see related cases.
in each case the decision reflected the chief justice s strong belief that all persons deserve to be treated with respect by their government.
in miranda the court directed police to inform every suspect of his or her rights at the time of arrest and even gave the police detailed instructions about what to say.
the rights of accused people need to be protected in order to ensure that innocent people are not punished.
these protections also ensure that federal state or local authorities will not harass people for political reasons as often happened to civil rights activists in the south in the 1950s and 1960s for example.
critics of the warren court claimed that miranda would lead to more crime because it would become more difficult to convict criminals.
police departments however adapted to the decision.
they placed the list of suspects rights mentioned in miranda on cards for police officers to read to suspects.
the statement of these rights became known as the miranda warning and quickly became famil iar to anyone who watched a police show on television.
as for the defendant ernesto miranda he was retried and convicted on the basis of other evidence.
right this card is carried by police officers in order to read suspects their rights.
far right an officer reads a suspect his rights.
miranda warning custodial interrogation juvenile adult the officer must determine whether the suspect understands the warning and waives his rights.
1 you have the right to remain silent.
2 anything you say can be used as evidence against you 3 vbu have a right to consult with an attorney before questioning and to have him with you during questioning.
4 if you can not afford an attorney one wih be appointed to represent you free of charge.
5 knowing these rights do you want to talk to me without having a lawyer present.
you may stop talking to me at any time and you may also demand a lawyer at any time.
historical impact the miranda decision was highly controversial.
critics complained that the opinion would protect the rights of criminals at the expense of public safety.
since miranda the court has continued to try to strike a balance between public safety and the rights of the accused.
several cases in the 1970s and 1980s softened the miranda ruling and gave law enforcement officers more power to gather evidence without informing suspects of their rights.
even so conservatives still hoped to overturn the miranda decision.
in 2000 however the supreme court affirmed miranda by a 7 to 2 majority in dickerson v united states.
writing for the majority chief justice william rehnquist argued there is no such justification here for overruling miranda.
miranda has become embedded in routine police practice to the point where warnings have become part of our national culture.
connect to history 1 drawing conclusions critics charged that miranda incorrectly used the fifth amendment.
the right to avoid self incrimination they said should only apply to trials not to police questioning.
do you agree or disagree.
connect to today 2 visit the links for historic decisions of the supreme court to research laws and other court decisions related to mapp and miranda.
then prepare a debate on whether courts should or should not set a guilty person free if the government broke the law in establishing that persons guilt.
7t internet activity the new frontier and the great society chapter 8 mexican track workers for the southern pacific railroad posed for this group photo taken sometime between 1910 and 1915 vocabulary peon a worker bound in servitude to a landlord creditor mexicans were accustomed to the region s hot dry climate.
but the work was grueling and the railroads made them work for less money than other ethnic groups.
mexicans were also vital to the development of mining and agriculture in the southwest.
when the 1902 national reclamation act gave government assistance for irrigation projects many southwest desert areas bloomed.
mexican workers became the major labor force in the agricultural industries of the region.
some mexicans however as well as african americans in the southwest were forced into debt peonage a system that bound laborers into slavery in order to work off a debt to the employer.
not until 1911 did the supreme court declare involuntary peonage a violation of the thirteenth amendment.
excluding the chinese by 1880 more than 100 000 chinese immigrants lived in the united states.
white people s fear of job competition with the chinese immigrants often pushed the chinese into segregated schools and neighborhoods.
strong opposition to chinese immigration developed and not only in the west.
see chinese exclusion act page 259.
racial discrimination posed terrible legal and economic problems for nonwhites throughout the united states at the turn of the century.
more people however whites in particular had leisure time for new recreational activities as well as money to spend on a growing arrray of consumer products.
assessment i s 1 terms names for each term or name write a sentence explaining its significance.
b wells grandfather clause jim crow laws debt peonage poll tax segregation plessy v ferguson main idea using your notes review the section and find five key events to place on a time line as shown.
1890 event event 1900 event event event which of these events do you think was most important.
critical thinking analyzing causes and effects why were race relations a significant social issue in the late 19th century.
how did they affect the lives of african americans.
4 comparing what did some african american leaders do to fight discrimination.
5 contrasting how did the challenges and opportunities for mexicans in the united states differ from those for african americans.
think about the types of work available to each group the effects of government policies on each group the effect of the legal system on each group i i life at the turn of the 20th century 289 plessy v ferguson 1896 origins of the case in 1892 homer plessy took a seat in the whites only car of a train and refused to move.
he was arrested tried and convicted in the district court of new orleans for breaking louisiana s segregation law.
plessy appealed claiming that he had been denied equal protection under the law.
the supreme court handed down its decision on may 18 1896 the ruling the court ruled that separate but equal facilities for blacks and whites did not violate the constitution.
legal reasoning plessy claimed that segregation violated his right to equal protection under the law.
moreover he claimed that being of mixed descent he was entitled to every recog nition right privilege and immunity secured to the citizens of the united states of the white race.
justice henry b brown writing for the majority ruled the object of the fourteenth amendment was.
undoubtedly to enforce the absolute equality of the two races before the law but it could not have been intended to abolish distinctions based upon color or to enforce social as distinguished from political equality or a commingling of the two races upon terms unsatisfactory to either.
laws permitting and even requiring their separation in places where they are liable to be brought into contact do not necessarily imply the inferiority of either race to the other 99 in truth segregation laws did perpetrate an unequal and inferior status for african americans.
justice john marshall harlan understood this fact and dissented from the majority opinion.
he wrote in justice john marshall harlan respect of civil rights all citizens are equal before the law.
he condemned the majority for letting the seeds of race hate.
be planted under the sanction of law.
he also warned that the thin disguise of equal accommodations.
will not mislead any one nor atone for the wrong this day done.
legal sources legislation u s constitution fourteenth amendment 1868 no state shall.
deny to any person within its jurisdiction the equal protection of the laws louisiana acts 1890 no.
ill that all railway companies carrying passengers in their coaches in this state shall provide equal but separate accommodations for the white and colored races related cases civil rights cases 1883 the court ruled that the fourteenth amendment could not be used to prevent private citizens from discriminating against others on the basis of race.
williams v mississippi 1898 the court upheld a state literacy requirement for voting that in effect kept african americans from the polls.
cumming v board of education of richmond county 1899 the court ruled that the federal government cannot prevent segregation in local school facilities because education is a local not federal issue.
chapter 15 main idea identifying problems g why was life difficult for farm laborers during the depression.
main idea summarizing what changes j occurred for 1 native americans as a result of the i new deal.
often met with violence from employers and government authorities.
although the ccc and wpa helped some mexican americans these agencies also discriminated against them by disqualifying from their programs migrant workers who had no permanent address.
q native americans gain support native americans received strong government support from the new deal.
in 1924 native americans had received full citizenship by law.
in 1933 president roosevelt appointed john collier as commissioner of indian affairs.
collier helped create the indian reorganization act of 1934 this act was an extreme change in government policy.
it moved away from assimilation and toward native american autonomy.
it also helped to restore some reservation lands to tribal ownership.
the act mandated changes in three areas economic native american lands would belong to an entire tribe.
this provision strengthened native american land claims by prohibiting the government from taking over unclaimed reservation lands and selling them to people other than native americans.
cultural the number of boarding schools for native american children was reduced and children could attend school on the reservations.
political tribes were given permission to elect tribal councils to govern their reservations.
some native americans who valued their tribal traditions hailed the act as an important step forward.
others who had become more americanized as individual landowners under the previous dawes act objected because they were tired of white people telling them what was good for them.
fdr creates the new deal coalition although new deal policies had mixed results for minorities these groups generally backed president roosevelt.
in fact one of fdr s great achievements was to create the new deal coalition an alignment of diverse groups dedicated to supporting the democratic party.
the coalition included southern whites various urban groups african americans and unionized industrial workers.
as a result democrats dominated national politics throughout the 1930s and 1940s.
labor unions flourish as a result of the wagner act and other prolabor legislation passed during the new deal union members enjoyed better working conditions and increased bargaining power.
in their eyes president roosevelt was a friend of labor.
labor unions donated money to roosevelt s reelection campaigns and union workers pledged their votes to him.
between 1933 and 1941 union membership grew from less than 3 million to more than 10 million.
unionization especially affected coal miners and workers in mass production industries such as the automobile rubber and electrica industries.
it was in these industries too that a struggle for dominance within the labor movement began to develop.
the new deal 507j the growing labor movement 1933 1940 robert f wagner a democratic senator from new york 1927 1949 robert f wagner was especially interested in workers welfare.
wagner introduced the national labor relations act in congress in 1935.
the growth of union membership 1930 1940 i union members in millions h n tfl o 4 00 j i i j i w z ly j c u 1930 1932 1934 1936 1938 1940 source historical statistics of the united states sit down strikes union workers such as these cio strikers at the fisher automobile plant in flint michigan in 1937 found the sit down strike an extremely effective method for getting their demands met.
main idea union membership soars a ben shahn poster from the late 1930s boasted of the rise in union membership.
the american federation of labor afl had traditionally been restricted to the craft unions such as carpenters and electricians.
most of the afl leaders opposed industrywide unions that represented all the workers in a given industry such as automobile manufacturing.
frustrated by this position several key labor leaders including john l lewis of the united mine workers of america and david dubinsky of the international ladies garment workers formed the committee for industrial organization to organize industrial unions.
the committee rapidly signed up unskilled and semiskilled workers and within two years it succeeded in gaining union recognition in the steel and automobile industries.
in 1938 the committee for industrial organization was expelled from the afl and changed its name to the congress of industrial organizations cio.
this split lasted until 1955 labor disputes one of the main bargaining tactics of the labor movement in the 1930s was the sit down strike.
instead of walking off their jobs workers remained inside their plants but they did not work.
this prevented the factory owners from carrying on production with strikebreakers or scabs.
some americans disapproved of the sit down strike calling it a violation of private property.
nonetheless it proved to be an effective bargaining tool.
not all labor disputes in the 1930s were peaceful.
perhaps the most dramatic incident was the clash at the republic steel plant in chicago on memorial day 1937 police attacked striking steelworkers outside the plant.
one striker an african american man recalled the experience.
analyzing effects how did new deal policies affect organized labor.
a personal voice jesse reese i began to see people drop.
there was a mexican on my side and he fell and there was a black man on my side and he fell.
down i went.
i crawled around in the grass and saw that people were getting beat.
id never seen police beat women not white women.
id seen them beat black women but this was the first time in my life id seen them beat white women with sticks.
quoted in the great depression 508 chapter 8 amusement parks to meet the recreational needs of city dwellers chicago new york city and other cities began setting aside precious green space for outdoor enjoyment.
many cities built small playgrounds and playing fields throughout their neighborhoods for their citizens enjoyment.
some amusement parks were constructed on the outskirts of cities.
often built by trolley car companies that sought more passengers these parks boasted picnic grounds and a variety of rides.
the roller coaster drew daredevil customers to coney island in 1884 and the first ferris wheel drew enthusiastic crowds to the world s columbian exposition in chicago in 1893 clearly many americans were ready for new and innovative forms of entertainment and a whole panorama of recreational activities soon became available.
eight hours for work eight hours for rest eight hours for what we will the carpenters union worcester massachusetts main idea making inferences how did the mass production of bicycles change womens lives.
bicycling and tennis with their huge front wheels and solid rubber tires the first american bicycles challenged their riders.
because a bump might toss the cyclist over the handlebars bicycling began as a male only sport.
however the 1885 manufacture of the first commercially successful safety bicycle with its smaller wheels and air filled tires made the activity more popular.
and the victor safety bicycle with a dropped frame and no crossbar held special appeal to women.
abandoning their tight corsets women bicyclists donned shirtwaists tailored blouses and split skirts in order to cycle more comfortably.
this attire soon became popular for daily wear.
the bicycle also freed women from the scrutiny of the ever present chaperone.
the suffragist susan b anthony declared i think bicycling has done more to emancipate women than anything else in the world.
it gives women a feeling of freedom and self reliance.
fifty thousand men and women had taken to cycles by 1888 two years later 312 american firms turned out 10 million bikes in one year.
41 americans took up the sport of tennis as enthusiastically as they had taken up cycling.
the modern version of this sport originated in north wales in 1873 a year later the united states saw its first tennis match.
the socialite florence harriman recalled that in the 1880s her father returned from england with one of new york s first tennis sets.
at first neighbors thought the elder harriman had installed the nets to catch birds.
hungry or thirsty after tennis or cycling.
turn of the century enthusiasts turned to new snacks with recognizable brand names.
they could munch on a hershey chocolate bar first sold in 1900 and wash down the chocolate with a coca cola.
an atlanta pharmacist originally formulated the drink as a cure for headaches in 1886 the ingredients included extracts from peruvian coca leaves as well as african cola nuts.
bicycling and other new sports became fads in the late 1800s.
the negro leagues were first formed in 1920 spectator sports americans not only participated in new sports but became avid fans of spectator sports especially boxing and baseball.
though these two sports had begun as popular informal activities by the turn of the 20th century they had become profitable businesses.
fans who couldn t attend an important boxing match jammed barbershops and hotel lobbies to listen to telegraphed transmissions of the contest s highlights.
baseball new rules transformed baseball into a professional sport.
in 1845 alexander j cartwright an amateur player organized a club in new york city and set down regulations that used aspects of an english sport called rounders.
five years later 50 baseball clubs had sprung up in the united states and new york alone boasted 12 clubs in the mid 1860s.
in 1869 a professional team named the cincinnati red stockings toured the country.
other clubs soon took to the road which led to the formation of the national league in 1876 and the american league in 1900 in the first world series held in 1903 the boston pilgrims beat the pittsburgh pirates.
african american baseball players who were excluded from both leagues because of racial discrimination formed their own clubs and two leagues the negro national league and the negro american league.
the novelist mark twain called baseball the very symbol.
and visible expression of the drive and push and rush and struggle of the raging tearing booming nineteenth century.
by the 1890s baseball had a published game schedule official rules and a standard sized diamond.
the spread of mass culture as increasing numbers of americans attended school and learned to read the cultural vistas of ordinary americans expanded.
art galleries libraries books and museums brought new cultural opportunities to more people.
other advances fostered mass entertainment.
new media technology led to the release of hundreds of motion pictures.
mass production printing techniques gave birth to thousands of books magazines and newspapers.
mass circulation newspapers looking for ways to captivate readers attention american newspapers began using sensational headlines.
for example to introduce its story about the horrors of the johnstown pennsylvania flood of 1889 in which more than 2 000 people died one newspaper used the headline the valley of death.
joseph pulitzer a hungarian immigrant who had bought the new york world in 1883 pioneered popular innovations such as a large sunday edition main idea drawing conclusions why do you think sports were so popular among americans at the turn of the century.
294 chapter 15 history through art j american gothic 1930 grant woods 1930 painting american gothic became one of the most famous portrayals of life in the midwest during the great depression.
painted in the style known as regionalism wood painted familiar subjects in realistic ways.
the house in the background was discovered by wood in eldon iowa while he was looking for subjects to paint.
he returned home with a sketch and a photograph and used his sister and his dentist as models for the farmer and daughter in the paintings foreground.
skillbuilder interpreting visual sources 1 what is the message wood portrays in this painting.
explain your answer.
2 do you think this painting is representative of the great depression.
why or why not.
of mexican muralists such as diego rivera typically portrayed the dignity of ordinary americans at work.
one artist robert gwathmey recalled these efforts.
a personal voice robert gwathmey the director of the federal arts project was edward bruce.
he was a friend of the roosevelts from a polite family who was a painter.
he was a man of real broad vision.
he insisted there be no restrictions.
you were a painter do your work.
you were a sculptor do your work.
that was a very free and happy period.
american gothic 1930 grant wood.
oil on beaver board 30 ll 16 x25 11 16 78 cm x 65 3 cm unframed.
the art institute of chicago friends of american art collection 1930 934 photography the art institute of chicago aii rights reserved by the estate of nan wood graham licensed by vaga new york ny quoted in hard times main idea summarizing in what ways did the new deal deliver art to the public.
during the new deal era outstanding works of art were produced by a number of american painters such as edward hopper thomas hart benton and iowa s grant wood whose work includes the famous painting american gothic.
the wpa s federal theater project hired actors to perform plays and artists to provide stage sets and props for theater productions that played around the country.
it subsidized the work of important american playwrights including clifford odets whose play waiting for lefty 1935 dramatized the labor struggles of the 1930s.
woody guthrie sings of america experiencing firsthand the tragedies of the depression singer and songwriter woody guthrie used music to capture the hardships of america.
along with tens of thousands of people from the great plains region guthrie was forced by the dust bowl to seek a better life elsewhere.
he took the road west in search of brighter opportunities and wrote about his experiences in his songs.
these dust bowl ballads told of the devastation brought by the dust storms the trials of the journey west and the challenges that migrant farm workers faced.
a likable and easy going performer guthrie had his own radio show first in los angeles and later in new york city.
however disagreements with management and guthrie s desire to be on the move meant that he rarely stayed at a job very long.
when he was traveling guthrie wrote often at the pace of a song a day.
the hundreds of simple but honest songs guthrie wrote about guthrje hard times and hope became popular around the country.
most notably his song this land is your land would become a classic american folk song.
woody guthrie had a major influence on the course of american folk music.
the new deal 513 walker evans took this photograph of a sharecropper for the influential book let us now praise famous men.
diverse writers depict american life many writers received support through yet another wpa program the federal writers7 project.
this project gave the future pulitzer and nobel prize winner saul bellow his first writing job.
it also helped richard wright an african american author complete his acclaimed novel native son 1940 about a young man trying to survive in a racist world.
zora neale hurston wrote a stirring novel with fwp assistance their eyes were watching god 1937 about a young woman growing up in rural florida.
john steinbeck one of this country s most famous authors received assistance from the federal writers project.
he was able to publish his epic novel the grapes of wrath 1939 which reveals the lives of oklahomans who left the dust bowl and ended up in california where their hardships continued.
before his success however steinbeck had endured the difficulties of the depression like most other writers.
other books and authors examined the difficulties of life during the 1930s.
james t farrell s studs lonigan trilogy 1932 1935 provides a bleak picture of working class life in an irish neighborhood of chicago while jack conroy s novel the disinherited 1933 portrays the violence and poverty of the missouri coalfields where conroy s own father and brother died in a mine disaster.
nevertheless other writers found hope in the positive values of american culture.
the writer james agee and the photographer walker evans collaborated on a book about alabama sharecroppers let us now praise famous men 1941.
though it deals with the difficult lives of poor farmers it portrays the dignity and strength of character in the people it presents.
thornton wilder s play our town 1938 captures the beauty of small town life in new england.
although artists and writers recognized america s flaws they contributed positively to the new deal legacy.
these intellectuals praised the virtues of american life and took pride in the country s traditions and accomplishments.
main idea analyzing issues how did the literature of the time reflect issues of the depression.
assessment 1 terms names for each term or name below write a sentence explaining its significance.
gone with the wind orson welles grant wood richard wright the grapes of wrath critical thinking 3 hypothesizing what type of movies do you think might have been produced if the government had supported moviemaking as part of the new deal.
use evidence from the chapter 2 revolution and the early republic main idea contrasting what was the difference between the land ordinance of 1785 and the northwest ordinance of 1787.
f main idea making inferences why do you think news of shayss rebellion made states eager to participate in the philadelphia convention.
after the revolution many americans favored a republic a government in which citizens rule through their elected representatives.
however many also feared that a democracy government directly by the people placed power in the hands of the uneducated masses.
these fears and concerns deeply affected the planning of the new government.
the articles of confederation the second continental congress set up a new plan of government in a set of laws called the articles of confederation.
the plan established a form of government called a confederation or alliance among the thirteen states.
the articles set up a congress in which each state would have one vote regardless of population.
powers were divided between the states and the national government.
the national government had the power to declare war make peace and sign treaties.
it could borrow money set standards for coins and for weights and measures and establish a postal service.
after approval by all thirteen states the articles of confederation went into effect in march 1781 one of the first issues the confederation faced had to do with the the northwest territory lands west of the appalachians where many people settled after the revolutionary war.
to help govern these lands congress passed the land ordinance of 1785 which established a plan for surveying the land.
see geography spotlight on page 72.
in the northwest ordinance of 1787 congress provided a procedure for dividing the land into no fewer than three and no more than five states.
the ordinance also set requirements for the admission of new states which however overlooked native american land claims j weaknesses of the articles of confederation congress could not enact and collect taxes.
each state had only one vote in congress regardless of population.
nine out of thirteen states needed to agree to pass important laws.
articles could be amended only if all states approved.
there was no executive branch to enforce laws of congress.
there was no national court system to settle legal disputes.
there were thirteen separate states that lacked national unity.
the land ordinance of 1785 and the northwest ordinance of 1787 became the confederation s most significant achievements.
overshadowing such successes however were the confederation s many problems.
the most serious problem was that each state functioned independently by pursuing its own interests rather than considering those of the nation as a whole.
the government had no means of raising money or enforcing its laws.
moreover there was no national court system to settle legal disputes.
the articles of confederation created a weak central government and little unity among the states.
shayss rebellion the need for a stronger central government became obvious in 1786 when many farmers in western massachusetts rose up in protest over increased state taxes.
the farmers discontent boiled over into mob action in january of 1787 when daniel shays a fellow farmer led an army of 1 200 farmers toward the arsenal at springfield massachusetts.
state officials hurriedly called out the militia to head off the army of farmers killing four of the rebels and scattering the rest.
shays s rebellion as the farmers protest came to be called caused panic and dismay throughout the nation.
it was clearly time to talk about a stronger national government.
because the states had placed such severe limits on the government to prevent abuse of power the government was unable to solve many of the nation s problems.
news of the rebellion spread throughout the states.
the revolt persuaded twelve states to send delegates to a convention called by congress in philadelphia in may of 1787 kl history video shays s rebellion dsbbbq review unit 67 i tv player james madison 1751 1836 the oldest of 12 children james madison grew up in virginia.
he was a sickly child who suffered all his life from physical ailments.
because of a weak speaking voice he decided not to become a minister and thus entered politics.
madisons virginia plan resulted from extensive research that he had done on political systems before the convention.
he asked edmund randolph a fellow delegate from virginia to present the plan because his own voice was too weak to be heard throughout the assembly.
besides providing brilliant political leadership madison kept a record of the debates that took place at the convention.
because of his plan and his leadership madison is known as the father of the constitution.
creating a new government most of the delegates at the constitutional convention recognized the need to strengthen the central government.
within the first five days of the meeting they gave up the idea of fixing the articles of confederation and decided to form an entirely new government that would replace the one created by the articles.
conflict and compromise one major issue that the delegates faced was giving fair representation to both large and small states.
james madison proposed the virginia plan which called for a bicameral or two house legislature with membership based on each state s population.
delegates from the small states vigorously objected to the virginia plan because it gave more power to states with large populations.
small states supported william paterson s new jersey plan which proposed a single house congress in which each state had an equal vote.
the debate became deadlocked and dragged on through the hot and humid summer days.
eventually roger sherman suggested the great compromise which offered a two house congress to satisfy both small and big states.
each state would have equal representation in the senate or upper house.
the size of the population of each state would determine its representation in the house of representatives or lower house.
voters of each state would choose members of the house.
the state legislatures would choose members of the senate.
the great compromise settled one major issue but led to conflict over another.
southern delegates whose states had large numbers of slaves wanted slaves included in the population count that determined the number of representatives in the house.
northern delegates whose states had few slaves disagreed.
not counting the slaves would give the northern states more representatives than the southern states in the house of representatives.
the delegates eventually agreed to the three fifths compromise which called for three fifths of a state s slaves to be counted as part of the population.
division of powers after the delegates reached agreement on the difficult questions of slavery and representation they dealt with other issues somewhat more easily.
they divided power between the states and the national government and they separated the national government s power into three branches.
thus they created an entirely new government.
the new system of government that the delegates were building was a form of federalism in which power is divided between a national government and several state governments.
the powers granted to the national government by the constitution are known as delegated powers or enumerated powers.
these include such powers as the control of foreign affairs and regulation of trade between the states.
powers not specifically granted to the national government but kept by the states are called reserved powers.
these include powers such as providing for and supervising education.
some powers such as the right to tax and establish courts were shared by both the national and the state governments.
main idea analyzing issues jgj in what ways did the great compromise resolve certain problems even as it created new ones.
68 chapter 2 revolution and the early republic the protection of rights and freedoms did not apply to all americans at the time the bill of rights was adopted.
native americans and slaves were excluded.
women were not mentioned in the constitution.
the growing number of free blacks did not receive adequate protection from the constitution.
although many states permitted free blacks to vote the bill of rights offered them no protection against whites discrimination and hostility.
i main idea drawing conclusions how did the adoption of the bill of rights show the flexibility of the constitution.
continuing relevance of the constitution the united states constitution is the oldest written national constitution still in use.
it is a living document capable of meeting the changing needs of americans.
one reason for this capability lies in article i section 8 which gives congress the power to make all laws which shall be necessary and proper for carrying into execution the powers that the constitution enumerates.
this clause is referred to as the elastic clause because it stretches the power of the government.
the framers of the constitution included these implied powers in order to allow the authority of the government to expand to meet unforeseen circumstances.
the constitution also can be formally changed when necessary through amendments.
the constitution provides ways for amendments to be proposed and to be ratified.
only 27 amendments have been added to the constitution.
these amendments have helped the government meet the challenges of a changing world while still preserving the rights of the american people.
since its ratification the u s constitution has served as a model for other democracies.
it has been one of our nation s most important exports influencing the constitutions of dozens of other nations.
it is a flexible document that continues to protect americans and inspire people around the world.
1 terms names for each term or name write a sentence explaining its significance republic james madison federalists articles of confederation federalism antifederalists northwest ordinance of 1787 checks and balances bill of rights shayss rebellion ratification main idea using your notes re create the web below on your paper and fill it in with specific issues that were debated at the constitutional convention.
choose one issue and explain how the delegates resolved that issue.
critical thinking 3 evaluating do you think the federalists or the antifederalists had the more valid arguments.
support your opinion with examples from the text.
think about americans experience with the articles of confederation americans experience with great britain forming opinions several states ratified the constitution only after being assured that a bill of rights would be added to it.
in your opinion what is the most important value of the bill of rights.
analyzing issues what was the intent of the constitution.
the bill of rights.
how effective were these documents in fulfilling their intended purposes.
why are these documents so important.
review unit 71 citizenship spotlight symbols of patriotism patriotism or a love of and identification with one s country and its citizens is an important characteristic.
feelings of patriotism make citizens willing to act in a way that benefits their nation.
since the formation of the united states following the revolutionary war americans have found different symbols to represent their sense of patriotism.
some of these symbols have been long lasting and others have changed over time but all have given americans a sort of common ground.
they have also served as a way to demonstrate that patriotism to others.
stars and stripes perhaps the most recognizable symbol of the united states is the american flag.
in 1777 the continental congress passed an act that established an official flag for the new nation.
the design of the flag has changed as new states have joined the nation and today the flag consists of 13 red and white stripes representing the original colonies and 50 stars on a field of blue representing the states of the union.
americans demonstrate their patriotism by honoring the flag as a symbol of freedom.
i nearest recruiting station for u s army uncle sam as the story goes uncle sam made his first appearance during the war of 1812 meatpacker samuel wilson supplied beef to the u s army during the war.
he stamped his barrels of beef with u s for united states but soldiers knew the food was supplied by uncle sam a newspaper reported the story and uncle sam became a widely accepted nickname for the united states.
the most famous visual representation of uncle sam is probably from the world war i recruiting poster at left which was created by artist james montgomery flagg.
the image was repurposed for world war ii and has become well known as a symbol of the united states.
72 chapter 2 revolution and the early republic were raised.
it also guaranteed that federal laws would remain the supreme law of the land.
washington shapes the executive branch the nation s leaders also faced the task of building an executive branch.
to help the president govern congress created three executive departments the department of state to deal with foreign affairs the department of war to handle military matters and the department of the treasury to manage finances.
to head these departments washington chose capable leaders thomas jefferson as secretary of state alexander hamilton as secretary of the treasury henry knox as secretary of war.
these department heads soon became the president s chief advisers or cabinet.
main idea contrasting how did jeffersons and hamiltons views of government differ.
hamilton and jefferson two conflicting visions hamilton and jefferson held very different political ideas.
hamilton believed in a strong central government led by a prosperous educated elite of upper class citizens.
jefferson distrusted a strong central gov ernment and the rich.
he favored strong state and local governments rooted in popular participation.
hamilton believed that commerce and industry were the keys to a strong nation jefferson favored a society of farmer citizens.
hamiltons economic plan as secretary of the treasury hamilton s job was to put the nation s economy on a firm footing.
to do this he called on the nation to pay off its debts a large amount of which was incurred during the revolution.
he also proposed the establishment of a national bank that would be funded by both the federal government and wealthy private investors.
this bank would issue paper money and handle taxes and other government funds.
opponents of a national bank such as james madison argued that since the constitution made no provision for such an institution congress had no right to authorize it.
this argument began the debate between those like hamilton who favored a loose interpretation of the constitution and those like madison who favored a strict interpretation a vital debate that has continued throughout u s history.
key players thomas jefferson 1743 1826 the writer of the declaration of independence thomas jefferson began his political career at age 26 when he was elected to virginias colonial legislature.
in 1779 he was elected governor of virginia and in 1785 he was appointed minister to france.
he served as secretary of state from 1790 to 1793 a southern planter jefferson was also an accomplished scholar the architect of monticello his virginia house an inventor of among other things a machine that made copies of letters and the founder of the university of virginia in 1819 despite his elite background and his ownership of slaves he was a strong ally of the small farmer and average citizen.
alexander hamilton 1755 1804 born into poverty in the british west indies alexander hamilton was orphaned at age 13 and went to work as a shipping clerk.
he later made his way to new york where he attended kings college now columbia university.
he joined the army during the revolution and became an aide to general washington.
intensely ambitious hamilton quickly moved up in society.
although in his humble origins hamilton was the opposite of jefferson he had little faith in the common citizen and sided with the interests of upper class americans.
hamilton said of jefferson s beloved common people your people sir your people is a great beast review unit 75 contrasting views of the federal government hamilton concentrating power in federal government fear of mob rule republic led by a well educated elite loose interpretation of the constitution national bank constitutional loose interpretation economy based on shipping and manufacturing payment of national and state debts favoring creditors supporters merchants manufacturers landowners investors lawyers clergy jefferson sharing power with state and local governments limited national government fear of absolute power or ruler democracy of virtuous farmers and tradespeople strict interpretation of the constitution national bank unconstitutional strict interpretation economy based on farming payment of only the national debt favoring debtors supporters the plain people farmers tradespeople skillbuilder interpreting charts 1 whose view of the federal government was a wealthy person more likely to favor.
2 how do you think jefferson differed from hamilton in his view of people and human nature.
the first political parties the differences within washington s cabinet intensified and soon helped to give rise to a two party system.
those who shared hamilton s vision of a strong central government mostly northerners called themselves federalists.
those who supported jefferson s vision of strong state governments mostly southerners called themselves democratic republicans.
french revolutionaries storm the bastille an infamous prison in paris france on july 14 1789.
the whiskey rebellion during washington s second term an incident occurred that reflected the tension between federal and regional interests.
previously congress had passed a protective tariff an import tax on goods produced abroad meant to encourage american production.
to generate even more revenue secretary hamilton pushed through an excise tax a tax on a product s manufacture sale or distribution to be levied on the manufacture of whiskey.
in 1794 furious whiskey producers in western pennsylvania refused to pay the tax and attacked the tax collectors.
the federal government responded by sending some 13 000 militiamen to end the conflict.
the whiskey rebellion as it came to be known marked the first use of armed force to assert federal authority.
background in addition to promoting american goods the tariff of 1789 as well as tariffs that followed provided the majority of the federal governments revenue until the 20th century.
challenges at home and abroad at the same time the new government faced critical problems and challenges overseas as well as at home along the western frontier.
addressing foreign affairs in 1789 a stunning revolution in france ended the french monarchy and brought hope for a government based on the will of the people.
by 1793 france was engaged in war with great britain as well as with other european countries.
in the united states reaction to the conflict tended to split along party lines.
democratic republicans supported france.
main idea developing historical perspective why did the united states want access to the mississippi river.
federalists wanted to back the british.
president washington took a middle position.
he issued a declaration of neutrality a statement that the united states would support neither side in the conflict.
washington remained wary of foreign involvement throughout his tenure in office.
in his farewell address in 1796 he warned the nation to steer clear of permanent alliances with any portion of the foreign world.
in another significant foreign matter thomas pinckney negotiated a treaty with spain in 1795 according to pinckney s treaty spain agreed to give up all claims to land east of the mississippi except florida and recognized the 31st parallel as the northern boundary of florida.
spain also agreed to open the mississippi river to american traffic and allow traders to use the port of new orleans.
the treaty was important because it helped pave the way for u s expansion west of the appalachians.
challenges in the northwest meanwhile americans faced trouble along their western border where the british still maintained forts and native americans continued to resist white settlers.
in 1794 after numerous skirmishes the u s military led by general anthony wayne defeated a confederacy of native americans at the battle of fallen timbers near present day toledo ohio.
the victory helped to establish the settlers supremacy in the region.
jays treaty at the time of the battle of fallen timbers john jay the chief justice of the supreme court was in london to negotiate a treaty with great britain.
one of the disputed issues was which nation would control territories west of the appalachian mountains.
when news of wayne s victory at fallen timbers arrived the british agreed to evacuate their posts in the northwest territory because they did not wish to fight both the united states and the french with whom they were in conflict at the same time.
although jay s treaty signed on november 19 1794 was a diplomatic victory the treaty provoked outrage at home.
for one thing it allowed the british to continue their fur trade on the american side of the u s canadian border.
this angered western settlers.
also the treaty did not resolve a dispute over neutral american trade in the caribbean.
americans believed that their ships had the right to free passage there.
the british however had seized a number of these ships confiscating their crews and cargo.
despite serious opposition the treaty managed to pass the senate.
the bitter political fight over jay s treaty along with the growing division between the federalists and democratic republicans convinced washington not to seek a third term.
adams provokes criticism in the election of 1796 the united states faced a new situation a contest between opposing parties.
the federalists nominated vice president john adams for president while the democratic republicans chose thomas jefferson.
in the election adams received 71 electoral votes while jefferson received 68 because the constitution stated that the runner up should become vice president the country found itself with a federalist president and a democratic republican vice president.
the election also underscored the growing danger of sectionalism placing the interests of one region over those of the nation as a whole.
almost all the electors from the southern states voted for jefferson while all the electors from the northern states voted for adams.
portrait of a young john adams by joseph badger review unit 77 adams tries to avoid war soon after taking office president adams faced his first crisis a looming war with france.
the french government regarded the u s british agreement over the northwest territory a violation of the french american alliance.
in retaliation they began to seize american ships bound for britain.
adams sent a three man team to paris to negotiate a solution.
4s this team which included future chief justice john marshall planned to meet with the french foreign minister talleyrand.
instead the french sent three low level officials whom adams in his report to congress called x y and z the french officials demanded a 250 000 bribe as payment for seeing talleyrand.
news of this insult which became known as the xyz affair provoked a wave of anti french feeling at home.
millions for defense but not one cent for tribute became the slogan of the day.
in 1798 congress created a navy department and authorized american ships to seize french vessels.
for the next two years an undeclared naval war raged between france and the united states.
the federalists called for a full scale war against france but adams refused to take that step.
through diplomacy the two countries eventually smoothed over their differences.
adams damaged his standing among the federalists but he kept the united states out of war.
main idea analyzing motives why did the french begin to seize u s ships.
the alien and sedition acts although democratic republicans cheered adams for avoiding war with france they criticized him mercilessly on many other issues.
tensions between federalists and democratic republicans rose to a fever pitch.
adams regarded democratic republican ideas as dangerous to the welfare of the nation.
he and other federalists accused the democratic republicans of favoring foreign powers.
many immigrants were active in the democratic republican party.
some of the most vocal critics of the adams administration were foreign born.
they included french and british radicals as well as recent irish immigrants who lashed out at anyone who was even faintly pro british including the federalist adams.
to counter what they saw as a growing threat against the government the federalists pushed through congress in 1798 four measures that became known as the alien and sedition acts.
three of these measures the alien acts raised the residence requirement for american citizenship from 5 years to 14 years and allowed the president to deport or jail any alien considered undesirable.
vocabulary alien belonging to or coming from another country foreign sedition rebellion against ones country treason analyzing political cartoonsj paris monster cinque tetes or the paris monster is the title of this political cartoon satirizing the xyz affair.
on the right the five members of the french directory or ruling executive body are depicted as a five headed monster demanding money.
the three american representatives elbridge gerry charles pinckney and john marshall are on the left exclaiming cease bawling monster.
we will not give you six pence skillbuilder analyzing political cartoons 1 how would you contrast the cartoons depiction of the u s representatives with its depiction of the french directory.
2 what other details in the cartoon show the cartoonists attitude toward the french.
78 chapter to answer the following questions.
taking on segregation pages 700 707 1 analyze the effects of the brown v board of education decision.
2 what was the role of martin luther king jr within the civil rights movement.
the triumphs of a crusade pages 710 716 3 what was the significance of the federal court case won by james meredith in 1962.
4 cite three examples of violence committed between 1962 and 1964 against african americans and civil rights activists.
challenges and changes in the movement pages 717 723 5 what were some of the key beliefs advocated by malcolm x.
6 why did some civil rights leaders urge stokely carmichael to stop using the slogan black power.
critical thinking 1964 congress passes the civil rights act.
1963 more than 250 000 people march on washington to demand immediate passage of the civil rights bill.
using your notes on your own paper draw a cluster diagram like the one shown below.
then fill it in with four events from the civil rights movement that were broadcast on nationwide television and that you find the most compelling.
ampie tv coverage of civil rights movement 1967 rioting in detroit and more than 100 other cities.
1968 martin luther king jr is assassinated.
1965 malcolm x is assassinated.
1965 march from selma to montgomery to fight for voting rights 1965 congress passes the voting rights act.
exampiet j amplet summarizing describe the roles of political organizations during the african american civil rights movement.
developing historical perspective what events prompted presidential and congressional action on behalf of minority rights.
describe the efforts to pass the civil rights act of 1957 the civil rights act of 1964 and the voting rights act of 1965 and how they affected minority rights.
explaining turning points what is the significance of the years 1968 1969 as a turning point in american history.
726 chapter 9 ss william h taft is elected president.
e b du bois helps found the national association for the advancement of colored people naacp.
mynotefocwk interact with history woodrow wilson is reelected.
11919 eighteenth amendment outlaws alcoholic beverages.
it is the dawn of the 20th century and the reform movement is growing.
moral reformers are trying to ban alcoholic beverages.
political reformers work toward fair government and business practices.
women fight for equal wages and the right to vote.
throughout society social and economic issues take center stage.
as you read the chapter 2 revolution and the early republic mm texas test practice use the cartoon and your knowledge of u s history to answer question 1.
1 this british cartoon was published during the winter of 1775 1776 in it king george iii and his ministers are shown killing the goose that laid the golden egg.
the cartoon is criticizing a the killing of british soldiers at concord and bunker hill.
b british response to the olive branch petition.
c john lockes theory of natural rights.
d thomas paines common sense.
2 both shayss rebellion and the boston tea party were the result of anger over f religious intolerance.
g the boston massacre.
use the information in the box and your knowledge of u s history to answer question 3 declaration of independence battles of lexington and concord second continental congress 3 which of the following lists the events in chronological order from first to last.
a declaration of independence battles of lexington and concord second continental congress b battles of lexington and concord second continental congress declaration of independence c second continental congress battles of lexington and concord declaration of independence d second continental congress declaration of independence battles of lexington and concord 71 test practice for additional test practice go online for diagnostic tests tutorials interact with history writesmart h collaborative learni think about the issues you recorded in mynotebook as you read the chapter 9 history through images of child labor in 1908 lewis hine quit his teaching job to document child labor practices.
hines photographs and descriptions of young laborers some only three years old were widely distributed and displayed in exhibits.
his compelling images of exploitation helped to convince the public of the need for child labor regulations.
hine devised a host of clever tactics to gain access to his subjects such as learning shop managers schedules and arriving during their lunch breaks.
while talking casually with the children he secretly scribbled notes on paper hidden in his pocket.
national politicians to pass the keating owen act in 1916 the act prohibited the transportation across state lines of goods produced with child labor.
two years later the supreme court declared the act unconstitutional due to interference with states rights to regulate labor.
reformers did however succeed in nearly every state by effecting legislation that banned child labor and set maximum hours.
efforts to limit working hours the supreme court sometimes took a more sympathetic view of the plight of workers.
in the 1908 case of muller v oregon louis d brandeis assisted by florence kelley and josephine goldmark persuasively argued that poor working women were much more economically insecure than large corporations.
asserting that women required the state s protection against powerful employers brandeis convinced the court to uphold an oregon law limiting women to a ten hour workday.
other states responded by enacting or strengthening laws to reduce womens hours of work.
a similar brandeis brief in bunting v oregon in 1917 persuaded the court to uphold a ten hour workday for men.
progressives also succeeded in winning workers compensation to aid the families of workers who were hurt or killed on the job.
beginning with maryland in 1902 one state after another passed legislation requiring employers to pay benefits in death cases.
the progressive era 311 reforming elections in some cases ordinary citizens won state reforms.
william s u ren prompted his state of oregon to adopt the secret ballot the initiative the referendum and the recall.
the initiative allows voters to put a proposed law on the ballot for public approval.
then voters instead of the legislature accepted or rejected the initiative by referendum a vote on the initiative.
the recall enabled voters to remove public officials from elected positions by forcing them to face another election before the end of their term if enough voters asked for it.
by 1920 20 states had adopted at least one of these procedures.
in 1899 minnesota passed the first mandatory statewide primary system.
this enabled voters instead of political machines to choose candidates for public office through a special popular election.
about two thirds of the states had adopted some form of direct primary by 1915 direct election of senators it was the success of the direct primary that paved the way for the seventeenth amendment to the constitution.
before 1913 each state s legislature had chosen its own united states senators which put even more power in the hands of party bosses and wealthy corporation heads.
to force senators to be more responsive to the public progressives pushed for the popular election of senators.
at first the senate refused to go along with the idea but gradually more and more states began allowing voters to nominate senatorial candidates in direct primaries.
as a result congress approved the seventeenth amendment in 1912 its ratification in 1913 made direct election of senators the law of the land j each of these measures was designed to make politicians more accountable to voters and to give americans more of a voice.
as a whole they have become powerful tools with which voters can influence public policy.
additionally government reform drew increased numbers of women into public life.
it also focused renewed attention on the issue of woman suffrage.
main idea summarizing summarize the impact of the direct election of senators.
1 terms names for each term or name write a sentence explaining its significance.
progressive movement florence kelley prohibition muckraker scientific management robert m la follette initiative referendum recall seventeenth amendment main idea using your notes copy the web below on your paper.
fill it in with examples of organizations that worked for reform in the areas named.
which group was most successful and why.
critical thinking forming generalizations 4 in what ways might individuals in this chapter 11 p.
the peace settlement had not fulfilled president wilson s hope of a world safe for democracy.
new democratic governments that emerged in europe after the war floundered.
without a democratic tradition people turned to authoritarian leaders to solve their economic and social problems.
the new democracies collapsed and dictators were able to seize power.
some had great ambitions.
joseph stalin transforms the soviet union in russia hopes for democracy gave way to civil war resulting in the establishment of a communist state officially called the soviet union in 1922 after v i lenin died in 1924 joseph stalin whose last name means man of steel took control of the country.
stalin focused on creating a model communist state.
in so doing he made both agricultural and industrial growth the prime economic goals of the soviet union.
stalin abolished all privately owned farms and replaced them with collectives large government owned farms each worked by hundreds of families.
stalin moved to transform the soviet union from a backward rural nation into a great industrial power.
in 1928 the soviet dictator outlined the first of several five year plans to direct the industrialization.
all economic activity was placed under state management.
by 1937 the soviet union had become the world s second largest industrial power surpassed in overall production only by the united states.
the human costs of this transformation however were enormous.
in his drive to purge or eliminate anyone who threatened his power stalin did not spare even his most faithful supporters.
while the final toll will never be known historians estimate that stalin was responsible for the deaths of 8 million to 13 million people.
millions more died in famines caused by the restructuring of soviet society.
by 1939 stalin had firmly established a totalitarian government that tried to exert complete control over its citizens.
in a totalitarian state individuals have no rights and the government suppresses all opposition.
world war looms in.
joseph stalin grabs control of the soviet union in 1924 and squelches all opposition after v i lenin founder of the communist regime dies.
hideki tojo the force behind japanese strategy becomes japans prime minister in 1941 emperor hirohito becomes a powerless figurehead.
geography skillbuilder 1 region in which countries did authoritarian leaders come to power.
who were the leaders.
2 location what geographic features might have led japan to expand.
the rise of nationalism 1922 1941 fascist dictatorship communist dictatorship imperialist military regime italy wants peace work and calm.
i will give these things with love if possible with force if necessary.
benito mussolini the rise of fascism in italy while stalin was consolidating his power in the soviet union benito mussolini was establishing a totalitarian regime in italy where unemployment and inflation produced bitter strikes some communist led.
alarmed by these threats the middle and upper classes demanded stronger leadership.
mussolini took advantage of this situation.
a powerful speaker mussolini knew how to appeal to italy s wounded national pride.
he played on the fears of economic collapse and communism.
in this way he won the support of many discontented italians.
by 1921 mussolini had established the fascist party.
fascism fash iz em stressed nationalism and placed the interests of the state above those of individuals.
to strengthen the nation fascists argued power must rest with a single strong leader and a small group of devoted party members.
the latin fasces a bundle of rods tied around an ax handle had been a symbol of unity and authority in ancient rome.
in october 1922 mussolini marched on rome with thousands of his followers whose black uniforms gave them the name black shirts.
when important government officials the army and the police sided with the fascists the italian king appointed mussolini head of the government.
calling himself ii duce or the leader mussolini gradually extended fascist control to every aspect of italian life.
tourists marveled that ii duce had even made the trains run on time.
mussolini achieved this efficiency however by crushing all opposition and by making italy a totalitarian state.
ea main idea analyzing causes what factors led to the rise of fascism in italy.
530 chapter and discuss it with a partner.
each partner should write three questions about the chosen issue.
consider what an informed voter would need to know.
then each partner should ask the other his or her questions.
use mywritesmart in your ebook to record your questions and your partners answers.
k 1 cemtury you have been asked to promote a civil rights cause that is important to your or your community.
think about the many civil rights challenges that people still face in the twenty first century.
working with a partner design and create a poster that supports the civil rights cause that you have chosen.
collaborative learni 5.
j writesmart imagine you are a member of congress in october 2001 consider whether you would support or oppose the usa patriot act legislation.
write a persuasive essay to bring others around to your point of view.
support your position with examples and address the concerns of those who take the opposite position.
use mywritesmart in your ebook to write your essay.
issues for the 21st century end of chapter 9 ta a stumbles as president taft pursued a cautiously progressive agenda seeking to consolidate rather than to expand roosevelt s reforms.
he received little credit for his accomplishments however.
his legal victories such as busting 90 trusts in a four year term did not bolster his popularity.
indeed the new president confessed in a letter to roosevelt that he never felt like the president.
when i am addressed as mr.
president taft wrote i turn to see whether you are not at my elbow.
the cautious taft hesitated to use the presidential bully pulpit to arouse public opinion.
nor could he subdue troublesome members of his own party.
tariffs and conservation posed his first problems.
the payne aldrich tariff taft had campaigned on a platform of lowering tariffs a staple of the progressive agenda.
when the house passed the payne bill which lowered rates on imported manufactured goods the senate proposed an alternative bill the aldrich bill which made fewer cuts and increased many rates.
amid cries of betrayal from the progressive wing of his party taft signed the payne aldrich tariff a compromise that only moderated the high rates of the aldrich bill.
this angered progressives who believed taft had abandoned progressivism.
the president made his difficulties worse by clumsily attempting to defend the tariff calling it the best tariff bill the republican party ever passed.
difficult pkcisions controlling resources historically conservationists such as gifford pinchot have stood for the balanced use of natural resources preserving some and using others for private industry.
free market advocates like richard ballinger pressed for the private development of wilderness areas.
preservationists such as john muir advocated preserving all remaining wilderness.
1 examine the pros and cons of each position.
with which do you agree.
what factors do you think should influence decisions about americas wilderness areas.
2 if youd been asked in 1902 to decide whether to develop or preserve americas wilderness areas what would you have decided.
main idea analyzing issues how did tafts appointee richard ballinger anger conservationists.
disputing public lands next taft angered conservationists by appointing as his secretary of the interior richard a ballinger a wealthy lawyer from seattle.
ballinger who disapproved of conservationist controls on western lands removed 1 million acres of forest and mining lands from the reserved list and returned it to the public domain.
when a department of the interior official was fired for protesting ballinger s actions the fired worker published a muckraking article against ballinger in collier s weekly magazine.
pinchot added his voice.
in congressional testimony he accused ballinger of letting commercial interests exploit the natural resources that rightfully belonged to the public.
president taft sided with ballinger and fired pinchot from the u s forest service.
the republican party splits taft s cautious nature made it impossible for him to hold together the two wings of the republican party progressives who sought change and conservatives who did not.
the republican party began to fragment.
problems within the party republican conservatives and progressives split over taft s support of the political boss joseph cannon house speaker from illinois.
a rough talking tobacco chewing politician uncle joe often disregarded seniority in filling committee slots.
as chairman of the house rules committee which decides what bills congress considers cannon often weak ened or ignored progressive bills.
reform minded republicans decided that their only alternative was to strip cannon of his power.
with the help of democrats they succeeded in march 1910 with a resolution that called for the entire house to elect the committee on rules and excluded the speaker from membership in the committee.
william howard taft the progressive era 329 william howard taft 1857 1930 william howard taft never wanted to be president.
after serving one term taft left the white house which he called the lonesomest place in the world and taught constitutional law at yale for eight years.
in 1921 president harding named taft chief justice of the supreme court.
the man whose family had nicknamed him big lub called this appointment the highest honor he had ever received.
as chief justice taft wrote that in my present life i dont remember that i ever was president however americans remember taft for among many other things initiating in 1910 the popular presidential custom of throwing out the first ball of the major league baseball season.
by the midterm elections of 1910 however the republican party was in shambles with the progressives on one side and the old guard on the other.
voters voiced concern over the rising cost of living which they blamed on the payne aldrich tariff.
they also believed taft to be against conservation.
when the republicans lost the election the democrats gained control of the house of representatives for the first time in 18 years.
the bull moose party after leaving office roosevelt headed to africa to shoot big game.
he returned in 1910 to a hero s welcome and responded with a rousing speech proposing a new nationalism under which the federal government would exert its power for the welfare of the people.
by 1912 roosevelt had decided to run for a third term as president.
the primary elections showed that republicans wanted roosevelt but taft had the advantage of being the incumbent that is the holder of the office.
at the republican convention in june 1912 taft supporters maneuvered to replace roosevelt delegates with taft delegates in a number of delegations.
republican progressives refused to vote and formed a new third party the progressive party.
they nominated roosevelt for president.
the progressive party became known as the bull moose party after roosevelt s boast that he was as strong as a bull moose.
the party s platform called for the direct election of senators and the adoption in all states of the initiative referendum and recall.
it also advocated woman suffrage workmen s compensation an eight hour workday a minimum wage for women a federal law against child labor and a federal trade commission to regulate business.
jay the split in the republican ranks handed the democrats their first real chance at the white house since the election of grover cleveland in 1892 in the 1912 presidential election they put forward as their candidate a reform governor of new jersey named woodrow wilson.
vocabulary old guard conservative members of a group main idea contrasting what were the differences between taft s and roosevelts campaign platforms.
democrats win in 1912 under governor woodrow wilson s leadership the previously conservative new jersey legislature had passed a host of reform measures.
now as the democratic presidential nominee wilson endorsed a progressive platform called the new freedom.
it demanded even stronger antitrust legislation banking reform and reduced tariffs.
the split between taft and roosevelt former republican allies turned nasty during the fall campaign.
taft labeled roosevelt a dangerous egotist while roosevelt branded taft a fathead with the brain of a guinea pig.
wilson distanced himself quietly gloating don t interfere when your enemy is destroying himself.
1 the election offered voters several choices wilson s new freedom taft s con servatism roosevelt s progressivism or the socialist party policies of eugene v debs.
both roosevelt and wilson supported a stronger government role in eco nomic affairs but differed over strategies.
roosevelt supported government action supervise lg business but did not oppose all business monopolies while debs jo chapter 22 tet offensive jan 30 feb 24 1968 geography skillbuilder location what were the geographical destinations of the tet offensive attacks.
what does this suggest about the vietcong forces.
major battle u s base demilitarized zone 0 75 150 miles 0 75 150 kilometers 17th parallel f main idea analyzing issues why did american support for the war change after the tet offensive.
throughout that day in 1968 vil lagers taking advantage of a week long truce proclaimed for tet streamed into cities across south vietnam to celebrate their new year.
at the same time many funerals were being held for war victims.
accompanying the funerals were the traditional firecrackers flutes and of course coffins.
the coffins however contained weapons and many of the villagers were vietcong agents.
that night the vietcong launched an overwhelming attack on over 100 towns and cities in south vietnam as well as 12 u s air bases.
the fighting was especially fierce in saigon and the former capital of hue.
the vietcong even attacked the u s embassy in saigon killing five americans.
the tet offensive continued for about a month before u s and south vietnamese forces re gained control of the cities.
general westmoreland declared the attacks an overwhelming defeat for the vietcong whose well laid plans went afoul.
from a purely military standpoint westmoreland was right.
the vietcong lost about 32 000 soldiers during the month long battle while the american and arvn forces lost little more than 3 000 tet changes public opinion from a psychological and political standpoint westmoreland s claim could not have been more wrong.
the tet offensive greatly shook the american public which had been told repeatedly and had come to believe that the enemy was close to defeat.
now the pentagon s continued reports of favorable body counts or massive vietcong casualties rang hollow.
daily americans saw the shocking images of attacks by an enemy that seemed to be everywhere.
in a matter of weeks the tet offensive changed millions of minds about the war.
despite the years of antiwar protest a poll taken just before tet showed that only 28 percent of americans called themselves doves while 56 percent claimed to be hawks.
after tet both sides tallied 40 percent.
the mainstream media which had reported the war in a skeptical but generally balanced way now openly criticized the war.
one of the nation s most respected journalists walter cronkite told his viewers that it now seemed more certain than ever that the bloody experience of vietnam is to end in a stalemate.
minds were also changing at the white house.
to fill the defense secretary position left vacant by robert mcnamara s resignation johnson picked clark clifford a friend and supporter of the president s vietnam policy.
however after settling in and studying the situation clifford concluded that the war was unwinnable.
we seem to have a sinkhole clifford said.
we put in more they match it.
i see more and more fighting with more and more casualties on the u s side and no end in sight to the action.
i kl history video command decisions tet refugees the vietnam war years if i ve lost walter cronkite then it s over.
i ve lost mr average citizen lyndon b johnson following the tet offensive johnson s popularity plummeted.
in public opinion polls taken at the end of february 1968 nearly 60 percent of americans disapproved of his handling of the war.
nearly half of the country now felt it had been a mistake to send american troops to vietnam.
war weariness eventually set in and 1968 was the watershed year.
johnson recognized the change too.
upon learning of cronkite s pessimistic analysis of the war the president lamented if i ve lost walter then it s over.
i ve lost mr average citizen.
days of loss and rage the vietnam war and the divisiveness it caused took its toll on president johnson.
the growing division over vietnam led to a shocking political development in the spring of 1968 a season in which americans also endured two assassinations a series of urban riots and a surge in college campus protests.
johnson withdraws well before the tet offensive an antiwar coalition within the democratic party had sought a democratic candidate to challenge johnson in the 1968 primary elections.
robert kennedy john f kennedy s brother and a senator from new york decided not to run citing party loyalty.
however in november of 1967 minnesota senator eugene mccarthy answered the group s call declaring that he would run against johnson on a platform to end the war in vietnam.
mccarthy s early campaign attracted little notice but in the weeks following tet it picked up steam.
in the new hampshire democratic primary in march 1968 the little known senator captured 42 percent of the vote.
while johnson won the primary with 48 percent of the vote the slim margin of victory was viewed as a defeat for the president.
influenced by johnson s perceived weakness at the polls robert kennedy declared his candidacy for president.
the democratic party had become a house divided.
in a televised address on march 31 1968 johnson announced a dramatic change in his vietnam policy the united states would seek negotiations to end the war.
in the meantime the policy of u s escalation would end the bombing would eventually cease and steps would be taken to ensure that the south vietnamese played a larger role in the war.
the president paused and then ended his speech with a statement that shocked the nation.
declaring that he did not want the presidency to become involved in the partisan divisions that are developing in this political year lyndon johnson announced accordingly i shall not seek and i will not accept the nomination of my party for another term as your president.
the president was stepping down from national politics his grand plan for domestic reform done in by a costly and divisive war.
war johnson later admitted killed the lady i really loved the great society.
violence and protest grip the nation the democrats as well as the nation were in for more shock in 1968 on april 4 america was rocked by the assassination of martin luther king jr violence ripped through more than 100 u s cities as enraged followers of the slain civil rights leader burned buildings and destroyed neighborhoods.
just two months later a bullet cut down yet another popular national figure.
robert kennedy had become a strong candidate in the democratic primary draw ing support from minorities and urban democratic voters.
on june 4 kennedy won the crucial california primary.
just after midnight of june 5 he gave a victory main idea analyzing motives why did president johnson decide not to run again.
750 chapter 16 survival is both an exalted privilege and a painful burden.
gerda weissmann klein the survivors an estimated six million jews died in the death camps and in the nazi massacres.
but some miraculously escaped the worst of the holocaust.
many had help from ordinary people who were appalled by the nazis treatment of jews.
some jews even survived the horrors of the concentration camps.
in gerda weissmann klein s view survival depended as much on one s spirit as on getting enough to eat.
i do believe that if you were blessed with imagination you could work through it she wrote.
if unfortunately you were a person that faced reality i think you didn t have much of a chance.
those who did come out of the camps alive were forever changed by what they had witnessed.
for survivor elie wiesel who entered auschwitz in 1944 at the age of 14 the sun had set forever.
a personal voice elie wiesel never shall i forget that night the first night in camp that turned my life into one long night seven times sealed.
never shall i forget that smoke.
never shall i forget the small faces of the children whose bodies i saw transformed into smoke under a silent sky.
never shall i forget those flames that consumed my faith forever.
never shall i forget the nocturnal silence that deprived me for all eternity of the desire to live.
never shall i forget those moments that murdered my god and my soul and turned my dreams to ashes.
never shall i forget those things even were i condemned to live as long as god himself.
never night assessment elie wiesel 1986 1 terms names for each term or name write a sentence explaining its significance.
holocaust genocide concentration camp kristallnacht ghetto main idea using your notes list at least four events that led to the holocaust.
cause effect write a paragraph summarizing one of the events that you listed.
critical thinking evaluating decisions do you think that the united states was justified in not allowing more jewish refugees to immigrate.
why or why not.
think about the views of isolationists in the united states some americans prejudices and fears the incident on the german luxury liner st louis developing historical perspective why do you think the nazi system of systematic genocide was so brutally effective.
support your answer with details from the text.
analyzing motives how might concentration camp doctors and guards have justified to themselves the death and suffering they caused other human beings.
world war looms 549 teks7a america moves toward war main idea why it matters now terms names in response to the fighting in europe the united states provided economic and military aid to help the allies achieve victory.
the military capability of the u s became a deciding factor in world war ii and in world affairs ever since.
axis powers allies lend lease act hidekl tojo atlantic charter r dno american s story1 taking notes use the graphic organizer online to take notes on the key events leading to the entry of the united states into world war ii.
two days after hitler invaded poland president roosevelt spoke reassuringly to americans about the outbreak of war in europe.
a personal voice franklin delano roosevelt this nation will remain a neutral nation but i cannot ask that every american remain neutral in thought as well.
even a neutral cannot be asked to close his mind or his conscience.
i have said not once but many times that i have seen war and i hate war.
as long as it is my power to prevent there will be no blackout of peace in the u s radio speech september 3 1939 although roosevelt knew that americans were still deeply committed to staying out of war he also believed that there could be no peace in a world controlled by dictators.
franklin d roosevelt the united states musters its forces as german tanks thundered across poland roosevelt revised the neutrality act of 1935 at the same time he began to prepare the nation for the struggle he feared lay just ahead.
moving cautiously away from neutrality in september of 1939 roosevelt persuaded congress to pass a cash and carry provision that allowed warring nations to buy u s arms as long as they paid cash and transported them in their own ships.
providing the arms roosevelt argued would help france and britain defeat hitler and keep the united states out of the war.
isolationists attacked roosevelt for his actions.
however after six weeks of heated debate congress passed the neutrality act of 1939 and a cash and carry policy went into effect 550 chapter 16 n main idea drawing conclusions g why did roosevelt take one unneutral step after another to assist britain and the soviet union in 1941.
supporting stalin britain was not the only nation to receive lend lease aid.
in june 1941 hitler broke the agreement he had made in 1939 with stalin not to go to war and invaded the soviet union.
acting on the principle that the enemy of my enemy is my friend roosevelt began sending lend lease supplies to the soviet union.
some americans opposed providing aid to stalin roosevelt however agreed with winston churchill who had said if hitler invaded hell the british would be prepared to work with the devil himself.
german wolf packs providing lend lease aid was one thing but to ensure the safe delivery of goods to britain and to the soviet union supply lines had to be kept open across the atlantic ocean.
to prevent delivery of lend lease shipments hitler deployed hundreds of german submarines u boats to attack supply ships.
from the spring through the fall of 1941 individual surface attacks by individual u boats gave way to what became known as the wolf pack attack.
at night groups of up to 40 submarines patrolled areas in the north atlantic where convoys could be expected.
wolf packs were successful in sinking as much as 350 000 tons of shipments in a single month.
in june 1941 president roosevelt granted the navy permission for u s warships to attack german u boats in self defense.
by late 1943 the submarine menace was contained by electronic detection techniques especially radar and by airborne antisubmarine patrols operating from small escort aircraft carriers.
science k technology german wolf packs on october 17 1940 near rockall west of ireland a british convoy sc 7 shown below was attacked by a german wolf pack.
the convoy was outlined clearly against a moonlit sky making the merchant ships easy prey.
at the start of the war the british had too few warships to escort the convoys.
alatof ftart n am aai a tanker burns and sinks in the atlantic ocean after being torpedoed by a german u boat.
german aircraft could patrol 1 000 miles out to sea to scout for convoys.
the germans used radios to summon u boats into a fighting wolf pack.
convoys pinned their hopes on finding u boats using asdic sonar apparatus that could detect submerged submarines.
u boats used hydrophonic equipment to pick up the sound of convoy propellers up to 100 miles away.
worw war looms hideki tojo 1884 1948 u s newspapers described hideki tojo as smart hard boiled resourceful and contemptuous of theories sentiments and negotiations the nazi press in germany praised tojo as a man charged with energy thinking clearly and with a single purpose to a british paper tojo was the son of satan whose single purpose was unleashing all hell on the far east.
in japan however tojo was looked up to as a man whose decisive leadership was a signal for the nation to rise and administer a great shock to the anti axis powers fdr plans for war although roosevelt was popular his foreign policy was under constant attack.
american forces were seriously underarmed.
roosevelt s august 1941 proposal to extend the term of draftees passed in the house of representatives by only one vote.
with the army provided for roosevelt began planning for the war he was certain would come.
the atlantic charter while congress voted on the extension of the draft roosevelt and churchill met secretly at a summit aboard the battleship uss augusta.
although churchill hoped for a military commitment he settled for a joint declaration of war aims called the atlantic charter.
both countries pledged the following collective security disarmament self determination economic cooperation and freedom of the seas.
roosevelt disclosed to churchill that he couldn t ask congress for a declaration of war against germany but he would wage war and do everything to force an incident.
the atlantic charter became the basis of a new document called a declaration of the united nations.
the term united nations was suggested by roosevelt to express the common purpose of the allies those nations that had fought the axis powers.
the declaration was signed by 26 nations four fifths of the human race observed churchill.
shoot on sight after a german submarine fired on the u s destroyer greer in the atlantic on september 4 1941 roosevelt ordered navy commanders to respond.
when you see a rattlesnake poised to strike the president explained you crush him.
roosevelt ordered the navy to shoot the german submarines on sight.
two weeks later the pink star an american merchant ship was sunk off greenland.
in mid october a u boat torpedoed the u s destroyer kearny and 11 lives were lost.
days later german u boats sank the u s destroyer reuben fames killing more than 100 sailors.
america has been attacked roosevelt announced grimly.
the shooting has started.
and history has recorded who fired the first shot.
as the death toll mounted the senate finally repealed the ban against arming merchant ships.
a formal declaration of a full scale war seemed inevitable.
japan attacks the united states the united states was now involved in an undeclared naval war with hitler.
however the attack that brought the united states into the war came from japan.
japan s ambitions in the pacific germany s european victories created new opportunities for japanese expansionists.
japan was already in control of manchuria in july 1937 hideki tojo he d ke to jo chief of staff of japan s kwantung army launched the invasion into china.
as french dutch and british colonies lay unprotected in asia japanese leaders leaped at the opportunity to unite east asia under japanese control by seizing the colonial lands.
by 1941 the british were too busy fighting hitler to block japanese expansion.
only the u s and its pacific islands remained in japan s way.
main idea summarizing why was the atlantic charter important.
main idea analyzing causes why did the united states enter into an undeclared shooting war with germany in fall 1941.
554 chapter 3 icltrnui t m xoro alexander graham bell invents the telephone which relies on a steady stream of electricity rather than electrical bursts to transmit sounds.
by 1900 there are over one million telephones in the united states.
marconi radio in 1895 guglielmo marconi an italian inventor sends telegraph code through the air as electromagnetic waves.
by the early 1900s the wireless makes voice transmissions possible.
commercial radio stations are broadcasting music and entertainment programs by the 1920s.
main idea summarizing how did technology influence both the north and the midwest in the 1840s.
where waterways didn t exist americans made them by building canals.
by the 1840s america boasted more than 3 300 miles of canals.
canals however soon gave way to railroads which offered the important advantage of speed as well as winter travel.
developed in england in the early 1800s steam powered locomotives began operating in the united states in the 1830s.
by 1850 over 9 000 miles of track had been laid across the united states.
the market revolution transforms the nation although most americans during the early 1800s still lived in rural areas and only 14 percent of workers had manufacturing jobs these workers produced more and better goods at lower prices than ever before.
many of these goods became affordable for ordinary americans and improvements in transportation allowed people to purchase items manufactured in distant places.
by the 1840s improved transportation and communication also made america s regions more interdependent.
steamboats went up as well as down the mississippi linking north to south.
the erie canal and eventually railroads and telegraph wires soon linked the east and the west.
heavy investment in canals and railroads transformed the northeast into the center of american commerce.
as the northeast began to industrialize many people then moved away to farm the fertile soil of the midwest.
they employed new machines such as the john deere steel plow for cultivating the tough prairie sod and cyrus mccormick s reaper for harvesting grain.
meanwhile most of the south remained agricultural and relied on such crops as cotton tobacco and rice.
changing workplaces the new market economy in the united states did not only affect what people bought and sold it also changed the ways americans worked.
moving production from the home to the factory split families created new communities and transformed relationships between employers and employees.
by the mid 19th century new machines allowed unskilled workers to perform tasks that once had taken the effort of trained artisans.
to do this work though workers needed factories.
television in the late 1800s scientists begin to experiment with transmitting pictures as well as words through the air.
in 1923 vladimir zworykin a russian born american scientist files a patent for the suitable for broadcast kinescope the picture in 1929 zworykin all electronic television.
computers scientists develop electronically powered computers during the 1940s.
in 1951 univac i universal advanced computer becomes the first commercially available computer.
in 1964 ibm initiates system 360 a family of mutually compatible computers that allow several terminals to be attached to one computer system.
internet today on the internet through e mail electronic mail or online conversation any two people can have instant dialogue.
the internet becomes the modern tool for instant global communication not only of words but images too.
and it is just as amazing now as the telegraph was in its time.
review unit 141 the lowell textile mills in the 1820s a group of entrepreneurs built several large textile mills in lowell massachusetts.
the lowell textile mills soon became booming enterprises.
thousands of people mostly women left family farms to find work in lowell.
mill owners sought female employees because women provided an abundant source of labor and owners could pay lower wages to women than men.
to the girls in the mills though textile work offered better pay than their main alternatives teaching sewing and domestic work.
in letters written in 1846 to her father in new hampshire 16 year old mary paul expressed her satisfaction with her situation at lowell.
a personal voice mary paul i have a very good boarding place have enough to eat.
the girls are all kind and obliging.
i think that the factory is the best place for me and if any girl wants employment i advise them to come to lowell.
quoted in women and the american experience a young mill girl from around 1840 her swollen hands suggest that she worked as a warper someone who straightened the strands of cotton or wool as they entered the loom.
before long however work conditions deteriorated.
the workday at lowell was more than 12 hours long.
in addition mills often were dark hot and cramped.
factory owners often showed little sympathy for the plight of workers.
in the mid 1840s one mill manager said i regard my workpeople just as i regard my machinery.
so long as they can do my work for what i choose to pay them i keep them getting out of them all i can.
main idea workers seek better conditions as industry grew strikes began to break out when workers protested poor working conditions and low wages.
workers strike in 1834 when the lowell mills announced a 15 percent wage cut 800 mill girls organized a strike a work stoppage to force an employer to respond to demands.
criticized by the lowell press and clergy most of the strikers agreed to return to work at reduced wages.
the mill owners fired the strike leader.
in 1836 lowell mill workers struck again but as in 1834 the company won and most of the strikers returned to their jobs.
although only 1 or 2 percent of workers in the united states were organized the 1830s and 1840s saw dozens of strikes many for higher wages but some for shorter hours.
employers defeated most of these strikes because they could easily replace unskilled workers with people recently arrived from europe who desperately needed jobs.
immigration increases european immigration leaving one country and settling in another rose dramatically in the united states between 1830 and 1860 between 1845 and 1854 alone nearly 3 million immigrants were added to the population.
more than 1 million were irish immigrants who fled their homeland after a disease on potatoes caused the great potato famine and led to mass starvation.
irish immigrants faced prejudice both because they were roman catholic and because they were poor.
frightened by allegations of a catholic conspiracy to take over the country protestant mobs in big cities constantly harassed them.
other workers resented the irish for their willingness to work as cheap labor a willingness that made them more desirable to employers.
making inferences what was the attitude of many factory owners toward their workers.
main idea summarizing why were most labor strikes of the 1880s and 1840s ineffective.
background during the great potato famine of 1845 1849 about 1 000 000 irish died of starvation and disease.
chapter 16 texas test practice use the cartoon and your knowledge of u s history to answer questions 1 and 2.
1 all of the following are true of f d r s neutrality policy except a roosevelt found it hard to keep the united states neutral.
b roosevelt did not always enforce the neutrality acts.
c roosevelt promoted the neutrality policy of the united states throughout the war.
d roosevelt spoke out against isolationism.
2 president wilsons image rises above president roosevelt to wish him luck for helping to pass the bill he is signing keeping the united states out of a war.
winning the next presidential election gaining greater revenues from europe.
use the quotation and your knowledge of u s history to answer question 3.
in the future days which we seek to make secure we look forward to a world founded upon four essential human freedoms.
the first is freedom of speech and expression.
everywhere in the world.
the second is freedom of every person to worship god in his own way.
everywhere in the world.
the third is freedom from want.
the fourth is freedom from fear 99 franklin roosevelt address to congress 1941 3 the four freedoms speech helped gain widespread support in the united states for a increasing aid to the allies.
b decreasing immigration.
c a military and arms buildup.
d a presidential election.
test practice for additional test practice go online for diagnostic tests tutorials interact with history my writesmart recall the issues that you recorded in mynotebook as you read the chapter to answer the following questions.
moving toward conflict pages 730 735 1 how did the tonkin gulf resolution lead to greater u s involvement in vietnam.
2 explain the relationship of the vietnam war to the domino theory.
u s involvement and escalation pages 736 741 3 why did so much of the american public and many in the johnson administration support u s escalation in vietnam.
4 why did the war begin to lose support at home.
what contributed to the sinking morale of the u s troops.
a nation divided pages 742 747 5 what race related problems existed for african american soldiers who served in the vietnam war.
6 summarize the ways in which the united states was sharply divided between hawks and doves.
a tumultuous year pages 748 753 7 what circumstances set the stage for president johnson s public announcement that he would not seek another term as president.
8 what acts of violence occurred in the united states during 1968 that dramatically altered the mood of the country.
the end of the war and its legacy pages 754 761 9 briefly describe the military conflict in vietnam soon after the last u s combat troops departed in 1973.
10 list the immediate effects and the more lasting legacies of americas involvement in the vietnam war.
critical thinking using your notes create a cause and effect diagram like the one below for the gulf of tonkin resolution and the war powers act.
then explain the impact of each event on the relationship between the legislative and executive branches of government.
cause congressional p jvieasure effect developing historical perspective read the economic spotlight feature on pages 762 763 describe thr economic impact of defense spending on the business cycle and education priorities from 1945 to the 1990s.
784 chapter 10 vocabulary guerrilla a member of a military force that harasses the enemy main idea analyzing motives h why did jos6 martf encourage cuban rebels to destroy sugar mills and plantations.
but american interest in cuba continued.
when the cubans rebelled against spain between 1868 and 1878 american sympathies went out to the cuban people.
the cuban revolt against spain was not successful but in 1886 the cuban people did force spain to abolish slavery.
after the emancipation of cuba s slaves american capitalists began investing millions of dollars in large sugar cane plantations on the island.
the second war for independence anti spanish sentiment in cuba soon erupted into a second war for independence.
jose marti a cuban poet and journalist in exile in new york launched a revolution in 1895 marti organized cuban resistance against spain using an active guerrilla campaign and deliberately destroying property especially american owned sugar mills and plantations.
marti counted on provoking u s intervention to help the rebels achieve cuba libre a free cuba.
public opinion in the united states was split.
many business people wanted the government to support spain in order to protect their investments.
other americans however were enthusiastic about the rebel cause.
the cry cuba libre.
was after all similar in sentiment to patrick henry s give me liberty or give me death.
war fever escalates in 1896 spain responded to the cuban revolt by sending general valeriano weyler to cuba to restore order.
weyler tried to crush the rebellion by herding the entire rural population of central and western cuba into barbed wire concentration camps.
here civilians could not give aid to rebels.
an estimated 300 000 cubans filled these camps where thousands died from hunger and disease.
headline wars weyler s actions fueled a war over newspaper circulation that had developed between the american newspaper tycoons william randolph hearst and joseph pulitzer.
to lure readers hearst s new york journal and pulitzer s new york world printed exaggerated accounts by reporters such as james creelman of butcher weyler s brutality.
stories of poisoned wells and of children being thrown to the sharks deepened american sympathy for the rebels.
this sensational style of writing which exaggerates the news to lure and enrage readers became known as yellow journalism.
hearst and pulitzer fanned war fever.
when hearst sent the gifted artist frederic remington to cuba to draw sketches of reporters stories remington informed the publisher that a war between the united states and spain seemed very unlikely.
hearst reportedly replied you furnish the pictures and i ll furnish the war.
the de lome letter american sympathy for cuba libre.
grew with each day s headlines when president william mckinley took office in 1897 demands for american intervention in cuba were on the rise.
preferring to avoid war with spain mckinley tried diplomatic means to resolve the crisis.
at first his efforts appeared to succeed.
spain recalled general weyler modified the policy regarding concentration camps and offered cuba limited self government.
jose marti 1853 1895 the cuban political activist jos6 martf dedicated his life to achieving independence for cuba.
expelled from cuba at the age of 16 because of his revolutionary activities marti earned a masters degree and a law degree.
he eventually settled in the united states.
wary of the u s role in the cuban struggle against the spanish martf warned i know the monster because i have lived in its lair his fears of u s imperialism turned out to have been well founded.
u s troops occupied cuba on and off from 1906 until 1922 martf died fighting for cuban independence in 1895 he is revered today in cuba as a hero and martyr.
america claims an empire 347 in february 1898 however the new york journal published a private letter written by enrique dupuy de lome the spanish minister to the united states.
a cuban rebel had stolen the letter from a havana post office and leaked it to the newspaper which was thirsty for scandal.
the de lome letter criticized president mckinley calling him weak and a bidder for the admiration of the crowd.
the embarrassed spanish government apologized and the minister resigned.
still americans were angry over the insult to their president.
maine explodes only a few days after the publication of the de lome letter american resentment toward spain turned to outrage.
early in 1898 president mckinley had ordered the u s s.
maine to cuba to bring home american citizens in danger from the fighting and to protect american property.
on february 15 1898 the ship blew up in the harbor of havana.
more than 260 men were killed.
at the time no one really knew why the ship exploded however american newspapers claimed that the spanish had blown up the ship.
the journal s headline read the warship maine was split in two by an enemy s secret infernal machine.
hearst s paper offered a reward of 50 000 for the capture of the spaniards who supposedly had committed the outrage.
main idea summarizing what events increased the tension between the united states and spain.
war with spain erupts now there was no holding back the forces that wanted war.
remember the maine.
became the rallying cry for u s intervention in cuba.
it made no difference that the spanish government agreed on april 9 to almost everything the united states demanded including a six month cease fire.
when the l s s.
maine exploded in the harbor of havana newspapers like the new vnru journal were quick to place the blame on spain.
k 348 chapter 17 the war for europe and north africa main idea why nr matters now terms names allied forces led by the united states and great britain battled axis powers for control of europe and north africa.
during world war ii the united states assumed a leading role in world affairs that continues today.
dwight d george patton eisenhower battle of the bulge omar bradley v e day d day harry s truman use the graphic organizer online to take notes on the war in north africa and europe.
it was 1951 and john patrick mcgrath was just finishing his second year in drama school.
for an acting class his final exam was to be a performance of a death scene.
mcgrath knew his lines perfectly.
but as he began the final farewell he broke out in a sweat and bolted off the stage.
suddenly he had a flashback to a frozen meadow in belgium during the battle of the bulge in 1945 three german tanks were spraying his platoon with machine gun fire.
a personal voice john patrick mcgrath only a few feet away one of the men in my platoon falls.
he calls out to me.
dont leave me.
the tanks advance one straight for me.
i grab my buddy by the wrist and pull him across the snow.
the tank nearest to us is on a track to run us down.
when the german tank is but 15 yards away i grab my buddy by the wrist and feign a lurch to my right.
the tank follows the move.
then i lurch back to my left.
the german tank clamors by only inches away.
in their wake the meadow is strewn with casualties.
i turn to tend my fallen comrade.
he is dead.
private john p mcgrath carried this bullet riddled letter in a pack that saved his life.
in 1990 he visited anzio where members of his company were buried.
a cue for passion like countless other soldiers mcgrath would never forget both the heroism and the horrors he witnessed while fighting to free europe.
the united states and britain join forces now that we are as you say in the same boat british prime minister winston churchill wired president roosevelt two days after the pearl harbor attack would it not be wise for us to have another conference and the sooner the better.
roosevelt responded with an invitation for churchill to come at once.
so began a remarkable alliance between the two nations.
the united states in world war ii 569 a convoy of british and american ships ride at anchor in the harbor of hvalfjord iceland.
war plans prime minister churchill arrived at the white house on december 22 1941 and spent the next three weeks working out war plans with president roosevelt and his advisors.
believing that germany and italy posed a greater threat than japan churchill convinced roosevelt to strike first against hitler.
once the allies had gained an upper hand in europe they could pour more resources into the pacific war.
by the end of their meeting roosevelt and churchill had formed in churchilps words a very strong affection which grew with our years of comradeship.
when churchill reached london he found a message from the president waiting for him.
it is fun roosevelt wrote in the message to be in the same decade with you.
the battle of the atlantic after the attack on pearl harbor hitler ordered submarine raids against ships along america s east coast.
the german aim in the battle of the atlantic was to prevent food and war materials from reaching great britain and the soviet union.
britain depended on supplies from the sea.
the 3 000 mile long shipping lanes from north america were her lifeline.
hitler knew that if he cut that lifeline britain would be starved into submission.
for a long time it looked as though hitler might succeed in his mission.
unprotected american ships proved to be easy targets for the germans.
in the first four months of 1942 the germans sank 87 ships off the atlantic shore.
seven months into the year german wolf packs had destroyed a total of 681 allied ships in the atlantic.
something had to be done or the war at sea would be lost.
the allies responded by organizing their cargo ships into convoys.
convoys were groups of ships traveling together for mutual protection as they had done in the first world war.
the convoys were escorted across the atlantic by destroyers equipped with sonar for detecting submarines underwater.
they were also accompanied by airplanes that used radar to spot u boats on the ocean s surface.
with this improved tracking the allies were able to find and destroy german u boats faster than the germans could build them.
in late spring of 1943 admiral karl doenitz the commander of the german u boat offensive reported that his losses had reached an unbearable height.
at the same time the united states launched a crash shipbuilding program by early 1943 140 liberty ships were produced each month.
launchings of allied ships began to outnumber sinkings.
by mid 1943 the tide of the battle of the atlantic had turned.
a happy churchill reported to the house of commons that june was the best month at sea from every point of view we have ever known in the whole 46 months of the war.
analyzing causes why had the tide turned in the battle of the atlantic by 570 chapter 23 video 7t 1969 president charles de gaulle of france resigns.
1972 i earthquake kills 10 000 in nicaragua.
11970 anwar el sadat becomes president of egypt.
an era of social change latinos and native americans seek equality main idea why it matters now terms names latinos and native americans confronted injustices in the 1960s.
campaigns for civil rights and economic justice won better representation and opportunity for latinos and native americans.
taking notes use the graphic organizer online to take notes on issues faced by latinos and native americans in the 1960s.
cesar chdvez dolores huerta united farm workers organizing committee la raza unida american indian movement aim carrying signs that say strike huelga mexican american farm workers protest poor working conditions.
one american s story jessie lopez de la cruz s life changed one night in 1962 when cesar chavez came to her home.
chavez a mexican american farm worker was trying to organize a union for california s mostly spanish speaking farm workers.
chavez said the women have to be involved.
they re the ones working out in the fields with their husbands.
soon jessie was in the fields talking to farm workers about the union.
a personal voice jessie lopez de la cruz wherever i went to speak i told them about.
how we had no benefits no minimum wage nothing out in the fields no restrooms nothing.
i said weil.
do you think we should be putting up with this in this modern age.
we can stand up.
we can talk back.
this country is very rich and we want a share of the money those growers make off our sweat and our work by exploiting us and our children quoted in moving the mountain women working for social change the efforts of jessie lopez de la cruz were just part of a larger rights movement during the turbulent and revolutionary 1960s.
as african americans were fighting for civil rights latinos and native americans rose up to assert their own rights and improve their lives.
the latino presence grows latinos or americans of latin american descent are a large and diverse group.
during the 1960s the latino population in the united states grew from 3 million to more than 9 million.
today the latino population includes people from sever al different areas primarily mexico puerto rico cuba the dominican republic central america and south america.
each of these groups has its own history its 768 chapter 10 tehchnatagig when the water has risen the upper gates are opened and the ship passes through the lock to the next level.
this photo shows a ship that has entered the canal from the pacific ocean side and is heading north through the miraflores locks.
ships and boats can also enter the canal through the atlantic ocean side and head south through the gatun locks.
the panama canal locks are used to raise and lower ships a total of 170 feet during the 51 mile trip through the panama canal.
for example ships from the atlantic ocean are lifted by the gatun locks to the level of gatun lake.
the ships cross the human made lake then move through another waterway the gaillard cut.
the pedro miguel and miraflores locks then lower the ships to the level of the pacific ocean.
gold hill main idea identifying problems si what problems did canal workers encounter in constructing the canal.
states signed a treaty in which the united states agreed to pay panama 10 million plus an annual rent of 250 000 for an area of land across panama called the canal zone.
the payments were to begin in 1913 constructing the canal due to the challenging physical geography its builders faced construction of the panama canal ranks as one of the world s greatest engineering feats.
builders fought diseases such as yellow fever and malaria and soft volcanic soil that proved difficult to remove.
work clearing brush and draining swamps began in 1904 by 1913 the height of construction more than 43 400 workers were employed.
some had come from italy and spain three quarters were blacks from the british west indies.
more than 5 600 workers died from accidents or disease.
the total cost to the united states was about 380 million.
5 on august 15 1914 the canal opened for business and more than 1 000 merchant ships passed through during its first year.
u s latin american relations however had been damaged by american support of the rebellion in panama.
the resulting ill will lasted for decades despite congress s paying colombia 25 million in 1921 to compensate the country for its lost territory.
history video panama canal locks io america claims an empire 361 analyzing political cartoons j worlds constable this cartoon drawn by louis dalrymple in 1905 shows teddy roosevelt implementing his new world diplomacy.
the cartoon implies that roosevelt has the right to execute police power to keep the countries of europe shown on the right out of the affairs of latin american countries shown on the left.
skillbuilder analyzing political cartoons 1 how does the cartoonist portray president roosevelt.
2 why is the worlds constable a good title for this cartoon.
speak softly and carry a big stick you will go far.
theodore roosevelt the roosevelt corollary financial factors drew the united states further into latin american affairs.
in the late 19th century many latin american nations had borrowed huge sums from european banks to build railroads and develop industries.
roosevelt feared that if these nations defaulted on their loans europeans might intervene.
he was determined to make the united states the predominant power in the caribbean and central america.
roosevelt reminded european powers of the monroe doctrine which had been issued in 1823 by president james monroe.
the monroe doctrine demanded that european countries stay out of the affairs of latin american nations.
roosevelt based his latin america policy on a west african proverb that said speak softly and carry a big stick.
in his december 1904 message to congress roosevelt added the roosevelt corollary to the monroe doctrine.
he warned that disorder in latin vocabulary america might force the united states to the exer actional cise of an international police power in effect the statement that corollary said that the united states would now use follows logically force to protect its economic interests in latin america.
from the f rst dollar diplomacy during the next decade the united states exercised its police power on several occasions.
for example when a 1911 rebellion in nicaragua left the nation near bankruptcy president william h taft roosevelt s successor arranged for american bankers to loan nicaragua enough money to pay its debts.
in return the bankers were given the right to recover their money by collecting nicaragua s customs duties.
the u s bankers also gained control of nicaragua s state owned railroad system and its national bank.
when nicaraguan citizens heard about this deal they revolted against president adolfo diaz.
to prop up 162 chapter 10 diaz s government some 2 000 marines were sent to nicaragua.
the revolt was put down but some marine detachments remained in the country until 1933 the taft administration followed the policy of using the u s government to guarantee loans made to foreign countries by american businesspeople.
this policy was called dollar diplomacy by its critics and was often used to justify keeping european powers out of the caribbean.
woodrow wilsons missionary diplomacy the monroe doctrine issued by president james monroe in 1823 had warned other nations against expanding their influence in latin america.
the roosevelt corollary asserted in 1904 that the united states had a right to exercise international police power in the western hemisphere.
in 1913 president woodrow wilson gave the monroe doctrine a moral tone.
according to wilson s missionary diplomacy the united states had a moral responsibility to deny recognition to any latin american government it viewed as oppressive undemocratic or hostile to u s interests.
prior to this policy the united states recognized any government that controlled a nation regardless of that nation s policies or how it had come to power.
wilson s policy pressured nations in the western hemisphere to establish democratic governments.
almost immediately the mexican revolution put wilson s policy to the test.
main idea analyzing motives why did president wilson refuse to recognize huertas government.
the mexican revolution mexico had been ruled for more than three decades by a military dictator porfirio diaz.
a friend of the united states diaz had long encouraged foreign investments in his country.
as a result foreigners mostly americans owned a large share of mexican oil wells mines railroads and ranches.
while foreign investors and some mexican landowners and politicians had grown rich the common people of the country were desperately poor.
in 1911 mexican peasants and workers led by francisco madero overthrew diaz.
madero promised democratic reforms but he proved unable to satisfy the conflicting demands of landowners peasants factory workers and the urban middle class.
after two years general victoriano huerta took over the government.
within days madero was murdered.
wilson refused to recognize the government that huerta formed.
he called it a government of butchers.
j k k history video the peasant revolution f.
intervention in mexico wilson adopted a plan of watchful waiting looking for an opportunity to act against huerta.
the opportunity came in april 1914 when one of huerta s officers arrested a small group of american sailors in tampico on mexico s eastern shore.
the mexicans quickly released them and apologized but wilson used the incident as an excuse to intervene in mexico and ordered u s marines to occupy veracruz an important mexican port.
eighteen americans and at least 200 mexicans died during the invasion.
the incident brought the united states and mexico close to war.
argentina brazil and chile stepped in to mediate the conflict.
they proposed that huerta step down and that u s troops withdraw without paying mexico for damages.
mexico rejected the plan and wilson refused to recognize a government that had come to power as a result of violence.
the huerta regime soon collapsed however and venustiano carranza a nationalist leader became president in 1915 wilson withdrew the troops and formally recognized the carranza government.
vt rspectfv.
intervention in mexico most u s citizens supported american intervention in mexico.
edith oshaughnessy wife of an american diplomat in mexico city had another perspective.
after touring veracruz oshaughnessy wrote to her mother i think we have done a great wrong to these people instead of cutting out the sores with a clean strong knife of war.
and occupation we have only put our fingers in each festering wound and inflamed it further america claims an empire 363 history through i i i i zapatistas 1931 jose orozco one of mexicos foremost artists painted these zapatistas followers of zapata to honor the peasant men and women who fought in the mexican revolution.
orozco did many paintings in support of the revolution.
what aspects of the image does the artist use to convey strength and unity.
rebellion in mexico carranza was in charge but like others before him he did not have the support of all mexicans.
rebels under the leadership of francisco pancho villa ve s andemiliano zapata e mel va no za pa ta opposed carranza s provisional government.
zapata son of a mestizo paasant was dedicated to land reform.
it is better to die on your feet than live on your knees zapata told the peasants who joined him.
villa a fierce nationalist had frequently courted the support and aid of the united states.
a personal voice pancho villa a s long as i have anything to do with the affairs in mexico there will be no further friction between my country and my friends of the north to president wilson the greatest american i stand pledged to do what i can to keep the faith he has in my people and if there is anything he may wish i will gladly do it for i know it will be for the good of my country.
new york times january 11 1915 despite villa s talk of friendship when president wilson recognized carranza s government villa threatened reprisals against the united states.
in january 1916 carranza invited american engineers to operate mines in northern mexico.
before they reached the mines however villa s men took the americans off a train and shot them.
two months later some of villa s followers raided columbus new mexico and killed 17 americans.
americans held villa responsible.
i chasing villa with the american public demanding revenge president wilson ordered brigadier general john j pershing and an expeditionary force of about 15 000 soldiers into mexico to capture villa dead or alive.
for almost a year villa eluded pershing s forces.
wilson then called out 150 000 national guardsmen and stationed them along the mexican border.
in the meantime 164 chapter 17 allies win battle of the philippine sea.
allies win battle of leyte gulf.
allies capture iwo jima.
allies capture okinawa.
drops atomic bombs on hiroshima and nagasaki.
japan surrenders.
1944 may jun jiti aug oct dec 1 945 maraprmayjiun attgsep allies invade sicily.
italy secretly surrenders to allies.
germans attack allies.
in battle of the bulge.
soviets first liberate death camps.
allies invade europe on d day.
e bloody anzio ends.
allies liberate paris.
v e day ends war in europe.
italians execute mussolini.
hitler commits suicide.
the allies go on the offensive the first allied offensive began in august 1942 when 19 000 troops stormed guadalcanal in the solomon islands.
by the time the japanese abandoned guadalcanal six months later they called it the island of death.
to war correspondent ralph martin and the troops who fought there it was simply hell.
a personal voice ralph g martin hell was red furry spiders as big as your fist giant lizards as long as your leg leeches falling from trees to suck blood armies of white ants with a bite of fire scurrying scorpions inflaming any flesh they touched enormous rats and bats everywhere and rivers with waiting crocodiles.
hell was the sour foul smell of the squishy jungle humidity that rotted a body within hours.
stinking wet heat of dripping rain forests that sapped the strength of any man.
the gl war i main idea i.
i j rawing delusions why was the battle of leyte gulfso crucial to allies.
guadalcanal marked japan s first defeat on land but not its last.
the americans continued leapfrogging across the pacific toward japan and in october 1944 some 178 000 allied troops and 738 ships converged on leyte island in the philippines.
general macarthur who had left the philippines two years earlier waded ashore and announced people of the philippines i have returned.
the japanese defense the japanese threw their entire fleet into the battle of leyte gulf.
they also tested a new tactic the kamikaze ka mtka ze or suicide plane attack in which japanese pilots crashed their bomb laden planes into allied ships.
kamikaze means divine wind and refers to a legendary typhoon that saved japan in 1281 by destroying a mongol invasion.
in the philippines 424 kamikaze pilots embarked on suicide missions sinking 16 ships and damaging another 80 americans watched these terrifying attacks with a strange mixture of respect and pity according to vice admiral charles brown.
you have to admire the devotion to country demonstrated by those pilots recalled seaman george marse.
yet when they were shot down rescued and brought aboard our ship we were surprised to find the pilots looked like ordinary scared young men not the wide eyed fanatical devils we imagined them to be.
despite the damage done by the kamikazes the battle of leyte gulf was a disaster for japan.
in three days of battle it lost 3 battleships 4 aircraft carriers 13 cruisers and almost 500 planes.
from then on the imperial navy played only a minor role in the defense of japan.
q the united states in world war ii 5i history through raising the flag on iwo jima on february 19 1945 the war in europe was nearing its end but in the pacific one of the fiercest battles of world war ii was about to erupt.
on that day 70 000 marines converged on the tiny japanese controlled island of iwo jima.
four days later they had captured mount suribachi the islands highest point but the battle for iwo jima would rage on for four more weeks.
six marines and a navy corpsman were sent to replace the flag with an even larger one.
joe rosenthal a wire service photographer saw the second flag raising grabbed his camera and clicked off a frame without even looking through his viewfinder.
rosenthals photo appeared the next morning on the front pages of american newspapers.
in the minds of americans it immediately replaced the gloomy blurred images of pearl harbor going up in flames.
skillbuilder interpeting visual sources x one of the mount suribachi images became one of the most recognized most reproduced images of world war ii.
study the details and point of view in each photo.
explain why you think o ia hsenj a s mage rather than lowerys became important.
what human qualities or events do you think rosenthals photograph symbolizes.
582 chapter skill activity using primary and secondary sources defining the skill primary sources are accounts written or created by people who were present at historical events either as participants or as observers.
primary sources include letters diaries journals speeches some news articles eyewitness accounts government data statutes court opinions and autobiographies.
secondary sources are based on primary sources and are produced by people who were not present at the original events.
they are written after the event occurred.
they often combine information from a number of different accounts and contain an interpretation of the event.
the interpretation is the historians understanding of what actually happened and why.
secondary sources include history books historical essays some news articles and biographies.
understanding the skill strategy evaluate the information in each type of source examine a source and identify the author to determine if he or she was at the event or not.
if the author was at the event evaluate his or her credentials.
how is the speaker connected to the events.
what opinions biases assumptions and points of view can you identify in the source.
if it is a secondary source analyze the information to see if there are details and information missing from primary sources.
the following passage describes views of american expansionism in regards to the annexation of hawaii.
it is mainly a secondary source but it quotes eyewitness accounts that are primary sources.
views on american expansionism during the late 1800s hawaii was swept up in american expansionism on one side native f hawaiians were shocked by the manipulation and eventual overthrow of their monarchy.
on the other side leaders in the united states wanted more control of the economic benefits and strategic location of hawaii.
by 1893 cries of annexation led to differing attitudes about the situation.
after queen liliuokalani was overthrown her niece princess kaiulani made a plea to president cleveland in 1893 to restore the hawaiian monarchy.
in her plea she wrote i seventy years ago christian america sent over christian men and women to give religion and civilization to hawaii today i a poor weak girl with not one of my people near me and all these j hawaiian statesmen against me have strength to stand up for the rights of my people.
even now i can hear the wail in my heart and it gives me strength and courage the strength that the seventy j millions of people who are in this free land will hear my cry and will refuse to let their flag cover.
dishonor to mine.
j at the time john l stevens was u s minister to hawaii.
in his brief a plea for annexation within an article called the hawaiian situation stevens described the hawaiian monarchy as extinct and argued that it was imperative that the united states annex hawaii.
he explained his reasoning a paramount reason why annexation should not be long postponed is that if it soon takes place the crown and government lands will be cut up and sold to american and christian caucasian people thus preventing the islands from being submerged and overrun by asiatics putting an end to japanese ambitions stimulated by our strong european rival.
president cleveland tried in vain to restore the monarchy unable to secure annexation at the time but managed to keep only five years later hawaii was named a u s territory.
business leaders were control of the hawaiian government.
0 locate sources.
the catalog in your school library or local public library lists resources alphabetically by subject title and author.
most of these are secondary sources but may contain copies or excerpts of primary sources.
articles in a general print or online encyclopedia such as encyclopedia britannica or world book can give you an overview of a topic and usually provide references to additional sources.
0 secondary source look for information collected from several sources.
this information can help provide a context for the primary source.
primary source identify the title and author and evaluate his or her credentials.
what assumptions and biases does the author reveal.
what qualifies the writer to report on the event.
here princess kaiulani is part of the hawaiian monarchy and stevens serves as minister to hawaii.
0 secondary source look for information collected after the event.
a secondary source provides perspective that is typically missing in a primary source.
strategy make a chart summarize information from primary and secondary sources in a chart.
primary source primary source secondary source author.
princess kaiulani author john l stevens author history textbook qualifications main figure qualifications main figure in qualifications had access in the events described the events described to multiple accounts of event information describes information detailed information describes a how she feels about the situation sensory observations feeling of strength and certainty consequences of inaction range of points of view and information available only after event puts events into historical perspective applying the skill make your own chart.
read chapter terms names assessment for each term or name below write a sentence explaining its connection to the 1960s.
1 cesar chavez 2 la raza unida 3 american indian movement aim 4 feminism 5 betty friedan main ideas 6 equal rights amendment era 7 phyllis schlafly 8 counterculture 9 haight ashbury 10 woodstock use your notes and the information in the chapter 17 main idea analyzing motives why did president roosevelt order the internment of japanese americans.
about two thirds were nisei or japanese people born in this country of parents who emigrated from japan.
thousands of nisei had already joined the armed forces and to ted nakashima an architectural draftsman from seattle the evacuation seemed utterly senseless.
a personal voice ted nakashima there are electricians plumbers draftsmen mechanics carpenters painters farmers every trade men who are able and willing to do all they can to lick the axis.
were on this side and we want to help.
why wont america let us.
from new republic magazine june 15 1942 no specific charges were ever filed against japanese americans and no evidence of subversion was ever found.
faced with expulsion terrified families were forced to sell their homes businesses and all their belongings for less than their true value.
japanese americans fought for justice both in the courts and in congress.
the initial results were discouraging.
in 1944 the supreme court decided in korematsu v united states that the government s policy of evacuating japanese americans to camps was justified on the basis of military necessity.
see pages 596 597.
after the war however the japanese american citizens league 0acl pushed the government to compensate those sent to the camps for their lost property.
in 1965 congress authorized the spending of 38 million for that purpose less than a tenth of japanese americans actual losses.
the j acl did not give up its quest for justice.
in 1978 it called for the payment of reparations or restitution to each individual that suffered internment.
a decade later congress passed and president ronald reagan signed a bill that promised 20 000 to every japanese american sent to a relocation camp.
when the checks were sent in 1990 a letter from president george bush accompanied them in which he stated we can never fully right the wrongs of the past.
but we can take a clear stand for justice and recognize that serious injustices were done to japanese americans during world war ii.
assessment 1 terms names gl bill of rights james farmer for each term or name write a sentence explaining its significance.
congress of racial internment equality core japanese american citizens league jacl main idea using your notes list the advances and problems in the economy and in civil rights during world war ii.
advances problems economy civil rights which of these advances and problems do you think had the most far reaching effect.
explain your answer.
critical thinking 3 comparing how were the experiences of african americans mexican americans and japanese americans similar during world war ii.
how were they different.
analyzing issues do you think the treatment of german italian and japanese americans was justified on the basis of military necessity.
explain your answer.
analyzing effects what effect did world war ii have on american families.
think about the role of women in families and the economy the relationship between the races the impact of the federal government on society the united states in world war ii 595 korematsu v united states 1944 origins of the case following the japanese attack on pearl harbor on december 7 1941 u s military officials argued that japanese americans posed a threat to the nation s security.
based on recommendations from the military president franklin roosevelt issued executive order 9066 which gave military officials the power to limit the civil rights of japanese americans.
military authorities began by setting a curfew for japanese americans.
later they forced japanese americans from their homes and moved them into detention camps.
fred korematsu was convicted of defying the military order to leave his home.
at the urging of the american civil liberties union aclu korematsu appealed that conviction.
the ruling the court upheld korematsus conviction and argued that military necessity made internment constitutional.
legal reasoning executive order 9066 was clearly aimed at one group of people japanese americans.
korematsu argued that this order was unconstitutional because it was based on race.
writing for the court majority justice hugo black agreed that all legal restrictions which curtail the civil rights of a single racial group are immediately suspect.
however in this case he said the restrictions were based on a military imperative and not group punishment based on antagonism to those of japanese origin.
as such justice black stated that the restrictions were constitutional.
compulsory exclusion of large groups.
except under circumstances of direct emergency and peril is inconsistent with our basic governmental institutions.
but when under conditions of modern warfare our shores are threatened by hostile forces the power to protect must be commensurate with the threatened danger.
99 justice frank murphy however dissented he opposed the majority.
he believed that military necessity was merely an excuse that could not conceal the racism at the heart of the restrictions.
this exclusion ought not to be approved.
such exclusion goes over the very brink of constitutional power and falls into the ugly abyss of racism 99 two other justices also dissented but korematsu s conviction stood.
legal sources legislation u s constitution fifth amendment 1791 no person shall be deprived of life liberty or property without due process of law executive order 9066 1942 i hereby authorize and direct the secretary of war to prescribe military areas in such places and of such extent as he may determine from which any or all persons may be excluded related cases hirabayashi v united states june 1943 the court upheld the conviction of a japanese american man for breaking curfew.
the court argued that the curfew was within congressional and presidential authority.
ex parte endo december 1944 the court ruled that a japanese american girl whose loyalty had been clearly established could not be held in an internment camp.
596 chapter 4 the union in peril main idea developing historical perspective h do you think that the union would take revenge on the southern states after the war is over.
after some political maneuvering the thirteenth amendment was ratified at the end of 1865 the u s constitution now stated neither slavery nor involuntary servitude except as a punishment for crime whereof the party shall have been duly convicted shall exist within the united states.
lincoln is assassinated whatever further plans lincoln had to reunify the nation after the war he never got to imple ment them.
on april 14 1865 five days after lee surrendered to grant at appomattox lincoln and his wife went to ford s theatre in washington to see a british comedy our american cousin.
during its third act a man crept up behind lincoln and shot the presi dent in the back of his head.
lincoln who never regained consciousness died on april 15 it was the first time a president of the united states had been assassinated.
after the shooting the assassin john wilkes booth a 26 year old actor and southern sympathizer then leaped down from the presidential box to the stage and escaped.
twelve days later union cavalry trapped him in a virginia tobacco shed and shot him dead.
the funeral train that carried lincoln s body from washington to his hometown of springfield illinois took 14 days for its journey.
approximately 7 million americans or almost one third of the entire union population turned out to mourn publicly their martyred leader.
the civil war had ended.
slavery and secession were no more.
now the country faced two new problems how to restore the southern states to the union and how to integrate approximately 4 million newly freed african americans into national life.
lincolns body lies in state in 1865 assessment 1 terms names for each term or name write a sentence explaining its significance.
gettysburg gettysburg address vicksburg william tecumseh sherman appomattox court house thirteenth amendment john wilkes booth main idea using your notes copy the multiple effects chart below on your paper and fill it in with consequences of the civil war.
which consequence of the civil war do you think has had the most impact on modern life.
critical thinking analyzing issues grant and sherman used the strategy of total war.
do you think the end justifies the means.
that is did defeating the confederacy justify harming civilians.
think about their reasons for targeting the civilian population shermans remark about georgia quoted on page 181 shermans march through georgia 4 summarizing how did lincoln abolish slavery in all states.
drawing conclusions why did the unions victory strengthen the power of the national government.
review unit 183 i reconstruction its effects main idea r ml ss why it matters now terms names in after the civil war the nation embarked on a period known as reconstruction during which attempts were made to readmit the south to the union.
the fourteenth and fifteenth amendments passed as part of reconstruction gave civil rights to americans of all races.
freedmens bureau reconstruction radical republicans andrew johnson fourteenth amendment fifteenth amendment scalawag carpetbagger hiram revels sharecropping ku klux kian kkk taking notes use the graphic organizer online to take notes on problems facing the south after the civil war and solutions that were offered for those problems.
robert g fitzgerald was born a free african american in delaware in 1840 during the civil war he served in both the u s army and the u s navy.
in 1866 he taught former slaves in a small virginia town.
a year after his arrival in virginia fitzgerald looked back on what he had accomplished.
a personal voice robert g fitzgerald i came to virginia one year ago on the 22nd of this month.
erected a school organized and named the freedmans chapel school.
now june 29th have about 60 who have been for several months engaged in the study of arithmetic writing etc.
this morning sent in my report accompanied with compositions from about 12 of my advanced writers instructed from the alphabet up to their present condition their progress has been surprisingly rapid.
quoted in proud shoes fitzgerald was working for the freedmen s bureau which had been established by congress to provide food clothing hospitals legal protection and education for former slaves and poor whites in the south in 1865.
robert fitzgerald the politics of reconstruction the need to help former slaves was just one of many issues the nation confronted after the war.
in addition the government led by andrew johnson lincoln s vice president and eventual successor had to determine how to bring the confederate states back into the union.
reconstruction the period during which the united states began to rebuild after the civil war lasted from 1865 to 1877 the term also refers to the process the federal government used to readmit chapter to answer the following questions.
mobilizing for defense pages 562 568 1 how did the u s military reflect the diversity of american society during world war ii.
2 how did the federal governments actions influence civilian life during world war ii.
3 what role did the media play in helping the country mobilize.
the war for europe and north africa pages 569 577 4 how did the allies win control of the atlantic ocean between 1941 and 1943.
5 what was the significance of the battle of stalingrad.
6 how did the battle of the bulge signal the beginning of the end of world war ii in europe.
the war in the pacific pages 578 587 7 briefly describe the island war in the pacific.
8 why did president truman decide to use atomic weapons.
the home front pages 590 595 9 how did the u s economy change during world war ii.
10 how did executive order 9066 affect the home front.
critical thinking using your notes in a chart like the one shown explain the opportunities and obstacles that women and ethnic minorities faced during world war ii.
women minorities opportunities obstacles analyzing issues read the feature on pages 596 59.
what constitutional issues were raised by executive order 9066 and internment of german italian and japanese americans during world war ii.
do you think the governments actions were constitutional.
summarizing explain the bravery and contributions of ethnic minorities in the armed forces during world war ii including the tuskegee airmen and the navajo code talkers.
explaining turning points what is the significance of the years 1939 194 ac a exola use the map and your knowledge of u s history to answer question 1 h 2 how did world war ii lead to one of the largest population shifts in u s history.
service men and women were forced to leave their homes for europe.
the loss of loved ones led people to move in with their families.
people moved to states with military bases and factories for better jobs.
j people moved to the middle of the country to escape wars on both coasts.
3 how did natural geography contribute to germanys defeat in world war ii.
a large bodies of water stood between germany and its enemies.
b germany had to fight a war on three fronts north africa western europe and eastern europe and the soviet union.
c there were too few rivers to be used for german supplies.
d switzerland pledged to remain neutral throughout the war.
1 why was it critical for the allies to take the japanese held islands of iwo jima and okinawa.
a the islands were highly populated areas with little military protection.
b the islands were critical as bases from which allied bombers could reach japan.
c the islands were centers for japanese development of a nuclear bomb.
d the allies intended to drop atomic bombs on the islands.
test practice for additional test practice go online for diagnostic tests tutorials interact with history writesmart multimedia activity think about the issues you recorded in mynotebook as you read the chapter 24 an age of limits 1968 1980 chapter 27 issues for the 21st century unit project this unit brings american history to the present day.
use your knowledge of historical eras the unit s content and the major characteristics of history to identify the eras in this unit.
then create a webpage that describes the defining characteristics of each era.
exhibit at the ellis island immigration museum design by metaform portraits in flag by pablo delano photograph norman mcgrath passage to a new century 1968 present k 1 k k k k ii w m ft r r 5 essential question myhigtebook what were the political social and economic events of the 1970s.
texas essential knowledge and skills teks 9g 10a 10c 10d 14b 17e 19c 30c 31a section 1 the nixon administration main idea president richard m nixon tried to steer the country in a conservative direction and away from federal control.
section 2 watergate nixon s downfall main idea president richard nixons involvement in the watergate scandal forced him to resign from office.
section 3 the ford and carter years main idea the ford and carter administrations attempted to remedy the nations worst economic crisis in decades.
section 4 environmental activism main idea during the 1970s americans strengthened their efforts to address the nations environmental problems.
richard nixon leaves the white house after resigning as president on friday august 9 1974 usa.
1968i richard m nixon is elected president.
19691 astronaut nell armstrong becomes the first person to walk on the moon.
1970j america celebrates the first earth day.
nixon visits china and the soviet union.
11972 nixon is reelected.
energy crisis begins and gasoline prices soar.
il9 4 vice president gerald r ford becomes president after the watergate scandal forces president nixon to resign.
1969 1970 1971 1972 1973 j 1974 china gives the u s two pandas.
l972j terrorists kill eleven israeli athletes at the xx olympiad in munich.
1973 war breaks outtnthe middle east when seven arab states attack israel on yom klppur 792 chapter 24 the soviet union regularly displayed its military strength in parades.
shown here is an icbm in a 1965 parade through moscows red square.
i soviet union.
like his visit to china nixon s trip to the soviet union received wide acclaim.
after a series of meetings called the strategic arms limitation talks salt nixon and soviet premier leonid brezhnev signed the salt i treaty.
this five year agreement limited the number of intercontinental ballistic missiles icbms and submarine launched missiles to 1972 levels.
the foreign policy triumphs with china and the soviet union and the administration s announcement that peace is at hand in vietnam helped reelect nixon as president in 1972 but peace in vietnam proved elusive.
the nixon administration grappled with the war for nearly six more months before withdrawing troops and ending america s involvement in vietnam.
by that time another issue was about to dominate the nixon administration one that would eventually lead to the downfall of the president.
assessment i j 1 terms names for each term or name write a sentence explaining its significance m nixon family assistance plan opec organization of new federalism southern strategy petroleum exporting revenue sharing stagflation countries realpolitik detente salt i treaty main idea using your notes in a two column chart similar to the one shown list the policies of richard nixon that promoted change and those that slowed it down.
promoted change slowed change policies policies critical thinking analyzing issues how did the opec oil embargo reflect the dynamic relationship between u s trade policies and its free enterprise system.
drawing conclusions how do nixons efforts to improve relations with china demonstrate his leadership.
5 summarizing how did southern democrats seek to maintain the status quo of segregation.
evaluating decisions in your opinion did nixons policy of detente help solve the countrys major foreign policy problems.
support your answer with evidence from the text.
think about the definition and origin of detente the effect of detente on u s dealings with communist countries s i an age of limits the effect of detente on the american public in what ways do you think nixon was most conservative.
in what ways was he least conservative.
teks19c watergate nixon s downfall main idea president richard nixons involvement in the watergate scandal forced him to resign from office.
why it matters now the watergate scandal raised questions of public trust that still affect how the public and media skeptically view politicians.
terms names r haldeman john ehrlichman john mitchell committee to reelect the president john sirica saturday night massacre one.
american s story taking notes use the graphic organizer online to take notes on the watergate scandal.
on july 25 1974 representative barbara jordan of texas a member of the house judiciary committee along with the other committee members considered whether to recommend that president nixon be impeached for high crimes and misdemeanors.
addressing the room jordan cited the constitution in urging her fellow committee members to investigate whether impeachment was appropriate.
a personal voice barbara jordan we the people it is a very eloquent beginning.
but when the constitution of the united states was completed.
i was not included in that4we the people but through the process of amendment interpretation and court decision i have finally been included in 4 we the people.
my faith in the constitution is whole.
it is complete.
it is total.
i am not going to sit here and be an idle spectator in the diminution the subversion the destruction of the constitution.
has the president committed offenses.
which the constitution will not tolerate.
u s representative barbara jordan 1974.
quoted in notable black american women the committee eventually voted to recommend the impeachment of richard nixon for his role in the watergate scandal.
however before congress could take further action against him the president resigned.
nixon s resignation the first by a u s president was the climax of a scandal that led to the imprisonment of 25 government officials and caused the most serious constitutional crisis in the united states since the impeachment of andrew johnson in 1868 president nixon and his white house the watergate scandal centered on the nixon administration s attempt to cozer up a burglary of the democratic national committee dnc headquarters at the watergate office and apartment complex in washington d c however the 802 chapter 18 background after 18 months francis gary powers was released from the soviet union in exchange for soviet agent rudolf abel who had been convicted of spying in the united states.
finally eisenhower himself wanted the flights discontinued.
he and khrushchev were going to hold another summit conference on the arms race on may 15 1960.
if one of these aircraft were lost when we were engaged in apparently sincere deliberations it could.
ruin my effectiveness he told an aide.
however dulles persuaded him to authorize one last flight.
that flight took place on may 1 and the pilot was francis gary powers.
four hours after powers entered soviet airspace a soviet pilot shot down his plane and powers was forced to parachute into soviet controlled territory.
the soviets sentenced powers to ten years in prison.
renewed confrontation at first eisenhower denied that the u 2 had been spying.
the soviets had evidence however and eisenhower finally had to admit it.
khrushchev demanded an apology for the flights and a promise to halt them.
eisenhower agreed to stop the u 2 flights but he would not apologize.
khrushchev angrily called off the summit.
he also withdrew his invitation to eisenhower to visit the soviet union.
because of the u 2 incident the 1960s opened with tension between the two superpowers as great as ever.
francis gary powerss military identification card francis gary powers at a senate committee hearing following his release by the soviets a assessment e terms names for each term or name write a sentence explaining its significance.
h bomb brinkmanship warsaw pact francis gary powers d eisenhower central intelligence eisenhower doctrine u 2 incident john foster dulles agency cia nikita khrushchev main idea using your notes list cold war trouble spots in iran guatemala egypt and hungary.
for each write a newspaper headline that summarizes the u s role and the outcome of the situation.
trouble spot headline critical thinking analyzing events how did the arms race and the space race intensify cold war tensions.
think about the mutual distrust between the soviet union and the united states the u s response to the sputnik launch brinkmanship 4 evaluating which of the two superpowers do you think contributed more to cold war tensions during the 1950s.
forming generalizations should one nation have the right to remove another nations head of government from power.
if so when.
if not why.
ghoose one headline and write a paragraph about that trouble spot.
cold war conflicts 627 american literature 1950 1959 science fiction reflects cold war fears many writers of science fiction draw on the scientific and social trends of the present to describe future societies that might arise if those trends were to continue.
nuclear proliferation the space race early computer technology and the pervasive fear of known and unknown dangers during the cold war were the realities that prompted a boom in science fiction during the 1950s and 1960s.
the body snatchers published in 1955 at the height of the great fear jack finneys the body snatchers on which the movie invasion of the body snatchers was based tells of giant seed pods from outer space that descend on the inhabitants of a california town.
the pods create perfect physical duplicates of the townspeople and lack only one thing human souls.
miles he looks sounds acts and remembers exactly like ira.
on the outside.
but inside he s different.
his responses she stopped hunting for the word aren t emotionally right if i can explain that.
he remembers the past in detail and he ll smile and say you were sure a cute youngster willy.
bright one too just the way uncle ira did.
but there s something missing and the same thing is true of aunt aleda lately.
wilma stopped staring at nothing again face intent wrapped up in this then she continued.
uncle ira was a father to me from infancy and when he talked about my childhood miles there was always a special look in his eyes that meant he was remembering the wonderful quality of those days for him.
miles that look way in back of the eyes is gone.
with this this uncle ira or whoever or whatever he is i have the feeling the absolutely certain knowledge miles that he s talking by rote.
that the facts of uncle ira s memories are all in his mind in every last detail ready to recall.
but the emotions are not.
there is no emotion none only the pretense of it.
the words the gestures the tones of voice everything else but not the feeling.
her voice was suddenly firm and commanding miles memories or not appearances or not possible or impossible that is not my uncle ira.
tir5 mawu kevin mccarthy oana wynter jack finney the body snatchers 1955j 628 chapter to answer the following questions.
origins of the cold war pages 602 608 1 what were the goals of u s foreign policy in the cold war.
2 describe the truman doctrine and how america reacted to it.
3 how was the nato alliance a response to soviet aggression.
the cold war heats up pages 609 615 4 what global events led to u s involvement in korea.
5 what issue between general douglas macarthur and president truman eventually cost macarthur his job.
immediate effects the cold war at home pages 616 621 6 what actions of joseph mccarthy worsened the national hysteria about communism.
7 how did the rosenberg case fuel anti communist feeling.
two nations live on the edge pages 622 627 8 how did the u s including the cia wage the cold war in the 1950s.
critical thinking using your notes create a cause and effect diagram like the one shown for each of these events a the united states adoption of a policy of containment and b the beginning of the nuclear arms race between the united states and the soviet union.
analyzing events what government actions during the communist scare conflicted with the bill of rights.
interpreting maps look carefully at the map on page 605 how did the absence of a natural barrier on the western border of the soviet union affect post world war ii soviet foreign policy.
explain your answer.
explaining turning points what is the significance of the year 1957 as a turning point in american history.
630 chapter 18 texas test practice use the quotation below and your knowledge of u s history to answer question 1.
in 1945 i had ordered the a bomb dropped on japan at two places devoted almost exclusively to war production.
we were at war.
we were trying to end it in order to save the lives of our soldiers and sailors.
we stopped the war and saved thousands of casualties on both sides.
in korea we were fighting a police action with sixteen allied nations to support the world organization which had set up the republic of korea.
we had held the chinese after defeating the north koreans and whipping the russian air force.
i just could not make the order for a third world war.
i know i was right.
off the record the private papers of harry s truman 1 according to president truman what was the main difference between using the atomic bomb on japan in 1945 and the possibility of using it on china in 1951.
a japan was more of a military power in 1945 than china was in 1951 b in 1945 we had many allies but in 1951 we had only two.
c in 1945 the bomb ended a world war but in 1951 it would have started one.
d the japanese were much fiercer fighters than the chinese were.
use the cartoon below and your knowledge of u s history to answer question 2.
2 what point of view about the arms race does this 1950 cartoon best support.
f the arms race between russia and the united states is as dangerous as a war.
g communism uncontained will spread.
h the bombs of the united states only threaten countries other than the united states.
j the united states needs to build up its arsenal in order to compete with russia 71 test practice for additional test practice go online for diagnostic tests tutorials ei interact with history j writesmart collaborative lear recall the issues that you recorded in mynotebook as you read the chapter 5 texas test practice use the flowchart and your knowledge of u s history to answer question 1 rise and fall of the farm economy late 1800s new mechanized farm tools lead to increased production.
crop output rises steadily from 1870 1900.
1 which effect accurately completes the flowchart.
a farmers have less money to repay loans and many lose their farms.
b small farmers live off the land so are not affected by the economy.
c wealthy farmers hoard gold rather than depend on paper money.
d the government subsidizes farmers to help them pay their bills.
use the quotation and your knowledge of u s history to answer question 2.
we have been taught to hunt and live on the game.
you tell us that we must learn to farm live in one house and take on your ways.
suppose the people living beyond the great sea should come and tell you that you must stop farming and kill your cattle and take your houses and lands what would you do.
would you not fight them gall a hunkpapa sioux quoted in bury my heart at wounded knee 2 what was galls view of future relations between the plains indians and the settlers.
f peaceful coexistence g further conflict h mutual respect j equality before the law 3 how did the invention of barbed wire change the look of the western frontier.
a it endangered wildlife.
b it ended the cattle frontier.
c it increased cattle stocks.
d it enriched the cow towns.
71 test practice for additional test practice go online for diagnostic tests tutorials interact with history vwritesmart collaborative learni think about the issues you recorded in mynotebook as you read the chapter.
now that youve learned how your countrys highest office holder president nixon lost the nations trust after the watergate scandal would you change your response.
discuss your suggestions with a small group.
then create a list ranking the misuses from least to most severe.
use mywritesmart in your ebook to write your list.
xggftury in a small group discuss possible environmental problems in each group members neighborhood listing them on a sheet of paper.
compare lists with other groups to determine the most common problems.
list possible solutions for each problem.
jpcus on writing mywritesmart based on what you have read in this chapter 6 main idea analyzing causes how did the 1877 strike and haymarket cause the public to resent the labor movement.
strikes turn violent industry and government responded forcefully to union activity which they saw as a threat to the entire capitalist system.
the great strike of 1877 in july 1877 workers for the baltimore and ohio railroad b o struck to protest their second wage cut in two months.
the work stoppage spread to other lines.
most freight and even some passenger traffic covering over 50 000 miles was stopped for more than a week.
after several state governors asked president rutherford b hayes to intervene saying that the strikers were impeding interstate commerce federal troops ended the strike.
the haymarket affair encouraged by the impact of the 1877 strike labor leaders continued to press for change.
on the evening of may 4 1886 3 000 people gathered at chicago s haymarket square to protest police brutality a striker had been killed and several had been wounded at the mccormick harvester plant the day before.
rain began to fall at about 10 o clock and the crowd was dispersing when police arrived.
then someone tossed a bomb into the police line.
police fired on the workers seven police officers and several workers died in the chaos that followed.
no one ever learned who threw the bomb but the three speakers at the demonstration and five other radicals were charged with inciting a riot.
all eight were convicted four were hanged and one committed suicide in prison.
after haymarket the public began to turn against the labor movement.
the homestead strike despite the violence and rising public anger workers continued to strike.
the writer hamlin garland described conditions at the carnegie steel company s homestead plant in pennsylvania.
a personal voice hamlin garland everywhere.
groups of pale lean men slouched in faded garments grimy with the soot and grease of the mills.
a roar as of a hundred lions a thunder as of cannons.
jarring clang of falling iron.
99 quoted in mcclures magazine the steelworkers finally called a strike on june 29 1892 after the company president henry clay frick announced his plan to cut wages.
frick hired armed the growth of union membership 1878 1904 isn i82 1884 1886 1888 1890 1892 1894 1896 1898 1900 1902 1904 skillbuilder interpreting graphs 1 which unions membership increased in 1889 1890.
2 what effect s did the haymarket riot have on union membership.
a new industrial age 247 key players eugene v debs 1855 1926 born in indiana eugene v debs left home at the age of 14 to work for the railroads.
in 1875 he helped organize a local lodge of the brotherhood of locomotive firemen and after attempts to unite the local railroad brotherhoods failed debs organized the american railway union.
while in prison following the pullman strike in 1894 debs read the works of karl marx and became increasingly disillusioned with capitalism.
he became a spokesperson for the socialist party of america and was its candidate for president five times.
in 1912 he won about 900 000 votes an amazing 6 percent of the total.
guards from the pinkerton detective agency to protect the plant so that he could hire scabs or strikebreakers to keep it operating.
in a pitched battle that left at least three detectives and nine workers dead the steelworkers forced out the pinkertons and kept the plant closed until the pennsylvania national guard arrived on july 12 the strike continued until november but by then the union had lost much of its support and gave in to the company.
it would take 45 years for steelworkers to mobilize once again.
the pullman company strike strikes continued in other industries however.
during the panic of 1893 and the economic depression that followed the pullman company laid off more than 3 000 of its 5 800 employees and cut the wages of the rest by 25 to 50 percent without cutting the cost of its employee housing.
after paying their rent many workers took home less than 6 a week.
a strike was called in the spring of 1894 when the pullman company failed to restore wages or decrease rents.
eugene debs asked for arbitration but pullman refused to negotiate with the strikers.
so the aru began boycotting pullman trains.
after pullman hired strikebreakers the strike turned violent and president grover cleveland sent in federal troops.
in the bitter aftermath debs was jailed.
pullman fired most of the strikers and the railroads blacklisted many others so they could never again get rail road jobs.
women organize although women were barred from many unions they united behind powerful leaders to demand better working conditions equal pay for equal work and an end to child labor.
perhaps the most prominent organizer in the women s labor movement was mary harris jones.
jones supported the great strike of 1877 and later organized for the united mine workers of america umw.
she endured death threats and jail with the coal miners who gave her the nickname mother jones.
in 1903 to expose the cruelties of child labor she led 80 mill children many with hideous injuries on a march to the home of president theodore roosevelt.
their crusade influenced the passage of child labor laws.
other organizers also achieved significant gains for women.
in 1909 pauline newman just 16 years old became the first female organizer of the international ladies garment workers union ilgwu.
a garment worker from the age of eight newman also supported mother jones 1830 1930 mary harris mother jones was a native of ireland who immigrated to north america as a child.
she became involved in the american labor movement after receiving assistance from the knights of labor.
according to a reporter who followed the mother of the laboring class on her childrens march in 1903 she fights their battles with a mothers love jones continued fighting until her death at age 100 jones was definitely not the kind of woman admired by industrialists.
god almighty made women she declared and the rockefeller gang of thieves made ladies chapter 25 in the war on drugs drug abuse battles over abortion rights sometimes competed just suy u.
for public attention with concerns about rising drug abuse.
a few nancy reagan slogan people argued that drugs should be legalized to reduce the power of gangs who made a living selling illegal drugs.
others called for treatment facilities to treat addictions.
the reagan administration launched a war on drugs and supported moves to prosecute users as well as dealers.
first lady nancy reagan toured the country with an antidrug campaign that admonished students to just say no.
main idea identifying problems b what problems in education emerged during the 1980s.
education education became another issue that stirred people s concerns.
in 1983 a federal commission issued a report on education titled a nation at risk.
the report revealed that american students lagged behind students in most other industrialized nations.
in addition the report stated that 23 million americans were unable to follow an instruction manual or fill out a job application form.
the commission s findings touched off a debate about the quality of education.
the commission recommended more homework longer school days and an extended school year.
it also promoted increased pay and merit raises for teachers as well as a greater emphasis on basic subjects such as english math science social studies and computer science.
in april 1991 president bush announced an education initiative america 2000.
he argued that choice was the salvation of american schools and recommended allowing parents to use public funds to send their children to schools of their choice public private or religious.
first lady barbara bush toured the country to promote reading and writing skills.
the urban crisis the crisis in education was closely connected to the crisis in the cities.
many undereducated students lived in cities such as baltimore chicago detroit philadelphia and washington d c during the 1970s the united states had become increasingly suburbanized as more and more white families responded to the lure of new homes big lawns shopping malls and well equipped schools outside the cities.
businesses moved too taking jobs and tax revenue with them.
poor people and racial minorities were often left in cities burdened by high unemployment rates crumbling infrastructures inadequate funds for sanitation and health services deteriorating schools and growing social problems.
by 1992 thousands of people were homeless including many families with children.
cities were increasingly divided into wealthy neighborhoods and poverty stricken areas.
one poverty stricken area south central los angeles which had erupted in violence in 1965 and 1968 erupted again in 1992 four white police officers had been videotaped beating an african american man named rodney king who had been fleeing from the officers in a speeding car.
an all white jury found the officers not guilty on charges of brutality.
this verdict resulted in riots that lasted five days and caused the deaths of 53 people.
difficult sending money into space under the reagan administration the government shifted the emphasis of the space program from scientific to military and commercial applications.
beginning in 1981 nasa directed a series of space shuttle flights.
the agency hoped to establish a space station and have the shuttle ferry workers and materials to it.
the explosion of the space shuttle challenger in 1986 in which the crew was killed crew shown above caused a reexamination of ventures into space.
many people thought the money spent on space should be spent on social needs.
1 should the federal government spend money on space exploration when so many american citizens require basic assistance.
2 if you were a legislator being asked to vote in favor of funding space exploration today how would you vote.
the equal rights struggle within this environment of dwindling resources and social struggle women worked to achieve economic and social gains.
geraldine ferraro speaks at the 1984 democratic convention.
political losses and gains during the early 1980s women s rights activists worked to obtain ratification of the equal rights amendment era.
although congress had passed the amendment in 1972 it had not yet been ratified or approved by three fourths of the states.
supporters of the amendment had until june 30 1982 to gain ratification from 38 states.
they obtained only 35 of the 38 ratifications they needed and the era did not become law.
with the failure of the equal rights amendment women s organizations began to concentrate on electing women to public office.
more women candidates began to run for office and in 1984 the democrats chose geraldine ferraro as their vice presidential candidate.
she had spoken of the necessity for women to continue working for equal opportunities in american society.
a personal voice geraldine ferraro it is not just those of us who have reached the top who are fighting this daily battle.
it is a fight in which all of us rich and poor career and home oriented young and old participate simply because we are women.
quoted in vital speeches of the day womens and mens average yearly earnings in selected careers 1982 career women men accountant 19 916 25 272 advertising manager 19 396 32 292 computer operator 13 728 17 992 cook 8 476 9 880 engineer 26 052 31 460 financial manager 19 136 30 004 high school teacher 18 980 21 424 insurance salesperson 15 236 22 152 lawyer 30 264 34 008 personnel specialist 17 836 26 832 physician 21 944 26 884 police detective 15 548 20 072 real estate salesperson 16 432 24 076 registered nurse 20 592 20 696 retail sales worker 8 736 13 728 social worker 15 600 20 436 university professor 20 748 26 832 source bureau of labor statistics current population survey 1983 1989 skillbuilder interpreting charts 1 name one career that paid men and women almost equally.
2 what conclusion can you draw from this chart.
in the november 1992 election the number of women in the house of representatives increased from 23 to 47 and the number of women senators tripled from two to six.
president reagan also had earlier named two women to his cabinet in 1983 elizabeth dole became secretary of transportation and margaret heckler became secretary of health and human services.
nevertheless women remained underrepresented in political affairs.
inequality several factors contributed to what some called the feminization of poverty.
by 1992 57 8 percent of the nation s women were part of the work force and a growing percentage of women worked as professionals and managers.
however in that year women earned only about 75 cents for every dollar men earned.
female college graduates earned only slightly more than male high school graduates.
also about 31 percent of female heads of households lived in poverty and among african american women the poverty rate was even higher.
new trends in divorce settlements aggravated the situation.
because of no fault divorce fewer women won alimony payments and the courts rarely enforced the meager child support payments they awarded.
to close the income gap that left so many women poor women s organizations and unions proposed a system of pay equity.
jobs would main idea summarizing what steps did women take to help them move forward after the era failed to pass.

chapter 13 concept map breakdown of compromise the civil war 1861 1865 sectionalism s avery grant takes command battle of gettysburg j f battle of vicksburg z turning points the course of the civil war slaves in rebelling states freed r emancipation proclamation draft riots i election of resources of north and south t7 stonewall jackson 1 lincoln s second inaugural address the end of the i.
civil war sherman s march to the sea northern strategy towards none anaconda plan lincoln s leadership blockade appomattox court house south choke off z 1 their economy lee surrenders to grant civil war ends conscription i draft capture the mississippi river firmness strong leader perseverance naval blockade of south kept changing generals j battle hymn 01 the republic julia ward howe l 22 chapter 12 america in world war ii 233 applying what you have learned prepare a class play containing three brief acts 1 roosevelt and his advisors prepare to submit demands to japan 2 japanese military leaders plan the attack on pearl harbor 3 american sailors discuss their experiences at pearl harbor just after the attack.
with graphic organizers complete the graphic organizer below by describing some of the more significant developments that led to american entry into world war ii.
rise of european dictatorships failure of the league of nations germany s invasion of poland japan s attack on peart harbor chapter 14 the reconstruction era 287 the looming battle between lincoln and congress over reconstruction never occurred.
in 1865 only a few days after the south surrendered lincoln was assassinated.
the new president andrew johnson was from the border state of tennessee and lacked president lincolns stature and authority.
initially congress believed johnson would not be lenient on the south.
johnson made wealthy planters write personal letters for clemency.
one senator remarked about johnson i thank god that you are here.
lincoln had too much of the milk of human kindness to deal with these dam rebels.
now they will be dealt with according to their just deserts but in the end president johnson followed lincolns plan of lenient treatment.
johnson was especially sympathetic to poor southern whites.
he recognized newly formed southern state governments and pardoned most rebel leaders.
many southern states then elected former confederate leaders for seats in the new congress.
portrait by matthew brady of president andrew johnson.
the black codes another problem facing the south was how to deal with the millions of freed slaves known as freedmen.
during the war the union army had even given some freed slaves land in the sea islands of south carolina and georgia as an experiment.
congress established the freedmens bureau to help the freed slaves with food clothing and medical care.
some of these agents were former northern veterans empowered to settle disputes between the freedmen and their former masters.
the bureau also searched for lost family members made slave marriages legal opened schools to teach former slaves to read and write and organized to demand their civil rights.
the new southern states were slow to extend voting rights to the freedmen.
some freedmen called for southerners to give them their own land and tools 20 acres and a mule but southern governments refused to do so.
a freedmens bureau school.
instead southern states passed black codes based on older slave codes in order to regulate the lives of the freedmen.
the aim of these codes was to preserve traditional southern society despite the abolition of slavery.
for example the black codes made it illegal for freedmen to hold public office to travel freely or to serve on juries.
any freed man found without a job could be fined and jailed.
name the impeachment of president johnson even before 1867 a number of radicals had called for johnsons removal fearing that reconstruction could never be successful so long as he remained in office.
to enforce its program congress passed the tenure of office act limiting the presidents power to dismiss his own cabinet members.
johnson refused to obey this law which he believed was unconstitutional.
when johnson dismissed his secretary of war congressional leaders moved to remove johnson from office through the process of impeachment.
under the constitution this process involves two steps.
johnson was first impeached accused by the house of representatives.
next the process moved to the senate where the radical republicans fell one vote short of removing johnson from office.
chapter 12 of their report personal justice denied 1982.
write a brief summary of what you find.
use the internet to research conditions that existed in the u s internment camps housing japanese americans and others.
find two images that illustrate the conditions that existed.
make a copy of these images and describe what they show.
finally pretend you are a reporter.
write a news article about the conditions you found in your investigation based on your research.
chapter 5 european exploration and colonization 61 based on these two documents and your knowledge of social studies answer the following question.
we the loyal subjects of king james having undertaken a voyage to plant the first colony in virginia do mutually combine ourselves together into a civil body politick and shall meet and convene for the general good of the colony we promise all due submission and obedience.
in witness we have subscribed our names at cape cod the mayflower compact 1620 we do therefore associate and connive ourselves to be as one public state or commonwealth and do for ourselves and our successors enter into combination and confederation as also in our civil affairs to be guided and governed according to such laws rules orders and decrees as shall be made fundamental orders of connecticut 1639 12 based on these excerpts in what way were these two documents similar.
f the signers of both documents had only just landed in america.
g in both documents colonists agreed to establish a community and obey to its laws.
h in both documents colonists agreed to obey the british kings decisions.
j both documents established a government in which its members chose their own governor.
13 which colonial settlement is correctly paired with the reason it was founded.
a north carolina haven for pilgrims and puritans i hist 2 b b georgia place for imprisoned debtors and convicts c maryland refuge for quakers d pennsylvania refuge for english catholics 14 what was the major reason european rulers sought to colonize north america.
f they needed people from north america to settle in europe.
cmst2 aq g they sought to learn more about native american cultures.
h they sought to expand their power with riches from the new world j they wanted a place to send their criminal population.
15 one reason for the importance of the mayflower compact and the fundamental orders of connecticut was that they laid the foundation for a a two house legislature in state governments just 3 b b the growth of representative government in colonial america c the development of english common law in the colonies d social freedom in colonial legislatures 16 the journeys of henry hudson christopher columbus and robert de lasalle to the new world were made possible because of the f effects of the atlantic slave trade hist 2 a g support of exploration by the english parliament h trade connections established by the travels of marco polo j development of new navigational instruments and technology name chapter 6 life in colonial america 63 new england triangular trade mid atlantic colonies southern colonies magna carta pill of rights of 16s9 house of purgesses mayflower compact fundamental orders of connecticut john peter zenger pilgrims puritans creat awakening mercantilism atlantic slave trade cotton mather phillis wheatley questions what differences existed between the main regions of the thirteen colonies.
what was life like in colonial america.
what factors contributed to religious freedom in the thirteen colonies.
how did the economic system of mercantilism affect the thirteen colonies.
a different patterns of life developed in three regions of the colonies based on differences in geography climate settler origins and economic activities.
b in new england a short growing season cooler climates rocky soil and an influx of puritan settlers encouraged the development of small farms and the growth of fishing shipping and handicraft trades.
c in the southern colonies a long growing season and warmer climate as well as the arrival of mainly anglican settlers seeking to make their fortune encouraged the development of larger farms that often grew cash crops for sale to england.
along main water routes large plantations developed.
d part of the southern colonies economy was based on slave labor.
slaves grew cotton tobacco rice and indigo.
they were taken by force from africa and faced a horrific middle passage journey across the atlantic.
most southerners however did not own slaves.
e the middle atlantic colonies had greater ethnic and religious diversity than either new england or the southern colonies.
some of these colonies had once been under dutch rule and were conquered by the english in 1664 the middle atlantic colonies had fertile soil and grew food crops.
name chapter 12 america in world war ii 251 examine the question.
this question tests your ability to apply outside knowledge to a poster.
you should examine the poster carefully.
then think about who made it and why.
recall what you know.
you should recall that during the war the office of war information owi was in charge of producing posters like this one to promote the war effort at home.
apply what you know.
the best answer is choice a choice 3 deals with the creation of japanese internment camps while choices c and d are agencies that were created during the new deal.
now try answering some additional questions on your own.
use the map and your knowledge of social studies to answer the following question.
2 the lend lease aid shown on the map was provided to f help the allied powers fight the axis powers g persuade other nations to join the united nations h provide technical assistance to developing nations j persuade other nations to pay their debts to the united states c hist 7 a 3 which was an example of appeasement.
a the u s neutrality acts of 1935 and 1937 hist 7 a b the conquest of poland in 1939 c the entry of the united states into world war ii in 1941 d the agreement of britain and france to give germany the sudetenland in 1938 4 which most accurately characterizes the policy followed by the united states in the years between world war i and world war ii.
f isolation from european military conflicts i hist 4 f j g containment of communism h active membership in the league of nations j military alliances with france and great britain i have returned many times to honor the valiant men who died serving me.
every man who set foot in normandy was a hero this was most likely said by a chester nimitz c b omar bradley d john j pershing douglas macarthur hist 7 f project without permission name chapter 6 life in colonial america 67 the main crops planted on a plantation were very labor intensive.
a successful harvest depended on slaves working from sunrise to sunset.
women usually worked the same hours as the men.
women were expected to return to the fields not long after giving birth to children.
the mortality death rate among slaves was high.
slave women were encouraged to have large numbers of children to replace slave losses.
the great majority of whites did not live on plantations.
they often farmed their land on a smaller scale.
applying what you have learned fa how did settlers to the thirteen colonies adapt to their physical environment.
fa how did the southern plantation system make that region unique.
a acting as an amateur historian a historical map shows the way an area was in the past.
the map below provides an outline of the thirteen english colonies.
using z the internet or your local or school library research the following fa identify each of the thirteen brit ish colonies by name.
j fa use different colors to show the three regions of colonial amer ica new england the middle i atlantic colonies and the south em colonies.
fa add other colors to show the j territories claimed by spain and france.
fa identify the appalachian moun j tains st lawrence river mis sissippi river lake erie lake ontario and long island.
j fa identify these ports and towns savannah georgia charleston s c raleigh n c james town va williamsburg va baltimore md philadelphia pa new york ny boston and plymouth ma.
9 9 name chapter 6 life in colonial america 69 the colonists enjoyed several institutions of representative government based on both english political traditions and new practices that emerged in the colonies.
during the middle ages england had developed traditions of liberty and limited self government that were unique in europe.
magna carta in 1215 the english king was forced by his barons to promise not to take away any free mans property or to imprison any free man without following procedures established by the laws of the land.
the great charter guaranteed individuals the right to a fair trial by their peers and forced the king to obtain the consent of a council of nobles before imposing any new taxes.
acting as an amateur.
historian t clause 29 no freeman shall be taken or imprisoned or have his freehold or liberties taken away or be outlawed or sent away or any other wise destroyed nor will we pass upon him nor condemn him but by lawful judgment of his peers equals or by the law of the land.
we will sell to no man we will not deny or defer to any man either justice or right how did clause 29 of the magna carta help to guarantee the rights of individuals living in england.
why did this become an important feature of political life in the colonies.
the british parliament in the middle ages the english king summoned his nobles and representatives from counties and towns to show support for the crown.
parliament developed into a national legislature consisting of nobles and elected representatives.
new taxes had to be approved by parliament.
after two revolutions in the 1600s parliament achieved supremacy over the king.
bill of rights of 1689 after the glorious revolution of 1688 the rights of english subjects were confirmed by the bill of rights of 1689 englands rulers agreed not to have a standing army or to impose new taxes without the permission of parliament.
the english bill of rights also guaranteed trial by jury the right to petition parliament and other personal freedoms as well as freedom of speech and debate in parliament.
chapter 6 life in colonial america 75 colonial society colonial society was divided into several social groups.
a handful of wealthy landowners and merchants stood at the top of colonial society then came independent farmers who worked their own land tradesmen shopkeepers and craftsmen working in towns and villages came next apprentices or servants were below them and at the very bottom of the colonial social ladder were unskilled laborers and slaves.
slavery and the slave trade one of the areas of greatest hardship and profit in colonial society was the slave trade.
no concern was given to the feelings or comfort of the victims of this trade.
slavers usually bought captured africans on the west coast of africa and put them on slave ships for the voyage to the americas.
enslaved africans were treated so harshly that many failed to survive the voyage.
traders were so greedy they sought to carry as many slaves as possible on their ships.
slaves were chained and crammed together below the deck where sitting or standing room was limited.
the air below deck was so stifling that some suffocated.
others tried to starve themselves or to jump over board.
when the slaves reached the americas they were sold off in auctions.
families were broken up.
captured africans experienced horrific conditions on the middle passage enslaved people made up a significant part of the population of colonial america.
the number of africans in new england grew from under 1 000 in 1700 to about 16 000 in the 1770s.
the number of slaves in the south was far greater reaching 125 000 by 1740 enslaved men and women were owned by plantation owners farmers ministers doctors and merchants.
they were used to perform household chores and skilled jobs as well as field labor.
estimated african american population in the thirteen british colonies 1690 1740 year new england colonies middle atlantic colonies southern colonies 1690 905 2 472 13 307 1700 1 680 5 361 22 476 1710 2 585 6 218 36 063 1720 3 956 10 825 54 058 1730 6 118 11 683 73 220 1740 8 541 16 452 125 031 source historical statistics of the united states name chapter 13 america in the cold war and civil rights years 269 as the cold war grew more intense americans became more concerned with their own internal security.
the house un american activities committee following world war ii americans feared a possible communist menace inside the united states.
president truman ordered the establishment of loyalty review boards to investigate individual un american activities such as participation in the american communist party.
many americans were accused of un american actions on very little evidence.
these victims were often unable to defend themselves or even to know who had accused them.
the process violated their constitutional rights.
congress decided to conduct its own loyalty checks through its special house un american activities committee.
this committee questioned actors directors writers and others about their possible communist sympathies.
those identified as present or former members of the communist party were frequently blacklisted and lost their jobs.
some like alger hiss were later prosecuted for perjury.
those who cooperated with the committee were often asked to inform on others.
the rosenberg trials in 1950 julius and ethel rosenberg were charged with selling national secrets to the soviet union about making the atomic bomb.
the rosenbergs were found guilty and executed for spying.
like the sacco and vanzetti case in the 1920s many americans doubted the rosenbergs guilt.
however in 1997 the national security agency released the venona papers.
this was a secret effort by the united states to gather and decode messages sent in the 1940s by soviet military intelligence agents.
the venona papers revealed the identities of several americans who had spied for the soviet union including julius rosenberg.
it showed that some soviet agents had in fact penetrated american government science and industry during the cold war.
the mccarthy hearings the fall of china increased fears of internal subversion.
in 1950 senator joseph mccarthy shocked americans by claiming that he knew the names of hundreds of communists who had infiltrated the u s state department and other government agencies.
like the red scare of the 1920s mccarthys allegations created fears of a communist conspiracy.
after three years of hearings mccarthy never provided any real proof for his charges.
he was censured formally criticized by the senate.
although mccarthy never proved any of his claims his witchhunt frightened many americans.
the term mccarthyism has become identified with making harsh accusations without evidence.
name chapter 4 foundations background to american history 45 the bill of rights the original constitution contained few specific guarantees of individual rights.
ratification of the constitution was only obtained when its supporters promised to add a bill of rights to protect individual liberties.
as soon as the first congress assembled in 1789 it began deciding which rights to include in the bill of rights a list of possible rights was reduced to ten which were approved by the members of congress.
they were then sent to the states for approval.
two thirds of the state legislatures approved these amendments by 1791 when they came into effect.
the first amendment actually covers five separate rights at the same time.
lets look at each of these rights more closely.
freedom of religion the first amendment guarantees freedom of worship.
it also prohibits congress from establishing an official or state religion.
this is sometimes called the separation of church and state.
freedom of speech the first amendment protects our freedom to say or write most things in public.
americans cannot be put in jail just for criticizing the government or for expressing unpopular beliefs.
this does not mean however that we can say whatever we want.
in some circumstances our speech can be limited.
for example a person cannot yell fire in a crowded movie theater as a joke since this might threaten other peoples lives.
the supreme court has ruled that government can limit speech when that speech creates a clear and present danger freedom of the press the first amendment allows newspapers radio and television to write or announce what they want without fear of punishment.
this freedom is essential in a democratic society since people need to be well informed to vote.
the right of assembly the first amendment states that congress cannot deny individuals the right to peacefully assemble name chapter 6 life in colonial america 83 6 with which statement would a puritan minister in the colony of massachusetts in 1660 have most likely agreed.
f all men and women are created equal hist 3 c j g no man should be required to worship against his will h differences of opinion are essential for a society to improve j both the government and church have a common purpose of promoting virtue 7 how was the virginia house of burgesses important to the development of democracy in the thirteen colonies.
a it was the first representative assembly in the colonies.
f hist 3 b b it created the first written constitution in america c it included a bill of rights to protect individual rights.
d it introduced the principle of electing judges.
8 in which colonial region did good harbors abundant forests rocky soil and a short growing season most influence the economy.
f southern colonies geog 11 a j g northwest territory h middle atlantic colonies j new england colonies use the passage and your knowledge of social studies to answer the following question.
t he word of god requires that to maintain the peace and union of a people there should be an orderly and decent government established according to god to order and dispose of the affairs of the people at all seasons as occasion shall require.
we do associate ourselves to be as one public state or commonwealth this case houses the original fundamental orders of connecticut.
it is ordered that there shall be yearly two general assemblies or courts one in april the other in september following the first shall be called the court of election it shall be yearly chosen from time to time magistrates and other public officers as needed whereof one is to be chosen governor for the year 9 this passage from the fundamental orders of connecticut was important to the concept of a democratic society because it represented a an effort by the colonists to use force to resist the king ihst 3 b b a step toward self government in colonial america c an early attempt to institute voting rights for all colonists d an effort by the colonists to establish freedom of religion name chapter 13 america in the cold war and civil rights years 275 in a subsequent ruling the court held that desegregation in public schools should be conducted with all deliberate speed enforcement of the decision was left to the lower federal courts which were to oversee that local school districts complied with the order.
because the phrase with all deliberate speed was vague many states were able to delay the courts order to desegregate their schools.
it would take many more years before the brown decision was fully implemented.
the supreme court had overturned legal racial segregation in the public schools but this still left other segregation laws known as jim crow laws in place throughout the south.
these laws prevented african americans from sharing beaches theaters restaurants water fountains or public buses with whites.
the montgomery bus boycott 1955 1956 in december 1955 rosa parks an african american seamstress and local naacp member refused to surrender her bus seat to a white passenger in montgomery alabama.
when parks was arrested for refusing to give up her seat local african american leaders began a boycott of the citys public buses.
dr martin luther king jr 1929 1968 a pastor in montgomery was the leader of the boycott.
the boycott lasted 13 months and brought rosa parks dr king and their cause before the attention of the world.
king rallied the boycotters at meetings in his church.
they car pooled to take each other to work.
king himself was arrested and his home was bombed but the boycott lasted and the case was eventually taken to federal court.
the court ruled that segregation on the buses operated by the city of montgomery violated the equal protection clause of the fourteenth amendment.
the boycott had shown that african americans could unite successfully to oppose segregation.
rosa parks rides in the front of the bus in defiance of segregation laws.
civil rights act of 1957 in 1957 the eisenhower administration passed the civil rights act to increase african american voting in the south.
the act created the civil rights commission and established a civil rights division in the u s justice department.
the law gave federal courts the power to register african american voters.
registration procedures were so complex the act proved ineffective but it helped set the pattern for later civil rights legislation.
little rock arkansas 1957 most southern states delayed putting the brown decision into effect.
governor orval faubus of arkansas was a world war ii veteran and a liberal democrat who favored segregation.
name chapter 13 america in the cold war and civil rights years 277 congressional bloc of southern democrats throughout the 1950s and 1960s southern democrats in congress banded together to obstruct attempts to pass federal civil rights legislation.
many of these southern legislators held important committee chairmanships which gave them the power to prevent such legislation from even coming to the floor of congress for a vote.
sit ins and freedom rides in the south 1960 1961 in 1960 african american students held a sit in at a whites only lunch counter in north carolina.
the tactic was soon copied by other students throughout the south.
in 1961 interracial groups rode buses in freedom rides in the south.
as a result of these protests downtown stores finally agreed to desegregate lunch coun ters and hire african american workers.
the african american college students sitting down freedom riders sought to overturn racial seg at the whites only lunch counter.
regation on public transportation.
they created confrontations so that the federal government would be forced to intervene.
these riders often faced the risk of violence and even death from those who opposed integration.
king s letter from a birmingham jail 1963 dr martin luther king jr emerged in the late 1950s as the leader of the civil rights movement.
like thoreau and gandhi before him king believed in non violence that passive resistance to unjust laws could change the attitudes of oppressors.
during the 1950s and 1960s king achieved international fame for carrying out resistance to injustice through civil disobedience.
king believed that if the government passed an unjust law people should oppose it with non violent tactics such as peaceful marches boycotts picketing and demonstrations.
when dr martin luther king led a march in birmingham alabama he was arrested.
television then revealed to the nation the brutal tactics often used by the police to break up peaceful demonstrations.
dr king wrote a letter from a birmingham jail explaining the reasons why african americans could no longer patiently wait for their constitutional rights.
his critics felt that the fight against racial segregation should take place in the courts and not in the street.
king argued that civil disobedience was justified not only because it was effective but because everyone has a moral dr king in the birmingham city jail.
responsibility to disobey unjust laws name chapter 7 the american revolution the road to independence 91 the issue of taxation disagreements quickly arose over the right of the british parliament to tax the colonists.
after the french and indian war britain faced a huge national debt.
it also cost money to station british troops in the 13 colonies and the west indies.
in britain people already paid higher taxes than the colonists.
the british government therefore proposed a series of new taxes on the colonists.
however these taxes were passed by the british parliament without first consulting the colonists.
british leaders thought this was only right because the colonists were not paying their fair share towards their own defense.
since the colonists lived so far away from london it seemed impossible for them to participate effectively in the british parliament.
taxation without representation.
wealthy colonial merchants and landowners used to acting in their colonial assemblies with little british interference resented these new policies.
colonial leaders were also influenced by enlightenment writers like john locke and william blackstone.
locke had written that government was a social contract he said the purpose of government was to protect individual freedom and property.
if a government failed to do this locke argued its citizens had the right to overthrow it.
blackstone defined the rights of individuals in english law as well as property rights that could not be violated even by the king.
following both locke and english traditions samuel adams and other colonists argued that the british government should not tax the colonists w nists believed that taxation without representation wa the stamp act.
the next new british tax was the stamp act 1765.
parliament ordered that every newspaper pamphlet and other public or legal document had to be printed or written on paper with an official stamp or seal on it.
this was a form of tax because the british government was to be paid for the official stamp.
the stamp act created a firestorm of protests in the colonies.
colonists objected that the british government had imposed this new tax without their consent.
colonists held meetings boycotted refused to buy british goods and even attacked british officials in protest.
in virginia patrick henry 1736 1799 denounced the stamp act and the house of burgesses passed resolutions against it.
samuel adams organized a series of protests in boston.
a stamp act congress against the act was held in new york city.
colonists produced petitions to the king and parliament stating their position on these new taxes.
these petitions argued that the colonists could only be taxed by their own consent.
john locke liout their consent.
these colo tyranny a british tax collector is tied to a pole by an unruly crowd.
name chapter 4 foundations background to american history 49 the seventh amendment guarantees the right to a trial by a jury in many civil disputes cases where one person sues another for injury or for breaking a contract.
the ninth amendment states that just because the constitution lists some specific rights this does not mean that citizens do not also hold other rights.
the tenth amendment states that the federal government has only those powers specifically given to it in the constitution.
all other powers are reserved to the states or the people.
applying what you have learned the freedoms our citizens enjoy because of the bill of rights are important to the fabric of life in america.
design and create a poster that showcases these freedoms.
some websites can help you create interactive posters.
select two amendments you just read about in this chapter 4 foundations background to american history 55 declaration independence 1776 u s constitution 1787 mostly written mostly by thomas jefferson.
gave reasons why the colonists were demanding independence from britain.
listed the grievances of american colonists against the british king.
argued that the purpose of government was to protect citizens unalienable rights to life liberty and the pursuit of happiness.
justified the overthrow of a government if that government abused people s rights.
replaced the articles of confederation.
jjt established a new national government.
provided for three branches of government executive with a president.
legislature with a two house congress.
judiciary with a supreme court.
provided a set of principles to ensure the federal government would not be too powerful federalism.
limited government.
checks and balances.
popular sovereignty.
first amendment 1791 bill of rights 1791 protections of individual freedoms congress cannot establish a state religion.
4c congress cannot stop individuals from practicing their own religion.
congress cannot make laws limiting someone s freedom of speech.
congress cannot make laws limiting freedom of the press.
congress cannot make laws prohibiting people from peacefully assembling.
people have a right to petition the government to correct wrongs.
other amendments in the bill of rights protections of individual freedoms second amendment gives citizens the right to bear arms.
third amendment no quartering of soldiers.
protections of the rights of the accused fourth amendment no unreasonable searches or seizures by government.
fifth amendment established a series of due process protections.
sixth amendment fair and impartial trial.
eighth amendment no cruel or unusual punishments no excessive bail.
alexis de tocqueville other key individuals a frenchman who came to the united states to study its prison system.
wrote democracy in america.
some historians have identified five key characteristics of american democracy that tocqueville believed set americans apart from europeans liberty.
egalitarianism equality.
individualism.
laissez faire.
e pluribus unutn.
out of many comes one.
several states have united to form one nation.
john trumbull sr colonial governor who sided with the colonists against the british.
john peter muhlenberg.
clergyman who recruited soldiers to fight the british.
john hancock.
president of the second continental congress signer of the declaration.
benjamin rush.
father of american medicine signer of declaration of independence.
john witherspoon.
signer of the declaration.
president of new jersey college princeton.
helped write federalist papers first chief justice of supreme court negotiated a boundary treaty with england.
charles carroll.
signer of the declaration.
name chapter 13 america in the cold war and civil rights years 281 s jsbsafrftoom wijj affirmative action name chapter 7 the american revolution the road to independence 99 this philosophy teaches that each individual is endowed at birth with rights that are unalienable because they were given to us by our creator.
this idea of unalienable rights became a basic belief of american government that some rights are derived from nature and may not be taken or violated by the government.
a acting as an amateur.
historian jefferson argued that citizens had the right to overthrow an oppressive government to protect these unalienable rights.
this argument is found in the most important paragraph of the declaration we hold these truths to be self evident that all men are created equal that they are endowed by their creator with certain unalienable rights that among these are life liberty and the pursuit of happiness that to secure these rights governments are instituted among men deriving their just powers from the consent of the governed that whenever any form of government becomes destructive of these ends it is the right of the people to alter or to abolish it and to institute new government briefly summarize this paragraph in your own words.
fc what justification did this paragraph give for the revolution against king george hi.
a the declaration of independence went on to list the grievances of the colonists against king george iii and his ministers.
most of these grievances related to the belief that the british crown was threatening the colonists rights in favor of tyrannical rule.
the king imposed taxes on the colonists without their consent.
he made the military superior to the civil government.
he refused to answer colonial petitions for the redress of grievances.
grievances against the king in the declaration of independence he asked citizens to give up their rights of representation.
he quartered large numbers of soldiers among the colonists.
he deprived the colonists of j trial by jury.
1 z z he dissolved the colonists rep he protected his soldiers against he waged war against the i resentative assemblies.
trial for murders of colonists.
american colonists.
1 the road to victory in the first years of the war the colonial army barely managed to escape disaster.
washington and the continental army occupied new york city in 1776 however the british drove washington and his army out of new york after the battle of long island.
british troops then occupied new york city.
name chapter 7 the american revolution the road to independence 103 cornwallis surrenders to washington.
the battle of yorktown 1781 after several more years of fighting general washington managed with french help to force general charles cornwallis and the main british army into a comer at yorktown virginia.
the french fleet blocked their escape by sea.
after a few days of combat cornwallis and his 8 000 british soldiers were forced to surrender in october 1781 the battle of yorktown turned out to be the last major battle of the war.
occasional fighting contin ued after the surrender at yorktown and washington feared the war might still drag on for another year.
however when word reached england of the defeat at yorktown the prime minister was forced to resign and the new government decided to give up the fight.
independence recognized the treaty of paris of 1783 formally ended the american revolutionary war.
under its terms the british recognized the independence of the colonies.
the british promised to remove all of their troops from the country.
in addition they gave all the land between the mississippi river and the atlantic from the great lakes to the border with florida to the new united states.
this move gave the new nation twice the area of the former colonies.
a variety of factors were responsible for the american victory over great britain then the worlds richest and most powerful empire i the american victory was due to many factors hi fighting for their homeland.
the colonists were defending their own soil.
the british were fighting a war thousands of miles from their homeland.
methods of warfare.
colonial forces used unconventional methods to fight the british.
they took advantage of hiding behind trees and other tactics.
the british fought in a more traditional manner with soldiers aligned in a straight formation out in the open.
local support.
the continental army received support from the local population including women.
the british were fighting a war on a hostile terrain.
nevertheless the british did receive support from loyalists and used canada as a refuge and as a staging ground for attacks against the colonists.
leadership.
washington was a very capable general.
he received help from experienced foreign military leaders such as baron von steuben kasimir pulaski and marquis de lafayette.
these european volunteers helped turn the continental army into a more disciplined fighting force.
the french alliance.
volunteers money troops and naval support from france were essential to the american victory.
name chapter 14 the sixties a decade of protest and change murals soon became an important artistic medium to support identity and justice in mexican american communities.
wall murals provided a visual presence to people who often lacked representation in public life with few voices on city councils or school boards.
in el paso alone more than a hundred chicano wall murals were completed.
these murals show taiano legends and heroes like cesar chavez.
305 an example of a wall mural in el paso texas.
american indians also grew restless in the 1960s.
back in 1953 the federal government had transferred its responsibility for those american indians still living on reservations to state governments.
lacking sufficient funds many states were unable to provide the same level of services previously provided by the federal government.
the new policy turned out to be largely a failure.
in 1963 the federal government reversed its policy and began encouraging tribal life on the reservations.
the civil rights act of 1964 prohibited discrimination against native americans.
in 1970 president nixon announced the federal government would honor its treaty obligations.
nevertheless many american indians still felt they were being mistreated.
under the slogan red power they formed the american indian movement to mobilize public opinion in their favor.
american indians sought greater respect for their heritage.
they introduced the term native american and protested against textbooks television shows and movies that showed anti american indian bias.
they dramatized the plight of american indians by temporarily occupying government monuments on alcatraz island and at wounded knee south dakota.
applying what you have learned create a chart comparing the roles of various political organizations that supported civil rights in this period.
for example you might compare the national organization of women the united farm workers and aim.
name chapter 5 industrialization and the gilded age 79 use the information in the passage and your knowledge of social studies to answer the following question.
factories and workshops inspection 1.
every such work shop shall be kept clean free from vermin rodents infectious or contagious matter and to that end shall be subject to inspection as provided in this act.
if upon inspection such work shops shall be found unhealthy or infectious such orders shall be given and action taken as the public health shall require.
children under 14 years of age are prohibited from being employed in any manufacturing establishment factory or work shop in the state.
the employment of children between ages of 14 and 16 years is prohibited unless an affidavit legal document by the parent or guardian shall first be filed in which shall be stated the age date and place of birth.
factories and workshops laws of illinois passed by the general assembly 1883 11 what conclusion can be drawn from this excerpt.
a most workers in illinois were members of a labor union.
hist 3 8 b illinois was not interested in improving factory working conditions.
c illinois sought to address some of the problems caused by industrialization.
d union membership in factories and workshops was prohibited in illinois.
12 which was an important benefit of the laissez fair policies of the federal government in the late nineteenth century.
f american entrepreneurs were able to invest in their businesses i econ i5 ij i with little government interference.
g american businesses were able to avoid the ups and down of the business cycle.
h american workers found it easy to organize into labor unions.
j american workers felt secure about the safety of conditions in factories.
13 during the period from 1865 to 1900 disputes between labor and business owners were sometimes marked by a the use of violence by both sides b cooperative efforts to resolve differences c government support for striking workers d negotiations by the federal government 14 what was the main purpose of the antitrust legislation passed by congress.
f to promote corporate consolidation econj5 b i g to restrict foreign access to american markets h to protect competition between private businesses j to reduce the average size of business 15 the statement god gave me my money.
i believe the power to make money is a gift from god to be developed and used for the good of mankind was probably said by a john d rockefeller c samuel gompers c hist 3 c i b terrence powderly d thomas edison name chapter 14 the sixties a decade of protest and change 307 a not only legislation the passage of new laws like the civil rights act of 1964 but also litigation disputes settled by courts has played a key role in the expansion of civil rights for minority groups in the united states.
this is clear not only from the supreme courts decision in brown v board of education you can see this case in the last chapter 8 establishing a new government 1777 to 1788 127 the basic challenge faced by the authors of the constitution was to create a national government that would be strong but not so strong that it might undermine individual liberties identified in the declaration of independence.
to achieve this goal the new constitution adopted a number of important principles limited government one of the most important principles of the u s constitution is the belief that the powers of government should be limited.
a self governing people gives their government leaders only certain specific powers.
these are the just powers of government mentioned in the declaration of independence.
under our system of limited government our national government has no duties or powers other than those powers specifically granted to it in the constitution.
republicanism americans created a republican form of government a democratic government chosen by the people.
a republic describes a government in which decisions are made by elected representatives not handed down by a king.
popular sovereignty another key principle of the u s constitution is that the people are sovereign they hold supreme power.
the just powers of the government come from the consent of the governed.
the people exercise their sovereignty by electing representatives to congress and by indirectly electing the president.
federalism the authors of the u s constitution created a federal republic government powers were divided between the national government and the states.
to accomplish this the writers of the constitution created a system in which power was shared between the national or federal and state governments.
the federal government treats issues facing the entire nation while state governments handle local affairs.
because power was divided between the national and state governments the authors of the constitution believed the national government would not become too strong.
name chapter 14 the sixties a decade of protest and change 311 at the same time south vietnam was far from a democracy.
its president was a dictator who was opposed by vietnams buddhists.
in 1963 he was overthrown and murdered in a coup.
president elsenhower had suggested that the fall of french indochina might create a domino effect.
according to this domino theory if south vietnam fell to communism neighboring southeast asian countries would also fall to communism like a row of dominos.
after taking vietnam cambodia and laos communists would threaten thailand to the west and the strait of malacca to the south.
resisting the communists in vietnam might prevent this collapse.
the domino theory greatly affected president kennedys thinking.
responding to requests from the south vietnamese government for help kennedy sent aid and u s military advisers to assist south vietnam in fighting the vietcong.
kennedy also felt that a successful democracy in south vietnam might serve as a model for other developing countries in asia africa and latin america.
under president johnson the united states became even more deeply involved in vietnam.
gulf of tonkin resolution 1964 in 1964 johnson announced that the north vietnamese had attacked u s ships in international waters in the gulf of tonkin.
congress voted to give johnson full military powers to stop north vietnams aggression.
years later it was revealed that the u s ships had actually been in north vietnamese waters in cooperation with south vietnamese warships that were bombing north vietnam.
johnson escalates the war although congress had not officially declared war president johnson used the gulf of tonkin resolution to escalate increase the war.
name chapter 9 the rights and responsibilities of american citizens 153 the fourteenth amendment after the civil war another series of important amendments was added to the constitution.
these abolished slavery and guaranteed the freed slaves and other citizens certain rights against the actions of state governments.
the fourteenth amendment was especially important.
the original bill of rights had only protected citizens against the actions of the federal government.
the fourteen amendment now applied to actions by state governments.
this amendment was mainly intended to help the freed slaves but actually applied to all citizens.
the supreme court later reached the conclusion that the fourteenth amendment guaranteed all the rights in the bill of rights against the actions of state governments as well as by the federal government.
the fourteenth amendment protects individual citizens from abuses by state governments in two ways due process rights.
according to the fourteenth amendment state governments must follow the same procedures as the federal government when arresting searching or convicting persons suspected of a crime.
everyone is guaranteed rights of due process equal protection rights.
the fourteenth amendment also guarantees each of us the equal protection of the laws.
neither the federal government nor a state government can treat members of different groups unequally unless there is some compelling reason to do so such as to protect national security.
on the basis of this provision the supreme court held in 1954 that states cannot send people to different public schools based on their racial or ethnic backgrounds.
fa using the internet or your school or public library locate a copy of the fourteenth amendment.
in your own words briefly describe what each of the five sections of the amendment are about.
fa the southern state legislatures refused to ratify the fourteenth amendment with the exception of tennessee.
what parts of the amendment do you think the southern state legislatures most objected to.
explain your answer.
fa the fourteenth amendment continues to be the center of a controversy in the debate over the citizenship of children bom in the united states by those who are considered undocumented aliens.
what is your opinion on this issue.
name chapter 8 america builds an empire 141 by the wars end the united states was occupying four of spains former colonies.
many americans believed they should annex them.
these american imperialists saw this as a unique opportunity pointing out how european powers had recently acquired colonies in africa and asia.
they believed the united states should take its own colonies before there was nothing else left to grab.
the imperialists gave these arguments on behalf of u s colonial expansion need for raw materials and markets.
the united states was now an industrial power.
colonies could provide needed raw materials for factories a guaranteed market for manufacturers and a place for farmers to sell their surplus crops.
strategic reasons.
some americans believed colonies would promote american naval strength.
with naval bases throughout the world america would be able to maintain a powerful navy to protect its interests.
reasons for colonial expansion it 1 nationalism.
some saw colonial expansion as a means of showing that the united states was a great and powerful nation.
they argued that the european powers were gathering colonies in africa asia and the pacific and that the united states should grab its own colonies before nothing was left.
attitudes towards other peoples.
many americans believed in anglo saxon superiority that americans were a superior race that should rule others.
progressives believed that by spreading american institutions they could help other less fortunate peoples.
missionaries wanted to convert native peoples to christianity.
admiral alfred thayer mahan president of the naval war college was americas leading advocate for imperial expansion.
theodore roosevelt was one of mahans followers.
in his the influence of sea power upon history 1890 mahan focused on the harsh political realities of expansion.
mahan argued that to achieve world power a country needed a powerful navy.
for this a country also needed a large merchant marine to supply its sailors.
finally a world power required colonies and naval bases to provide coaling stations for its steamships and to create the trade needed to support its merchant ships.
because other powers were also competing for naval supremacy alfred thayer mahan and world markets mahan believed it was essential for americans 7 to seize control of pacific trade routes to construct a canal through central america and to dominate the caribbean region.
geographically americans would then control the sea lanes from the caribbean sea across the pacific ocean all the way to china and japan.
chapter 11 the age of jackson 199 a andrew jackson a popular military hero accused john quincy adams and henry clay of stealing the election of 1824 by a corrupt bargain b jackson was elected president in 1828 he saw himself as the representative of the common man and invited the public to attend his inauguration.
c in these years state governments ended property requirements for voting allowing all adult white males to vote.
political parties adopted new tactics to reach more voters popular rallies parades and nominating conventions.
d jackson favored the spoils systems replacing government officials with his own supporters.
this policy gave more citizens a role in government and prevented the creation of a permanent class of government officials.
e jackson proposed the indian removal act in 1830 the act required the indians to adopt western ways or move west.
the cherokees refused to do so and appealed their case to the supreme court.
john marshall ruled in their favor.
in worcester r georgia the court again ruled in favor of the cherokees.
this could not prevent jackson from removing the cherokees.
the delay in their move led to thousands of cherokee deaths along the trail of tears f southerners opposed the tariff of abominations and the tariff of 1832 john c calhoun wrote that a state had the right to nullify within its borders a federal law it believed was unconstitutional.
in 1832 south carolina threatened to secede but backed down when president jackson threatened to use force.
g jackson opposed the second national bank which he felt favored the rich in the north.
he withdrew government funds and refused to renew its charter.
h the american free enterprise system is based on respect for private property minimal government interference in the economy and the free interaction of producers and consumers.
prices are set by the interaction of consumer demand and the available supply from producers.
i the industrial revolution started in the 1760s in britain and spread to the united states.
it began in the textile industry but soon transferred to other industries.
work shifted from homes to factories where workers could be supervised and where water and steam power could be used to run machines.
j the age of jackson was a period of reform.
protestant preachers traveled the countryside and preached for days at camp meetings in the second great awakening.
abolitionists sought to end slavery.
dorothea dix campaigned to improve conditions in mental hospitals.
other reformers belonged to the temperance movement which sought to ban the drinking of alcohol.
k during this period women met at the seneca falls convention 1848 where they demanded equality with men including the right to vote.
l this period was also a golden age of literature and art with such prominent writers as nathaniel hawthorne herman melville and edgar alan poe and the painters of the hudson river school including thomas cole.
name chapter 9 america in world war i 157 austria gave an ultimatum to serbia and then invaded serbia to avenge the assassination.
they were encouraged by their ally germany.
existing alliances quickly brought the other major powers into the war.
russia was allied to serbia germany was allied to austria hungary and britain and france were allied to russia.
what might have been a minor regional crisis quickly escalated into a major european war.
the generals on each side hoped for a quick victory before their enemies could get their forces into action.
europe at the start of world war n e s sweden great britain a denmark isl russia atlantic ocean spain a o mediterranean sea africa miles france 750 a new kind of wa military leaders on both sides predicted the war would be over quickly.
to avoid a two front war german war plans called for their army to march through neutral belgium to take paris before russia could enter the war.
the germans advanced across belgium into france but they were stopped before reaching paris.
new and improved weapons were used to fight the war including the machine gun poison gas submarines and airplanes.
these weapons made it easier to defend positions than to attack.
soldiers dug deep fortified trenches.
soon trenches extended hundreds of miles along eastern france on germanys western front trench warfare was a new and strange form of warfare that the world had never seen.
these trenches were separated by fields of barbed wire and mines known as no mans land anyone who climbed out of the trenches faced instant death from enemy machine gun fire.
soldiers spent years in the trenches facing shelling from artillery fire for hours each day.
since neither side could advance fighting lines became stationary.
name chapter 9 america in world war i 167 world war i results important individuals i wilson s fourteen points.
proposed by i wilson as a basis for the peace treaty.
1 create new nation states poland i break up austria hungary.
freedom of the seas.
i no secret treaties open diplomacy.
league of nations.
versailles and other treaties.
ended world.
war i dealt harshly with germany.
j germany lost its colonies i austria hungary and ottoman turkey were j broken up into separate nation states i league of nations was created.
archduke franz ferdinand.
his assassina i tion sparked the start of wwi.
john j pershing.
commanded american expeditionary force during wwi.
i alvin york.
wwi soldier who won congres j sional medal of honor for valor.
i woodrow wilson.
u s president during wwi.
issued fourteen points.
he strongly supported u s participation in a league of i nations.
henry cabot lodge.
u s senator who led i the fight against joining the league of nations.
chapter 10 the roaring twenties 195 use the information in the timeline and your knowledge of social studies to answer the following question.
the influence of the automobile 1923 1932 country club plaza the first shopping center opens in kansas city.
in november 16 833 cars cross the st john s river to florida as the start of winter sees motor pilgrimages to florida.
v 1923 1924 1930 1931 a 1932 a census data suggests southern cities are becoming more racially segregated as car owning whites move to suburbs that have no public transportation.
king kullen opens its first supermarket in queens new york as an outgrowth of the auto age since pedestrians cannot carry large amounts of groceries home.
one room rural schools decline as school districts operate 63 000 school buses.
6 based on this timeline which conclusion can be drawn about the influence of the automobile.
f automobiles created large scale unemployment in certain cities.
jeon 16 a g the automobile had little economic impact on the united states.
h the growth of automobiles had a dramatic effect on life in the united states.
j henry ford produced automobiles at a price many americans could afford.
7 prohibition established by the eighteenth amendment stated that a only imported alcoholic beverages could be sold.
hist 6 a b the manufacture and sale of u s alcoholic beverages was banned c americans must be 18 years old to purchase alcoholic beverages d alcoholic beverages could be sold only in government run stores 8 during the 1920s congress passed a series of immigration laws that were primarily designed to f increase immigration from asia.
hist 6 a g expand the workforce for the growing economy h limit immigration from southern and eastern europe j prohibit immigration from latin america 9 which development in the 1920s was inconsistent with much of the racial and ethnic intolerance of the decade.
a red scare c harlem renaissance f cult 25 8 y b revival of the ku klux kian d trial of sacco and vanzetti 10 which event represented an expression of nativism during the 1920s.
f trial of john scopes for teaching evolution hist 6 a g adoption of a quota system to limit immigration h charles lindberghs solo transatlantic flight j the rise in popularity of spectator sports name chapter 12 manifest destiny and the rise of sectionalism 249 applying what you have learned abraham lincolns house divided speech spoke of the dangers of disunion because of slavery.
look up that section of the speech in the library or on the internet.
describe in your own words why lincoln felt slavery posed a danger.
should john brown be considered an american hero or a villain.
turn your classroom into the u s senate in the 1850s.
assign roles as democratic or republican senators from the north south and west.
then see if you can negotiate a compromise on the issue of the extension of slavery in order to avoid the civil war.
a make your own illustrated timeline of major events involving sectional rivalry from the missouri compromise of 1820 to john browns raid of 1859 learning with graphic organizers in the next chapter 13 the civil war 1861 1865 261 three weeks after davis spoke lincoln responded to the challenge posed by the secession in his first inaugural address.
lincoln reassured southerners that he would not interfere with slavery in the south.
but he warned that the constitution was based on the idea that the union of these states is perpetual and that no state can lawfully get out of the union thus he would do his utmost to preserve the union by force if necessary.
he denied jefferson davis claim that southern states had a lawful right to leave it.
he further stated that even if the constitution were taken to be a simple contract it could not be legally cancelled without an agreement between all the states both north and south.
he saw the union as a union of people not states.
march 1861 lincoln delivers his first inaugural address.
acting as an amateur historian when lincoln delivered his inaugural address thousands came not just to see the new president but to hear what he had to say about the crisis facing the nation.
part of his address was a direct appeal to the seceding southern states in your hands my dissatisfied fellow countrymen not in mine is the momentous issue of civil war.
the government will not assail you.
you can have no conflict without being yourselves the aggressors.
you have no oath registered in heaven to destroy the government while i shall have the most solemn one to preserve protect and defend it we are not enemies but friends.
we must not be enemies.
though passion may have strained it must not break our bonds of affection.
the mystic chords of memory stretching from every battlefield and patriot grave to every living heart and hearthstone all over this broad land will yet swell the chorus of the union when again touched as surely they will be by the better angels of our nature what message was lincoln giving to southern states in his address.
fc how did his views on the union differ from those of jefferson davis.
firing on fort sumter fort sumter was a federal fort in charleston harbor south carolina.
the garrison of federal troops stationed there was running out of food and supplies and had no way of obtaining these onshore after south carolina seceded.


7 where and how do you find the content vocabulary for chapters are in this book.
2 where in the front of the book can you find a political map of the united states.
5 what time period does chapter 15 lesson 1 the industrial north lesson 2 people of the north lesson 3 southern cotton kingdom lesson 4 people of the south the story matters these women are like many other workers at the mills of lowell massachusetts.
they have come to earn wages and to live in the comfortable company town mill owners have built.
at lowell the women can earn good wages and enjoy the cultural offerings designed to help them grow into fine upstanding members of society.
the women hear that other factories do less for their workers.
also more and more immigrants are arriving each day.
the immigrants are hungry and willing to work longer hours for lower wages.
things are changing at lowell.
foldables goto the foldables library in the back of your book to make a foldable that will help you take notes while reading this chapter 6.
where can you find the thinking like a historian activity in each chapter.
what is the title of chapter.
place and time revolutionary america 1776to178j after a period of growing tension the american colonies rebelled against the british.
soon patriot soldiers were fighting against british redcoats up and down the east coast as well as in the 1 1 esf.
the map on the next page shows many of the major battles of the revolutionary war.
1776 nathan hale standing left wasan officer of the continental army but his greatest contribution was as a spy and as a symbol of the patriotspiritc freedom.
captured by the british during a mission and sentenced to die hale is said to have declared i only regret that i have but one life to lose for my country.
step into the place map focus this map shows some of the major battles fought during the american revolution.
place which two battles were fought in new jersey.
29c location which was the southernmost battle.
29c 3 identifying where did most of the battles in the revolutionary war take place.
networks sf map explore the interactive version of there s more online.
this map on networks.
time line explore the interactive version of this time line on networks.
i 1 original 13 colonies major battle 7o w 1780 british forces capture charles town south carolina 1781 british surrender at yorktown 1782 spain completes conquest of florida 1783 treaty of paris is signed networks there s more online.
ef biography peter salem j ef chart the fighting fortes graphic organizer early battles i et map the revolutionary war 1776 1777 st primary source the battle i of trenton sf self check quiz ef slideshow women of the revolution ef video the war for independence tial question whydoesconflictdewlop.
9 teib texas essential knowledge and skills 4b explain the roles played by significant individuals during the american revolution including abigail adams john adams wentworth cheswell samuel adams mercy otis warren james armistead benjamin franklin bernardo de galvez crispus attucks king george iii haym salomon patrick henry thomas jefferson the marquis de lafayette thomas paine and george washington.
4c explain the issues surrounding important events of the american revolution including declaring independence writing the articles of confederation fighting the battles of lexington concord saratoga and yorktown enduring the winter at valley forge and signing the treaty of paris of 1783.
17a analyze the arguments of the federalists and anti federalists including those of alexander hamilton patrick henry james madison and george mason.
23d analyze the contributions of people of various racial ethnic and religious groups to our national identity.
23e identify the political social and economic contributions of women to american society.
29d identify points of view from the historical context surrounding an event and the frame of reference which influenced the participants.
reading helpdesk it matters because the patriots used skill cunning and determination to survive early defeats and win a key victory at saratoga.
the two armies face off guidingquestion who were the opposing sides in the american revolution.
in april 1776 colonial leader john adams predicted weshall have a long and bloody war to go through few people agreed with him.
each side thought they would win the war quickly.
the british planned to crush the colonists by force.
most patriots americans who supported independence believed the british would give up after losing one or two major battles.
british advantages as the war began the british seemed to have a big advantage.
they had the strongest navy in the world.
the british also had a well trained army.
they were supported by the wealth of their empire.
great britain also had more people.
more than 8 million people lived in britain.
there were only 2 5 million americans.
the patriots did not seem to be a match for the british.
they had no regular army and a weak navy.
american soldiers also lacked experience and weapons for fighting.
much of the patriot military force was in the form of militia groups.
these volunteer soldiers fought only for short periods of time and then returned home.
in addition not all americans supported the struggle for independence.
some americans remained loyal to britain.
others such as the quakers were neutral.
they would not take part in the war because they opposed all armed conflict.
loyalists in the colonies at least one in five americans was thought to be a loyalist or tory the number may have been as high as one in three.
these americans remained loyal to britain and opposed independence.
some americans changed sides during the war.
loyalist support also varied from region to region.
in general support for britain was strongest in the carolinas and georgia and weakest in new england.
loyalists had reasons to support britain.
some depended on the british for their jobs.
some feared the revolution would throw america into chaos.
others simply could not understand why the colonies wanted independence.
for them patriot complaints seemed minor and not worth fighting over.
the british actively sought the support of african americans.
virginias royal governor lord dunmore promised freedom to those african americans who joined the british cause.
many men answered his call.
eventually some of them ended up free in canada.
others settled in the british colony of sierra leone in africa.
loyalty to britain divided friends and family.
for example william franklin son of patriot benjamin franklin was a loyalist who had served as a royal governor of new jersey.
this disagreement caused lasting damage to their relationship.
as one connecticut man observed neighbor was against neighbor father against son and son against father and he that would not thrust his own blade through his brothers heart was called an infamous villain advantages of the patriots the patriots did hold some advantages.
they were fighting on their own ground.
the british on the other hand had to fight from thousands of miles across the atlantic ocean.
it took time and money to ship soldiers and supplies.
thinkinq like a historian drawing inferences and conclusions made in the 1750s the liberty bell hung in the pennsylvania state house now independence hall.
legend has it that on july 8 1776 the bells ringing announced the first public reading of the declaration of independence.
the liberty bell also rang every fourth of july and for many public events until a crack appeared in about 1846 today the liberty bell stands as a symbol of freedom.
why do you think such symbols are important to the people of a country.
the continental army was made up mostly of inexperienced soldiers.
taking notes categorizing use a diagram like this one to list the patriot defeats and victories during the early years of the american revolution.
194 the american revolution content vocabulary mercenary recruit build vocabulary word parts the suffix ist means one who is.
adding this suffix to an adjective creates a noun.
adding ist to the word loyal makes the word loyalist one who is loyal.
during the revolution x lesson 1 195 during the revolutionary war women could not officially join the army.
a few managed to fight in disguise.
many more served as cooks nurses or even spies.
today about 400 000 women serve in the american armed forces reserves and national guard.
v critical thinking comparing how have attitudes about women in the military changed since the 1770s.
reading helpdesk the patriot soldier also had greater motivation or sense of purpose.
the british relied on mercenaries muhr suh.
nehr eez or hired soldiers to fight for them.
the americans called these mercenaries hessians heh shuhnz after the region in germany from which most of them came.
the patriots fought for the freedom of their own land.
this gave them a greater stake in the wars outcome than soldiers who fought for money.
the americans also lured the hessians away with promises of land.
the patriots greatest advantage was probably their leader george washington.
few could match him for courage and determination.
the war might have taken a different turn without washington.
the continental army after the declaration of independence the continental congress served as the national government.
however the congress lacked the power to raise money through taxes.
delegates led by james madison of virginia called for a stronger national government to bind the colonies together.
they believed that winning independence was possible only under a strong national government.
not every american agreed.
they placed great value on liberty and personal freedom.
after rejecting the rule of the british parliament they were unwilling to transfer power to their own continental congress.
as a result the american revolution was in some ways 13 separate wars with each state fighting for its own interests.
this made it hard for the congress to get soldiers and raise money.
local militia made up a key part of the patriot forces.
these troops were limited.
many were farmers who needed to provide for their families and did not want to leave their fields unattended.
the patriots also needed well trained soldiers who could fight the british throughout the colonies.
to meet this need the congress established the continental army which depended on the states to recruit ree kroot soldiers.
at first soldiers signed up for just one year but general washington asked for longer terms.
if we ever hope for success he said we must have men enlisted for the whole term of the war.
eventually the continental congress invited soldiers to sign up for three years or until the war ended.
most soldiers however still signed up for only one year.
academic vocabulary mercenary a hired soldier recruit to enlist in the military transfer to move previous earlier the american revolution the revolutionary war 1776 1777 v quebec montreal ss.
4 like r v champlairfr x.
ftstanwix r 1 1777 vmmu oriskany 7j t a r j.
v york city iceton hia w 100 miles atlantic ocean a 0 100 km albers equal area projection 75w 40n american victory british victory british capture new york city 1776 americans attack trenton n and princeton 1776 1777 k howe captures philadelphia 1777 burgoyne surrenders at saratoga 1777 70w lllil the continental army also had a hard time finding officers qualified military commanders.
some were young men who were recruited from the ranks.
the best officers had experience from previous or earlier wars.
men did all the fighting with a few exceptions.
for example margaret corbin of pennsylvania went with her husband when he joined the continental army.
after he died in battle she took his place.
mary ludwig hays mccauley joined her husband in battle as well.
the soldiers called her moll of the pitcher or molly pitcher because she carried water pitchers to the soldiers.
legend has it she also took part in combat.
on february 21 1822 pennsylvania recognized molly pitchers service by granting her an annual payment of 40.
deborah sampson of massachusetts took a different route to the battlefield.
she joined up as a soldier by disguising herself as a man.
h reading progress check summarizing what disadvantages did the patriots face in fighting the british.
geography connection early in the revolutionary war the british and the patriots each won some battles.
location in what area were most battles on this map fought.
critical thinking sequencing according to this map which british victory occurred just before the battle of saratoga.
lesson 1 197 r early campaigns guidingquestion what were significant battles in the early years of the american revolution.
relatively few soldiers fought in the war s early battles.
at bunker hill for example about 2 200 british soldiers fought 1 200 americans.
the british had not yet won a clear victory.
they realized they were going to need more troops.
during the summer of 1776 britain sent 32 000 troops across the atlantic to new york.
the british commander general william howe hoped the sheer size of his army would convince the patriots to give up.
he was soon disappointed.
critical thinking using math skills what is the approximate ratio of british army forces to the continental army and colonial militias.
reading helpdesk the fighting forces 1777 british regular army continental army and colonial militias patriot defeat on long island only 20 000 soldiers made up the patriot force under george washington.
yet the americans were determined to fight.
the two sides clashed in the battle of long island in late august 1776 the british badly defeated the outnumbered continental army.
one patriot nathan hale showed his bravery at long island.
hale disguised himself as a dutch schoolteacher and went to spy on british troops.
the british caught hale and hanged him as punishment.
according to legend hale went to his death saying i only regret that i have but one life to lose for my country the patriots fought hard on long island but could not overcome the larger and better equipped british army.
a british officer wrote that many patriot soldiers killed on long island had not been wearing shoes socks or jackets.
they are also in great want of blankets he said predicting that the rebels would suffer during the winter.
after the defeat washington retreated from new york which became a loyalist stronghold.
the british chased the continental army across new jersey into pennsylvania.
satisfied that washington was beaten the british let him go.
a low point for the patriots washington and his forces had managed to escape the british.
as winter approached however the patriots cause was near collapse the continental army had fewer than 5 000 soldiers.
many had completed their terms.
others had run away.
reading in the content area circle graphs circle or pie graphs show how a whole is divided into parts.
in the case ofthe graph above the whole is fighting forces in the revolutionary war.
often circle graphs visually show how the whole is divided.
they often have numbers and labels as well.
198 the american revolution enslaved african american peter salem appears in the far right of this painting ofthe battle of bunker hill.
i i washington begged the continental congress for more troops.
he suggested allowing free african americans to enlist but many americans opposed this idea.
early in the war the southern colonies had persuaded the congress not to take this step.
many white people in the south worried about giving guns and training to african americans.
they feared the possibility of revolt among the enslaved population.
african americans in battle the growing need for soldiers led some states to ignore the ban on african americans.
rhode island raised an all african american regiment in 1778 by the wars end every state except south carolina enlisted african americans to fight.
historians believe that as many as 5 000 african americans joined the patriots.
one example was peter salem an enslaved african american from massachusetts.
salem fought at concord and at the battle of bunker hill and served the patriot cause throughout the war.
in return for his service salem won his freedom.
another massachusetts patriot wentworth cheswell was a free african american.
like paul revere cheswell made a midnight ride on horseback to warn local residents that british soldiers were coming.
he later fought heroically in the battle of saratoga.
african americans had many reasons to fight.
some fought 5 because they believed in the patriot cause of freedom and liberty j others may have joined up for the chance to earn money.
some i were enslaved africans who had run away or who like salem were allowed by their slaveholders to enlist.
lesson 1 199 i r washington s forces made a daring crossing of the icy delaware river surprising the enemy at trenton and delivering a key patriot victory.
the battles of trenton and princeton while the patriots were struggling through the winter the main british force was settled in new york.
the british also left some troops in princeton and trenton new jersey.
washington saw a chance to catch the british by surprise.
washington was camped in pennsylvania across the delaware river from the british camp in new jersey.
on christmas night 1776 washington led 2 400 troops across the icy river to surprise the enemy at trenton the next day.
washington then escaped and marched to princeton his army scattered the british force there.
a reading progress check explaining why was the winter of 1776 1777 significant.
british strategy guiding question was the british plan for victory successful.
reading helpdesk in early 1777 the british began a three pronged battle plan.
their goal was to seize albany new york and gain control ot te hudson river.
if they controlled the hudson they would cuto new england from the middle colonies.
build vocabulary multiple meaning words skills practice some words have more than one meaning.
late most commonly means not on time.
it can also mean recent work with a partner.
have your partner ask you to do things and practice doing what your partner asks.
take turns.
200 the american revolution first general john burgoyne would lead troops south from canada.
at the same time lieutenant colonel barry st leger would move east from lake ontario.
a third group under general howe would move north up the hudson.
the three british forces would then attack patriot troops at albany.
the british capture philadelphia before the attack on albany howe sought to capture philadelphia the home of the continental congress.
howe won battles in september 1777 at brandywine and paoli near philadelphia.
then howes troops captured philadelphia forcing the continental congress to flee.
by now winter was coming.
howe decided to stay in philadelphia instead of going to albany.
the battle of saratoga meanwhile the british plan for taking albany was in trouble.
in august american soldiers led by benedict arnold stopped st leger at fort stanwix new york.
general burgoynes army had not reached albany either.
in july he captured fort ticonderoga but he needed supplies.
he sent a force to the american supply base at bennington vermont.
a local militia group the green mountain boys defeated them.
burgoyne retreated to saratoga new york.
here burgoyne found himself in serious trouble and alone.
patriots had stopped st leger at fort stanwix.
howe was still in philadelphia.
now american troops under general horatio gates blocked and surrounded burgoynes army.
burgoyne made a desperate attack on october 7 the patriots held firm.
on october 17 1777 general burgoyne surrendered.
the british plan had failed.
the continental army had won an enormous victory that changed the course of the war.
h reading progress check analyzing why did howe s philadelphia victory lead to defeat at saratoga.
include this lesson s information in your foldable.
c the american revolution o beginning 1776 1777 0 middle 1778 1779 o ending 1780 1783 lesson 1 review review vocabulary 1 use each of the following words in a sentence that demonstrates its meaning.
3oa 3ob 4 a mercenary b recruit answer the guiding questions 2 contrasting how did the two sides in the american revolution differ.
29b summarizing how did the continental army fare in the early battles of the war.
29b explaining what key factors led to the american victory at saratoga narrative writing as a patriot write a letter to the editor of your local newspaper.
point out the patriot strengths and why you think the patriots will win the war for independence.
290300 lesson 1 201 1teks texas essential knowledge and skills 4b explain the roles played by significant individuals during the american revolution including abigail adams john adams wentworth chesweli samuel adams mercy otis warren james armistead benjamin franklin bernardo de galvez crispus attucks king george iii haym salomon patrick henry thomas jefferson the marquis de lafayette thomas paine and george washington.
4c explain the issues surrounding important events of the american revolution including declaring independence writing the articles of confederation fighting the battles of lexington concord saratoga and yorktown enduring the winter at valley forge and signing the treaty of paris of 1783.
7c analyze the impact of slavery on different sections of the united states.
23d analyze the contributions of people of various racial ethnic and religious groups to our national identity.
23e identify the political social and economic contributions of women to american society.
it matters because the ideals of liberty and freedom helped attract key support and helped the colonists overcome difficult challenges.
gaining allies guiding question how did america gain allies.
by late 1777 benjamin franklin had been in france lor a year.
he was trying to get the french to support the americans fight for independence.
with his skill and charm franklin gained many friends for the united states.
the french had secretly given the americans money but they had not entered the war.
the continental congress sent jonathan austin of boston to france to deliver the news of the american victory at saratoga.
as soon as austin arrived franklin asked if the british had taken philadelphia.
austin answered yes sir.
but sir i have greater news than that.
general burgoyne and his whole army are prisoners of war franklin surely understood the importance of this news.
the victory at saratoga was a turning point in the american revolution.
france and other nations now realized that the americans might actually win their war against great britain.
france decided to help the americans.
in february 1778 france declared war on britain and sent money equipment and troops to aid the american patriots.
ii reading helpdesk taking notes identifying use a diagram like the one here to determine what aid the patriots received during the american revolution.
202 the american revolution sources of aid to the patriots e 3 z content vocabulary inflation academic vocabujjs.
aid to help desert to leave without permission like france spain also decided to help the americans.
spain did not form an alliance with the united states but it did declare war on great britain in 1779 spanish forces fought the british in present day louisiana mississippi alabama and florida.
this fighting kept many british troops out of action against the americans.
winter at valley forge in 1778 news traveled slowly across the atlantic.
people in the united states did not learn of the french american alliance until the spring.
meanwhile british general howe and his forces spent the winter in comfort in philadelphia.
washington set up camp at valley forge about 20 miles 32 km to the west.
there washington and his troops suffered through a terrible winter.
they lacked decent food clothing shelter and medicine.
washingtons greatest challenge at valley forge was keeping the continental army together.
snowstorms and damaged roads slowed delivery of supplies.
the continental army built huts and gathered supplies from the countryside.
several volunteers including washingtons wife martha made clothes for the troops and cared for the sick.
washington declared that no army had ever put up with such i uncommon hardships with such spirit.
naked and starving as i they are he wrote we cannot enough admire the incomparable i patience and fidelity faithfulness of the soldiery benjamin franklin served as americas first ambassador to france.
french nobles and thinkers greatly admired the american.
much like a singer or actor today franklin became a star in america and europe.
fashionable women even wore a hairstyle meant to look like a fur cap franklin wore.
how might franklins popularity have helped the patriot cause.
martha washington shown here on the arm of george washington helped lift the spirits of the army during the bitter winter at valley forge.
c skills practice use a concept map to help you understand new vocabulary.
write a vocabulary word in the center circle and write details and ideas about the word in the surrounding circles.
reading helpdesk academic vocabulary desert to leave without permission or intent to come back 204 the american revolution washington and the continental army lived through a terrible winter at valley forge.
critical thinking identifying cause and effect how did the difficult winter at valley forge affect the continental army.
joseph martin a young soldier from connecticut spent the winter at valley forge.
we had hard duty to perform he wrote years later and little or no strength to perform it with most ofthe men lacked blankets shoes and shirts.
martin made a pair of rough shoes for himself out of a scrap of cowhide which hurt his feet.
primary source m t he only alternative i had was to endure this inconvenience or to go barefoot as hundreds of my companions had to till they might be tracked by their blood upon the rough frozen ground.
99 joseph martin in a narrative of a revolutionary soldi ivitiuy soiaiers oecame sick and died.
other men deserted duhzert ed or left without permission.
some officers quit.
the continental army seemed to be falling apart.
yet the continental army did survive the winter.
spring came and conditions gradually improved.
new soldiers joined the ranks.
the army grows stronger every day one officer wrote.
there is a spirit of discipline among the troops that is better than numbers then in april 1778 washington told his troops of frances help.
everyones spirits rose at the thought.
the continental army celebrated with a religious service and a parade.
build vocabulary related words some words sound the same despite different spellings and meanings.
still aid and aide have related meanings.
the word aide is a noun meaning helper.
the academic vocabulary aid is a verb meaning to help.
foreigners help on the battlefield the patriot cause had supporters around the world.
a number of individuals from other nations gave their talents to the cause.
one leader at valley forge was the marquis de lafayette lah fee eht of france.
he had come to the united states as a 19 year old volunteer in june 1777 lafayette was excited about the ideas expressed in the declaration of independence and he wanted to join the battle for freedom.
he believed that the american cause represented the future of humankind.
when he reached the united states lafayette offered his services to general washington.
he agreed to serve without pay and became a trusted aide to washington.
other europeans volunteered to work for the patriot cause.
two polish men thaddeus kosciuszko kawshchushkoh and casimir pulaski poo lahs kee supported american efforts.
kosciuszko helped build important defenses for the americans.
pulaski won promotion to the rank of general.
he died in 1779 fighting for the continental army.
friedrich von steuben vahn stoobuhn also came to help washington.
von steuben had been an officer in the prussian army.
he helped to train the patriot troops at valley forge and shape the ragged continental army into a more effective fighting force.
in 1778 spaniard juan de miralles mee rah yays arrived in philadelphia.
he had persuaded spain cuba and mexico to send money to the united states.
miralles became friends with many patriot leaders and lent money to the cause.
europeans who had recently moved to the united states also joined the patriot cause.
for example almost two thirds of the soldiers in pennsylvania regiments were foreign born.
even with the help of foreign nations and individuals the patriots faced a huge challenge.
the continental army still needed large amounts of money to fight the war and defeat the british.
oprogress check explaining how did lafayette help the patriot cause.
thaddeus kosciuszko of poland was a big contributor to the patriot cause.
baron von steuben trained american recruits at valley forge 1778 x z x life on the home front guidingquestion what was life like on the home front during the american revolution.
the war changed the lives of all americans even those who stayed at home.
for example wives of soldiers had to take care of families by themselves.
they had to run a farm or a business without a husbands help.
children had to make do without a father present.
eifa t 6 m jt rt yv r during the war congress and the states printed paper money.
over time people came to question the value of this paper money and the amounts required to make purchases rose.
critical thinking identifying cause and effect what happened when people began to question the value of the paper money.
problems in the economy raising funds to pay for the war was a great challenge.
the continental congress had no power to tax.
the congress did get some money from the states and borrowed money from friendly countries such as france spain and holland.
wealthy patriots such as haym salomon and robert morris also lent large sums of money to the war effort.
yet these amounts fell far short of the need.
to meet this need the congress and the states simply printed hundreds of millions of dollars worth of paper money.
the paper money quickly lost its value.
the face value of bills was greater than the supply of gold and silver backing them.
this led to inflation inflay shun which means that it took more and more money to buy the same amount of goods.
people began to have doubts about how much their paper bills were worth.
congress stopped printing paper money because no one would use it.
this left the americans with no way to finance their fight for independence.
new ways of thinking the ideals of liberty and freedom inspired the american revolution.
these same ideals also caused some women to question their role in american society.
abigail adams was one example.
in 1776 she wrote a letter to her husband john adams a member of congress arguing for womens rights 6 zz z primary source w if particular care and attention is not paid to the ladies we are determined to foment a rebellion and will not hold ourselves bound by any laws in which we have no voice or representation.
99 reading helpdesk inflation when it takes more and more money to buy the same amount of goods from familiar letters of john adams and his wife abi9 during the revolution t academic vocabulary issue a subject that people have different views about 6 the american revolution questioning slavery the revolutionary quest for freedom and liberty led some white americans to question slavery.
in 1778 governor william livingston of new jersey asked his government to free all enslaved people.
he said slavery was utterly inconsistent with the principles of christianity and humanity african americans made similar arguments.
in new hampshire enslaved people asked the government for their freedom so that the name of slave may not be heard in a land gloriously contending for the sweets of freedom as you have read african americans fought for the american cause and hoped the revolution would help end slavery.
the pennsylvania legislature in 1780 adopted a plan to gradually free enslaved people the first legislature in the world to take such action against slavery.
other northern states soon took similar measures.
still the issue of slavery would remain unsettled for many years.
treatment of loyalists not all americans supported the patriot cause.
during the war thousands of loyalists fought on the side of the british.
some loyalists spied on the patriots.
many loyalists fled packing their belongings and selling whatever they could.
some left hurriedly for england.
others took off for spanish owned florida.
known loyalists who remained in the united states faced difficult times.
their neighbors often shunned them.
some became victims of violence.
loyalists who actively helped the british faced arrest.
in a few rare cases patriots executed loyalists.
h reading progress check 1 describing how were loyalists treated by the patriots during the war.
biography abigail adams 1744 1818 abigail adams was the wife of john adams delegate to the continental congress.
she had a dose relationship with her husband and the two wrote often about the political issues of the day.
abigail adams famously argued for women s rights in a letter to her husband telling him if particular care and attention is not paid to the ladies we are determined to start a rebellion and will not hold ourselves bound by any laws in which we have no voice or representation.
l 1 critical thinking analyzing primary sources what complaint is abigail adams making about the treatment of women.
include this lesson s information in your foldable.
the american revolution 0 beginning 1776 1777 0 middle 1778 1779 o ending 1780 1783 lesson 2 review 1 review vocabulary 1 explain the significance of the following terms from this lesson.
3oa a desert b inflation answer the guiding questions 2 identifying who were the key european allies of the patriots.
3 explaining on what basis did abigail adams suggest women might not hold themselves bound by laws.
4b descriptive writing take the perspective of a foreign soldier volunteering to serve in the united states in the fight against the british.
write a letter to family back home explaining why you have decided to risk your life in this cause.
290300 lesson 2 207 n s netw rks there s more online.
biography john paul jones ef chart graph native american alliances graphic organizer british defeats in the south ef map revolutionary war in the west and south sf primarysource political cartoons bf self check quiz ef timeline bernardo de galvez ef video fsb texas essential knowledge and skills 4c explain the issues surrounding important events of the american revolution including declaring independence writing the articles of confederation fighting the battles of lexington concord saratoga and yorktown enduring the winter at valley forge and signing the treaty of paris of 1783.
22b describe the contributions of significant political social and military leaders of the united states such as frederick douglass john paul jones james monroe stonewall jackson susan b anthony and elizabeth cady stanton.
29d identify points of view from the historical context surrounding an event and the frame of reference which influenced the participants.
reading helpdesk lesson 3 battlegrounds shift l question whydoescoirihctdevelop.
it matters because important battles of the war for independence took place along the western frontier at sea and in the south.
fighting in the west guiding question how did the war in the west develop.
the revolutionary war was of great interest to many native american groups living in and around the 13 states.
some native americans helped the patriots.
more sided with the british.
for them the british seemed less of a threat than the americans who lived in their midst and took their land.
west of the appalachian mountains the british and their native american allies raided american settlements.
mohawk war chief joseph brant led a number of brutal attacks in southwestern new york and northern pennsylvania.
farther west henry hamilton the british commander at detroit paid native americans for settlers scalps.
this practice earned him the nickname the hair buyer virginia militia leader george rogers clark set out to end attacks in the west.
in july 1778 clark led a force of 175 westward down the ohio river and over land.
the patriots captured a british post at kaskaskia ka skas kee uh in present day illinois.
they then took the british town of vincennes vin sehnz in present day indiana.
british troops under hamilton recaptured vincennes that december.
clark vowed to get it back.
in february 1779 clark and his troops taking notes identifying cause and effect use a diagram like the one here to show why the british lost control in the south.
british defeats in the south content vocabulary blockade privateer 208 the american revolution at the time of the revolution about 200 000 native americans lived along the western frontier.
here they attack an american settlement in pennsylvania s wyoming valley in 1778 critical thinking speculating why do you think many native americans supported the british rather than the americans.
li military historical image braved harsh winter conditions to surprise the british and force their surrender.
clarks victory strengthened the american position in the west.
qprogress check summarizing what victories did the american forces win in the west.
the war at sea guiding question what was the result of the war at sea.
the revolutionary war also took place at sea.
here great britains powerful navy enjoyed a major advantage.
british vessels formed an effective blockade blah kayd keeping ships from entering or leaving american harbors.
the blockade limited delivery of supplies and troops to patriot forces.
privateers to break the blockade congress ordered 13 warships but only two of the ships made it to sea.
several were quickly captured by the british.
the american navy was too weak to operate well.
congress also authorized some 2 000 ships to sail as privateers.
a privateer pry vuh teer is a privately owned merchant ship outfitted with weapons.
the goal of the privateer is to capture enemy merchant ships and cargo.
finding crews for these ships was not difficult.
sailors from the whaling and fishing ports of new england signed on eagerly for the profitable privateering trade.
during the war privateers captured more british ships than the american navy did.
blockade a measure to keep ships from entering or leaving a harbor privateer a privately owned ship outfitted with weapons lesson 3 209 f serapis meet in one ofthe most famous naval battles ofthe war.
american naval officer john paul jones led the crew ofthe bonhomme richard in the conflict.
an american naval hero the war at sea produced one of the wars great heroes.
a daring american naval officer john paul jones won his first successes raiding british ports.
near the coast of great britain in september 1779 joness ship bonhomme richard met the british warship serapis.
the bonhomme richard and the serapis fought for hours.
the british captain asked whether jones wished to surrender.
jones is said to have answered i have not yet begun to fight in the end it was the serapis that surrendered.
the naval victory made john paul jones a hero to the patriots.
q progress check reading helpdesk academic vocabulary impact an effect describing how did privateers contribute to the american war effort.
fighting in the south guidingquestioim what was the result of the war in the south.
in the early years of the war the americans had won several battles in the south.
in 1776 patriot forces crushed loyalists at tl.
battle of moores creek near wilmington north carolina.
the also saved the key port of charles town south carolina from th british.
although this was a small battle its impact on the rest o the war was great.
i i 210 the american revolution by 1778 these results along with patriot victories such as saratoga had convinced the british that bringing their old colonies back into the empire would not be easy.
as a result the british came up with a new plan to finish the war.
the new british plan focused on the south where there were many loyalists.
the british hoped to use sea power and the support of the loyalists to win important victories in the southern states.
at first the strategy worked.
early british success in late 1778 british general henry clinton sent 3 500 troops from new york to take savannah georgia.
the british occupied the coastal city and controlled most of the state.
clinton himself led a force into the south in early 1780 in may he led a second british attack on charles town.
this time the south carolina city surrendered and the british took thousands of prisoners.
it marked the worst american defeat of the war.
after clintons victory he returned to new york.
he left general charles cornwallis in command of british forces in the south.
the continental congress sent forces under general horatio gates to face cornwallis.
the two armies met at camden south carolina in august 1780 the british won this first encounter.
yet cornwallis soon found that he could not control the area he had conquered.
he and his troops faced a new kind of warfare.
11 geography connection starting in 1778 many revolutionary war battles took place in the west and the south.
location based on this map what was the southernmost battle between the patriots and the british.
critical thinking analyzing visuals why do you think the british wanted to capture ports at savannah and charles town.
40 0 200 km lambert azimuths equal area projection i 3sn i 95w british forces american victory british victory fort 90w the revolutionary war in the west and south 1778 1781 kaskaskia july4 f7 f.
ga 85w 80w ittm r l.
york city atlantic ocean british capture savannah 1778 patriots victorious at kaskaskia cahokia and vincennes after defeats at charles town and camden patriots are victorious at kings mountain and cowpens 1780 1781 washington and rochambeau rush toward virginia aug 1781 french admiral de grasses keeps british ships away cornwallis trapped the british surrender at yorktown 1781 lesson 3 211 skills practice work with a partner.
before you read a selection use the visuals headings and vocabulary words to ask questions about the content.
after you finish decide with your partner which questions were answered by the text and where you can find answers to the rest.
spaniard bernardo de galvez fought against the british during the american revolution.
academic vocabulary sustain to suffer or experience hit and run tactics the british had counted on strong loyalist support in the south.
they received less help than expected.
instead as british forces moved through the countryside small forces of patriots attacked them.
these bands of soldiers appeared suddenly fired their weapons and then disappeared.
this hit and run technique caught the british off guard.
francis marion was one successful patriot leader.
marion who was known as the swamp fox operated out of the swamps of eastern south carolina.
he was quick and smart.
one british colonel grumbled that the devil himself could not catch marion.
spain s help great britain also found itself with another new enemy.
spain declared war on britain in 1779 the spanish governor of louisiana bernardo de galvez gahl ves had tons of supplies and ammunition shipped up the mississippi river to american troops in the northwest territory.
it was with this help that george rogers clark captured the key posts of kaskaskia and vincennes.
galvez also raised an army to fight the british.
galvezs forces drove the british out of the gulf of mexico region.
american successes after their victory at camden south carolina the british moved northward through the carolinas in september 1780 along the way the british warned the local people to give up the fight for independence and join the british.
if they refused the british threatened to hang their leaders and lay their country waste the americans who received this warning were mountain people.
fiercely independent they had been neither patriots nor loyalists until the british warning angered them.
they formed a militia army and set out to force the british from their land.
at kings mountain the american militia force killed or captured a british led loyalist force of about 1 000 the patriot victory brought new support for independence from southerners.
in october 1780 nathanael greene replaced gates as commander of the continental forces in the south.
rather than lead one attack on cornwalliss forces greene split his army in two.
in january 1781 one section defeated the british at cowpens south carolina.
another section joined francis marions raids.
greene combined his forces in march.
then he met cornwallis s build vocabulary word origins of sayings today people refer to the hit and run tactics used by some patriot forces as guerrilla warfare.
212 the american revolution superstock this british cartoon dates from 1779 before the american revolution ended.
it shows a rider being thrown off a horse.
the horse represents the former colonies.
the rider represents great britain and the man on the ground represents a revolutionary war soldier.
critical thinking analyzing primary sources what outcome of the war does the cartoonist predict.
army at guilford courthouse in present day greensboro north carolina.
greenes army was forced to retreat but the british sustained great losses in the process.
general cornwallis gave up the campaign to conquer the carolinas.
cornwallis retreats cornwallis realized the british had to act quickly to win the war.
more french troops were coming to north america and the patriots held virginia.
troops and supplies were moving south.
in april 1781 cornwallis marched north to virginia.
his troops carried out raids throughout the region.
general washington sent lafayette and general anthony wayne south to push cornwallis back.
meanwhile cornwallis took shelter at yorktown on the virginia coast.
the battle for the south was entering its final phase.
b progress check evaluating what effect did the patriot victory at kings mountain produce.
include this lesson s information in your foldable.
the american revolution o beginning 1776 1777 0 hddle 1778 1779 o ending 1780 1783 lesson 3 review review vocabulary 1 use each of the following words in a sentence about the revolutionary war.
3oa 3ob a blockade b privateer answer the guiding questions 2 describing what role did many native americans take during the war in the west.
3 identifying who was john paul jones and what was his significance in the war.
22b 4 summarizing what happened during the british campaign in the south.
29b expository writing you have read about several military leaders in this lesson.
which leader do you think most helped the patriot cause.
write a short essay to explain your answer.
22b 3od lesson 3 213 networks there s more online.
ef biography comte derochambeau graphic organizer treaty of paris ef map siege at yorktown et music yankee doodle self check quiz ef video lesson 4 the final years t k h otll rial question whydoesconfllctdewlop.
texas essential knowledge and skills 1a identify the major eras and events in u s history through 1877 including colonization revolution drafting of the declaration of independence creation and ratification of the constitution religious revivals such as the second great awakening early republic the age of jackson westward expansion reform movements sectionalism civil war and reconstruction and describe their causes and effects.
4b explain the roles played by significant individuals during the american revolution including abigail adams john adams wentworth cheswel i samuel adams mercy otis warren james armistead benjamin franklin bernardo de galvez crispus attucks king george iii haym salomon patrick henry thomas jefferson the marquis de lafayette thomas paine and george washington.
4c explain the issues surrounding important events of the american revolution including declaring independence writing the articles of confederation fighting the battles of lexington concord saratoga and yorktown enduring the winter at valley forge and signing the treaty of paris of 1783.
10a locate places and regions of importance in the united states during the 17th 18th and 19th centuries.
29d identify points of view from the historical context surrounding an event and the frame of reference which influenced the participants.
reading helpdesk it matters because the patriots and their allies cleverness and commitment led to final victory in the revolutionary war.
victory at yorktown guiding question what events occurred in the victory at yorktown.
while the british were carrying out their southern campaign key events were taking place in the north.
in july 1780 french warships appeared off newport rhode island.
the ships carried french soldiers commanded by comte de rochambeau row sham boh.
eventually rochambeau joined up with general washington who was camped north of new york city.
there the two leaders waited for the arrival of a second fleet of french ships.
if and when the second french fleet arrived washington planned to attack the british army base in new york which was under the command of general henry clinton.
instead both the ships and the troops would find a better opportunity to strike at the british.
that opportunity would come farther south at yorktown virginia.
washington leaves for virginia as he waited outside new york washington followed reports of fighting in the south.
in 1781 he sent lafayette and anthony to virginia to stop cornwallis.
once in virginia lafayette sent many spies to the nearby british camp.
none was as important as james an enslaved african held by william armistead.
the secret taking notes describing use a diagram like this one to show what the united states and great britain agreed to in the treaty of paris.
214 the american revolution great britain content vocabulary siege ratify ambush information james gathered helped lafayette pin down cornwallis and his army on a peninsula a piece of land surrounded by water on three sides.
the place was called yorktown.
washington also got important news about the french fleet he was waiting for the ships were heading toward chesapeake bay instead of new york.
they were going to join in the fight to defeat cornwallis.
with this news washington quickly changed his plans.
he and rochambeau would advance on the british at yorktown rather than at new york.
washington kept his new strategy or plan of action secret.
he wanted clinton to think the patriots still planned to attack at new york.
this he hoped would keep clinton from sending aid to cornwallis.
washington and rochambeau then rushed south with their armies.
secrecy was strict.
most soldiers did not know where they were going.
one wrote we do not know the object of our march and are in perfect ignorance whether we are going against new york or virginia the french and american troops marched 200 miles 322 km in 15 days.
general clinton did not learn they were gone until it was too late.
there was nothing he could do to stop the three forces lafayettes troops washingtons and rochambeaus army and the french fleet from meeting at yorktown.
view the map of the siege at yorktown.
a trap at yorktown washingtons plan worked perfectly.
by the end of september 14 000 american and french troops stood against cornwalliss 8 000 british and hessian troops at yorktown.
meanwhile the french fleet kept guard at chesapeake bay.
british ships could not get in to help cornwallis escape by sea.
general clinton and the rest of the british army sat helplessly in new york.
they were unable to help cornwallis.
the british were trapped.
american and french forces began a siege seej they blocked off the british supply and escape routes.
in this way they hoped to force the british to surrender.
thinlina like a historian making predictions throughout the revolutionary war washington succeeded in holding his army together despite many difficulties.
one of these difficulties was political meddling.
the continental congress often interfered with his military operations.
during the gloomy winter at valley forge some members of congress and army officers plotted to replace washington as commander in chief.
how might washingtons removal or resignation have affected the war.
in august 1781 comte de rochambeau joined washington s continental army in its march to yorktown.
siege an attempt to force surrender by blocking the movement of people or goods into or out of a place academic vocabulary strategy a plan of action lesson 4 215 swamp rochambeau 9 000 v geography connection general cornwallis and his army left the carolinas for virginia in 1781 he wound up at yorktown on the shores of the chesapeake bay.
location how would you describe the type of land on which cornwallis and his forces camped at yorktown.
critical thinking analyzing visuals does this location seem like it would be easy or difficult to defend.
washington s headquarters gloucester yorktown field of british surrender lafayette s headquarters general von steuben oieneral lafayette 8 000 lincoln reading helpdesk victory over cornwallis the siege began to take effect.
the british ran low on supplies and many soldiers were wounded or sick.
on october 14 washingtons aide alexander hamilton led an attack that captured key british defenses.
cornwallis could see that the situation was hopeless.
on october 19 he surrendered his troops.
the patriots had won the battle of yorktown.
they took nearly 8 000 british prisoners and captured more than 200 heavy guns.
at the surrender ceremony the british marched between rows of french and american troops.
a french band played yankee doodle this was a song the british had used to taunt the americans.
a british band responded with a childrens tune the world turned upside down with the mighty british surrendering to the upstart americans it seemed a fitting song for the situation.
hprogress check explaining why did washington advance on yorktown.
reading strategy sequencing describe the sequence of events from october 9 to october 19 that led to the victory over cornwallis.
skills practice when you read your text evaluate the visuals such as pictures charts and graphs.
are they effective.
how do they help you understand the content better.
the american revolution rints photographs division lc dig ppmsca 05936 independence achieved guiding question what helped the patriots win independence.
the patriot victory at yorktown was a terrible blow to the british and their war effort.
still the fighting went on after cornwallis surrendered.
the british still held savannah charles town and new york.
there would be a few more clashes on land and sea.
however the defeat at yorktown convinced the british that the war was too costly to pursue or proceed with.
the americans and british sent delegates to paris to work out a treaty.
benjamin franklin john adams and john jay represented the united states.
the american congress ratified rat ihfyed or approved the first draft of the treaty in april 1783 the final treaty of paris was signed on september 3 1783 by that time britain had also made peace with france and spain.
under the treaty of paris great britain recognized the united states as an independent nation.
the british also promised to withdraw all their troops from american territory.
they gave americans fishing rights to the waters off the coast of nearby canada.
in turn the united states promised that americans would pay british merchants what they owed.
the treaty also stated that the congress would advise the new states to return property taken from loyalists.
a conspiracy against congress many months passed between the end of fighting in the revolutionary war and the signing of the peace treaty.
during that time washington was unwilling to dissolve the army.
instead he camped his idle troops in newburgh new york.
many of these soldiers believed they were owed pay from the congress.
when this pay did not come the soldiers grew angry.
some officers sent a letter around in march 1783 if their demands were not met the letter said the army should use force against the congress.
washington realized that this threat of revolt was dangerous.
the new nation could be destroyed.
in a dramatic speech he asked the angry soldiers to be patient.
then washington urged the congress to meet their just demands.
the congress agreed.
washingtons leadership ended the threat to the new nation.
british forces first sang yankee doodle to poke fun at what they considered the awkward ways of the americans.
the americans however quickly made yankee doodle their own.
they created new verses that made fun of the british and praised george washington.
critical thinking speculating why might songs and other forms of music be important in fighting a war.
ratify to approve officially academic vocabulary pursue to proceed with lesson 4 217 washington returns home in late november 1783 the war truly ended.
the last british troops left new york city.
washington could at last give up his command.
the soldiers could return to their homes and their lives.
on december 4 washington said farewell to his troops.
three weeks later he formally resigned or gave up his position at a meeting of the congress.
washington said having now finished the work assigned me i retire and take my leave of all the employments of public life washington returned home to mount vernon virginia.
there he planned to remain and live quietly with his family.
after the war washington looked forward to a return to his home mount vernon in virginia.
he planned to take no role in the new government.
critical thinking speculating why do you think washington hoped to get away from public life.
why the americans won how did the americans defeat powerful great britain.
remember the americans had several advantages in the war.
first they fought on their own land.
the british had to move troops and supplies across an ocean.
it was harder for them to get reinforcements as the siege of yorktown showed.
when their ships were blocked the british troops had no support.
also the americans knew the land.
they knew where to lay in ambush am bush or surprise attack.
they were expert at wilderness fighting.
the british in contrast had much difficulty controlling the american countryside once they occupied the cities.
the battle of kings mountain which you read about in lesson 3 illustrates this point.
the rural people did not like being told what to do.
they also had wilderness fighting skills that could defeat their new enemies.
help from other countries contributed to the american victory.
the success at yorktown would not have been possible without french soldiers and ships.
spain gave aid when they attacked the british.
individuals such as lafayette and von steuben came to america to provide vital services to the patriot cause.
ambush an attack in which the attacker hides and surprises the enemy reading helpdesk 8 the american revolution perhaps most important the american revolution was a movement of the people.
its outcome depended not on any one battle or event but on the determination and spirit of all patriots.
as washington remarked about the patriotic crowds here is an army they the british will never conquer in 1776 the american colonists began a revolution.
in the declaration of independence they outlined the principles of freedom and the rights they felt all peoples and nations should have.
these ideas inspired people in other parts of the world.
for example french rebels in 1789 began a revolution in defense of liberty equality and fraternity the french upheld these principles men are born and remain free and equal in rights in 1791 there was revolution in the french colony of saint domingue.
inspired by the ideals of the american and french revolutions enslaved africans took up arms.
they were led by a man named toussaint louverture too san loo vuhrtoor and soon shook off french rule.
in 1804 saint domingue present day haiti became the second nation in the americas to achieve independence from colonial rule.
we have asserted our rights declared the revolutionaries.
we swear never to yield them to any power on earth h progress check explaining why did washington take action to end the newburgh conspiracy.
include this lesson s information in your foldable.
the american revolution o beginning 1776 1777 middle 1770 1779 ending 1700 1703 the ideals of the american revolution helped inspire the enslaved people of haiti who fought for the independence of their french colony.
lesson 4 review review vocabulary 1 define each of the following terms and use it in a sentence.
3oa 3ob a siege b ratify c ambush answer the guiding questions 2 sequencing describe washington s actions leading up to and during the patriot victory at yorktown.
1b 4b 4c 29b 3 explaining what were the terms ofthe treaty of paris of 1783 4 analyzing maps why were british ships unable to help cornwallis escape by sea.
what was the result ofthe siege at yorktown.
ioa expository writing what were the effects of the drafting ofthe declaration of independence for americans.
what were its effects in other countries lesson 4 219 activities directions write your answers using standard grammar spelling sentence structure and punctuation.
0 use your foldables to explore the essential question.
expository writing how did the experiences ofthe patriots and the experiences ofthe british differ in the war.
how did these differences contribute to the outcome.
use examples from the chapter n assessment directions on a separate sheet of paper answer the questions below.
make sure you read carefully and answer all parts of the questions.
lesson review lesson 1 0 identifying central issues what decisions were made at yalta and what role did they play in the emergence of the cold war.
7b q describing what was the bretton woods conference.
how did the decisions taken at bretton woods affect the international monetary system and the use of the gold standard.
15e 17e 0 describing describe the manner in which germany was divided by great britain the united states the soviet union and france.
7b 0 evaluating what were the pros and cons of the united states joining the united nations.
what elements of the un charter help the united states protect its interests.
what were the potential weaknesses of the united nations.
19e 0 analyzing information why did the allied victory and the creation of the united nations not lead to a more peaceful world as president roosevelt had hoped.
8a 0 identifying how did the newly formed united nations respond to the acts of genocide committed during world warll.
lesson 2 0 identifying central issues what was the policy of containment.
how did it affect president truman s decision to send troops to fight in the korean war.
8c 8d 0 making connections how was american aid to western europe a key to containing communism.
what was the legislation that proposed such aid.
8a 0 determining cause and effect explain the causes of the korean war the reasons the united states became involved and outcome of u s involvement.
8c 8d lesson 3 0 interpreting significance following world war ii how did the red scare affect the united states.
8b drawing inferences how did senator mccarthy s accusations of communist influence affect domestic life and intensify cold war tensions.
8b describing in the early 1950s in what ways did literatur and films about the h bomb and communist spies reflect the characteristics and issues of the era.
25a lesson 4 analyzing describe president eisenhower s approach to defense spending in the 1950s.
why did he cut military spending and what effect did he expect it to have on the economy.
17c explaining what was the role of brinkmanship in eisenhower s foreign policy.
why was it controversial.
sequencing events describe the events that followed c a result of the distribution of khrushchev s secret speech.
0 comparing compare the eisenhower doctrine with the truman doctrine.
what action took place following the establishment of the eisenhower doctrine.
8d summarizing summarize the relationship between khrushchev and eisenhower at the end of eisenhower s presidency.
exploring the essential questions 0 synthesizing design a website describing the origins c the cold war and its effects on 1950s society.
on a sheet paper describe the website and the way you would organize the site s information.
include maps biographi and accounts of historic events to show ways cold war tensions affected postwar international relations.
prese a visual presentation of your website to the class.
8a 8b 8c 30a 30b 3oc need extra help.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 i co to page 398 396 398 397 397 399 402 405 410 411 414 416 417 418 393 4211.
424 d understanding relationships among events howdid cold war fears of nuclear war affect american society.
critical thinking 0 assessing describe the berlin airlift.
why did it begin.
how did it enable the united states to respond to soviet aggression without going to war.
8a analyzing describe the truman doctrine and the marshall plan.
explain how these policies were intended to prevent further soviet aggression in europe after world war ii.
8a 0 describing explain the events that led to the creation of nato and outline the terms of the nato treaty.
what were some ofthe pros and cons of signing the nato treaty and becoming a member of this international organization.
8a 19e interpreting describe the relationship between u s international trade polices at the end of world war ii and the u s free enterprise system.
describe the pros and cons of international trade treaties.
17e 19e q analyzing explain the reasons that eisenhower adopted a policy of using the cia to conduct covert operations during the cold war.
identify two countries where he used this policy and the results ofthe covert intervention.
8d evaluating explain why 1957 was a turning point in history.
what event that year resulted in changes that continue to shape our world today.
2d understanding historical interpretations describe how cold war tensions were intensified by the house un american activities committee huac.
how did historians initially interpret the red scare ofthe 1950s.
in what way may the release ofthe venona papers in 1995 have changed those interpretations.
8b 29c analyzing primary sources read the excerpt below and answer the questions that follow.
in 1950 margaret chase smith the only woman in the senate was upset by senator mccarthy s behavior.
she had hoped that her colleagues would reprimand him.
they failed to do so and smith then made her declaration of conscience speech.
primarysource as a united states senator i am not proud ofthe way in which the senate has been made a publicity platform for irresponsible sensationalism.
i am not proud ofthe reckless abandon in which unproved charges have been hurled as an american i am shocked at the way republicans and democrats alike are playing directly into the communist design of confuse divide and conquer i want to see our nation recapture the strength and unity it once had when we fought the enemy instead of ourselves 99 margaret chase smith speech to congress june 1 1950 social studies skills using a decision making process imagine you work for president eisenhower.
the president has explained the country needs a strong military because of the threat from the soviet union and the united states is committed to containing communism.
at the same time the president is worried about the economy.
he is concerned that a lot of government spending on the military will weaken the economy.
write a briefing paper for the president recommending the policy of massive retaliation.
in the paper apply a decision making process that explains why you are recommending this decision.
17c 27b 32b making connections what is the connection between smith s point of view and the views ofmccarthyism during the red scare.
8b 29a 29e interpreting speeches why did smith use the phrase confuse divide and conquer.
8b 29a 29e 29h need extra help.
19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 goto page 1 404 403 n a fl 14201 393 411 393 ljhj the cold war begins 425 read the excerpt below and answer the questions that follow.
primary source you have to take chances for peace just as you must take chances in war.
some say that we were brought to the verge of war.
of course we were brought to the verge of war.
the ability to get to the verge without getting into the war is the necessary art if you try to run away from it if you are scared to go to the brink you are lost.
we ve had to look it square in the face we walked to the brink and we looked it in the face.
we took strong action.
john foster dulles quoted in rise to globalism interpreting primary sources what strategy is john foster dulles describing.
why is he saying it is necessary.
8a 29a 29e 29h drawing inferences why do you think the eisenhower administration was able to make the policy dulles is describing work.
what circumstances in the 1950s gave the united states the ability to negotiate this way.
8a 29b 29h analyzing visuals use the map to answer the following questions.
i j american i i british i j french i.
i soviet present day germany uncertain border w identify central issues identify and explain the reasons for the changes in germany s political boundaries after world war ii.
12b interpreting geographic distributions based on the geography and control of the zones what challenges would have existed for each of the allied countries and would any country have been more or less affected.
31 posing questions about geographic distributions what questions would you need to ask about the geographic distribution on the map in order to underst why the soviet union was unwilling to take reparations from their zone only.
8a 31b extended response question comparing and contrasting write an essay compari and contrasting the international leadership of franklin roosevelt at the yalta conference with harry truman s leadership at the potsdam conference.
compare the un states relationship with its allies at both conferences identify the goals of roosevelt and truman and evalua their success in achieving their goals.
your essay should have an introduction at least four paragraphs and a conclusion.
7b standardized test practice what political contribution did eleanor roosevelt make after world war ii.
26d a she chaired a un commission on human rights to address and prevent genocide.
b she chaired a un commission on international tre and tariffs to help rebuild european economies.
c she met with leaders of the allied powers at the potsdam conference.
d she met with leaders of the allied powers at the conference.
what scientific and technological innovation in the mi resulted from the american policy of brinkmanship.
f atomic bomb g b 52 h u 2 spy plane j armored tank need extra help.
30 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 go to page i47 lie 398 postwar america networks there s more online about life in america after world war ii.
chapter 5 place andtime united states 1872 1917 u s economists politicians and other leaders recognized that economic growth could only come through expansion into foreign markets.
with that in mind the united states embarked on a path toward imperialism that included colonization and the acquisition of new territory.
one strategic acquisition was the panama canal.
after agreeing to pay for the rights to the project and the land around it president roosevelt pushed for the canal s completion.
william gorgas a u s army surgeon helped control a major obstacle facing the construction of the panama canal disease.
step into the place read the quotes and look at the information presented on the map.
12a 29a analyzing historical documents did roosevelt and gorgas agree on the challenges the construction of the panama canal posed.
primarysource no single great material work which remains to be undertaken on this continent is as of such consequence to the american people as the building of a canal across the isthmus connecting north and south america theodore roosevelt from a speech to congress 1901 primarysource m the route of the panama canal lay through a low swampy country where yellow fever and malaria prevailed to an alarming extent we appreciated that if the americans were subject to this disease to any considerable extent we should have great difficulty in keeping them at panama and if we could afford to pay sufficiently high wages to induce them to stay congress in all probability would not sanction the continuance of the work if we lost from yellow fever fifteen or sixteen hundred americans every year.
c gorgas from sanitation in panama 1915 step into the time the greatest inflnpnrpnn i is iseti j878 u sh.
s treaty with samoa hayes garfield arthur 1877 1881 1881 1881 188 making connections determine which president had pueblo nuevo panama bay san carlos isla pedro gonzalez isla san jose san miguel isla del rey pacific ocean gulf of panama harrison 1893 americans s 1 1893 overthrow queen 1 uss liliuokalani maine explodes in mckinley t roosevelt 1897 1901 1901 1909 taft 1909 1913 1904 senate approves treaty leasing the panama canal networks there s more online.
biography sanford b dole biography queen liliuokalani ef biography matthew perry ef chart graph u s foreign investments gf video u s imperialism et interactive self check quiz j lesson 1 the imperialist vision on how are empires built.
reading helpdesk academic vocabulary expansion conference content vocabulary imperialism protectorate pan americanism taking notes key ideas and details organizing as you read about the development ofthe united states as a world power use the major headings of the lesson to create an outline for the lesson similar to the one below.
the imperialist vision i building support for imperialism a b c 1 teks texas essential knowledge and skills 4a explain why significant events policies and individuals such as the spanish american war u s expansionism henry cabot lodge alfred thayer mahan theodore roosevelt sanford b dole and missionaries moved the united states into the position of a world power 4b evaluate american expansionism including acquisitions such as guam hawaii the philippines and puerto rico continued on the next page 1 1 it matters because during the late 1800s the desire to find new markets increase trade and build a powerful navy caused the uni states to become more involved in international affairs.
building support for imperialism guiding question why did the united states assert itself as a world power.
following the civil war most americans showed little interest ir expanding their nations territory outside the united states.
instead they focused on reconstructing the south settling the w and building up industry.
in the 1880s economic and military competition from europe and a growing feeling of cultural superiority convinced many americans that the united states should become a world power.
a desire for new markets many european nations were expanding overseas a development called the new imperialism.
imperialism is the economic and political domination of a strong nation over weaker ones.
europe nations expanded their power overseas for many reasons.
they needed to import raw materials for manufacturing.
high tariffs ii industrialized nations intended to protect domestic industries reduced trade forcing companies to look for new markets overse investment opportunities had also slowed in western europe so europeans began looking overseas for places to invest their capita to protect their investments european nations began exertin control over territories making some into colonies and others ini protectorates.
in a protectorate the imperial power protected lo rulers against rebellions and invasion.
in return rulers usually ha to accept europeans advice on how to govern their countries.
as the united states industrialized many americans noticed the expansion of european power overseas and took an interest i the new imperialism.
many concluded that the nation needed ne overseas markets to keep its economy strong.
180 a feeling of superiority certain key ideas encouraged americans to support the nations expansion overseas.
historian john fiske argued that english speaking nations had superior character ideas and systems of government.
many americans linked his ideas known as anglo saxonism with the idea of manifest destiny.
these americans believed the nation was destined to expand overseas to spread its civilization to others.
imperialism the actions used by one nation to exercise political or economic control over a smaller or weaker nation primarysource the work which the english race began when it colonized north america is destined to go on until every land that is not already the seat of an old civilization shall become english in its language in its religion in political habits and traditions and to a predominant extent in the blood of its people w john fiske from manifest destiny harper s magazine 1885 protectorate a country that is technically independent but is actually under the control of another country expansion the act or process of increasing or enlarging the extent number volume or scope another influential advocate of anglo saxonism was josiah strong a popular american minister in the late 1800s.
strong linked anglo saxonism to christian missionary ideas.
his ideas influenced many americans.
the anglo saxon strong declared is divinely commissioned to be in a peculiar sense his brothers keeper by linking missionary work to anglo saxonism strong convinced many americans to support an expansion of american power overseas.
building a modern navy as these ideas gained support the united states became more assertive in foreign affairs.
in 1888 the country risked war to prevent germany from taking control of samoa.
the crisis ended peacefully.
however it led some americans to believe that the united states would be shut out of foreign markets if it did not build up its navy and acquire bases overseas.
continued from p 180 teks texas essential knowledge and skills 29h use appropriate skills to analyze and interpret social studies information such as maps graphs presentations speeches lectures and political cartoons 31b pose and answer questions about geographic distributions and patterns shown on maps graphs charts and available databases hawaii weds uncle sam in the wedding depicted in this cartoon president mckinley is uncle sam s best man and sanford b dole gives away the bride who represeni hawaii.
1 interpreting political cartoom use your skills in determining poin of view.
do you think the artist believes the american people wan to annex hawaii.
explain why.
2 analyzing political cartoons u your historical knowledge of social issues in america in the late 1800s.
how is the cartoon using the emotions of some americans to sw their opinion about annexation.
analyzing primary sources mahan oil military bases to provide resting places for them warships where they can coal and repair would be one of the first duties of a government proposing to itself the development of the power of the nation at sea.
alfred thayer mahan from the influence of sea power upon history 1890 dbq identifying central ideas why do you think establishing resting places is a key issue for developing naval power.
u s naval officer captain alfred t mahan helped build public supp for a navy when he published the influence of sen power upon history ii 1890 mahan pointed out that many prosperous nations had a large fleet merchant ships to trade with the world and a large navy to defend the nations trade.
mahans book helped build public support for a big navy.
two powerful senators henry cabot lodge and albert j beveridge use their position to convince congress to support a new navy.
in the execu branch benjamin tracy secretary of the navy under president harrison john d long secretary of the navy under president mckinley and his assistant secretary theodore roosevelt all supported mahans ideas.
by the 1890s several different ideas had come together.
business leaders wanted new markets overseas.
anglo saxonism had convinced many americans they were destined to expand into the world while growing european imperialism threatened u s security.
these ideas along with mahans book convinced congress to authorize a large modern navy.
b reading progress check summarizing why did americans attitudes toward overseas expansion chanc american expansion in the pacific guidingquestion why did the united states look to the pacific for new markets.
from the earliest days of the republic americans had expanded their nation by moving westward.
when looking overseas for new markets th united states naturally looked to the pacific.
perry opens japan in 1852 president millard fillmore ordered commodore matthew c pei to negotiate a trade treaty with japan.
in 1853 warships under perrys command entered edo bay now tokyo bay.
japans rulers fearing the influence of western ideas had limited contact with the west.
after seei t e warships however the japanese realized they were not powerful enough to resist modern weapons.
in 1854 japan signed the treaty of kanagawa giving the united states trading rights at two japanese ports.
annexing samoa and hawaii as trade with asia grew the united states needed ports for its ships to refuel and resupply as they crossed the pacific.
pago pago in the samoan islands had one of the finest harbors in the south pacific.
in 1878 the united states negotiated permission to open a base there.
an 1899 agreement divided samoa between germany and the united states.
more important was hawaii.
americans found that sugarcane grew well in hawaii and planters established sugar plantations there.
in 1875 the united states signed a treaty exempting hawaiian sugar from tariffs.
this action was taken to aid hawaii during an economic recession and prevent hawaii from turning to britain or france for help.
when the treaty was up for renewal the united states insisted hawaii grant it exclusive rights to a naval base at pearl harbor.
in 1887 wealthy sugar planters led by sanford dole forced the hawaiian king to accept a new constitution that limited the kings authority.
the planters eventually wanted to make hawaii part of the united states.
tensions grew worse when congress passed a new tariff in 1890 the tariff gave subsidies to american sugar producers making hawaiian sugar more expensive.
the planters knew that if hawaii joined the united states they too would get the subsidies.
the next year queen liliuokalani ascended the hawaiian throne and tried to restore the monarchys authority.
in response the planters overthrew the queen.
backed by the american ambassador and u s marines the planters forced liliuokalani to give up power and asked dole to serve as president of the new hawaiian republic.
dole then requested the united states annex hawaii.
president cleveland who opposed imperialism tried instead to restore the queen to power but hawaiis new leaders refused.
instead they decided to wait until a new president took office.
in 1898 under president mckinley the united states annexed hawaii and mckinley chose dole to be hawaiis first governor.
h reading progress check explaining how did the search for new overseas markets push the united states to become a world power.
lesson 1 review reviewing vocabulary 1 explaining how did anglo saxonism help foster american imperialism.
4a using your notes 2 listing review the notes you completed during the lesson to list the factors that led the united states to realize an imperialist vision in the 1890s.
4a answering the guiding questions 3 analyzing why did the united states assert itself as a world power.
4a 4 summarizing why did the united states look to the pacific for new markets.
4a 5 describing what role did sanford dole play in hawaii s annexation to the united states.
4a 4b writing activity argument suppose that you are living in the united states in the 1890s.
write a letter to the president persuading him to support or oppose an imperialist policy for the united states.
4b becoming a world power 183 networks there s more online.
biography emilio aguinaldo biography william randolph hearst biography joseph pulitzer chart graph spanish american war deaths ef image guerilla fighters image yellow journalism map distance between the u s andthe philippines video the spanish american war interactive self check quiz reading helpdesk content vocabulary yellow journalism autonomy jingoism taking notes key ideas and details organizing as you read about the spanish american war complete a graphic organizer like the one below by listing the circumstances that contributed to war with spain.
teks texas essential knowledge and skills 2d explain the significance of the following years as turning points 1898 spanish american war 1914 1918 world war i 1929 the great depression begins 1939 1945 world war ii 1957 sputnik launch ignites u s soviet space race 1968 1969 martin luther king jr assassination and u s lands on the moon continued on the next page lesson 2 the spanish american war it matters because during the spanish american war the united states defeated spanish troops in cuba and the philippines.
afterward the united states annexed the philippines ai became an imperial power.
the coming of war academic vocabulary intervene volunteer guiding question why was the united states willing to go to war with spain overfuba.
cuba was one of spains oldest colonies in the americas.
its sugarcane plantations generated considerable wealth for spain an produced nearly one third of the worlds sugar in the mid 1800s.
until spain abolished slavery in 1886 about one third ot the cut population was enslaved and forced to work for wealthy landowners on the plantations.
in 1868 cuban rebels declared independence and launched a guerrilla war against spanish authorities.
lacking internal suppo the rebellion collapsed a decade later.
many cuban rebels then fl to the united states including their leader jose marti.
by the early 1890s the united states and cuba had become closely linked economically.
cuba exported much ot its sugar to the united states and americans had invested approximately 50 million in cubas sugar plantations mines and railroads.
th economic ties created a crisis in 1894 when the united states imposed a new tariff on sugar that devastated cubas economy.
with cuba in financial distress the cuban rebels launched a nev rebellion in february 1895 marti died during the fighting buttl rebels seized control of eastern cuba declared independence an formally established the republic of cuba in september 1895 america supports cuba when the uprising began president cleveland declared the united st neutral.
however stories of spanish atrocities in two major newspape the new york journal and the new york world swayed many america in the rebels favor.
the news reports in which writers exaggerated ot 184 made up stories to attract readers became known as yellow journalism.
although some stories were invented cubans indeed suffered horribly.
the spanish sent nearly 200 000 troops to put down the rebellion.
the rebels destroyed a considerable amount of property some belonging to americans hoping to provoke american intervention in the war.
to prevent villagers from helping the rebels the spanish herded hundreds of thousands of rural men women and children into reconcentration camps where tens of thousands died of starvation and disease.
calls for war in 1897 william mckinley became president of the united states.
in september 1897 he asked spain whether the united states could help negotiate an end to the conflict so that the united states would not have to intervene in the war.
spain removed weyler from office and offered the cubans autonomy but only if cuba remained part of the spanish empire.
the rebels refused to negotiate.
spains concessions enraged many spanish loyalists in cuba.
in january 1898 the loyalists rioted in havana.
mckinley sent the battleship uss maine to havana to protect americans living there.
then on february 15 1898 the maine exploded in havana harbor.
to this day no one is sure why the maine exploded.
many americans believed the spanish did it.
remember the mainel became the rallying cry for war against spain.
mckinley faced tremendous pressure to go to war.
within the republican party jingoism aggressive nationalism was very strong.
on april 11 1898 mckinley asked congress to authorize the use of force.
on april 19 congress proclaimed cuba independent demanded that spain withdraw from the island and authorized the president to use armed force.
on april 24 spain declared war on the united states.
h reading progress check examining what events led to the war with spain in 1898.
continued from p 184 ma texas essential knowledge and skills 1991 cold war ends 2001 terrorist attacks on world trade center and the pentagon and 2008 election of first black president barack obama 4a explain why significant events policies and individuals such as the spanish american war u s expansionism henry cabot lodge alfred thayer mahan theodore roosevelt sanford b dole and missionaries moved the united states into the position of a world power 4b evaluate american expansionism including acquisitions such as guam hawaii the philippines and puerto rico 15d describe the economic effects of international military conflicts including the spanish american war and world war i on the united states a war on two fronts guidingquestion how was the spanish american war different from earlier u s wars.
the u s navy was ready for war with spain.
the navy blockaded cuba and commodore george dewey commander of the american naval squadron based in hong kong was ordered to attack the spanish fleet based in the philippines then a spanish colony.
american naval planners wanted to prevent the spanish fleet from sailing east to attack the united states.
yellow journalism type of sensational biased and often false reporting for the sake of attracting readers intervene to get involved in the affairs of another autonomy the quality of or state of being self governing jingoism extreme nationalism marked by aggressive foreign policy skills practice when trying to learn a lot of new ideas names and events use the words who what when and where to ask questions.
as you read about the war between spain and the united states use words you know in the questions.
president mckinley sent the battleship maine to cuba to help americans evacuate.
when the ship exploded an enraged nation blamed spain although the explosion may have originated within the ship.
remember the maine1.
became the battle cry for war.
critical thinking analyzing what do you think contributed to american sympathy with the cubans.
becoming a world power 185 volunteer person who joins the military by choice rough rider and future president theodore roosevelt the battle of manila bay on may 1 1898 the american ships in deweys squadron entered manila bay in the philippines.
they quickly destroyed the spanish fleet.
deweys quick victory surprised mckinley.
hastily the army assembled 20 000 troop to sail from san francisco to the philippines.
on the way the americans also seized the island of guam another spanish possession.
while waiting for the american troops to arrive dewey contacted emilio aguinaldo a filipino revolutionary leader who had staged an unsuccessful uprising against the spanish in 1896 now while aguinaldo and his rebels took control of most of the islands american troops seized the philippine capital of manila.
american forces in cuba the spanish in cuba were not prepared for war.
their soldiers were weak and sick and their warships were old with untrained crews.
if the united states could defeat the spanish fleet spain would not be able to supply its troops in cuba.
eventually spain would have to surrender.
the u s army was not prepared for war either.
the army had recruited volunteers but lacked proper resources to train and equip them.
one volunteer cavalry unit was a rough mix of cowboys miners and law officers known as the rough riders theodore roosevelt was second in command.
between june 22 and 24 some 17 000 u s troops had landed east of santiago cuba.
the spanish fleet well protected by powerful shore based guns occupied santiago harbor.
americans wanted to capture those guns to drive the spanish fleet out of the harbor and into battle with the american fleet waiting nearby.
on july 1 american troops attacked spanish positions near santiago and the san juan heights.
the rough riders and the all african american 9th and 10th cavalry regiments attacked and held kettle hill then assists in the capture of san juan hill.
in santiago the spanish commander orders the spanish fleet to flee the harbor.
on july 3 american warships attacked them destroying every spanish vessel.
later the spanish in santiago surrendered leaving american troops to occupy nearby puerto rico.
b reading progress check summarizing on what two fronts was the spanish american war fought.
an american empire guiding question how did the united states develop an overseas empire.
as american and spanish leaders met to discuss the terms for a peace treaty americans debated what to do about their newly acquired lands.
cuba would receive its independence as promised and spain had agreed to the u s annexation of guam and puerto rico.
the big question was what to do with the philippines.
the united states faced a difficult choice remain true to its republican ideals or become an imperial power that ruled a foreign country without the consent of its people.
the issue sparked an intense political debat the debate over annexation many people emphasized the economic and military benefits of taking the philippines.
it would provide another pacific naval base a stopover on the way to china and a large market for american goods.
others believed america had a duty to help less civilized peoples.
surely this spanish has not been a grab for the empire commented one minister but a heroic effort to free the oppressed and to teach millions of ignorant debased human beings thus freed how to live not all americans supported annexation.
an anti imperialist movement quickly formed and many prominent americans voiced their opposition to the united states becoming an imperial power.
andrew carnegie argued that the cost of empire far outweighed the economic benefits.
samuel gompers the head of the american federation of labor worried that competition from cheap filipino labor would drive down american wages.
the social worker and reformer jane addams and the writer samuel clemens both believed imperialism violated american principles and traditions.
many people argued that it was inconsistent for a democratic republic founded on the idea of self government to rule over others who would have no say in who was appointed to rule them.
despite the objections of anti imperialists president mckinley ultimately decided to annex the islands.
he later explained his reasoning as follows primary source when i next realized that the philippines had dropped into our laps i confess i did not know what to do with them.
i sought counsel from all sides democrats as well as republicans but got little help and one night late it came to me this way i don t know how it was but it came 1 that we could not give them back to spain that would be cowardly and dishonorable 2 that we could not turn them over to france and germany our commercial rivals in the orient that would be bad business and discreditable 3 that we could not leave them to themselves they were unfit for self government and they would soon have anarchy and misrule over there worse than spain s was and 4 that there was nothing left for us to do but to take them all and to educate the filipinos and uplift and civilize and christianize them and by god s grace do the very best we could by them as our fellow men for whom christ also died 99 james rusling interview with president william mckinley the christian advocate january 1903 mckinleys thinking blended the ideas of many military and business leaders with the ideas of anglo saxonism.
on december 10 1898 the united states and spain signed the treaty of paris under which cuba became independent.
also the united states acquired puerto rico and guam and paid spain 20 million for the philippines.
after an intense debate the senate approved the treaty in february 1899 a turning point the year 1898 was a major turning point in american history.
in just a few short months the united states had defeated a european nation demonstrated that its navy was one of the most powerful in the world and had acquired its own empire.
the reputation of the united states for being a nation that did not involve itself in global affairs was shattered.
increasingly the worlds other great powers had to take american perspectives and policies into account and in the years ahead the united states would find itself drawn into issues and events thousands of miles from its own shores.
after 1898 the united states had become a world power.
the platt amendment although the united states had promised to grant cuba its independence conditions were attached to the new cuban constitution.
the platt amendment submitted by senator orville platt specified the following 1 cuba could not make any treaty with another nation that would weaken its independence 2 cuba had to allow the united states to buy or lease becoming a world power 187 naval stations in cuba 3 cubas debts had to be kept low to prevent foreign countries from landing troops to enforce payment and 4 the united states would have the right to intervene to protect cuban independence and keep order.
the platt amendment which effectively made cuba an american protectorate remained in effect until its repeal in 1934 governing puerto rico in 1900 congress passed the foraker act establishing a civil government for puerto rico.
the law provided for an elected legislature and a governor and executive council that were appointed by the u s president.
congress gradually allowed puerto ricans greater self government.
in 1917 it granted puerto ricans u s citizenship.
thirty years later puerto ricans were allowed to elect their own governor.
a debate eventually began over whether puerto rico should become a state become independent or continue as a self governing commonwealth of the united states.
the debate over puerto ricos status continues today.
rebellion in the philippines in 1899 emilio aguinaldo ordered his troops to attack the american soldiers who had been sent there.
aguinaldo wanted the philippines to be independent.
to fight the filipino guerrillas the u s military established reconcentration camps to separate filipino guerrillas from civilians.
thousands died from disease and starvation.
many u s soldiers died fighting the guerrillas.
while american troops fought the guerrillas the first u s civilian governor of the islands william howard taft tried to win over the the annexation debate americans were divided over whether the united states should give the filipinos their independence or become an imperial power by annexing the philippines.
the opposition tells us that we ought not to govern a people without their self government.
we govern the indians without their consent we govern our territories without their consent we govern our children without their consent would not the people of the philippines prefer the just humane civilizing government of this republic to the savage bloody rule of pillage and extortion from which we only to those who are capable of a harbor and coaling station in the philippines would answer every trade and military necessity and such a concession could have been secured at any time without difficulty.
it is not necessary to own people in order to trade with them.
we carry on trade x today with every part of the world and our commerce has expanded william jennings bryan more rapidly than the commerce of presidential candidate any european empire.
imperialism finds no warrant in the bible.
the command go ye into all the world and preach the gospel to every creatur has no gatling gun attachment from speeches of william jennings srt have rescued them from the meaning of the times o making inferences according to albert beveridge wh annexation of the philippines an honorable course of acti q analyzing what are william jennings bryan s two mai criticisms of imperialism.
188 filipinos by improving education transportation and health care.
these reforms slowly reduced filipino hostility.
in march 1901 american troops captured aguinaldo.
on july 4 1902 the united states declared the war over.
gradually the filipinos gained more control over their government.
by the mid 1930s they elected their own congress and president.
in 1946 they gained full independence from the united states.
political cartoons many people debated the decision to annex the philippines arguing over costs and benefits ofthe new empire.
president mckinley raises the american flag over the philippines while william jennings bryan tries to chop it down.
1 identifying central ideas based on the cartoon what do you think mckinley is trying to accomplish.
35 the economic effects of the war in 1897 the year before the war americans had invested roughly 700 million in business ventures overseas.
by 1904 they had invested over 2 5 billion.
the war made cuba safe again and american investment in sugar plantations and mining surged.
hawaii was now an american territory and companies there no longer had to pay tariffs to ship goods to the united states making it attractive to investors.
puerto rico was in a similar position.
american investors revived the islands sugar industry and expanded its tobacco industry.
american investments in the philippines helped build railroads open mines and expanded its sugar industry as well.
all of these developments came at a cost.
together the war with spain and the battle against the filipino guerrillas had cost some 400 million.
over 5 400 men had died in the war with spain and another 4 200 died fighting filipino guerrillas.
the war also led to a steady increase in naval spending from 64 million in 1899 to 135 million in 1912 the spending helped stimulate parts of the economy related to shipbuilding though it also diverted money from investment in other areas.
but as a new world power with far flung bases and territories the united states now needed a larger naval force to project its power and safeguard its interests.
tl reading progress check drawing conclusions how do the actions of mckinley in the cartoon represent his feelings about u s imperialism.
the debate over empire explaining what did the united states do to expand its territorial interests.
lesson 2 review reviewing vocabulary 1 describing describe the level of autonomy that cuba obtained afterthe spanish american war.
4b 2 identifying central ideas identify two results of the united states s intervening in the revolution in cuba.
20 4a 4b 15d using your notes 3 finding the main idea review the notes that you completed during the lesson to identify what all the events had in common.
4a answering the guiding questions 4 explaining why was the united states willing to go to war with spain over cuba.
4a 5 contrasting how was the spanish american war different from earlier u s wars.
4b 6 analyzing how did the united states develop an overseas empire.
4a 4b writing activity narrative suppose that you are a filipino living during the time ofthe u s annexation ofthe philippine islands.
write a journal entry in which you describe your feelings about american control ofthe islands.
4b becoming a world power 189 networks there s more online.
biography john hay sf biography theodore roosevelt ef biography pancho villa ef video the building ofthe panama canal ef interactive self check quiz lesson 3 new american diplomacy how an ampins built.
it matters because reading helpdesk academic vocabulary access tension the united states s influence continued to expand into foreign countries.
president theodore roosevelt mediate disputes in asia and latin america and acquired the panama canal zone.
presidents taft and wilson increase u s trade and influence in latin america.
content vocabulary sphere of influence open door policy dollar diplomacy guerrilla taking notes key ideas and details organizing complete a graphic organizer similar to the one below to list reasons the united states wanted a canal through central america.
teks texas essential knowledge and skills 4a explain why significant events policies and individuals such as the spanish american war u s expansionism henry cabot lodge alfred thayer mahan theodore roosevelt sanford b dole and missionaries moved the united states into the position of a world power 4b evaluate american expansionism including acquisitions such as guam hawaii the philippines and puerto rico continued on the next page american diplomacy in asia guiding question why did the united states want to eliminate spheres of influence in chin in 1899 the united states was a major power in asia with naval bases all across the pacific.
operating from those bases the united states navy by then the worlds third largest navy could exert american power anywhere in east asia.
the nations main interest in asia however was not conquest but commerce.
between 1895 and 1900 u s exports to china quadrupled.
although china bought only about two percent of u s exports the vast chinese markets excited american business leaders especially those in the textile oil and steel industries.
the open door policy in 1894 war erupted between china and japan over korea which was client state dependent upon china.
western observers were astonishe when japan easily defeated chinas massive military.
the war showed that japan had mastered western technology and that china was weaker than anyone had thought.
in the peace treaty china recognize koreas independence and gave japan territory in manchuria.
the russians were concerned about japans rising power.
they did not want japan to acquire the territory in manchuria because it bordered russia.
backed by france and germany russia forced japan to return the manchurian territory it had acquired.
then in 1898 russia demanded china lease the territory to russia instead.
leasing meant the territory would still belong to china even though a foreign government would maintain overall control.
soon germany france and britain also demanded leaseholds in chin 190 each leasehold became the center of a countrys sphere of influence an area where a foreign nation controlled economic development.
u s politicians and businessmen worried that china would be divided among the europeans and americans would not be allowed to do business there.
president mckinley and secretary of state john hay both supported what they called an open door policy which would allow all countries to trade with china.
in 1899 hay asked countries with leaseholds in china not to discriminate against other nations wanting to do business in their sphere of influence.
each nation responded by saying it accepted the open door policy but would not follow it unless all the others agreed.
once hay had received assurances from all of the nations with leaseholds he declared that the united states expected the other powers to uphold the policy.
the policy helped the u s economy by ensuring that american companies could continue to trade with china.
the boxer rebellion while foreign countries debated access to chinas market secret chinese societies organized to fight foreign control and influence.
one group the society of righteous and harmonious fists was known to westerners as the boxers.
in 1900 this group decided to destroy both the foreign devils and their chinese christian converts whom they believed were corrupting chinese society.
in what came to be called the boxer rebellion the boxers and some chinese troops attacked foreign embassies in peking now beijing and tientsin now tianjin killing more than 200 foreigners including many christian missionaries.
after the german ambassador to china was killed eight nations germany austria hungary britain france italy japan russia and the united states intervened.
a large multinational force rescued the foreigners and ended the rebellion.
during the crisis secretary of state john hay worked with british diplomats to persuade the other powers not to partition china.
in a second set of open door notes hay convinced the participating powers to accept compensation from china for damages caused by the rebellion.
after some discussion the powers agreed not to break up china into european controlled colonies.
the united states retained access to chinas lucrative trade in tea spices and silk and gained a larger market for its own goods.
h reading progress check making inferences what was the importance of the open door policy to the united states.
sphere of influence section of a country where a foreign nation enjoys special rights and powers open door policy a policy that allowed each foreign nation in china to trade freely in the other nations spheres of influence access freedom or ability to obtain or make use of continued from p 190 teks texas essential knowledge and skills 12a analyze the impact of physical and human geographic factors on the settlement ofthe great plains the klondike gold rush the panama canal the dust bowl and the levee failure in new orleans after hurricane katrina 15c explain how foreign policies affected economic issues such as the chinese exclusion act of 1882 the open door policy dollar diplomacy and immigration quotas 31b pose and answer questions about geographic distributions and patterns shown on maps graphs charts and available databases international soldiers pose in tientsin now tianjin after rescuing their besieged delegations during the boxer rebellion.
the american is second from the left.
criticalthinking drawing conclusions why were the boxers and other secret chinese societies organized.
dollar diplomacy a policy of joining the business interests of a country with its diplomatic interests abroad to congress in which he stated what came to be known as the roosevelt corollary to the monroe doctrine.
it stated that the united states would intervene in latin american affairs when necessary to maintain economic and political stability in the western hemisphere.
the goal of the roosevelt corollary was to prevent european powers from using the debt problems of latin america to justify intervening in the region.
the united states first applied the roosevelt corollary in the dominican republic which had fallen behind on its debt payments to european nations.
in 1905 the united states began collecting customs tariffs in the dominican republic using the marine corps as its agent.
dollar diplomacy roosevelts successor william howard taft placed less emphasis on military force and more on economic development.
taft believed that supporting latin american industry would increase trade and profits for american businesses and lift latin america countries out of poverty and social disorder.
his policy came to be called dollar diplomacy.
to give europeans less reason to intervene in latin american affairs tafts administration worked to replace european loans with loans from american banks.
in 1911 american bankers began making loans to nicaragua to support its shaky government.
the next year civil unrest forced nicaraguas president to ask for greater assistance.
u s marines entered nicaragua replaced the customs collector with an american agent and formed a committee to control the customs commissions.
u s troops supported the government and customs until 1933 h reading progress check explaining why was it important for the united states to influence latin american nations.
woodrow wilson s diplomacy in mexico guiding question how did moral diplomacy shape president wilson s foreign policy.
it would be the irony of fate said woodrow wilson just before he was inaugurated in 1913 if my administration had to deal chiefly with foreign affairs wilsons experience and interest were in domestic policy.
he was a university professor before entering politics and was a committed progressive.
foreign affairs however absorbed much of wilsons time and energy as president.
wilson opposed imperialism.
he believed that democracy was essential to a nations stability and prosperity.
he wanted the united states to promote democracy to create a world free of revolution and war.
he hoped the united states would lead by moral example but his first international crisis thwarted that hope.
the mexican revolution for more than 30 years porfirio diaz ruled mexico as a dictator.
during diazs reign mexico became much more industrialized but foreign investors owned the new railroads and factories that were built.
most mexican citizens remained poor and landless.
in 1910 discontent erupted into revolution.
francisco madero a reformer who seemed to support democracy constitutional government and land reform led the revolution.
madero however was an unskilled administrator.
worried about maderos plans for land reform landowners plotted against him.
in 1913 general victoriano huerta seized power and madero was murdered.
94 huertas brutality repulsed wilson who refused to recognize the new government.
instead wilson announced a new policy.
to win u s recognition groups that seized power in latin america would have to establish a government based on law not on force.
wilson believed that without u s support huerta soon would be overthrown.
meanwhile wilson ordered the navy to intercept arms shipments to huertas government.
he also permitted americans to arm huertas opponents.
wilson sends troops into mexico in april 1914 american sailors visiting the mexican city of tampico were arrested after entering a restricted area.
after their release their commander demanded an apology.
the mexicans refused.
wilson saw the refusal as an opportunity to overthrow huerta.
soon after congress authorized the use of force wilson learned that a german ship was unloading weapons at the mexican port of veracruz.
wilson immediately ordered american warships to veracruz where u s marines forcibly seized the city.
although the president expected the mexican people to welcome his action anti american riots broke out.
wilson then accepted international mediation to settle the dispute.
venustiano carranza whose forces had acquired arms from the united states became mexicos president.
mexican forces opposed to carranza conducted raids into the united states hoping to force wilson to intervene.
in march 1916 pancho villa vee yuh and a group of guerrillas armed fighters who carry out surprise attacks burned the town of columbus new mexico killing 17 americans.
wilson responded by sending about 5 800 troops under general john j pershing across the border to find and capture villa.
the expedition ended without success.
wilsons mexican policy damaged u s foreign relations.
the british ridiculed the presidents attempt to shoot the mexicans into self government.
latin americans regarded his moral imperialism as no improvement over theodore roosevelts big stick diplomacy.
in fact wilson followed roosevelts example in the caribbean.
in 1914 he negotiated exclusive rights for naval bases and a canal with nicaragua.
in 1915 he sent marines into haiti to put down a rebellion.
in 1916 he sent troops into the dominican republic to set up a government he hoped would be more stable and democratic than the current regime.
h reading progress check examining why did president wilson s moral diplomacy not accomplish its intended purpose.
biography general john j pershing 1860 1948 during the spanish american war general john j pershing earned the praise of his superior officers one of whom said that pershing was the coolest and bravest man i ever saw under fire.
pershing was made commander of the expedition into mexico to capture pancho villa.
though the mission failed it made pershing a respected public figure.
critical thinking predicting consequences after the failed expedition to capture villa what was the next military conflict in which general pershing commanded troops.
guerrillas armed fighters who carry out surprise attacks lesson 3 review reviewing vocabulary 1 explaining how did the open door policy help prevent any one nation from monopolizing trade with china.
15c using your notes 2 identifying use your notes to identify major reasons that the united states wanted to build a canal through central america.
4a 4b 12a answering the guiding questions 3 analyzing why did the united states want to eliminate spheres of influence in china.
15c 4 evaluating was president roosevelt correct in his belief that a strong military presence promoted global peace.
4b 5 comparing and contrasting how did moral diplomacy shape president wilson s foreign policy.
writing activity narrative suppose that you are a mexican citizen during wilson s presidency.
write a radio news broadcast expressing your feelings about american actions in mexico.
becoming a world power 195 chapter 5 assessment directions on a separate sheet of paper answer the questions below.
make sure you read carefully and answer all parts ofthe questions.
lesson review lesson 1 0 describing how did josiah strong s ideas help propel the united states to build an empire.
4a q explaining primary sources why did alfred thayer mahan think that a larger and more powerful navy would help american expansionism.
how did his ideas help move the united states into a position of world power.
4a 0 explaining why did sanford dole and other hawaiian sugar planters want hawaii to join the united states.
4a 4b 15c lesson 2 0 summarizing what were the main results of the united states victory in the spanish american war.
4a 4b 0 evaluating how did filipinos feel about the u s government after the spanish american war.
4b 0 explaining how did the spanish american war contribute to the united states becoming a world power.
4a 4b 0 explaining what were the economic effects of the spanish american military conflict in 1898.
15d lesson 3 0 analyzing what were the human geographic factors that led the united states to build a canal through panama.
12a 0 explaining how did the open door policy and dollar diplomacy affect the economy in the united states.
15c 0 analyzing how did the roosevelt corollary and dollar diplomacy affect u s relations with other countries.
15c exploring the essential questions determining cause and effect create a cause and effect diagram that identifies the causes of american imperialism and the effects ofthe united states decision to build an empire in the late 1800s and early 1900s.
4b 15c 15d critical thinking 0 explaining what was significance of 1898 and why might it be considered a turning point in u s history.
2d analyzing what were the physical geographic factors that shaped the building ofthe panama canal.
12a 0 evaluating how did theodore roosevelt s foreign policy help establish the united states as a world power.
social studies skills 0 sequencing using absolute and relative chronology place the following list of events in the correct chronological order and then give the date each event took place.
2c 29b boxer rebellion alfred mahan publishes his book on sea power matthew perry arrives in japan the open door policy is issued spanish american war panama canal completed hawaiian planters overthrow liliuokalani the philippine rebellion ends treaty of paris 0 evaluating the validity of a source use the library or internet to find writings by people in support of and against the annexation ofthe philippines.
evaluate their points of view based on their language and logic they use then evaluate each writer s background and experience t determine if they are reliable or objective sources.
consid each person s historical context and what was shaping their thinking.
examples of people you may wish to research include alfred mahan albert beveridge henry cabot lodge theodore roosevelt william mckinley jam addams samuel clemens andrew carnegie samuel gompers carl schurz.
4a 4b 29e need extra help.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 181 i 182 183 187 188 187 189 193 l9 n8 h8 h8 9 h9 m87 j96 categorizing create a chart listing the arguments on both sides of the debate about whether or not to annex the philippines.
4b 29b bi analyzing primary sources read the following excerpts one from alfred mahan s book the influence of sea power upon history and the other from a speech by republican carl schurz a leading opponent of imperialism and then answer the following questions.
primary source the protection of naval stations must depend either upon direct military force as do gibraltar and malta or upon a surrounding friendly population such as the american colonists once were to england and it may be presumed the australian colonists now are.
such friendly surroundings and backing joined to a reasonable military provision are the best of defenses colonies attached to the mother country afford therefore the surest means of supporting abroad the sea power of a country.
in peace the influence ofthe government should be felt in promoting by all means a warmth of attachment and a unity of interest which will make the welfare of one the welfare of all and the quarrel of one the quarrel of all and in war or rather for war by inducing such measures of organization and defense as shall be felt by all to be a fair distribution of a burden of which each reaps the benefit alfred thayer mahan from the influence of sea power upon history 1890 primary source m many imperialists admit that our trade with the philippines themselves will not nearly be worth its cost but they say that we must have the philippines as a foothold a sort of power station for the expansion of our trade on the asiatic continent especially in china.
admitting this for argument s sake i ask what kind of a foothold we should really need.
coaling stations and docks for our fleet and facilities for the establishment of commercial houses and depots.
that is all.
and now i ask further whether we could not easily have had these things if we had instead of making war upon the filipinos favored the independence ofthe islands.
everybody knows that we could.
we might have those things now for the mere asking if we stopped the war and came to a friendly understanding with the filipinos to morrow carl schurz the policy of imperialism address to the anti imperialist conference 1899 j interpreting speeches what policies does schurz suggest the united states could have followed instead of annexing the philippines and going to war with the filipino guerrillas.
29a analyzing why does mahan think colonies are the best way to support a nation s navy.
4a 29a comparing and contrasting primary sources in what ways do schurz and mahan agree.
what is the main point on which they disagree.
29a 29h analyzing visuals use the political cartoon to answer the following questions.
interpreting political cartoons using your skills in detecting bias and points of view which side ofthe debate over imperialism do you think the cartoonist supports.
explain why and also explain what he thinks the debate over imperialism is doing to the united states.
4b 29f 29h 0 analyzing political cartoons using your knowledge of why many american leaders wanted to expand overseas who do you think the man in the suit beside uncle sam represents.
4a 4b 15c 29b 29h need extra help.
17 18 19 20 21 22 1 go to page 186 186 182 182 189 189 j becoming a world power 197 use the map major imperial powers to answer the following questions.
analyzing geographic distributions based on the distribution of the world s imperial powers why would president roosevelt have issued the roosevelt corollary.
4a 15c 31b posing questions about geographic distributions what questions would you ask to be able to explain why many american business leaders supported president roosevelt s plan to build a canal in panama.
4a 12a 15c 31b examining geographic patterns based on the patterns on the map why do you think the united states developed the open door policy.
15c 31b posing questions about geographic patterns in order to understand why africa was divided up by the imperial powers what questions would you need to ask.
31b extended response questions explaining why did the united states become a world power in the late 1800s.
write an essay explaining the ideas that convinced leaders that the united states should build up its navy and expand overseas.
outline the role of significant individuals policies and events that moved the united states into a position of world power.
4a evaluating think about american expansionism and the nation s acquisition of guam hawaii the philippines and puerto rico.
imagine you are a u s senator about to vote on the decision to annex the philippines.
taking into account the nation s values and traditions as well as its economic needs and the world s military and political situation in the 1800s write a speech evaluating whether american foreign policy was correct or not and explaining how you are going to vote.
4b transfer information write a script for an oral presentation that announces the results of the treaty of paris.
the script should be read aloud and performed fora video presentation or other visual display.
30c create and analyze arguments and draw conclusions research various points of view about the saying that theodore roosevelt used to describe his foreign policy speak softly but carry a big stick.
write a short essay to describe at least two viewpoints about the saying.
be sure to use social studies terminology correctly such as expansionism diplomacy and acquisitions.
29g 30b standardized test practice which of the following contributed to the united states becoming a world power.
a the spanish american war b the closing ofthe panama canal c the annexation of cuba by the united states d queen liliuokalani s rise to the throne which ofthe following argued that a strong navy was critical to a nation s economic success.
f john fiske g matthew c perry h william jennings bryan j alfred thayer mahan need extra help.
23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 gotopage lt l 192 19o 1180 180 l86 tst 182 198 the progressive movement 1890 1920 networks there s more online about the progressive movement and the changes it made.
chapter 5 lesson 1 the imperialist vision lesson 2 the spanish american war lesson 3 new american diplomacy the story matters international economic and military competition convinced the united states that it must become a world power on par with britain and spain.
by acquiring new lands before and after the spanish american war the united states became more prominent but it also took on new responsibilities.
in the late 1800s the united states increased its trade and military presence in east asia and latin america.
by the early 1900s it had created an american empire.
matthew calbraith perry commodore of the u s navy negotiated the opening of japan to the west with the treaty of kanagawain1854.
photo the granger collection new york 177 chapter 9 place and time the nation s capital 1788 to today the constitution established a strong central government.
the home of that government is the district of columbia washington d c v step into the place map focus washington d c serves as the capital of the united states and the home to many important buildings and offices.
location between what two states is the district located.
place what are some of the buildings or institutions of national importance located in v v ci v v 1 a joint session of congress including both the house and the senate listens to the president deliver the state of the union address.
in the united states immigrants can become citizens and accept the rights and responsibilities that go along with it.
f f j t drawing conclusions one of the reasons that the site of washington d c was chosen as the capital was that it was in the center of the country as it existed in 1790 what are the advantages of such networks ef map explore the interactive version of there s more online.
this map on networks.
ef timeline explore the interactive version of this time line on networks.
capitol heights 1865 thirteenth amendment ends slavery 1870 fifteenth amendment protects african american voting rights 1920 nineteenth amendment establishes women s right to vote i ir w landover.
iifl zig 1974 president nixon resigns as president 1954 brown v board of j education of topeka ends segregation in public schools f 2009 barack obama becomes first african american president barack obama 2009 i l iwu l 1 or lj i o v w to f u d networks there s more online.
sf chart graph amending the constitution the federal court system et diagram a system of checks and balances et graphic organizer major principles of the constitution et self check quiz ec video lesson 1 principles of the constitution al question why do people form governments.
17eks texas essential knowledge and skills 15b summarize the strengths and weaknesses of the articles of confederation.
15c identify colonial grievances listed in the declaration of independence and explain how those grievances were addressed in the u s constitution and the bill of rights.
15d analyze how the u s constitution reflects the principles of limited government republicanism checks and balances federalism separation of powers popular sovereignty and individual rights.
16a summarize the purposes for and process of amending the u s constitution.
16b describe the impact of 19th century amendments including the 13th 14th and 15th amendments on life in the united states.
18c evaluate the impact of selected landmark supreme court decisions including dred scott v sandford on life in the united states.
19b summarize rights guaranteed in the bill of rights.
reading helpdesk it matters because the constitution is the foundation of our country s government.
our constitution guidingquestion what basic principles of government are set forth by the constitution.
the united states constitution sets forth seven key principles upon which the american system of government rests.
these principles are 1 popular sovereignty 2 a republican form of government 3 limited government 4 federalism 5 separation of powers 6 checks and balances and 7 individual rights.
the principles of the constitution ensure government restraint as well as power.
at the same time the constitution sets limits so that americans need never fear tyranny.
popular sovereignty the idea that the power of government lies with the people is called popular sovereignty or the right of the people to rule the declaration of independence had identified many grievances against king george iii including imposing taxes on the colonists without their consent and suspending their legislatures.
the principles of the constitution guard against the abuse of power by government.
republicanism a republic is a government in which power is held by the people and exercised by their elected representatives.
the principle of republicanism includes several ideas.
citizens have the opportunity to choose their representatives.
republicanism taking notes listing as you read use a diagram like the one shown to identify the seven major principles on which the constitution was based.
256 the constitution major principles content vocabulary popular sovereignty.
enumerated pwer constitutional.
reserved power iwpublic concurrent power limited government republicanism rejects the idea that the power to rule is inherited.
republicanism stresses the values of individual liberty and inalienable rights.
the constitution establishes a republican form of government.
a constitutional republic is a government in which the people rule through elected representatives who govern according to a constitution that limits the governments power.
limited government the framers were wary of a government that might take away peoples rights or favor certain groups.
at the same time they realized that the nation needed a stronger government than the articles of confederation had provided.
their goal was to establish limited government in which the powers of government are strictly defined.
a limited government has only those powers that are given to it by the people.
federalism the original 13 states had fought hard to win independence from great britain.
the articles of confederation protected that independence but it failed to create a national government strong enough to deal with many challenges the young nation faced.
the united states has a federal government in which the many state governments and the single federal government share power.
this system is known as federalism.
the constitution creates the federal system.
it explains how powers are distributed among different levels of government.
the constitution spells out the powers given to congress and establishes the executive and judicial branches.
the constitution lists enumerated powers or those powers that are specifically given to congress.
enumerated powers include the power to coin money regulate interstate and foreign trade maintain the armed forces and create federal courts.
the states cannot exercise these powers.
reserved powers are those powers that belong to the states.
the constitution does not specifically list the reserved powers.
the tenth amendment declares that all powers not specifically granted to the federal government are reserved to the states the reserved powers include the power to establish schools pass marriage and divorce laws and regulate trade within a state.
under the constitution the federal government and the state governments share certain powers.
these are the concurrent powers.
examples of concurrent powers are the right to raise taxes borrow money provide for the public welfare republicanism favoring a republic with elected representation as the best form of government the power to coin money is an enumerated power.
congress also has the power to print currency such as the paper bills shown here.
0 popular sovereignty the belief that government is subject to the will of the people constitutional republic a government in which citizens rule through elected representatives according to a plan of government limited government government with limited powers strictly defined by law enumerated power a power specifically given congress in the constitution reserved power a power belonging only to the states concurrent power a power shared by the states and federal government lesson 1 257 the right to carry out criminal justice is a concurrent power and the federal government and the states have their own justice systems.
and administer criminal justice.
each state and the federal government can exercise these powers at the same time.
while states have their own laws and powers the constitution is the supreme law of the land if a state law contradicts the constitution or federal law the constitution or federal law prevails.
this is stated in article vi clause 2 of the constitution the supremacy clause.
separation of powers to make sure no person or group in government has too much power the constitution provides for a separation of powers.
this means the constitution separates the legislative executive and judicial powers of government.
it then places these powers in three different branches of government.
each branch has different and limited powers duties and responsibilities.
checks and balances the framers did more than separate the powers of government.
they set up a system of checks and balances.
under this system each branch of government can check or limit the power of the other branches.
this system helps maintain a balance in the power of the three branches.
here is an example of how the system of checks and balances works congress legislative branch has the power to pass a law.
if the president executive branch disagrees with the law he or she can reject it through the presidential power of the veto.
this veto power checks the power of congress.
at the same time congress can override the veto.
this checks the power of the executive branch.
the united states supreme court judicial branch also has important checks on the other branches.
the supreme court has the power to interpret the constitution and to decide whether or not actions by the legislative and executive branches are allowed.
congress can check decisions made by the courts by beginning the process of changing the constitution itself.
for example the supreme court ruled in the 1857 dred scott v sandford decision that african americans enslaved or free were not citizens.
in 1866 congress proposed the fourteenth amendment.
the amendment was meant to grant full citizenship to formerly enslaved african americans.
when ratified by the states in 1868 the fourteenth amendment had the effect of overruling the dred scott decision.
there are several other ways in which the branches of government check and balance one another.
the diagram separation of powers a principle by which powers are divided among different branches of government to make sure no one branch has too much power individual rights constitutional principle that recognizes people s fundamental rights ii reading helpdesk academic vocabulary contradict to go against or state the opposite 258 the constitution a system of checks and balances can impeach president can override veto can reject appointments can refuse to approve treaties can impeach judges can reject appointment of judges executive branch actions unconstitutional judicial branch a system of checks and balances shows how each branch of government can check the power of the other branches.
individual rights the constitution that the framers wrote in 1787 did not have a bill of rights.
these ten amendments became part of the constitution in 1791 they guarantee basic liberties and individual rights including freedom of religion freedom of speech and of the press freedom to assemble in groups and to protest against the government the right to bear arms the right to a speedy and public trial by jury the right to be free from unreasonable searches and seizures by the government freedom from cruel and unusual punishments since 1791 other constitutional amendments have expanded on the rights of the american people.
for example amendments have abolished slavery defined citizenship guaranteed equal protection of the law for all people and guaranteed the right to vote for people aged 18 and older.
amendments have also authorized the direct popular election of senators.
d reading progress check each branch of government can check and balance the power of the other branches in several ways.
identifying what is an example of a legislative branch check on the judicial branch.
critical thinking analyzing do you think the different branches of government are truly balanced.
why or why not.
describing what is the purpose of the system of checks and balances.
lesson 1 259 amending the constitution guiding question how is the constitution able to change over time.
the united states constitution is one of the worlds oldest written constitutions.
it is also a short document compared to many other constitutions.
its clear direct language has helped support stable government for well over two centuries.
at the same time the constitution has enabled government to adapt to changing times and to deal with challenges that the original framers never dreamed of from radio communications to nuclear power to space exploration and more.
the constitution has changed as a result of formal amendment.
the framers allowed for this process when they wrote the constitution.
people have suggested many hundreds of amendments over the years.
yet the nation has amended its constitution only 27 times.
the framers deliberately made the amendment process difficult.
as the diagram the amendment process shows amending the constitution involves two steps.
the first is the formal proposal of an amendment.
congress can do this by a two thirds vote.
also two thirds of the state legislatures can call a the amendment process af of the hundreds of amendments people have proposed or suggested only 27 have become part of the constitution.
q identifying where do amendments to the constitution get their start.
critical thinking drawing conclusions do you think the process for amending the constitution is too easy too difficult or about right.
step 1 proposal a constitutional amendment can be proposed in one of two ways b at a convention called by 2 3 of the states implied power power not enumerated in the constitution but suggested in its language a by 2 3 of the members of both the house senate step 2 ratification after an amendment is proposed it must be ratified.
this too can be done in one of two ways academic vocabulary involve to include b by 3 4 of ratifying conventions in the states skillspractice read text with a partner.
help one another with the difficult sentences.
ask a teacher for help when you need it.
i i 260 the constitution convention to propose an amendment though this method has never been used.
the second step in the amendment process is ratification.
ratification of an amendment requires approval by three fourths of the states.
states can ratify the amendment at either a state convention or through a vote by the state legislature.
amendments have brought significant changes to the nation.
in addition to protecting our rights amendments have extended the right to vote to a larger share of the population.
the fifteenth amendment sought to ensure that african american men would have the right to vote.
the nineteenth amendment extended voting rights to women.
the twenty fourth amendment outlawed poll taxes giving more people the ability to vote.
the twenty sixth amendment lowered the voting age to 18 formal amendment is one way the constitution has changed.
the language of the constitution has also been subject to different interpretations.
for example over history congress has claimed for itself certain implied powers ihm plyd.
these are powers that are suggested but not directly stated in the constitution.
the source of the implied powers is article i section 8 of the constitution.
here is found the necessary and proper clause or the elastic clause this clause directs congress to make all laws which shall be necessary and proper for carrying out its duties.
also in article i section 8 is the commerce clause this gives congress power to regulate commerce with foreign nations and among the several states congress has used this clause to expand its powers into areas such as the regulation of television that do not appear in the constitution.
h reading progress check summarizing what is the two step process for amending the u s constitution.
over the course of american history some unwritten customs of government have become so strong that they seem to have the effect of law.
for example until the twenty fifth amendment which was ratified in 1967 the constitution did not specify that the vice president would assume the office of president in the event of a presidents death.
yet on eight occasions that is exactly what happened.
each time the custom was applied it acquired more force.
i include this lesson s information in your foldable foldables l study organizer i lesson 1 review review vocabulary 1 write a paragraph in which you explain the differences among the following 3oa jod a enumerated power b reserved power c concurrent power d implied power 2 explain the significance of the following terms isd a popular sovereignty b limited government answer the guiding questions 3 analyzing why did the framers want to establish a system of limited government in the constitution and how did they accomplish that goal.
isd 4 summarizing for what purposes has the u s constitution been amended.
give specific examples.
ha 29b persuasive writing should congress have the power to interpret the constitution.
write a paragraph in which you argue for or against the wide application of the implied powers.
29e 3od lesson 1 261 ihb u.
mm networks there s more online.
biography sandra day o connor graphic organizer branches of government ef self check quiz ef slide show the oval office ef video msw i lesson 2 3 i jl vote government and the people itial question howdonewideaschangethewaypeoplelive.
texas essential knowledge and skills 16b describe the impact of 19th century amendments including the 13th 14th and 15th amendments on life in the united states.
19c explain the importance of personal responsibilities including accepting responsibility for one s behavior and supporting one s family.
19d identify examples of responsible citizenship including obeying rules and laws staying informed on public issues voting and serving on juries 19e summarize the criteria and explain the process for becoming a naturalized citizen of the united states.
19f explain how the rights and responsibilities of u s citizens reflect our national identity.
21b describe the importance of free speech and press in a constitutional republic.
it matters because in a nation where the people rule citizens must understand their government and their rights and responsibilities.
the federal government guiding question what are the three branches of government.
to achieve a separation of powers the constitution divides the federal government into three branches.
they are called the legislative executive and judicial branches.
the nation s legislature congress is the legislative branch of government.
it has two houses the house of representatives and the senate.
currently the house has 435 voting members and 6 nonvoting delegates from the district of columbia puerto rico guam american samoa the virgin islands and the northern mariana islands.
representatives who must be at least 25 years old serve two year terms.
there is no limit to the number of terms a person can serve.
the number of representatives from each state is based on the states population.
states with more people have more representatives in congress though every state has at least one representative.
the federal government resets each states share of the 435 house seats every 10 years.
a states number of representatives may go up or down depending on population changes.
reading helpdesk naturalization taking notes summarizing write a short summary of the job of each branch of government as you read along.
then compare how each branch differs from the other two.
262 the constitution content vocabulary judicial review due process equal protection the senate has 100 senators two from each state.
senators must be at least 30 years old and they serve six year terms.
only one third of the seats come up for election every two years.
as with house members there are no term limits for senators.
article i of the constitution describes the role of congress.
congress makes the nations laws.
these laws are not just rules for behavior.
congress passes laws that impose taxes authorize the spending of money and create government programs.
congress also has the job of declaring war.
both houses of congress must agree on a bill or proposed law.
once both houses do this the bill goes to the president.
if the president signs the bill it becomes law.
the executive branch the executive branch is led by the president and vice president who each serve four year terms.
it also includes the presidents cabinet or top advisers and many other offices departments and agencies.
the executive branchs main job is to administrate or carry out the laws passed by congress.
the president does however propose laws to congress.
the president has many other powers laid out in article ii of the constitution.
these include directing foreign policy naming ambassadors and negotiating treaties with other nations.
the president is also the commander in chief of the armed forces.
the constitution places the military under the control of the president a civilian.
the framers realized that if military force was not controlled it could endanger the nation.
the judicial branch article iii of the constitution establishes a supreme court and allows for congress to create lower courts.
congress has established district courts which are the main trial courts for the federal government and appeals courts which hear cases on appeal from lower courts.
there are several other types of federal courts as well.
for example there are special federal courts for hearing bankruptcy cases.
bankruptcy is a legal process for people or businesses that cannot pay off their debts.
the supreme court is at the top of the united states legal system.
it rules on only the most difficult legal questions and its rulings are never appealed.
the supreme court also has the power of judicial review.
the court can review the actions of the executive and legislative branches to determine whether they violate the constitution.
skills practice look at the text used in class.
point to and say the words you know.
the oval office is the official office of the president of the united states.
w h f judicial review power of the court to judge whether or not actions of other branches are constitutional academic vocabulary administrate to carry out biography sandra day o connor 1930 in his 1980 election campaign ronald reagan promised to name the first woman justice to the supreme court.
during his first year in office a vacancy opened on the court.
reagan chose sandra day o connor an arizona appeals court judge to fill the vacancy.
o connor served as a justice until 2006 in an interview she discussed the increased opportunities for women she had witnessed when i went to law school about 1 percent of all law students were women.
and last year over 50 percent were.
members are nominated by the president and approved by congress.
today the supreme court is made up of nine justices the chief justice and eight associate justices.
the constitution gave congress the power to set this number.
justices serve no fixed term.
unless removed for bad behavior they stay on the bench until they retire or die.
the main duties of the justices are to hear and rule on cases they choose from among the thousands that are presented to them each year.
they listen to arguments and then they must present and explain their decision called the courts opinion.
this opinion is then used by lower courts in making their rulings p reading progress check identifying what parts of the constitution discuss the establishment and duties of the three branches of our federal government.
critical thinking identifying points of view what view does sandra day o connor express about the progress of women s opportunities.
reading helpdesk what it means to be a citizen guidingquestion what are the rights and elements of participation of american atm.
citizens of the united states enjoy certain rights and liberties.
being a citizen also involves some responsibilities.
our rights our rights fall into three main categories 1he right to be protected from unfair government actions the right to be treated equally with others and the right to enjoy basic freedoms.
our government must treat people fairly and accordingto clear rules.
this is spelled out in the fifth amendment which says no one shall be deprived of life liberty or property without due process of law due process means the government must follow established procedures in taking action against a citizen.
the fourteenth amendment guarantees all people equal protection of the laws.
this principle means all people regardless of race religion or political beliefs must receive the same treatment under the law.
the first amendment outlines many of our basic freedoms these include freedom of religion freedom of speech and of the press freedom of assembly and freedom to petition the government.
the framers knew that in a free society in which the people rule people must be able to share ideas.
our rights and freedoms have limits.
for example government can limit our freedom of speech or our right to hold a protest i due process the legal rules and procedures the government must observe before depriving a person of life liberty or property equal protection the equal application of the law regardless of a person s race religion political beliefs or other qualities naturalization the process of becoming a citizen of another country academic vocabulary diminish reduce make smaller 264 the constitution if it threatens public safety.
also one persons exercise of his or her rights cannot take away others rights.
limits on rights and freedoms must be applied equally to all people.
the duties and responsibilities of citizenship a citizen is a person who owes loyalty to a nation and is entitled to its protection.
for the most part anyone born on u s soil is automatically a u s citizen.
u s soil includes american territories and military bases around the world.
citizenship is also granted to anyone born outside of the united states if one parent is a u s citizen.
a person who was born in another country can become a citizen through the process called naturalization nachuh ruh lih zay shuhn.
a number of responsibilities things we are expected or required to do come with citizenship.
for example citizens must obey the law pay their taxes and sit on a jury if they are called.
all males 18 and older must register with the government in case they are needed to defend the country.
exercising the right to vote is an important responsibility that allows citizens to participate in government and guide its direction.
other responsibilities are more personal in nature.
they include supporting ones family getting an education and being informed about public issues.
respecting the property rights and opinions of others and being accountable for ones behavior are also key responsibilities.
if people do not fulfill their responsibilities as citizens the quality of our government and communities is diminished.
b reading progress check identifying what are some examples of responsible citizenship.
early in united states history voting was generally limited to white men who owned property.
today the right to vote is available to most citizens 18 years of age or older.
f now vote hebe critical thinking drawing conclusions why do you think the people of the united states have steadily expanded the eligibility to vote.
foldables i study organizer i include this lesson s information in your foldable.
seven principles line people rule.
o lesson 2 review review vocabulary 1 write a brief paragraph that includes the following terms joa jod a due process b equal protection 2 explain the significance of these terms joa a judicial review b naturalization answer the guiding questions 3 analyzing how is the principle of separation of powers established by the u s constitution reflected in the structure of the federal government.
ud 4 explaining how do the responsibilities of citizenship reflect our identity as a democratic nation.
i f 5 explaining explain at least two ways you can fulfill the responsibility of supporting or helping your family.
19c expository writing write a letter to a citizen in another country explaining how the rights established by the first amendment reflect our country s national identity.
i9f jod lesson 2 265 activities directions write your answers using standard grammar spelling sentence structure and punctuation.
o use your to explore the essential question.
expository writing leading up to the american revolution the american colonists were upset by what they considered abuses of power by the british government.
the declaration of independence listed the colonists complaints.
how did the u s constitution and the bill of rights address the american grievances expressed in the declaration of independence.
write your response in an essay.
isc jod 0 social studies skills using a decision making process should the electoral college be replaced.
some americans want to abolish it and replace it with a system that lets people vote directly for a president.
in a small team gather information about the electoral college.
list and consider the options discuss their advantages and disadvantages and then decide which option is best.
share your findings with the other teams.
discuss and evaluate the other teams solutions.
29e thinking like a historian creating databases use your school or public library to research u s supreme court cases during the time period 1792 1850 choose four cases and collect this information the name of the case the year the opinion was rendered and the conclusion of the case.
create a chart organizing the information in rows and columns for easy reference.
discuss with your classmates how this information could be entered into a database for rapid retrieval and sorting and why someone might want to keep track of information in this manner.
291 geography activity interpreting maps the constitution authorized the federal government to determine the population or take a census every 10 years.
this map shows the results of the first census in 1790 the count included states and future states.
under the constitution which states or future states would have the fewest representatives in congress based on the 1790 population figures.
explain how you arrived at your answer.
29h 29j british territory new hampshire 141 885 vermont 85 539.
400 miles 0 400 km albers equal area projection jfritory northwest of ohio r spanish territory j a maine paft o massachusetts f96 540 massachusetts 378 787 rhode island 68 825 connecticut 237 946 new jersey 184 139 delaware 59 094 s maryland 319 728 50 w atlantic ocean 6ow vermont became a state in 1791 kentucky became a state in 1792 territory south of ohio r south carolina 249 073 3 ft 70w population m more than 450 000 ib 300 000 450 000 s 150 000 300 000 lzj 75 000 150 000 czz1 less than 75 000 l j territories l j foreign lands 266 the constitution assessment s3 directions write your answers using standard grammar spelling sentence structure and punctuation.
checking for understanding 0 summarize the rights guaranteed by each of the amendments contained in the bill of rights.
191 isd a first amendment b second amendment c third amendment d fourth amendment e fifth amendment f sixth amendment 6 seventh amendment h eighth amendment i ninth amendment j tenth amendment review the guiding questions 0 identifying how is serving on juries one of the duties ofa responsible citizen.
wo 0 summarizing what are some amendments that have become part of the constitution since 1791.
29b 0 identifying cause and effect what effect did the ratification of the fifteenth amendment have on life in the united states.
wb 29b 0 analyzing how does the u s constitution reflect the principle of republicanism.
isd criticalthinking 0 analyzing how is judicial review part of the checks and balances established in the u s constitution.
150 0 describing why are freedom of speech and freedom of the press important parts of democratic government.
when can the government limit free speech.
21b 0 evaluating what did the supreme court decide in the dred scott v sandford easel how did congress respond to the decision.
i6b i8a ibc 0 identifying why do citizens of a democratic nation have the responsibility of staying informed.
how does this responsibility help them participate in the election process.
wd 0 explaining how do our rights as citizens reflect our identity as a democratic nation.
mf 0 evaluating how do the two houses of congress establish a system of representation.
do you think the system is a fair and balanced way to represent the interests of the people.
29e 0 analyzing write a paragraph analyzing how the three branches of government work together to create a system of checks and balances.
isd jod 0 analyzing how does the u s constitution reflect the principle of popular sovereignty.
isd 0 identifying our government is based on the principle of consent of the governed.
explain why voting is part of responsible citizenship wd 0 applying relative chronology read the descriptions of events which took place during the history of the united states.
place the events in the correct chronological order ib a richard nixon resigns as president.
b sandra day o connor becomes the first female supreme court justice.
c james madison sponsors the bill of rights.
d george washington takes the oath of office as the first president of the united states.
e supreme court rules that dred scott and all other african americans are not citizens in dred scott v sandford.
need extra help.
ifyou ve missed question o 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 review lesson constitution 2 1 1 1 2 2 1 2 2 2 1 1 1 1 267 c0mfi1ii assessment continued dbq short response as benjamin franklin was leaving the last session of the constitutional congress a woman asked well doctor what have we got a republic oi a monarchy.
franklin answered a republic if you can keep it.
interpreting what do you think franklin meant by his remark.
29b identifying points of view what does he suggest about citizen rights and responsibilities in a republic.
290 extended response expository writing the constitution contains features that allow for it to be changed and to be interpreted.
do you consider this to be a strength or a weakness of the constitution.
write an essay to explain your view jod standardized test practice i analyzing documents dbq primary source the complete independence of the courts of justice is peculiarly essential in a limited constitution.
by a limited constitution i understand one which contains certain specified exceptions to the legislative authority such for instance as that it shall pass no bills of attainder haws imposing punishment without a trial no ex post facto after the fact laws and the like.
limitations of this kind can be preserved in practice no other way than through the medium of courts of justice whose duty it must be to declare all acts contrary to the manifest tenor of the constitution void.
without this all the reservations of particular rights or privileges would amount to nothing.
the federalist no.
78 identifying in the constitution the power of one branch of the national government to limit the other branches is called isa a civil rights.
b impeachment.
c checks and balances.
d bills of attainder.
identifying according to federalist ha 78 the constitution should give courts the power to decide on the constitutionality of laws.
this power is called f judicial review.
g separation of powers.
h concurrent powers.
i popular sovereignty.
isa need extra help.
ifyou ve missed question review lesson 1 2 1 2 1 268 the constitution the constitution of the united states the constitution of the united states is truly a remarkable document.
it was one of the first written constitutions in modern history.
the framers wanted to devise a plan for a strong central government that would unify the country as well as preserve the ideals of the declaration of independence.
the entire text of the constitution and its amendments follows.
for easier study those passages that have been set aside or changed by the adoption of amendments are printed in blue.
also included are explanatory notes that will help clarify the meaning of each article and section.
269 the preamble introduces the constitution and sets forth the general purposes for which the government was established.
the preamble also declares that the power of the government comes from the people.
the printed text of the document shows the spelling and punctuation of the parchment original.
article i the legislative branch the constitution contains seven divisions called articles.
each article covers a general topic.
for example articles i ii and iii create the three branches of the national government the legislative executive and judicial branches.
most of the articles are divided into sections.
70 the constitution preamble we the people of the united states in order to form a more perfect union establish justice insure domestic tranquility provide for the common defence promote the general welfare and secure the blessings of liberty to ourselves and our posterity do ordain and establish this constitution for the united states of america.
article i section 1 all legislative powers herein granted shall be vested in a congress of the united states which shall consist of a senate and house of representatives.
section 2 1.
the house of representatives shall be composed of members chosen every second year by the people of the several states and the electors in each state shall have the qualifications requisite for electors of the most numerous branch of the state legislature.
no person shall be a representative who shall not have attained the age of twenty five years and been seven years a citizen of the united states and who shall not when elected be an inhabitant of that state in which he shall be chosen.
representatives and direct taxes shall be apportioned among the several states which may be included within this union according to their respective numbers shall be determined in adding to the wlmlc dumber free pei sons including 11 lose in i u n d l o su r i c c i m a n of years and excluding i ndiaim mil luxed iliice lilflr all other persons.
the actual enumeration shall be made within three years after the first meeting of the congress of the united states and within every subsequent term often years in such manner as they shall by law direct.
the number of representatives shall not exceed one for every thirty thousand but each state shall have at least one representative and until such enumeration shall be made the state of new i lampslure shall he entitled to chuse three massachusetts eight rhode island and providence plantations one connecticut five dev ywe six new jersey four pennsylvania eight delaware one.
maryland six virginia ten north carolina five.
south carolina five and georgia three.
when vacancies happen in the representation from any state the executive authority thereof shall issue writs of election to fill such vacancies.
the house of representatives shall chuse their speaker and other officers and shall have the sole power of impeachment.
section 3 1.
the senate of the united states shall be composed of two senators from each state chosen by the legislature thereof for six years and each senator shall have one vote.
immediately after they shall be assembled in consequence of the first election they shall be divided as equally as may be into three classes.
the seats of the senators of the first class shall be vacated at the expiration of the second year of the second class at the expiration of the fourth year and of the third class at the expiration of the sixth year so that one third may be chosen every second year and if vacancies happen by resignation or otherwise during the recess of the legislature of any state the executive thereof may make temporary appointments until the next meeting of the legislature which shall then fill such vacancies.
no person shall be a senator who shall not have attained to the age of thirty years and been nine years a citizen of the united states and who shall not when elected be an inhabitant of that state for which he shall be chosen.
the vice president of the united states shall be president of the senate but shall have no vote unless they be equally divided.
ihe senate shall chuse their other officers and also a president pro tempore in the absence of the vice president or when he shall exercise the office of the president of the united states.
the senate shall have the sole power to try all impeachments.
when sitting for that purpose they shall be on oath or affirmation.
when the president of the united states is tried the chief justice shall preside and no person shall be convicted without the concurrence of two thirds of the members present.
judgment in cases of impeachment shall not extend further than to removal from office and disqualification to hold and enjoy any office of honor trust or profit under the united states but the party convicted shall nevertheless be liable and subject to indictment trial judgment and punishment according to law.
electing senators originally senators were chosen by the state legislators of their own states.
the seventeenth amendment changed this so that senators are now elected by the people.
i there are 100 senators 2 from each i state.
the vice president serves as president of the senate.
impeachment one of congress s i powers is the power to impeach.
to accuse government officials of j wrongdoing put them on trial and i if necessary remove them from office.
which body has the power i to decide the official s guilt or i innocence.
vocabulary impeachment bringing charges against an official president pro tempore presiding officer of senate who serves when the vice president is absent indictment charging a person with an offense the constitution 271 section 4 1.
the times places and manner of holding elections for senators and representatives shall be prescribed in each state by the legislature thereof but the congress may at any time by law make or alter such regulations except as to the places of chusing senators.
the congress shall assemble at least once in every year and such meeting shall he mi the inst meiidav in 1 cceir unless they shall by l aw appoint a dilleieiit 1 a.
section 5 1.
each house shall be the judge of the elections returns and qualifications of its own members and a majority of each shall constitute a quorum to do business but a smaller number may adjourn from day to day and may be authorized to compel the attendance of absent members in such manner and under such penalties as each house may provide.
each house may determine the rules of its proceedings punish its members for disorderly behaviour and with the concurrence of two thirds expel a member.
each house shall keep a journal of its proceedings and from time to time publish the same excepting such parts as may in their judgment require secrecy and the yeas anti nays of the members of either house on any question shall at the desire of one fifth of those present be entered on the journal.
neither house during the session of congress shall without the consent of the other adjourn for more than three days nor to any other place than that in which the two houses shall be sitting.
section 6 1 1 the senators and representatives shall receive a compensation for their services to be ascertained by law and paid out of the treasury of the united states.
they shall in all cases except treason felony and breach of the peace be privileged from arrest during their attendance at the session of their respective houses and in going to and returning from the same and for any speech or debate in either house they shall not be questioned in any other place.
no senator or representative shall during the time for which he was elected be appointed to any civil office under the authority of the united states which shall have been created or the emoluments whereof shall have been encreased during such time and no person holding any office under the united states shall be a member of either house during his continuance in office.
section 7 1.
all bills for raising revenue shall originate in the house of representatives but the senate may propose or concur with amendments as on other bills.
every bill which shall have passed the house of representatives and the senate shall before it become a law be presented to the president of the united states if he approve he shall sign it but if not he shall return it with his objections to that house in which it shall have originated who shall enter the objections at large on their journal and proceed to reconsider it.
if after such reconsideration two thirds of that house shall agree to pass the bill it shall be sent together with the objections to the other house by which it shall likewise be reconsidered and if approved by two thirds of that house it shall become a law.
but in all such cases the votes of both houses shall be determined by yeas and nays and the names of the persons voting for and against the bill shall be entered on the journal of each house respectively.
if any bill shall not be returned by the president within ten days sundays excepted after it shall have been presented to him the same shall be a law in like manner as if he had signed it unless the congress by their adjournment prevent its return in which case it shall not be a law.
every order resolution or vote to which the concurrence of the senate and house of representatives may be necessary except on a question of adjournment shall be presented to the president of the united states and before the same shall take effect shall be approved by him or being disapproved by him shall be repassed by two thirds of the senate and house of representatives according to the rules and limitations prescribed in the case of a bill.
section 8 1.
the congress shall have the power to lay and collect taxes duties imposts and excises to pay the debts and provide for the common defence and general welfare of the united states but all duties imposts and excises shall be uniform throughout the united states 2.
to borrow money on the credit of the united states 3.
to regulate commerce with foreign nations and among the several states and with the indian tribes 4.
to establish an uniform rule of naturalization and uniform laws on the subject of bankruptcies throughout the united states 5.
to coin money regulate the value thereof and of foreign coin and fix the standard of weights and measures 6.
to provide for the punishment of counterfeiting the securities and current coin of the united states 7.
to establish post offices and post roads where tax laws begin all tax laws must originate in the house of representatives.
this ensures that the branch of congress that is elected by the people every two years has the major role in determining taxes.
j how bills become laws a bill may become a law only by passing both j houses of congress and by being signed by the president.
the president i can check congress by rejecting j vetoing its legislation.
how j can congress override the president s veto.
powers of congress expressed j powers are those powers directly stated in the constitution.
most of the expressed powers of congress are listed in article i section 8 these powers are also called enumerated powers beca u se they a re n u m bered 1 18 which clause gives congress the power to declare war.
vocabulary bill draft of a proposed law revenue income raised by government resolution legislature s formal expression of opinion impost tax naturalization procedure by which a citizen of a foreign nation becomes a citizen of the united states.
the constitution 273 elastic clause the final enumerated j power is often called the elastic dause.
this clause gives congress the right to make all laws necessary and proper to carry out the powers expressed in the other clauses of article i it is called the elastic clause because it lets congress stretch its powers to meet situations the founders could never have anticipated.
what does the phrase necessary and proper in the elastic clause mean.
almost from the beginning this phrase was a subject of dispute.
the issue was whether a strict or a broad interpretation of the constitution should be applied the dispute was first addressed in 1819 in the case of mcculloch v maryland when the supreme court ruled in favor of a broad interpretation.
habeas corpus a writ of habeas corpus issued by a judge requires a law official to bring a prisoner to court and show cause for holding the prisoner.
a bill of attainder is a bill that punished a person without a jury trial.
an ex post facto law is one that makes an act a crime after the act has been committed.
what does the constitution say about bills of attainder.
vocabulary tribunal a court insurrection rebellion 8.
to promote the progress of science and useful arts by securing for limited times to authors and inventors the exclusive right to their respective writings and discoveries 9.
to constitute tribunals inferior to the supreme court 10.
to define and punish piracies and felonies committed on the high seas and offences against the law of nations 11.
to declare war grant letters of marque and reprisal and make rules concerning captures on land and water 12.
to raise and support armies but no appropriation of money to that use shall be for a longer term than two years 13.
to provide and maintain a navy 14.
to make rules for the government and regulation of the land and naval forces 15.
to provide for calling forth the militia to execute the laws of the union suppress insurrections and repel invasions 16.
to provide for organizing arming and disciplining the militia and for governing such part of them as maybe employed in the service of the united states reserving to the states respectively the appointment of the officers and the authority of training the militia according to the discipline prescribed by congress 17.
to exercise exclusive legislation in all cases whatsoever over such district not exceeding ten miles square as may by cession of particular states and the acceptance of congress become the seat of government of the united states and to exercise like authority over all places purchased by the consent of the legislature of the state in which the same shall be for the erection of forts magazines arsenals dock yards and other needful buildings and 18.
to make all laws which shall be necessary and proper for carrying into execution the foregoing powers and all other powers vested by this constitution in the government of the united states or in any department or officer thereof.
section 9 1.
i he migration or import at ion ot such pc i son s as anv of the states now existing shall think proper to admit shall not he prohibited by the congress prior to the year one thousand eight hundred and eight hut a l ax or duty may he imposed on such importation not exceeding ten dollars tor each person.
the privilege of the writ of habeas corpus shall not be suspended unless when in cases of rebellion or invasion the public safety may require it.
no bill of attainder or ex post facto law shall be passed.
no capitation or other direct tax shall be laid unless in proportion to the census or enumeration herein before directed to be taken.
itt r n articles exported from any 274 the constitution 6.
no preference shall be given by any regulation of commerce or revenue to the ports of one state over those of another nor shall vessels bound to or from one state be obliged to enter clear or pay duties in another.
no money shall be drawn from the treasury but in consequence of appropriations made by law and a regular statement and account of the receipts and expenditures of all public money shall be published from time to time.
8 no title of nobility shall be granted by the united states and no person holding any office of profit or trust under them shall without the consent of the congress accept of any present emolument office or title of any kind whatever from any king prince or foreign state.
section 10 1.
no state shall enter into any treaty alliance or confederation grant letters of marque and reprisal coin money emit bills of credit make any thing but gold and silver coin a tender in payment of debts pass any bill of attainder ex post facto law or law impairing the obligation of contracts or grant any title of nobility.
no state shall without the consent of the congress lay any imposts or duties on imports or exports except what may be absolutely necessary for executing its inspection laws and the net produce of all duties and imposts laid by any state on imports and exports shall be for the use of the treasury of the united states and all such laws shall be subject to the revision and controul of the congress.
no state shall without the consent of congress lay any duty of tonnage keep troops or ships of war in time of peace enter into any agreement or compact with another state or with a foreign power or engage in war unless actually invaded or in such imminent danger as will not admit of delay.
article ii section 1 1.
the executive power shall be vested in a president of the united states of america.
he shall hold his office during the term of four years and together with the vice president chosen for the same term be elected as follows.
each state shall appoint in such manner as the legislature thereof may direct a number of electors equal to the whole number of senators and representatives to which the state may be entitled in the congress but no senator or representative or person holding an office of trust or profit under the united states shall be appointed an elector.
limitations on the states section 10 lists limits on the states.
these restrictions were designed in part to prevent an overlapping in functions and authority with the federal i government.
article ii.
the executive branch article ii creates an executive branch to carry out laws passed by congress.
article ii lists the powers and duties of the presidency describes qualifications for office and procedures for electing the president and provides for a vice president.
vocabulary appropriations funds set aside for a specific use the constitution 275 previous elections the twelfth amendment added in 1804 changed the method of electing the president stated in article ii section 3 the twelfth amendment requires that the electors cast separate ballots for president and vice president.
qualifications the president must be a citizen of the united states by birth at least 35 years of age and a resident of the united states for 14 years.
vacancies ifthe president dies resigns is removed from office by impeachment or is unable to carry out the duties of the office the vice president becomes president.
the twenty fifth amendment sets procedures for presidential succession.
salary originally the president s salary was 25 000 per year.
the president s current salary is 400 000.
the president also receives annual nontaxable expense and travel accounts.
the president also receives living accommodations in two residences the white house and camp david.
the electors shall meet in their respective states and vote by ballot for two persons of whom one at least shall not be an inhabitant of the same state with themselves.
and they shall make a list of all the persons voted tor and ol the number of votes for each which list they shall sign and entity aud transmit sealed to the seat ot the jo et nment ot the l ruled states directed to the president ot the senate.
i he president of the senate shall in the presence ot the senate and 1 louse nt representatives open all the ertitnates and the otes shall then be counted.
the person having the greatest number ot votes shall be the president it such number he a laiont ut the whole number of idee tors appointed and it there he im than one who have such majority and have an equal numhe of votes then the 1 louse ot representatives shall immediate chuse by ballot one ot them tor president and it unperson have a majority then trom the ti c 1 ugliest on the l ist the said house shall in like manner june the president.
i kit in clausing the president the otes shall he taken hv states the representation from each state ha ing one ote a quorum for this purpose shall consist ot a member or members tron two thirds ot the states and a majoritv ot all the states shah be necessary to a choice.
in e cry fuse a 11cr the hoieeof the president the person having the greatest number ot m of the electors shall be the iw president.
but it there shouie.
remain two or more who have equal v otes the senate shah chuse from them by ballot the vice president.
the congress may determine the time of chusing the electors and the day on which they shall give their votes which day shall be the same throughout the united states.
no person except a natural born citizen or a citizen of the united states at the time of the adoption of this constitution shall be eligible to the office of president neither shall any person be eligible to that office who shall not have attained to the age of thirty five years and been fourteen years a resident within the united states.
in case of the removal of the president from office or of his death resignation or inability to discharge the powers and duties of the said office the same shall devolve on the vice president and the congress may by law provide for the case of removal death resignation or inability both of the president and vice president declaring what officer shall then act as president and such officer shall act accordingly until the disability be removed or a president shall be elected.
the president shall at stated times receive for his services a compensation which shall neither be encreased nor diminished during the period for which he shall have been elected and he shall not receive within that period any other emolument from the united states or any of them.
before he enter on the execution of his office he shall take the following oath or affirmation i do solemnly swear or affirm that i will faithfully execute the office of president of the united states and will to the best of my ability preserve protect and defend the constitution of the united states section 2 1.
the president shall be commander in chief of the army and navy of the united states and of the militia of the several states when called into the actual service of the united states he may require the opinion in writing of the principal officer in each of the executive departments upon any subject relating to the duties of their respective offices and he shall have power to grant reprieves and pardons for offences against the united states except in cases of impeachment.
he shall have power by and with the advice and consent of the senate to make treaties provided two thirds of the senators present concur and he shall nominate and by and with the advice and consent of the senate shall appoint ambassadors other public ministers and consuls judges of the supreme court and all other officers of the united states whose appointments are not herein otherwise provided for and which shall be established by law but the congress may by law vest the appointment of such inferior officers as they think proper in the president alone in the courts of law or in the heads of departments.
the president shall have power to fill up all vacancies that may happen during the recess of the senate by granting commissions which shall expire at the end of their next session.
section 3 he shall from time to time give to the congress information of the state of the union and recommend to their consideration such measures as he shall judge necessary and expedient he may on extraordinary occasions convene both houses or either of them and in case of disagreement between them with respect to the time of adjournment he may adjourn them to such time as he shall think proper he shall receive ambassadors and other public ministers he shall take care that the laws be faithfully executed and shall commission all the officers of the united states.
the cabinet mention of the principal officer in each of the executive departments is the only suggestion of the president s cabinet to be found in the constitution.
the cabinet is an advisory body and its power depends on the president.
section 2 clause 1 also makes the president a civilian the head of the armed services.
this established the principle of civilian control of the military.
presidential powers an executive order is a command issued by a president to exercise a power which he or she has been given by the u s constitution or by a federal statute.
the constitution places the military under the control of the president a civilian the framers realized that if military force was not controlled it could endanger the nation.
in times of emergency presidents sometimes have used the executive order to override the constitution and congress.
during the civil war president lincoln suspended many fundamental rights such as closing down newspapers that opposed his policies and imprisoning people who disagreed with him.
lincoln said that these actions were justified to preserve the union.
the constitution 277 article iii.
the judicial branch the term judicial refers to courts.
the constitution set up only the supreme court but provided for the establishment of other federal courts.
the judiciary of the united states has two different systems of courts.
one system consists of the federal courts whose powers derive from the constitution and federal laws the other includes the courts of each of the 50 states whose powers derive from state constitutions and laws.
statute law federal courts deal mostly with statute law or laws passed by congress treaties and cases involving the constitution itself.
the supreme court a court with original jurisdiction has the authority to be the first court to hear a case.
the supreme court has appellate jurisdiction and mostly hears cases appealed from lower courts.
vocabulary original jurisdiction authority to be the first court to hear a case appellate jurisdiction authority to hear cases that have been appealed from lower courts 3 section 4 j the president vice president and all civil officers of the j united states shall be removed from office on impeachment for and conviction of treason bribery or other high crimes j and misdemeanors.
i article iii section 1 j the judicial power of the united states shall be vested in i one supreme court and in such inferior courts as the congress may from time to time ordain and establish.
the judges both of the supreme and inferior courts shall hold their offices during good behaviour and shall at stated times receive for their services a compensation which shall not be diminished during their continuance in office.
section 2 1.
the judicial power shall extend to all cases in law and equity arising under this constitution the laws of the united states and treaties made or which shall be made under their authority to all cases affecting ambassadors other public ministers and consuls to all cases of admiralty and maritime jurisdiction to controversies to which the united states shall be a party to controversies between two or more states between i si ue md it of another state between 111 ein i j11 lei ent staler between citizens of the same state claiming lands under grants of different states and between a state or the citizens thereof and foreign states citizens or subjects.
in all cases affecting ambassadors other public ministers and consuls and those in which a state shall be party the supreme court shall have original jurisdiction.
in all the other cases before mentioned the supreme court shall have appellate jurisdiction both as to law and fact with such exceptions and under such regulations as the congress shall make.
the trial of all crimes except in cases of impeachment shall be by jury and such trial shall be held in the state where the said crimes shall have been committed but when not committed within any state the trial shall be at such lace or places as the congress may by law have directed.
section 3 1.
treason against the united states shall consist only in levying war against them or in adhering to their enemies giving them aid and comfort.
no person shall be convicted of treason unless on the testimony of two witnesses to the same overt act or on confession in open court.
the congress shall have power to declare the punishment of treason but no attainder of treason shall work corruption of blood or forfeiture except during the life of the person attainted.
article iv section 1 full faith and credit shall be given in each state to the public acts records and judicial proceedings of every other state.
and the congress may by general laws prescribe the manner in which such acts records and proceedings shall be proved and the effect thereof.
section 2 1.
the citizens of each state shall be entitled to all privileges and immunities of citizens in the several states.
a person charged in any state with treason felony or other crime who shall flee from justice and be found in another state shall on demand of the executive authority of the state from which he fled be delivered up to be removed to the state having jurisdiction of the crime.
no person held to service of labour in one state under the haws thereof escaping into another shall in consequence of any haw or regulation therein be discharged from such service or labour but shall be delivered up on claim of the party to whom such service or habour may be due.
section 3 l new states may be admitted by the congress into this union but no new state shall be formed or erected within the jurisdiction of any other state nor any state be formed by the junction of two or more states or parts of states without the consent of the legislatures of the states concerned as well as of the congress.
the congress shall have power to dispose of and make all needful rules and regulations respecting the territory or other property belonging to the united states and nothing in this constitution shall be so construed as to prejudice any claims of the united states or of any particular state.
i new states congress has the power to admit new states.
it also determines the basic guidelines for applying for statehood.
two states maine and west virginia were created within the boundaries of another state.
in the case of west virginia president lincoln recognized the west virginia government as the legal government of virginia during the civil war.
this allowed west virginia to secede from virginia without obtaining approval from the virginia legislature.
vocabulary treason violation of the allegiance owed by a person to his or her own country for example by aiding an enemy 278 the constitution the constitution 279 republic government can be classified in many different ways.
the ancient greek philosopher aristotle classified government based on the question who governs.
according to aristotle all governments belong to one of three major groups 1 autocracy rule by one person 2 oligarchy rule by a few persons or 3 democracy rule by many persons.
a republic is a form of democracy in which the people elect representatives to make the laws and conduct government.
section 4 the united states shall guarantee to every state in this union a republican form of government and shall protect each of them against invasion and on application of the legislature or of the executive when the legislature cannot be convened against domestic violence.
article v the amendment process article v spells out the ways that the constitution can be amended or changed.
all of the 27 amendments were proposed by a two thirds vote s of both houses of congress.
only the twenty first amendment was j ratified by constitutional conventions f of the states.
all other amend i ments have been ratified by state j legislatures.
what is an amendment.
j article vi.
national supremacy article vi contains the supremacy.
this clause establishes that the f constitution laws passed by congress f and treaties of the united states shall j be the supreme law of the land.
i the supremacy clause recognized j the constitution and federal laws as j supreme when in conflict with those of the states.
i j article v the congress whenever two thirds of both houses shall deem it necessary shall propose amendments to this constitution or on the application of the legislatures of two thirds of the several states shall call a convention for proposing amendments which in either case shall be valid to all intents and purposes as part of this constitution when ratified by the legislatures of three fourths of the several states or by conventions in three fourths thereof as the one or the other mode of ratification may be proposed by the congress provided hat m a iiicii j mail wliiji ma be.
prior to the year one thousand eight hundred and eight u in any manner alleel the lirsi and loin th la uses m the yu section ofthe first artie a and that no state without its consent shall be deprived of its equal suffrage in the senate.
article vi i.
all debts contracted and engagements entered into before the adoption of this constitution shall be as valid against the united states under this constitution as under the confederation.
this constitution and the laws of the united states which shall be made in pursuance thereof and all treaties made or which shall be made under the authority of the united states shall be the supreme law of the land and the judges in every state shall be bound thereby any thing in the constitution or laws of any state to the contrary notwithstanding.
the senators and representatives before mentioned and the members of the several state legislatures and all executive and judicial officers both of the united states and ofthe several states shall be bound by oath or affirmation to support this constitution but no religious test shall ever be required as a qualification to any office or public trust under the united states.
i vocabulary amendment a change to the constitution ratification process by which an amendment is approved f article vii the ratification of the conventions of nine states shall be sufficient for the establishment of this constitution between the states so ratifying the same.
done in convention by the unanimous consent ofthe states present the seventeenth day of september in the year of our lord one thousand seven hundred and eighty seven and of the independence of the united states of america the twelfth.
in witness whereof we have hereunto subscribed our names signers george washington president and deputy from virginia new hampshire john langdon nicholas gilman massachusetts nathaniel gorham rufus king connecticut william samuel johnson roger sherman new york alexander hamilton new jersey william livingston david brearley william paterson jonathan dayton pennsylvania benjamin franklin thomas mifflin robert morris george clymer thomas fitzsimons jared ingersoll james wilson gouverneur morris delaware george read gunning bedford jr john dickinson richard bassett jacob broom maryland james mchenry daniel of st thomas jenifer daniel carroll articlevii.
ratification articlevii addresses ratification and declares that the constitution would take effect after it was ratified by nine states.
virginia john blair james madison jr north carolina william blount richard dobbs spaight hugh williamson south carolina john rutledge charles cotesworth pinckney charles pinckney pierce butler georgia william few abraham baldwin a j k a r ii attest william jackson secretary 280 the constitution the constitution 281 bill of rights the first 10 amendments are known as the bill of rights 1791.
these amendments limit the powers of government.
the first amendment protects the civil liberties of individuals in the united states.
the amendment freedoms are not absolute however.
they are limited by the rights of other individuals.
what freedoms does the first amendment protect.
amendment i congress shall make no law respecting an establishment of religion or prohibiting the free exercise thereof or abridging the freedom of speech or of the press or the right of the people peaceably to assemble and to petition the government for a redress of grievances.
amendment ii a well regulated militia being necessary to the security of a free state the right of the people to keep and bear arms shall not be infringed.
amendment vi in all criminal prosecutions the accused shall enjoy the right to a speedy and public trial by an impartial jury of the state and district wherein the crime shall have been committed which district shall have been previously ascertained by law and to be informed of the nature and cause of the accusation to be confronted with the witnesses against him to have compulsory process for obtaining witnesses in his favor and to have the assistance of counsel for his defence.
amendment iii no soldier shall in time of peace be quartered in any house without the consent of the owner nor in time of war but in a manner to be prescribed by law.
amendment vii in suits at common law where the value in controversy shall exceed twenty dollars the right of trial by jury shall be preserved and no fact tried by a jury shall be otherwise reexamined in any court of the united states than according to the rules of common law.
rights to a speedy fair trial a basic protection is the right to a speedy public trial.
the jury must hear witnesses and evidence on both sides before deciding the guilt or innocence of a person charged with a crime.
this amendment also provides that legal counsel must be provided to a defendant.
in 1963 the supreme court ruled in gideon v wainwright that if a defendant cannot afford a lawyer the government must provide one to defend him or her.
why is the right to a speedy trial important.
rights of the accused this amendment contains important protections for people accused of crimes.
one of the protections is that government may not deprive any person of life liberty or property without due process of law.
this means that the government must follow proper constitutional procedures in trials and in other actions it takes against individuals.
according to amendment i what is the function of a grand jury.
vocabulary quarter to provide living accommodations warrant document that gives police particular rights or powers probable cause a reasonable basis to believe a person is linked to a crime common law law established by previous court decisions amendment iv the right of the people to be secure in their persons houses papers and effects against unreasonable searches and seizures shall not be violated and no warrants shall issue but upon probable cause supported by oath or affirmation and particularly describing the place to be searched and the persons or things to be seized.
amendment v no person shall be held to answer for a capital or 1 otherwise infamous crime unless on a presentment or indictment of a grand jury except in cases arising in the land or naval forces or in the militia when in actual service in time of war or public danger nor shall any person be subject for the same offence to be twice put in jeopardy of life or limb nor shall be compelled in any criminal case to be a witness against himself nor be deprived of life liberty or property without due process of law nor shall private property be taken for public use without just compensation.
amendment viii excessive bail shall not be required nor excessive fines imposed nor cruel and unusual punishments inflicted.
amendment ix the enumeration in the constitution of certain rights shall not be construed to deny or disparage others retained by the people.
amendment x the powers not delegated to the united states by the constitution nor prohibited by it to the states are reserved to the states respectively or to the people.
amendment xi the judicial power of the united states shall not be construed to extend to any suit in law or equity commenced or prosecuted against one of the united states by citizens of another state or by citizens or subjects of any foreign state.
bail money that an accused person provides to the court as a guarantee that he or she will be present for a trial 282 the constitution powers of the people this amendment prevents government from claiming that the only rights people have are those listed in the bill of rights.
powers of the states the final amendment of the bill of rights protects the states and the people from an all powerful federal government.
it establishes that powers not given to the national government or denied to the states by the constitution belong to the states or to the people.
i suits against states the eleventh i amendment 1795 limits the jurisdiction of the federal courts.
i the supreme court had ruled that a federal court could try a lawsuit brought by citizens of south carolina j against a citizen of georgia.
this case j chisholm v georgia decided in 1793.
raised a storm of protest leading to s passage of the eleventh amendment.
the constitution 283 election of president and vice president the twelfth amendment 1804 corrects a problem that had arisen in the method of electing the president and vice president.
this amendment provides for the electoral college to use separate ballots in voting for president and vice president.
if no candidate receives a majority of the electoral votes who elects the president.
1 amendment xii the electors shall meet in their respective states and vote by ballot for president and vice president one of whom at least shall not be an inhabitant of the same state with themselves they shall name in their ballots the person voted for as president and in distinct ballots the person voted for as vice president and they shall make distinct lists of all persons voted for as president and of all persons voted for as vice president and of the number of votes for each which lists they shall sign and certify and transmit sealed to the seat of the government of the united states directed to the president of the senate the president of the senate shall in the presence of the senate and house of representatives open all the certificates and the votes shall then be counted the person having the greatest number of votes for president shall be the president if such number be a majority of the whole number of electors appointed and if no person have such majority then from the persons having the highest numbers not exceeding three on the list of those voted for as president the house of representatives shall choose immediately by ballot the president.
but in choosing the president the votes shall be taken by states the representation from each state having one vote a quorum for this purpose shall consist of a member or members from two thirds of the states and a majority of all the states shall be necessary to a choice.
and il the ib i of represcntatixcs shall not dumsc a i rcsiucnl whcnnc.
the right nl choice shall devolve upon then helore the lourth day ol march next lolluw no then the ice ileadc shall act as president as in t he esc nl the death nr other constitutional disahility ol l he ih esideni.
the person having the greatest number of votes as vice president shall be the vice president if such number be a majority of the whole number of electors appointed and if no person have a majority then from the two highest numbers on the list the senate shall choose the vice president a quorum for the purpose shall consist of two thirds of the whole number of senators and a majority of the whole number shall e necessary to a choice.
but no person constitutionally ineligible to the office of president shall be eligible to that of vice president of the united states.
amendment xiii section 1 neither slavery nor involuntary servitude except as a punishment for crime whereof the party shall have been duly convicted shall exist within the united states or any place subject to their jurisdiction.
abolition of slavery amendments thirteen 1865 fourteen 1868 and fifteen 1870 often are called the civil war amendments because they grew out of that great conflict.
5 the thirteenth amendment outlaws slavery.
section 2 congress shall have power to enforce this article by appropriate legislation.
amendment xiv section 1 all persons born or naturalized in the united states and subject to the jurisdiction thereof are citizens of the united states and of the state wherein they reside.
no state shall make or enforce any law which shall abridge the privileges or immunities of citizens of the united states nor shall any state deprive any person of life liberty or property without due process of law nor deny to any person within its jurisdiction the equal protection of the laws.
section 2 representatives shall be apportioned among the several states according to their respective numbers counting the whole number of persons in each state excluding indians not taxed.
but when the right to vote at any election for the choice of electors for president and vice president of the united states representatives in congress the executive and judicial officers of a state or the members of the legislature thereof is denied to any of the male inhabitants of such state being twenty one years of age and citizens of the united states or in any way abridged except for participation in rebellion or other crime the basis of representation therein shall be reduced in the proportion which the number of such male citizens shall bear to the whole number of male citizens twenty one years of age in such state.
section 3 no person shall be a senator or representative in congress or elector of president and vice president or hold any office civil or military under the united states or under any state who having previously taken an oath as a member of congress or as an officer of the united states or as a member of any state legislature or as an executive or judicial officer of any state to support the constitution rights of citizens the fourteenth.
amendment 1868 originally was intended to protect the legal rights j of the freed slaves.
today it protects the rights of citizenship in general by prohibiting a state from depriving j any person of life liberty or property j without due process of law.
in addition it states that all citizens have the right to equal protection of the law in all states.
representation in congress this section reduced the number of members a state had in the house of representatives if it denied its citizens the right to vote.
later civil rights laws and the twenty fourth amendment guaranteed the vote to african americans.
vocabulary abridge to reduce 284 the constitution the constitution 285 public debt the public debt acquired by the federal government during the civil war was valid and could not be questioned by the south.
however the debts of the confederacy were declared to be illegal.
could former slaveholders collect payment for the loss of their slaves.
right to vote the fifteenth amendment 1870 prohibits the government from denying a person s right to vote on the basis of race.
despite the law many states denied african americans the right to vote by such means as poll taxes literacy tests and white primaries.
during the 1950s and 1960s congress passed successively stronger laws to end racial discrimination in voting rights.
election of senators the seventeenth amendment 1913 states that the people instead of state legislatures elect united states senators.
how many years are in a senate term.
vocabulary emancipation freedom from slavery of the united states shall have engaged in insurrection or j rebellion against the same or given aid or comfort to the enemies thereof.
but congress may by a vote of two thirds i of each house remove such disability.
section 4 f the validity of the public debt of the united states i authorized by law including debts incurred for payment of j pensions and bounties for service in suppressing insurrection or rebellion shall not be questioned.
but neither the united states nor any state shall assume or pay any debt or obligation incurred in aid of insurrection or rebellion against the united states or any claim for the loss or emancipation of any slave but all such debts obligations and claims shall be held illegal and void.
section 5 the congress shall have power to enforce by appropriate legislation the provisions of this article.
i amendment xv i section 1 the right of citizens of the united states to vote shall not be denied or abridged by the united states or by any state on account of race color or previous condition of j servitude.
j section 2 j 4 the congress shall have power to enforce this article by appropriate legislation.
amendment xvi the congress shall have power to lay and collect taxes on incomes from whatever source derived without j apportionment among the several states and without regard to.
any census or enumeration.
amendment xvii section 1 the senate ofthe united states shall be composed of two senators from each state elected by the people thereof for six years and each senator shall have one vote.
the electors in each state shall have the qualifications requisite for electors of t e most numerous branch of the state legislatures.
286 the constitution section 2 when vacancies happen in the representation of any state in the senate the executive authority of such state shall issue writs of election to fill such vacancies provided that the legislature of any state may empower the executive thereof to make temporary appointments until the people fill the vacancies by election as the legislature may direct.
section 3 this amendment shall not be so construed as to affect the election or term of any senator chosen before it becomes valid as part of the constitution.
amendment xviii section 1 alter one year from ratification of this article the manufacture sale or transportation of intoxicating liquors within the importation thereof into or the exportation thereof from the united states and all territory subject to the iurisdiction thereof for beverage purposes is hereby prohibited.
section 2 the congress and the several states shall have concurrent power to enforce this article by appropriate legislation.
section 3 this article shall he inoperative unless it shall have been ratified as an amendment to the constitution by the legislatures of the several states as provided in the constitution within seven years from the date ofthe submission hereof to the states by the congress.
amendment xix section 1 the right of citizens of the united states to vote shall not be denied or abridged by the united states or by any state on account of sex.
section 2 congress shall have power by appropriate legislation to enforce the provisions of this article.
prohibition the eighteenth amendment 1919 prohibited the production sale or transportation of alcoholic beverages in the united states.
prohibition proved to be difficult to enforce.
this amendment was later repealed by the twenty first amendment.
woman suffrage the nineteenth amendment 1920 guaranteed women the right to vote.
by then women had already won the right to vote in many state elections but the amendment put their right to vote in all state and national elections on a constitutional basis.
the constitution 287 lame duck amendments the twentieth amendment 1933 sets new dates for congress to begin its term and for the inauguration of the president and vice president.
original constitution elected officials j who retired or who had been defeated remained in office for several months.
for the outgoing president this period ran from november until march.
such i outgoing officials had little influence and accomplished little and they were called lame ducks because they were so inactive.
i pficif date was fixed as inauguration day.
succession this section provides that ifthe president elect dies before taking office the vice president elect becomes president.
amendment xx section 1 the terms of the president and vice president shall end at noon on the 20th day of january and the terms of the senators and representatives at noon on the 3d day of january of the years in which such terms would have ended if this article had not been ratified and the terms of their successors shall then begin.
section 2 the congress shall assemble at least once in every year and such meeting shall begin at noon on the 3d day of january unless they shall by law appoint a different day.
section 3 if at the time fixed for the beginning of the term of the president the president elect shall have died the vice president elect shall become president.
if a president shall not have been chosen before the time fixed for the beginning of his term or if the president elect shall have failed to qualify then the vice president elect shall act as president until a president shall have qualified and the congress may by law provide for the case wherein neither a president elect nor a vice president elect shall have qualified declaring who shall then act as president or the manner in which one who is to act shall be selected and such person shall act accordingly until a president or vice president shall have qualified.
section 4 the congress may by law provide for the case of the death of any of the persons from whom the house of representatives may choose a president whenever the right of choice shall have devolved upon them and for the case of the death of any of the persons from whom the senate may choose a vice president whenever the right of choice shall have devolved upon them.
section 5 section 1 and 2 shall take effect on the 15th day of october following the ratification of this article.
vocabulary president elect individual who is elected president but has not yet begun serving his or her term 288 the constitution section 6 this article shall be inoperative unless it shall have been ratified as an amendment to the constitution by the legislatures of three fourths of the several states within seven years from the date of its submission.
amendment xxi section 1 the eighteenth article of amendment to the constitution of the united states is hereby repealed.
section 2 the transportation or importation into any state territory or possession of the united states for delivery or use therein of intoxicating liquors in violation of the laws thereof is hereby prohibited.
section 3 this article shall be inoperative unless it shall have been ratified as an amendment to the constitution by conventions in the several states as provided in the constitution within seven years from the date of the submission hereof to the states by the congress.
amendment xxii section 1 no person shall be elected to the office of the president more than twice and no person who had held the office of president or acted as president for more than two years of a term to which some other person was elected president shall be elected to the office of the president more than once.
but this article shall not apply to any person holding the office of president when this article was proposed by the congress and shall not prevent any person who may be holding the office of president or acting as president during the term within which this article becomes operative from holding the office of president or acting as president during the remainder of such term.
iii repeal of prohibition the twenty first amendment 1933 repeals the eighteenth amendment.
it is the only amendment ever passed to overturn an earlier amendment.
it is also the only amendment ratified by special state conventions instead of state legislatures.
term limit the twenty second amendment 1951 limits presidents to a maximum of two elected terms.
it was passed largely as a reaction to franklin d roosevelt s election to four terms between 1933 and 1945 i 1 i section 2 this article shall be inoperative unless it shall have been ratified as an amendment to the constitution by the legislatures of three fourths of the several states within seven years from the date of its submission to the states by the congress.
the constitution 289 electors for the district of columbia the twenty third amendment 1961 allows citizens living in washington d c to vote for president and vice president a right previously denied residents of the nation s capital.
the district of columbia now has three presidential electors the number to which it would be entitled if it were a state.
abolition of poll tax the twenty fourth amendment 1964 prohibits poll taxes in federal elections.
prior to the passage of this amendment some states had used such taxes to keep low income african americans from voting.
in 1966 the supreme court banned poll taxes in state elections as well.
the vice president the twenty fifth amendment 1967 established a process for the vice president to take over leadership of the nation when a president is disabled.
it also set procedures for filling a vacancy in the office of vice president.
this amendment was used in 1973 when vice president spiro agnew resigned from office after being charged with accepting bribes.
president richard nixon then appointed gerald r ford as vice president in accordance with the provisions of the twenty fifth amendment.
a year later president nixon resigned during the watergate scandal and ford became president.
president ford then had to fill the vice presidency which he had left vacant upon assuming the presidency.
he named nelson a rockefeller as vice president.
thus individuals who had not been elected held both the presidency and the vice presidency.
whom does the president inform if he or she cannot carry out the duties of the office.
amendment xxiii j section 1 j the district constituting the seat of government of the.
united states shall appoint in such manner as the congress i may direct a number of electors of president and vice president i equal to the whole number of senators and representatives j in congress to which the district would be entitled if it were a state but in no event more than the least populous state they shall be in addition to those appointed by the states but they shall be considered for the purposes of the election of president and vice president to be electors appointed by a state and they shall meet in the district and perform such duties as provided by the twelfth article of amendment.
section 2 the congress shall have power to enforce this article by appropriate legislation.
j amendment xxiv section 1 the right of citizens of the united states to vote in any primary or other election for president or vice president j for electors for president or vice president or for senator or representative in congress shall not be denied or abridged by the united states or any state by reason of failure to pay any poll tax or other tax.
section 2 j the congress shall have power to enforce this article by j appropriate legislation.
1 i r amendment xxv section 1 j in case of the removal of the president from office or his death j or resignation the vice president shall become president.
j section 2 j whenever there is a vacancy in the office of the vice president the president shall nominate a vice president who j shall take the office upon confirmation by a majority vote of s both houses of congress.
290 the constitution section 3 whenever the president transmits to the president pro tempore of the senate and the speaker of the house of representatives his written declaration that he is unable to discharge the powers and duties of his office and until he transmits to them a written declaration to the contrary such powers and duties shall be discharged by the vice president as acting president.
section 4 whenever the vice president and a majority of either the principal officers of the executive departments or of such other body as congress may by law provide transmit to the president pro tempore of the senate and the speaker of the house of representatives their written declaration that the president is unable to discharge the powers and duties of his office the vice president shall immediately assume the power and duties of the office of acting president.
thereafter when the president transmits to the president pro tempore of the senate and the speaker of the house of representatives his written declaration that no inability exists he shall resume the powers and duties of his office unless the vice president and a majority of either the principal officers of the executive department or of such other body as congress may by law provide transmit within four days to the president pro tempore of the senate and the speaker of the house of representatives their written declaration that the president is unable to discharge the powers and duties of his office.
thereupon congress shall decide the issue assembling within forty eight hours for that purpose if not in session.
if the congress within twenty one days after receipt of the latter written declaration or if congress is not in session within twenty one days after congress is required to assemble determines by two thirds vote of both houses that the president is unable to discharge the powers and duties of his office the vice president shall continue to discharge the same as acting president otherwise the president shall resume the power and duties of his office.
voting age the twenty sixth amendment xxvi section 1 1 amendment 1971 lowered the voting age in both federal and state elections to 18 the right of citizens of the united states who are eighteen years of age or older to vote shall not be denied or abridged by the united states or by any state on account of age.
the constitution 291 congressional pay raises the twenty seventh amendment 1992 makes congressional pay raises effective during the term following their passage.
james madison offered the amendment in 1789 but it was never adopted.
in 1982 gregory watson then a student at the university of texas discovered the forgotten amendment while doing research for a school paper.
watson made the amendment s passage his crusade.
section 2 the congress shall have power to enforce this article by appropriate legislation.
amendment xxvii no law varying the compensation for the services of senators and representatives shall take effect until an election of representatives shall have intervened.
joint meeting of congress ill 292 the constitution t 7 4 4 abigail adams is thoughtful and smart.
like other women of her day she does not lead a public life.
yet to her husband patriot and now president john adams she is a trusted adviser.
during her husband s presidency she watches with a keen eye as the first political parties form.
she helps her husband identify his true friends and his secret enemies.
her involvement in politics shocks some people.
for a time it even costs her a dear friendship with thomas jefferson.
the division of the nation into different political parties was a trying time for the united states.
it was one of the challenges facing the young nation in the federalist era.
ilillsgsfils goto the foldables library in the back of your book to make a foldable that will help you take notes while reading this chapter.
499 h chapter.
daniel boone was the most famous of america s early frontiersmen.
interfoto alam 343 chapter 3 place and time the americas i400 toi625 starting in the late 1400s europeans explored the oceans hoping to find a direct sea route to the east indies.
instead they found what to them was a new world.
over the next few centuries they explored and settled the americas.
6 n s european exploration 1487 1611 hudson bay north america step into the place map focus this map shows the different routes taken by different explorers.
movement how many european nations made explorations of north and south america.
criticalthinking drawing conclusions why do you think so many nations sent out voyages of exploration at this time.
2a 29b tropic of cancel v i k i i i new spain pacific ocean fpf r o i h 1i j 2000 miles greenlar cuba peru south america i lr h n w e s i 1 0 x 5m 0 2000 km miller projection netw orks et map explore the interactive version of there s more online.
this map on networks.
time line explore the interactive version ofthis time line on networks.
30 e 60e 90e 12o e 150re networks there s more online.
graphic organizer technological advances ef maps.
trade routes to asia.
west african trading kingdoms ef self check quiz ef slideshows the compass.
mansamusa ef video 1m lesson 1 a changing world ential question how do new ideas change the way people live.
tks texas essential knowledge and skills 2a identify reasons for european exploration and colonization of north america.
reading helpdesk it matters because europe was aware of the riches of asia and africa.
attempts to increase trade with these lands eventually developed into an era of european exploration that reached far beyond europe s borders.
new ideas new nations guiding question where did the renaissance take place.
for centuries after the roman empire fell in a d 476 the people of western europe were cut off from the rest of the work.
western europe was made up of small kingdoms and city states dominated by the catholic church.
then in the early a d 6 s a new religion islam began to spread rapidly in the middle east and africa.
this rise of islam would soon end western europes isolation.
in 1095 the europeans launched the first of nine expeditions known as the crusades.
their purpose was to take hack control of christian holy sites in the middle east from the muslims followers of islam.
the crusades also had an unplanned result.
in the middle east europeans met arab merchants who sold them spices sugar silk and other goods from china and india.
european interest in asia grew.
that interest grew even more after italian explorer marco polo returned from china.
in the late 1200s polo wrote about asias people great riches and splendid cities in his book truvcls which was widely read in europe.
two hundred years later his travels would inspire another italian explorer christopher columbus.
taking notes identifying as you read use a diagram like this one to identify the advances in technology that paved the way for european voyages of exploration.
78 exploring the americas technologicatx advances ip content vocabulary crusade.
technology pilgriims classical astrolabe mosque renaissance compass geography connection the growth of trade merchants in europe knew they could make a lot of money selling goods from asia.
wealthy europeans were eager to buy asian spices perfumes silks and precious stones.
merchants first bought these goods from arab traders in the middle east.
the merchants then sent the goods overland by caravan to the mediterranean sea.
from there the goods traveled by ship to italian ports in venice genoa and pisa.
these cities prospered as centers of the growing trade.
however arab traders charged high prices.
this led europeans to look for a route to the east that would not require them to buy from arab merchants.
the growth of ideas by the 1300s several italian city states had become strong economic and cultural centers.
their influence spread across europe.
newly powerful bankers and merchants in pisa venice and genoa studied classical works those of ancient greece and rome.
science was another area in which change occurred.
many scholars tested new and old theories of science.
they performed experiments and evaluated the results.
caravans or groups of travelers from asia carried silks and spices overland to markets in the west.
at the shores ofthe mediterranean and black seas the goods were loaded onto ships and transported to europe.
location how would you describe the location of genoa and venice.
critical thinking drawing conclusions based on the information on this map why do you think european traders charged high prices for silks and spices.
crusade one of a series of expeditions europeans made to regain control of christian holy sites in the middle east from the a d 1000s to the 1200s classical related to the culture of ancient greece and rome reading in the content area understanding visuals when a map shows a historical event or era you will not always find present day boundaries.
sometimes you can identify where things are taking place today by using natural features such as bodies of water.
historical maps provide a sense of time and help us to understand which cities and countries existed hundreds of years ago and which still exist today.
lesson 1 79 r the arts were also influenced by classical forms and new ideas.
authors wrote about the individual s place in the universe.
artists studied classical sculpture and architecture.
they admired the harmony and balance in greek art.
the renaissance this period of intellectual and artistic creativity is known as the renaissance reh nuh sahns.
the word renaissance means rebirth in french.
it refers to the rebirth of interest in classical greek and roman ideas.
as the renaissance spread across europe over the next two centuries it changed the way europeans thought about themselves and the world.
it also set the stage for an age of exploration and discovery.
the mona lisa painted by leonardo da vinci is a masterpiece of the renaissance.
from what we know the portrait features a woman from florence who was 24 years old when da vinci began the painting.
reading helpdesk the rise of powerful nations for centuries europe had been a patchwork of small states.
by the 1400s however a new larger type of state had developed in western europe.
strong monarchs rose to power in spain portugal england and france.
they began to establish national laws courts taxes and armies to replace those of the local rulers.
these ambitious monarchs sought ways to increase trade and make their countries even stronger and wealthier.
as early as the mid 1400s powerful countries such as portugal and spain began to search for sea routes to asia.
they too wanted to engage in foreign trade.
this placed them in direct competition with the italian port cities that had become so powerful a century earlier.
as a result a new era of exploration began.
reading progress check drawing conclusions in what way did trade help to bring about the renaissance.
the effects of new technology guidingquestion what technological advancements paved the way for european voyages of exploration.
advances in technology the use of scientific knowledge for practical purposes helped to make european voyages of exploration possible.
in the 1450s the introduction of the printing press made it much easier to print books.
more people had access to books and to new information.
many europeans read marco renaissance a reawakening of culture and intellectual curiosity in europe from the 1300s to the 1600s technology the use of scientific knowledge for practical purposes astrolabe an instrument used to plan a course of travel using the stars compass an instrument that shows the direction of magnetic north academic vocabulary acquire to get possession or control of 80 exploring the americas compass astrolabe aids to navigation quadrant the compass helped sailors tell which direction they were sailing.
the astrolabe and quadrant qwah druhnt measured the angle of a star to the horizon to help them find their location on the sea.
drawing conclusions explain how the compass astrolabe and quadrant could make a long ocean voyage possible.
critical thinking making connections what tools might sailors use to find their position at sea today.
polos travels when it appeared in printed form in 1477 this book gave people descriptions of faraway places such as areas that are now iraq siberia japan india ethiopia and madagascar.
whether the descriptions were entirely accurate is open to debate.
however polos travels led european readers to realize that there were many spectacular sights beyond their immediate world.
better maps and instruments most early maps were not accurate.
this was because they were drawn based on the points of view of traders and travelers.
little by little cartographers or mapmakers improved their accuracy.
using reports of explorers and information from arab and chinese scholars and astronomers mapmakers made more accurate land and sea maps.
these maps showed the directions of ocean currents.
they also showed lines of latitude which measured distances north and south of the equator.
people also improved instruments for navigating the seas.
sailors could find their latitude with an astrolabe as truh layb which measured the positions of stars.
in the 1200s europeans acquired the magnetic compass from china.
the compass allowed sailors to accurately determine their direction.
better ship design advances in ship design allowed sailors to make long ocean voyages.
the stern rudder and triangular sail enabled ships to sail into the wind.
the portuguese three masted caravel keruh vehl became the most famous ship of the european age of exploration.
caravels could sail faster and carry more cargo and supplies than earlier ships.
these advances and competition for i foreign trade led countries such as portugal and spain to search for sea routes to asia.
portugal began its explorations along the west coast of africa an area europeans had never visited before.
d reading progress check 3s identifying cause and effect how did the caravel affect exploration in a 5 s positive way.
lesson 1 81 geography connection trade routes across earth s largest desert the sahara provided west african kingdoms with access to the mediterranean coast.
location which west african kingdom extended the farthest west.
critical thinking drawing conclusions other than the information on trade routes what key historic information does the map show.
atlantic ocean marrake tropic of cancer i i v si 2on tomboudou timbuktu n0 equator 0 600 km.
j lambert azimuthal equal area projection west african trading kingdoms a d 400 1600 1 kingdoms and empires in africa guiding question what were the most powerful empires in africa.
between a d 400 and 1600 powerful kingdoms and city states flourished in africa south of the sahara.
much ol their power and wealth came from mining and trade.
arab traders traveled africas east coast exchanging cotton silk and porcelain for african ivory and metals.
west africans mined and traded gold copper and iron ore 1rade with north africas islamic societies brought wealth and islamic customs to the west african kingdoms.
the kingdoms also traded directly with europe.
the portuguese set up trading posts along africas western coast in the mid 1400s.
reading helpdesk ghana a trading empire between a d 400 and 1100 a vast trading empire known as ghana emerged in west africa.
ghana grew wealthy from the taxes it placed on trade.
caravans carrying gold ivory and enslaved people crossed the desert to north africa and returned with salt cloth and brass.
such trading contacts led many west africans to become muslim.
pilgrimage a journey to a holy place mosque a muslim house of worship 82 dloring the americas studios photodisc getty in 1076 north african people called almoravids al muh rah vihdz attacked ghana disrupting the trade routes in the region.
soon new trade routes bypassed ghana altogether.
the drop in trade led to ghanas decline and new kingdoms emerged in the region.
mali wealth and power mali one of the new kingdoms grew very powerful.
mali developed trade routes across the desert to north africa.
by the late 1200s malis territory was huge.
one traveler reported that it took four months to cross it from north to south.
in 1324 malis great king mansa musa a muslim traveled to the muslim holy city of makkah mecca in what is now saudi arabia.
he returned from this religious journey or pilgrimage pihl gruh mihj with an arab architect.
the architect built great mosques mahsks muslim houses of worship in timbuktu malis capital.
timbuktu became a center of islamic art and learning.
the songhai empire in time the songhai sawng geye people who lived along the niger river overthrew mali rule.
they captured timbuktu in 1468 askiya muhammad leader of the songhai empire divided songhai into provinces each with its own officials.
everyone in the empire followed a legal system based on the teachings of islam.
in the late 1500s north africas kingdom of morocco defeated and ended the songhai empire.
d reading progress check drawing conclusions what did the middle east and africa have that europeans wanted.
lesson 1 review review vocabulary 1 examine the two terms that follow.
then write a sentence based on what you have read that explains the connection between the terms.
3oa 3ob a astrolabe b technology 2 write a sentence about the classical ideas that were rediscovered during the renaissance.
3oa 3ob answer the guiding questions 3 explaining how did the rise of italian city states help lead to the renaissance.
4 identifying how did new technology pave the way for european voyages of exploration.
5 listing what were the three most powerful empires in west africa between the 400s and 1500s.
persuasive writing which ofthe following do you think was the most important innovation and why 3oo a the compass b improved maps c the printing press include this lesson s information in your foldable lesson 1 83 networks there s more online.
ef biographies.
christopher columbus d vasco da gama jw.
queen isabella graphic organizer explorers and their sponsors ef maps early portuguese exploration.
european voyages of exploration ef self check quiz video lesson 2 a.
early exploration rial question why do people trade.
teks texas essential knowledge and skills 2a identify reasons for european exploration and colonization of north america.
it matters because the ornval of the europeans in the americas in the fifteenth century changed the lives of people in both the americas and europe forever.
the search for new trade routes guidingquestion which country took the lead in finding a trade route to india.
reading helpdesk in 1492 christopher columbus led 90 sailors in three ships on a voyage into the unknown.
as the voyage dragged on the sailors grew angry.
columbus wrote i am told that if i persist in going onward the best course of action will be to throw me into the sea some night before that could happen a lookout from the ship pinta made the signal that he had spotted land.
on october 12 1492 columbus left his ship the santa maria and went ashore.
columbus believed he had arrived in the indies islands located southeast of china.
actually he had reached north america.
how did columbus get it so wrong.
the maps that he and other european explorers used at the time did not include the americas because no one in europe knew they existed.
all maps showed three continents europe asia and africa merged into a huge landmass and bordered by oceans.
some explorers thought that the western atlantic and eastern pacific oceans ran together to form what they called the ocean sea.
no one realized the true size of the oceans or the existence of other continents.
taking notes identifying as you study the lesson use a diagram such as this one to identify the explorers who were sponsored by portugal and those who were sponsored by spain.
14 exploring the americas explorers sponsored by portugal sponsored by spain content vocabulary cape circumnavigate columbus was sailing on behalf of spain but portugal was the first european power to explore the boundaries of the known world by sea.
unlike spain portugal did not have a port on the mediterranean sea.
this meant the portuguese could not use the existing trade routes between asia and europe.
portugals rulers wanted to find a new route to china and india.
the portuguese also knew about the great riches in the west african kingdoms.
these riches were carried by caravan across the desert to north africa and then by ship across the mediterranean.
portuguese traders needed a better route so that they too could get west african gold and other riches.
the beginning of portuguese exploration portugals prince henry laid the groundwork for the era of exploration.
in about 1420 he set up a center for exploration at sagres saw grish on the southwestern tip of portugal where endeth land and where beginneth sea known as henry the navigator the prince never intended to become an explorer himself.
instead he planned the voyages and then analyzed the reports that his crews brought home.
at sagres prince henry set up a school of navigation.
there astronomers geographers and mathematicians came to share their knowledge with portuguese sailors shipbuilders and mapmakers.
as each successful voyage brought back new information henrys expert mapmakers updated the charts.
portuguese ships sailed south along the coast of west africa.
as they went south they traded for gold and ivory and set up trading posts in the region.
because of its abundance of gold africas west coast came to be known as the gold coast in the mid 1400s portuguese traders began to buy enslaved africans there as well.
king john ii of portugal launched new efforts to create a portuguese trading empire in asia.
all the portuguese had to do was find a sea route around africa.
if they succeeded they would be able to trade directly with india and china.
they could bypass the north african and asian caravans and mediterranean merchants.
with that goal in mind in the 1480s king john urged portuguese sea captains to explore farther south along the african coast.
reading strategy reading in the content area answers to the questions what happened.
and why did it happen.
fill the pages of history books.
look for the answers to these questions as you read.
it can help your understanding of history to think of the situations you encounter as a series of cause and effect relationships.
the santa maria was a sturdy vessel built to survive a long ocean voyage.
critical thinking drawing inferences what traits would make a person a good crew member on the santa maria.
if lesson 2 85 critical thinking drawing inferences what can you infer from the fact that bartolomeu dias s route hugged gama s route did not 30w reading helpdesk bartolomeu dias in 1487 bartolomeu dias set out from lisbon with two small caravels and a supply ship.
king john had sent dias to explore the southernmost part of africa.
from there dias was to sail northeast into the indian ocean.
this expedition included some of portugals best pilots.
they sailed for days staying close to the coast ot africa.
after passing the mouth of the orange river in south africa the expedition met with a fierce storm that carried it southward off course and out of sight of land.
when the winds linally died down dias steered east and then north until he found land again.
excitedly dias realized that he had already sailed past the southernmost part of africa.
on the way he had passed a landform called a cape a piece of land that juts into the water.
dias set a course back to portugal.
on the return journey after passing that piece of land again he wrote that he had been around the cape of storms king john renamed it the cape of good hope the king hoped that the passage around africa might provide a new route to india.
vasco da gama portugal s voyages to india began years later.
in july 1497 after much preparation vasco da gama set sail from portugal with four ships headed for africa.
da gamas ships did not hug the cape a point of land that sticks out into water much like a peninsula word origins changing meanings the word pilot used to mean navigator.
what does it mean today.
skills practice when you see a new word think about what yoi have seen and done.
does the word remind you anything you have done.
86 exploring thelaericas african coast as diass ships had.
instead they sailed in a wide arc south and west of africa.
they were out of sight of land for more than three months.
the purpose of this detour was to reach ocean currents that would help the sailors travel safely around the cape of good hope.
after rounding the cape on november 22 da gama was on africas eastern coast.
he made many stops including one at mombasa mahm bahsuh part of present day kenya.
there he met a pilot from india who guided him the rest of the way.
da gama reached the port of calicut in india in may 1498 portugals long held dream of a sea route to asia was now a reality.
portugal s trading empire events moved quickly.
within six months of da gamas return to portugal 13 ships set sail out of lisbon and headed for india.
the ships were commanded by a nobleman pedro alvares cabral peh droo awl vuh ruhsh kuh brawl.
cabral planned to follow da gamas westward then southward course.
instead he went so far west that he reached brazil.
cabral claimed brazil for his king and sent one of the ships back to portugal with the good news that portugal now had a foothold in the americas.
cabral then continued to india and returned with spices porcelain and other valuable cargo.
other portuguese fleets soon made the journey to india where portugal set up permanent forts.
portuguese fleets began to make yearly voyages to india.
their cargoes made the portuguese capital of lisbon the marketplace of europe.
h reading progress check analyzing what was the importance ofthe voyages of dias and da gama.
biography vasco da gama c 1460 1524 vasco da gama who was the son of a portuguese noble led two voyages of exploration for portugal.
during the second he landed at goa which later became portugal s base of power in india.
in 1524 the king of portugal made da gama portugal s viceroy or governor in india and he returned to goa.
critical thinking drawing inferences why do you think the king appointed vasco da gama his viceroy in india.
columbus crosses the atlantic guidingquestion how did spain and portugal protect their claims in the americas.
keystone stringer hulton born in genoa italy in 1451 christopher columbus became a sailor for portugal.
he traveled as far north as the arctic circle and as far south as africas gold coast.
to reach asia christopher columbus had a different route in mind than the one used by his portuguese comrades.
he planned to sail west.
in the 1400s most educated people believed the world was round.
people were less certain about earths size.
columbus was among those who based their estimates on the works of ptolemy tahl uh mee an ancient greek astronomer.
columbus believed asia was about 2 760 miles 4 441 km from portugal a voyage of about two months by ship.
however ptolemy had underestimated earths size and by using ptolemy s estimate columbus did too.
lesson 2 87 a bilge pump operating from the main deck removed water from storage areas.
the caravel ballast stones were placed in the hull to provide better balance.
f caravels ranged in length from 75 to 90 feet 23 to 27 m and were suited for sailing along shallow coastlines.
criticalthinking explaining how did the caravel s lateen sail help sailors.
lateen sail caught wind that blew perpendicular to or at a right angle to the ship making the ship easier to maneuver.
reading helpdesk academic vocabulary devote to commit oneself or one s resources to something alter to change tloring the americas vikings in north america several centuries before the voyages of da gama cabral and columbus northern europeans known as vikings or norsemen had sailed to north america.
they sailed from present day scandinavia to iceland and greenland in the 800s and 900s and established settlements there for a brief period of time.
according to norse sagas or traditional stories a viking sailor named leif eriksson explored lands west of greenland in about the year 1000 the sagas refer to this land as vinland ruins from around that period exist in northeastern canada which could support the sagas.
the vikings voyages were not well known throughout europe however.
other europeans did not discover the americas until columbus made his historic voyage.
columbus and queen isabella columbus had a plan for reaching asia but he still needed money to finance his expedition.
he visited european monarchs looking for support.
finally he found a sponsor in spain.
for most of the 1400s spanish monarchs devoted or committed their energy to driving the muslims out of spain.
muslims had invaded spain in the 700s but their power had been declining for centuries.
the last muslim kingdom in spain reading strategy reading a diagram diagrams may include a cutaway view.
this provides a view of the outside and part of the inside of an object at the same time.
li dagli the art fell in 1492 this freed spains monarchs to focus on other goals.
the spanish observed the seafaring and trading successes of neighboring portugal with envy.
they too wanted the riches of asian trade.
king ferdinand and queen isabella of spain agreed to support columbuss expedition for two reasons.
one reason was that columbus promised to bring christianity to any lands he found.
this was important to isabella because she was a devout catholic.
another reason was that if he succeeded in finding a route to asia spain would become wealthy from trade with that region.
queen isabella promised columbus a share of any riches gained from lands he discovered on his way to asia.
columbus s first voyage on august 3 1492 columbus set sail from palos spain.
he had two small ships the nina and the pinta and a larger one the santa maria.
columbus was captain of the santa maria his lead ship or flagship.
the three ships carried about 90 sailors and a six month supply of food and water.
the small fleet stopped at the canary islands off the coast of west africa for repairs and supplies.
columbus then began the difficult voyage westward across unknown and mysterious stretches of the atlantic ocean.
after a few weeks at sea the sailors grew nervous about the distance they had traveled.
columbus refused to alter his course.
instead he encouraged the crew by describing the riches he believed they would find.
he urged them on saying that with the help of our lord they would arrive in the indies.
on october 12 1492 at two oclock in the morning a lookout shouted tierra.
tierra land.
land he had spotted a small island in the chain now called the bahamas.
columbus went ashore claimed the island for spain and named it san salvador although he did not know it columbus had reached the americas.
columbus believed he had arrived in the east indies the islands off the coast of asia.
this is why today we call the caribbean islands the west indies it also explains why columbus called the local people indians he noted that the natives regarded the europeans with wonder and often touched the crew members to find out if they were flesh and bones like themselves when columbus returned to spain queen isabella and the spanish king ferdinand received him with great honor.
they made him admiral of the ocean sea and agreed to provide funds for his future voyages.
biography queen isabella 1451 1504 queen isabella was a catholic of strong faith.
she insisted columbus treat native americans fairly and ordered him to release several enslaved native americans he brought to spain.
isabella hoped to convert the native americans to christianity.
she also wanted their labor.
she ordered that the native americans be forced to work on buildings to mine and collect gold and to work on farms and crop fields.
christopher columbus 1451 1506 columbus proved himself to be a great navigator and sailor.
he believed he would discover great riches and new lands.
he also knew he could win rich rewards for himself.
columbus wrote in 1492 your highnesses commanded me to go to india and for this accorded me great rewards and ennobled me raised me to the rank of nobility.
critical thinking comparing and contrasting how were the goals of queen isabella and columbus similar and different.
ts lesson 2 89 k european voyages of exploration 1492 1609 john cabot 1497 1498 martin frobisher 1576 1578 giovanni da verrazano 1524 jacques cartier 1535 henry hudson 1609 spanish christopher columbus 1492 1493 amerigo vespucci 1499 1500 portuguese pedro cabral 1500 1 000 miles 0 1 000 km orthographic projec tion geography connection beginning in the late 1400s nations in western europe began exploring the americas.
movement which explorer traveled along the northern coast of south america.
for which country did he sail.
critical thinking analyzing visuals study cabral s route.
based on what you know about portugal and the information in the map key explain why his route is labeled to india.
reading helpdesk columbus s achievements columbus made three more voyages for spain in 1493 1498 and 1502 he explored the caribbean islands of hispaniola present day haiti and the dominican republic cuba and jamaica.
he also sailed along the coasts of central america and northern south america.
he claimed these lands for spain and started settlements.
he also mapped the eastern coastline of central america.
columbus had not reached asia but instead had found a part of the world that was unknown to europeans asians and africans.
in the years that followed the spanish went on to explore most of the caribbean and to establish the spanish empire in the americas.
dividing the americas both spain and portugal wanted to protect their claims in the americas.
they turned to pope alexander vi for help.
in 1493 he ordered a line of demarcation an imaginary line that reached from the north pole to the south pole and cut through the middle of the atlantic ocean.
spain was to control all lands west of the line and portugal would control all lands east of the line.
circumnavigate to travel completely around something usually by water exploring the americas portugal objected saying that the division gave more land to spain.
in 1494 the two countries signed an agreement called the treaty of tordesillas tohrdaysee yuhs which moved the line farther west.
the two countries had divided the entire unexplored world between themselves.
further explorations after columbus other voyagers explored the americas.
in 1499 italian amerigo vespucci vehspoochee led a voyage funded by spain.
on this and a later journey for portugal he explored the coast of south america.
vespucci realized south america was a separate continent and not part of asia.
european geographers began to call the continent america in his honor.
a spaniard vasco nunez de balboa bal bohuh heard stories of the great waters beyond the mountains of panama in central america.
he hiked through steamy rain forests to find them.
at the coast in 1513 balboa saw a vast body of water which he claimed for spain along with the adjoining lands.
balboa was the first european to see the pacific ocean from the americas.
sailing around the world in 1520 ferdinand magellan a portuguese explorer who was sailing for spain reached the southernmost tip of south america.
he sailed through the stormy waters of a narrow sea passage or strait.
the strait led him into a calm ocean the same one balboa had seen.
the waters were so peaceful pacifico in spanish that s magellan named the ocean the pacific ocean.
magellan died in i the philippine islands but his crew continued to sail westward i arriving back in spain in 1522 magellans crew were the first people known to circumnavigate or sail around the world.
e8 reading progress check i evaluating what did spain have to gain by supporting columbus and i his voyage.
the strait that led magellan above from the atlantic ocean to the pacific ocean is now called the strait of magellan.
trade exploration z o i circumnavigation include this lesson s con ertsand conqvistai ors.
information in your i gold land foldable.
o i s ortuvest l passage lesson 2 review answer the guiding questions i review vocabulary 1 use the term cape in a sentence about the explorations of portugal in the late 1400s.
3oa job 2 write a sentence about why it was such an achievement for someone to circumnavigate the globe.
3ob 3 identifying why did portugal begin exploring the coast of africa.
4 identifying forwhattwo reasons did king ferdinand and queen isabella support columbus s expedition.
persuasive writing suppose you are an explorer in the 1400s.
write a letter to a european monarch persuading him or her to finance your overseas expedition.
lesson 2 91 networks there s more online.
ef biography sor juana inesde la cruz ef infographic spanish missions maps spanish explorers spanish missions in california primary source cortes and the aztecs ef self check quiz lesson 3 spain in america question what are the consequences when cultures interact.
yrys texas essential knowledge and skills 1a identify the major eras and events in u s history through 1877 including colonization revolution drafting of the declaration of independence creation and ratification of the constitution religious revivals such as the second great awakening early republic the age of jackson westward expansion reform movements sectionalism civil war and reconstruction and describe their causes and effects.
2a identity reasons for european exploration and colonization of north america.
12b explain reasons for the development of the plantation system the transatlantic slave trade and the spread of slavery.
23c identify ways conflicts between people from various racial ethnic and religious groups were resolved.
reading helpdesk it matters because spanish explorers in the americas conquered people and searched for gold.
spain became richer while many native americans suffered from harsh treatment at the hands of the spaniards.
european explorers and conquerors guiding question what were the goals of early spanish explorers.
when spanish explorers reached the americas natives told tales of gold silver and kingdoms wealthy beyond belief.
i he spanish listened eagerly and they traveled far and wide in search of these riches.
these explorers known as conquistadors kahn keestah dohrz got encouragement from spanish rulers.
the rulers gave conquistadors the right to explore and create settlements in the americas.
in return the conquistadors agreed to give spain one fifth of any treasure they found.
this deal allowed spanish rulers to explore the americas with little risk.
if a conquistador failed he lost his own fortune.
if he succeeded both he and spain gained wealth and glory.
the conquest of mexico and peru although many of the tales of gold and riches proved to be false some were true.
two wealthy empires the aztec in what is no mexico and central america and the inca in south america were among the richest prizes the conquistadors claimed.
in 1519 hernan cortes landed on the east coast of present day tkinklui uke a mexico.
within two years cortes conquered the aztec empire t t t ct y t.
t a ivt that had ruled the region.
huge amounts of aztec gold made li 1d ilj kjtvin cortes and spain wealthy.
cortess success encouraged other conquistadors.
twelve years after the aztec conquest francisco pizarro led an army into the inca capital in cuzco in present day peru.
the spanish arrested and later executed the inca ruler.
without their leader the inca were not able to fight effectively.
pizarro soon controlled most of the vast and wealthy inca empire.
why spain won the conquistadors victories over the aztec and inca were quick and lasting.
how did cortes and pizarro conquer such mighty empires with their small forces.
first the spanish had weapons and animals the aztec and inca had never seen.
the spanish had guns and cannons.
they rode horses and had huge ferocious dogs.
to the native americans the spanish seemed almost like gods.
one aztec recalled the fear that spread at the soldiers approach tjheir weapons clashed and rattled t hey terrified everyone who saw them cortes received help from some native people who disliked their harsh rulers and were happy to help overthrow them.
finally disease played a large role.
for many native groups contact with the europeans was deadly.
with no immunity or resistance to european diseases the aztec and the inca suffered terrible epidemics.
illnesses weakened them in their struggle against the spanish.
h reading progress check analyzing how were the spanish able to defeat native american empires.
spain in north america guiding question what did spain hope to find in the americas.
mexico and peru were lands rich in silver and gold.
hoping to find similar wealth to the north conquistadors explored the southeastern and southwestern parts of what is today the united states.
analyzing primary sources in 1519 hernan cortes prepared to leave cuba for mexico with 11 ships carrying about 550 spanish soldiers and 16 horses.
before setting off cortes said to his men primary source i know in my heart that we shall take vast and wealthy lands people such as have never before been seen if you do not abandon me as i shall not abandon you i shall make you in a very short time the richest of all men who have crossed the seas from the life of the conqueror by his secretary trans.
lesley byrd simpson based on this quote what inspired the conquistadors.
taking notes describing as you study the lesson use a graphic organizer like this one to identify three spanish conquistadors and describe the regions they explored.
s exploring the americas explorer reqion explored content vocabulary conquistador mission immunity presidio pueblo plantation conquistador a spanish explorer immunity resistance such as to disease academic vocabulary contact when two or more groups or objects come together cortes accepts the surrender of the aztec ruler.
lesson 3 93 sorjuana ines de la cruz 16517 1695 juana ines de la cruz was born in new spain the daughter of a spanish father and a creole mother.
she became a famous writer in a culture i where most women were not taught j to read.
her intelligence and thirst for learning led her to seek religious j training which allowed her time to 1 study and write.
her private library was one ofthe largest in the j americas.
in addition to books she 3 also collected musical and scientific 1 instruments.
recognized as a great writer in her own lifetime her 1 poems plays and stories were published in the americas and in j spain.
today de la cruz is seen as one 1 ofthe greatest mexican colonial j writers.
i critical thinking speculating why do you think it might have been difficult for de la cruz to become a successful writer.
reading helpdesk juan ponce de leon pahn suh day lee ohn made the first spanish landing on the east coast of present day florida in 1513 according to legend ponce de leon was not looking only for gold.
he also hoped to find the legendary fountain of youth.
this had been described by a historian of that time as a spring of running water of such marvelous virtue that drinking it makes old men young again ponce de leon s exploration led to the first spanish settlement in what is now the united states a fort the spanish built at st augustine florida in 1565 the seven cities of gold still other conquistadors searched for quick riches and several lost their lives in the process.
alvar nunez cabeza de vaca cuh bay suh duh vah cuh was part of a spanish expedition to florida in 1528 after coming into conflict with native americans in florida the expedition sailed south toward mexico in november led by panfilo de narvaez nahrvah ays.
three of its five boats were lost in a storm.
the two boats that made it through the storm became stuck on a beach on an island near present day texas.
within a few months only a handful of the spanish explorers were still alive.
to survive among the native americans de vaca and an enslaved african named estevanico estay vahn ee koh persuaded the native americans that they had healing powers.
cabeza de vaca later wrote that their method of healing was to bless the sick breathing upon them and to recite latin prayers.
in 1533 the spaniards set off on a long trek across the southwest.
while traveling they often heard stories about seven rich cities in the region.
when cabeza de vaca finally arrived in mexico in 1536 he told eager listeners about the seven cities of cibola seven cities of gold.
de soto searches for gold excited by these stories hernando de soto led an expedition to explore florida and what is today the southeastern united states.
for three years they traveled following stories of gold.
their encounters with the native people often turned violent.
de soto crossed the mississippi river in 1541 describing it as swift and very deep after traveling as far west as present ay oklahoma de soto died of fever.
his men buried him in the waters of the mississippi.
reading in the content area map keys a map key shows what symbols and colors on the map mean in the map on the next page the key explains the colors ofthe lines on the map for example the yellow line represents ponce de leon s route in 1513 exploring the americas imiill w liu nillo llll lljllill4 0 800 km lambert azimuthal equal area projection coronado takes up the search another conquistador who searched for the seven cities of cibola was francisco vasquez de coronado kawr oh nah doh.
his travels took him through northern mexico and present day arizona and new mexico until his expedition reached a zuni zoo nee settlement in 1540 finally convinced that there was no gold members of the expedition traveled west to the colorado river and east into what is now kansas.
they found no gold only windswept plains and strange shaggy cows buffalo.
h reading progress check speculating why do you think that the encounters between de soto s party and native americans were sometimes violent.
life under spanish rule the granger collection nyc guiding question what effect did spanish rule have on society.
spanish law set up three kinds of settlements in the americas pueblos missions and presidios.
pueblos or towns were centers of trade.
missions were religious communities.
they included a church a small town and fields for crops.
a presidio was a type of fort and was usually built near a mission.
juan de onate day ohnyahtay traveled up from mexico to establish a spanish presence in the lands to the north.
he was also assigned to convert the native people to christianity.
skills practice keep a list of words you hear often during class lessons and discussion.
use these words in class discussion.
lesson 3 95 mission nuestra senora de la purisima concepcion de acuna located in san antonio texas was dedicated in 1755 after 20 years of construction.
all missions had the same basic plan and were located near wood water and land for farming and grazing.
there was a church housing for the priests and native american converts grain fields with irrigation ditches and corrals for cattle sheep and goats.
reading helpdesk in 1598 onate founded or established the province of new mexico.
he introduced cattle and horses to the pueblo people.
the first spanish city in the southwest santa he was established in 1607 santa fe became the capital of the province in 1610 spanish colonial society there was a very clear class system in spanish colonial society.
the highest level of society was made up of the penbisulares people who were born in spain.
they were the landowners leaders of government and heads of the catholic church.
next in rank were the creoles people born in the americas whose parents were spanish.
the next level below were the mestizos mehsteezohs people with one spanish and one native american parent.
still lower were the native americans most of whom lived in great poverty and enslaved africans.
the spanish government granted conquistadors who settled in the americas the right to demand either taxes or labor from native americans living on the land.
this system forced the native americans into a form of slavery.
for example in the 1540s when the spanish discovered silver ore in northern mexico they set up mining camps.
they then forced native americans to dig for silver.
the damp mineshafts were a grueling environment in which to work.
many native americans died there from malnutrition and disease.
pueblo a town in the spanish ruled lands mission a religious community where farming was carried out and native americans were converted to christianity presidio a fort plantation a large farm academic vocabulary found to start to establish 9 exploring the americas a spanish priest bartolome de las casas spoke out against such cruel treatment of native americans and pleaded for laws to protect them.
he claimed that millions had died because the spanish made gold their ultimate aim seeking to load themselves with riches in the shortest possible time las casass reports convinced spanish leaders to pass the new laws in 1542 these laws forbade enslaving native americans.
unfortunately the laws were not always enforced.
the plantation system not all spaniards sought gold.
some found wealth shipping crops to spain.
in the west indies key exports were tobacco and sugarcane.
the spanish developed the plantation system to raise these crops.
a plantation is a large farm.
the spanish first used native american labor to work their plantations.
las casas suggested that they be replaced by enslaved africans a suggestion he bitterly regretted later.
as a result thousands of enslaved africans were brought from west africa to the americas.
those who survived the brutal voyage were sold to plantation owners.
by the late 1500s slave labor was an essential part of the economy of the colonies.
i a fc san diego dealcaid 1769 san carlos borrome de carmelo 1770 san antonio de pi san luis obispo de tok 17 pacific ocean 100 miles i 0 100 km albers equal area projection geography connection by 1820 there were 21 missions along the california portion of el camino real the royal road.
location what was the i southernmost spanish mission.
ii critical thinking drawing conclusions why do i you think so many missions were located along waterways.
lesson 3 97 connections to today our spanish heritage spanish influence in the united states is strong.
many spanish words have been incorporated into the language such as fiesta and canyon the spanish who were expert ranchers introduced animals such as horses sheep pigs and beef cattle into the american southwest.
many place names in the united states today are spanish in origin.
some examples in the text are santa fe and california.
can you think of any others.
include this lesson s information in your foldable.
spanish settlement in the southwest in the 1600s and 1700s the spanish with much help from native americans settled the southwest including present day new mexico texas and california.
the spanish explorer juan cabrillo kuh bree yoh first sighted what is now california in 1542 however for 200 years the spanish had left the area alone.
around 1769 that policy changed.
california was the northern frontier of the spanish empire in north america and spain needed a large number of colonists to solidify its hold on the region.
spain also wanted to convert more native americans to christianity.
spanish settlement in california consisted mostly of mission building.
the spaniards trained native americans who lived on the mission to be farmers.
they learned how to grow crops irrigate farmland and perform other tasks usually carried out on a ranch.
eventually the missions became economically profitable enough to sell some of their goods such as wine olive oil and leather.
effect on native american life californias many native american groups had well ordered societies before the spanish arrived.
they hunted fished and gathered plants for food.
the arrival of the spanish disrupted this way of life.
the spanish forced native peoples to convert to christianity and to live and work at the missions.
q reading progress check summarizing what kinds of settlements did the spanish build in the americas.
1 lesson 3 review teks review vocabulary 1 use the following content vocabulary terms to write a short paragraph about spanish settlement in the americas.
3oa a pueblo c presidio b mission d plantation answer the guiding questions 2 identifying why did the conquistadors want to conquer and settle the americas.
2a 98 exploring the americas 3 explaining why was 1513 a significant year in the history of the americas.
4 explaining why did the spanish bring africans to their colonies in the americas.
descriptive writing the conquistadors are often described as possessing both good and bad qualities.
write a paragraph in which you express what you think were the qualities both good and bad of the spanish conquistadors.
3od reading helpdesk taking notes t st ng as you study the lesson use a diagram like this to list the explorers who tried to find a northwest passage.
networks there s more online.
game column game ef graphic organizer the northwest passage images jacques marquette and louis joliet new amsterdam sf self check quiz ef video ml lesson 4 competing for colonies tial question what are the consequences when cultures interact.
it matters because the european competition for colonies in the americas led to settlement and exploration in many parts of north america.
teks texas essential knowledge and skills 1a identify the major eras and events in u s history through 1877 including colonization revolution drafting of the declaration of independence creation and ratification of the constitution religious revivals such as the second great awakening early republic the age of jackson westward expansion reform movements sectionalism civil war and reconstruction and describe their causes and effects.
2a identify reasons for european exploration and colonization of north america.
religious rivalries guidingquestion m ftflf were the religious motives behind the a ge of exploration.
the europeans who explored and settled in north america in the 1500s sought wealth.
they also wanted to spread their christian faith.
the first to arrive were roman catholics the only christian church in the western part of europe at that time.
not long after columbus made his first voyage across the atlantic however religious conflict shook europe.
new rivalries based on religious beliefs emerged.
luther and the reformation in 1517 a german priest named martin luther nailed a list of complaints on the door of a local catholic church questioning the power and authority of catholic leaders including the pope the head of the catholic church.
luther hoped to spark reform within the church but pope leo x rejected his ideas.
others agreed with luther.
his ideas helped launch a movement called the reformation rehfuhrmay shuhn.
the movement led to a new form of christianity called protestantism prah tuhstuhntih zuhm.
among the differences between protestants and catholics was that protestants did not accept the leadership of the pope.
the reformation led to widespread conflict within and between the nations of europe.
search for the northwest passage content vocabulary reformation protestantism armada northwest passage tenant farmer lesson 4 99 in 1639 a french woman named marie guyard or marie of the incarnation arrived in quebec frances first colony.
later she wrote religious books in the languages of the native peoples she met there.
in a letter guyard wrote primary source you will perhaps laugh that at the age of fifty years i am beginning to study a new tongue language but one must undertake all things for the service of god and the salvation of ones neighbour from word from new france by marie guyard religious rivalry in europe in 1533 the english king henry viii left the catholic church.
later during the rule of his daughter elizabeth i further reforms established england as a protestant nation.
at that time it was common for kings and queens to insist that their subjects follow their religion.
subjects who did not could lose their lands and fortunes.
in england many people were unhappy about leaving the catholic church but they had little power to resist.
englands protestantism caused conflict with spain.
beginning in 1585 king philip of spain made plans to invade england.
a successful invasion could mean the overthrow of protestantism.
in may 1588 philip sent an armada ahr mah duh or war fleet of 132 ships to england.
with 30 000 troops and more than 2 000 guns the spanish armada was the mightiest naval force in the world.
yet the smaller faster english ships quickly gained the upper hand.
the defeat of spains armada marked the end of spanish control of the seas.
now the way was clear for the english to start colonies in north america.
from her letter what do you know about the person and character of marie guyard.
religious rivalries in the americas catholics from spain and france worked to spread their faith among the native americans.
the spanish settled in the southwestern and southeastern regions of north america and the french settled in the northeast.
dutch and english protestants set up colonies along the atlantic coast between the french and the spanish settlements.
religious differences contributed to the rivalries between these settlements.
reading helpdesk search for a northwest passage in the 1500s and early 1600s england france and the netherlands sent explorers to map the coast of north america and later establish trade and colonies.
explorers also hoped to discover a northwest passage to asia a direct water route through the americas.
england sent john cabot an italian to look for a northern sea route to asia in 1497 cabot probably landed on the coast of present day newfoundland.
in 1524 france hired another italian giovanni de verrazano to look for a northern route.
verrazano explored the coast of north america from present day nova scotia down to the carolinas.
reformation a sixteenth century religious movement rejecting orchanging some roman catholic teachings and practices and establishing the protestant churches protestantism a form of christianity that was in opposition to the catholic church armada a fleet of warships academic vocabulary widespread over a wide area the j icas flk 100 exploring the in 1609 henry hudson and his crew landed on the shores of delaware bay.
the native people offered goods for trade.
in 1535 french explorer jacques cartier kahrteeay sailed up the st lawrence river hoping it would lead to the pacific.
cartier did not make it to the pacific but he discovered a mountain peak that he named mont royal which means royal mountain this is the site of the present day city of montreal.
the netherlands also wanted to find a passage through the americas.
the dutch hired english sea explorer and navigator henry hudson to look for it.
in 1609 he discovered the river that now bears his name.
in his ship the half moon hudson sailed north on the hudson river as far as the site of present day albany new york.
deciding that he had not found a passage to india he turned back.
the following year england sent hudson to try again.
on this trip hudson discovered a huge bay now called hudson bay.
thinking he had reached the pacific hudson spent months looking for an outlet.
his crew became impatient and rebelled.
they set hudson his son and a few sailors adrift in a small boat never to be seen again.
b reading progress check analyzing why did nations want to find a northwest passage.
northwest passage a sea passage between the atlantic and the pacific along the north coast of north america skills practice work with a partner.
take turns describing something.
ask one another questions about the details.
lesson 4 101 k in 1673 father jacques marquette and louis joliet located the great mississippi river.
they hoped to find that the river led to the pacific ocean.
french and dutch settlements guidingquestion how did french and dutch settlements compare to the spanish critical thinking colonies.
explaining in what way was marquette and joliet s expedition successful.
unsuccessful.
reading helpdesk french explorers and settlers trailed the spanish by many years but the french did establish settlements in north america.
at first the french were most interested in natural resources including fish and furs.
french trappers went far into the interior ol north america and traded with native americans.
france built forts to protect its trade.
french missionaries followed the traders.
in 1663 new france became a royal colony.
the new royal governor supported expanded exploration.
c pivnng me ivussissippi river in the 1670s two french explorers a fur trader louis joliet and a priest jacques marquette traveled the mississippi river by canoe.
joliet and marquette hoped to find precious metals.
they were also looking for a northwest passage.
when they realized that the mississippi flowed south into the gulf of mexico rather than west into the pacific they headed back upriver.
in 1682 robert cavelier de la salle followed the mississippi all the way to the gulf of mexico.
he claimed the region for france calling it louisiana in honor of louis xiv.
in 1718 the french founded new orleans.
french explorers and missionaries traveled west to the rocky mountains and the rio grande.
tenant farmer a settler who pays rent academic vocabulary or drovirlps work tn a lanrlnu npr in nyrhanno pose to present to offer or provides work to a landowner in exchange for the right to use the landowner s land 102 exploring the americas new france and new netherland french settlement in north america advanced slowly.
new france was made up of estates along the st lawrence river.
estate holders brought in settlers in exchange for land.
these settlers became tenant farmers teh nuhnt who paid rent and worked for their lord for a set period each year.
the french got along well with the native americans.
french trappers and missionaries lived among them learned their languages and respected their ways.
the missionaries had come to convert native americans to catholicism but they did not try to change their customs.
because the french colony grew slowly it did not seem to pose a threat to the native americans and their lands.
the netherlands was a small country with few natural resources and limited farmland.
this is why the dutch were eager to set up a north american colony.
after hudsons voyage in 1609 the dutch began to explore north america.
the netherlands also had a large fleet of trading ships that sailed all over the world.
in 1621 the netherlands created the dutch west india company to run its trade between the americas and africa.
in 1623 the company took over control of the dutch colony in north america called new netherland the heart of the colony was new amsterdam.
the town was built on the tip of manhattan island.
in 1626 governor y peter minuit bought the island from the manhattoes people for 60 dutch guilders about 24 worth of trade goods.
b reading progress check explaining what were france s goals in north america.
foldables s study organizer include this lesson s information in your foldable o trade exploration o cirojtnaavigdtian sn estsand co stadors o.
gold land tdortlnwest s passage the dutch hoped new amsterdam located where the hudson river enters what is now new york harbor would become an important center for their trade.
critical thinking analyzing which characteristics of the region of new amsterdam might encourage trade for dutch settlers.
lesson 4 review review vocabulary 1 explain the meaning of the terms armada and protestantism by using both in a sentence.
3oa 3ob 2 explain the significance of the term tenant farmer.
30a answer the guiding questions 3 identifying for what reasons did the english french and dutch establish colonies in north america.
2a 4 analyzing what effect did the defeat of the spanish armada have on england.
5 identifying why did louis joliet and jacques marquette set out to explore the mississippi river.
2a narrative writing write a letter to a relative in europe from the point of view of an early french or dutch settler in north america.
describe what life is like and what your goals are in north america.
29d 3od lesson 4 103 3 activities jty directions write your answers using standard grammar spelling sentence structure and punctuation.
ouse your i siwiltfoto explore the essential questions.
expository writing what was the main reason european nations explored north america.
in your opinion was it to spread religion gain wealth search for the northwest passage bring honor to their rulers or control natural resources.
select one reason then write two or more paragraphs defending your choice.
use examples to support your view.
2a 29e 3od social studies skills creating a thematic map work in a group of five to map the routes of columbus magellan cabral cabot and la salle.
each member should research one explorer then trace the route of that explorer on a single map large enough to display in the classroom.
each member contributes a short paragraph on the explorer describing his adventures and importance.
291 3od thinking like a historian creating charts with a partner create a comparison chart of two countries that were exploring the americas during this era.
include in the chart a areas explored b major waterways and c population or settlements.
write three questions about the information that can be answered from the chart.
exchange your chart and questions with another team and answer the questions they provided.
29b 29i 293300 visual literacy drawing inferences this painting shows coronado leading an expedition into new mexico.
what does this image suggest about the way the spanish conquistadors viewed their role in the lands they explored.
explain your answer.
29b 29d 104 e americas assessment directions write your answers using standard grammar spelling sentence structure and punctuation.
checking for understanding o among the causes of european exploration and colonization were the rise of a new spirit of adventure and the competition among nations for new trade routes and gold.
what were some of the effects of this competition.
write a paragraph explaining your answer.
ia jod review the guiding questions 0 identifying what were some of the technological advancements that paved the way for european voyages of exploration.
2a 0 explaining why did the rise of new nations during the renaissance set the stage for a new era of exploration and discovery.
2a o analyzing why did king ferdinand and queen isabella of spain agree to finance columbus s expedition.
2a 29d 0 describing how did the pacific ocean get its name.
0 stating what was the main reason the spanish conquered and colonized the aztec and inca.
2a 0 explaining why did slavery spread in the spanish colonies.
ub 0 identifying what religious rivalry in europe shaped the exploration of the americas.
2a 0 explaining why were the dutch eager to set up a colony in north america.
ia 2a critical thinking 0 contrasting european nations had different reasons for exploring overseas.
how did portuguese efforts to reach asia differ from columbus s efforts.
2a 29b 0 comparing compare how the spanish and the french interacted with the environment.
nc 29b 0 contrasting how did spain s exploration and colonization in the americas differ from england s.
2a 29b 0 interpreting maps using the map in lesson 3 spanish missions in california complete the following tasks ib 29c 29h a list the missions in chronological order beginning with the first one serra built.
b calculate the number of years that elapsed between the building of the first mission and the last.
interpreting maps using the place and time map in this chapter.
select one that you think is still useful today or could be used or adapted to solve a current problem.
write a paragraph explaining what group or groups of people it would help and how it would do so.
analyzing primary sources read the excerpt from franklin roosevelt s inaugural address and then answer the questions that follow.
primary source our greatest primary task is to put people to work.
this is no unsolvable problem if we face it wisely and courageously.
it can be accomplished in part by direct recruiting by the government itself treating the task as we would treat the emergency of a war.
our constitution is so simple and practical that it is possible always to meet extraordinary needs by changes in emphasis and arrangement without loss of essential form.
we do not distrust the future of essential democracy.
franklin roosevelt s inaugural address analyzing primary sources what does roosevelt think is the most important thing to accomplish.
how does he propose to do it.
29a identifying central issues what unspoken fear does roosevelt address.
29a read the excerpt from eleanor roosevelt s autobiography and then answer the questions that follow.
primary source this trip to the mining areas was my first contact with the work being done by the quakers.
i liked the idea of trying to put people to work to help themselves.
the men were started on projects and taught to use their abilities to develop new skills.
the women were encouraged to revive any household arts they might once have known but which they had neglected in the drab life of the mining village it was all experimental work but it was designed to get people off relief to put them to work building their own homes and to give them enough land to start growing food 99 the autobiography of eleanor roosevelt 1937 drawing conclusions according to eleanor roosevelt what were benefits of the quaker project.
29a 29h making connections what does this say about eleanor roosevelt s views on government aid to the poor.
29a 29h need extra help.
19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 t 23 fio to page 324 313 322 327 325 312 307 318 321 roosevelt and the new deal 329 analyzing visuals use the graph to answer the following questions.
positive negative employment rates 0 average employment rates 0 analyzing graphs what does the zero line represent on the graph.
based on the graph s pattern what was the state ofthe economy in 1941.
29h j explaining based on what you know about the new deal and the events ofthe era what caused the dramatic decline in employment in late 1937.
what is significant about the decline.
29h use the map to answer the following questions.
identifying how did the distribution of population in the tennessee valley authority tva impact the physical environment.
why do you think the tennessee river valley was chosen for this project.
14a 29h 31b need extra help.
extended response questions compare and contrast write a brief essay comparing the policies ofthe new deal with the approaches advocated by political opponents on the right and the lefi of the political spectrum.
what were their main objection to the new deal.
how did roosevelt structure the new deal to build political support and counter the complaint of opponents.
16d expository look up the full text of roosevelt s first inaugural address to the nation on march 4 1933 either online or at a library.
imagine that you are a newspaper reporter who covered the inauguration and is now lookir back at roosevelt s first 100 days in office.
write a news article describing the mood ofthe nation at the time ant the promises that roosevelt made to the nation.
describ what roosevelt was trying to do in the speech.
use evidence from the speech and from the chapter to expla what roosevelt accomplished in his first 100 days and whether he lived up to his promises in the speech.
29t standardized test practice how do citizens today benefit from the policies ofthe securities and exchange commission that were made during the new deal.
16e 29b a today s investors receive information from compar about the stocks they own.
b today s investors can make more money than evei before because ofthe regulations.
c today s investors have their stock purchases insuri by the government.
d today s investors can buy and sell stocks wheneve they wish.
which new deal program insured citizens bank depos and improved public confidence in the banking systen f fca g sec h fdic j nira isotopage 307 307 307 326131 0 0 330 a world in flames networks there s more online about the united states and world war ii.

chapter 5 examine old ideas and traditions.
philosopher john locke believed that a social contract existed between political rulers and the people they ruled.
baron de montesquieu argued that the only way to achieve liberty was through the separation of governmental powers.
american models of government americans had their own models of self government to follow like town meetings the virginia house of burgesses and the mayflower compact.
in 1639 the people of connecticut drew up the english colonies first written constitution.
a constitution is a set of basic principles and laws that states the powers and duties of the government.
in addition the declaration of independence clearly set forth the beliefs on which americans thought government should be based.
to keep individual leaders from gaining too much power the new state constitutions created limited governments or governments in which all leaders have to obey the laws.
most state constitutions had rules to protect the rights of citizens or those accused of crimes.
some banned slavery.
the massachusetts constitution of 1780 is the oldest state constitution still in effect.
thomas jefferson s ideas about religious freedom were included in the virginia statute for religious freedom.
this document declared that no person could be forced to attend a particular church or be required to pay for a church with tax money.
right to vote under british rule only free white men that owned land could vote.
many states constitutions expanded suffrage or the right to vote by allowing any white man who paid taxes to vote.
in every state however only land owners could hold public office.
some states originally allowed women and free african americans to vote but these rights were soon taken away.
suffrage would not be restored to these groups for decades to come.
comparing what two principles were common to state constitutions written during the revolutionary war.
reading check.
articles of confederation the second continental congress was organized to create a national government.
the continental congress appointed a committee of thirteen with one member from each colony.
this group was assigned to discuss and draft the articles of confederation the new national constitution.
under the articles of confederation congress would become the single branch of the national government but it would have limited powers in order to protect the liberties of the people.
each state had one vote in the congress.
congress could settle conflicts among the states issue coins borrow money and make treaties with other countries and with native americans.
congress could also ask the states for money and soldiers.
however states had the power to refuse these requests.
the government did not have a president or a national court system.
the second continental congress passed the articles of confederation on november 15 1777 then it sent the articles to each state legislature for ratification or official approval before the new national government could take effect.
conflicts over claims to western lands slowed the process but by 1779 every state except maryland had ratified the articles.
maryland s leaders refused to ratify until other states gave up their western land claims.
thomas jefferson assured maryland that western lands would be made into new states rather than increasing territory for existing states.
satisfied with this condition in march 1781 maryland ratified the articles.
this put the first national government of the united states into effect.
summarizing what were two weaknesses of the new national government.
reading check j 4 chapter 14 rw the underground railroad canada enslaved african americans followed many routes to escape from southern slavery.
once in the free states however fugitive slaves could not be certain of their freedom.
u s law still considered them as property and bounty hunters were paid to capture and return any fugitive slaves they found.
lllll atlantic ocean fxfi fugitive slaves hid behind a secret door in this indiana house on the underground railroad.
free states slave states routes of the underground railroad 75 150 miles 0 75 150 kilometers 0 k geography skills interpreting maps this painting a ride for liberty the fugitive slaves by eastman johnson shows an african american family riding toward freedom.
1 place which northern cities were destinations for escaped slaves.
2 movement which rivers were routes for the underground railroad.
primary source handbill anti abolitionist rally members of an anti abolitionist group used this flyer to call people together in order to disrupt a meeting of abolitionists in 1837 seditious means guilty of rebelling against lawful authority.
outrage fellow citizen a a ttkokltioyimi of the most revolting character is among yon exciting the feel tiie worth against the south.
a seditious lecture is to he delivered this evening at y oclock at the presbyterian church in cannon street j.
are re luest 1 to attend and unite in putting down and siiencingby peaceable means this tool of evil and fanaticism.
j ket the rights of the states guaranteed by the constitution 1 feb at 1837 union forever.
ik the group believes abolition violates the constitution.
analysis skill i analyzing primary sources what emotional language does this handbill use to get its message across.
the most famous and daring conductor on the underground railroad was harriet tubman.
when tubman escaped slavery in 1849 she left behind her family.
she swore that she would return and lead her whole family to freedom in the north.
tubman returned to the south 19 times successfully leading her family and more than 300 other slaves to freedom.
at one time the reward for tubman s capture reportedly climbed to 40 000 a huge amount of money at that time.
reading check drawing inferences why were the operations of the underground railroad kept secret.
opposition to ending slavery although the north was the center of the abolitionist movement many white northerners agreed with the south and supported slavery.
others disliked slavery but opposed equality for african americans.
newspaper editors and politicians warned that freed slaves would move north and take jobs from white workers.
some workers feared losing jobs to newly freed african americans whom they believed would accept lower wages.
abolitionist leaders were threatened with violence as some northerners joined mobs.
such a mob killed abolitionist elijah lovejoy in 1837 in alton illinois.
the federal government also obstructed abolitionists.
between 1836 and 1844 the u s house of representatives used what was called a gag rule.
congress had received thousands of antislavery petitions.
yet the gag rule forbade members of congress from discussing them.
this rule violated the first amendment right of citizens to petition the government.
but southern members of congress did not want to debate slavery.
many northern members of congress preferred to avoid the issue.
eventually representative and former president john quincy adams was able to get the gag rule overturned.
his resolution to enact a constitutional amendment halting the expansion of slavery never passed however.
many white southerners saw slavery as vital to the south s economy and culture.
they also felt that outsiders should not 458 chapter 14 opposing the call for women s rights publications about women s rights first appeared in the united states shortly after the american revolution.
however women s concerns did not become a national issue with strong opposition for many more years.
the movement grows the change took place when women took a more active and leading role in reform and abolition.
other social changes also led to the rise of the women s movement.
women took advantage of better educational opportunities in the early 1800s.
their efforts on behalf of reform groups helped them leam how to organize more effectively and to work together.
another benefit of reform group work was that some men began to fight for women s rights.
many activists both men and women found it unacceptable that women were not allowed to vote or sit on juries.
they were also upset that married women in many states had little or no control over their own property.
opposition to women s rights like the abolitionist movement the struggle for women s rights faced opposition.
many people did not agree with some of the goals of reading check the women s rights movement.
some women believed that they did not need new rights.
they said that women were not unequal to men only different.
some critics believed that women should not try to work in public for social changes.
women were welcome to work for social change but only from within their homes.
let her not look away from her own little family circle for the means of producing moral and social reforms wrote t s arthur.
his advice appeared in a popular women s magazine called the lady at home.
some people also thought that women lacked the physical or mental strength to survive without men s protection.
they believed that a woman should go from the protection of her father s home to that of her husband s.
they also thought that women could not cope with the outside world therefore a husband should control his wife s property.
despite opposition women continued to pursue their goal of greater rights.
drawing conclusions why did some men and women think that the women s rights movement was misguided.
primary source f f historic document declaration of sentiments at the 1848 seneca falls convention 100 people signed the declaration of sentiments a document declaring the rights of women.
the wording of the document purposely echoed the declaration of independence.
i the authors use the same words that are in the declaration of independence but include women.
we hold these truths to be self evident that all men ar d women are created equal that they are endowed by their creator with certain inalienable1 rights that among these are life liberty and the pursuit of happiness that to secure these rights governments are instituted deriving their just powers from the consent of the governed.
whenever any form of government becomes destructive of these ends it is the right of those who suffer from it to refuse allegiance2 to it and to nsst upqn e institution of a new government lay ing its foundation on such principles and organizing its powers in such form as to them shall seem most likely to effect their safety and happiness.
1 inalienable not able to be taken away 2 allegiance loyalty here the women demand that they become a part of government.
analysis skill analyzing primary sources why would women want to use the declaration of independence as a source for their own declaration.
seneca falls convention in 1840 elizabeth cady stanton attended the world s anti slavery convention in london england while on her honeymoon.
she discovered that unlike her husband she was not allowed to participate.
all women in attendance had to sit behind a curtain in a separate gallery of the convention hall.
william lloyd garrison who had helped found the american anti slavery society sat with them in protest.
the treatment of women abolitionists at the convention angered stanton and her new friend lucretia mott.
apparently even many abolitionists did not think that women were equal to men.
stanton and mott wanted to change this so they planned to form a society to advance the rights of women.
eight years passed before stanton and mott finally announced the seneca falls convention the first public meeting about women s rights held in the united states.
it opened on july 19 1848 in seneca falls new york.
declaration of sentiments the convention organizers wrote a declaration of sentiments.
this document detailed beliefs about social injustice toward women.
they used the declaration of independence as the basis for the language for their declaration of sentiments.
the authors included 18 charges against men the same number that had been charged against king george iii.
the declaration of sentiments was signed by some 100 people.
about 240 people attended the seneca falls convention including men such as abolitionist frederick douglass.
many other reformers who also worked in the temperance and abolition movements were present.
several women who participated in the convention worked in nearby factories.
one of them 19 year old charlotte woodward signed the declaration of sentiments.
she worked long hours in a factory making gloves.
her wages were very low and she could not even keep her earnings.
she had to turn her wages over to her father.
464 chapter 1 you try it.
the following passage shows you how some specialized vocabulary is defined in context.
from chapter 1 p 12 native american culture areas i native americans in the pacific northwest j carved images of totems ancestor or ani i mal spirits on tall wooden poles.
totem 5 poles held great religious and historical i significance for native americans of the 5 northwest.
feasts called potlatches were another unique or unusual aspect of these native americans culture.
use the clues to understand meaning.
1 find the word totems.
the phrase after the dash is the definition.
often in this book specialized vocabulary words are defined after a dash.
so be on the lookout for dashes.
2 the word potlatch is defined in the third sentence.
the clue to finding this definition is the word called.
words like called and known as can indicate that a definition is coming up.
in this case the word feasts is a definition of potlatch.
3 in the first sentence you see a term that is in boldface print.
you should recognize that word from seeing it in the section opener.
the definition is highlighted.
why do you think some specialized vocabulary words are in boldface print while others are not.
4 the word unique is defined in the final sentence.
the clue to finding this definition is the comma followed by the word or.
so be on the lookout for commas followed by or.
j as you read chapter 10 regions of the united states early 1800s southerners imported their manufactured goods.
tariffs made imported goods more expensive for southern farmers.
in addition high tariffs angered some of the south s european trading partners.
these trading partners would likely raise their own tariffs in retaliation.
to avoid this situation southerners called for low tariffs.
southerners also relied on enslaved african americans to work the plantations.
the issue of slavery would become increasingly controversial between the north and south.
in the third region the west the frontier economy was just emerging.
settlers favored policies that boosted their farming economy and encouraged further settlement.
western farmers grew a wide variety of crops.
their biggest priority was cheap land and internal improvements such as better roads and water transportation.
tariff of abominations tariffs became one of the first issues that president jackson faced.
in 1827 the year before jackson s election northern manufacturers began to demand a tariff on imported woolen goods.
northerners wanted the tariff to protect their industries from foreign competition especially from great britain.
british companies were driving american ones out of business with their inexpensive manufactured goods.
the tariff northerners supported however was so high that importing wool would be impossible.
southerners opposed the tariff sayng it would hurt their economy.
before andrew jackson took office congress placed a high tariff on imports.
angry southerners called it the tariff of abominations.
an abomination is a hateful thing.
southern voters were outraged.
president john quincy adams signed the tariff legislation though he did not fully support it.
in early u s history presidents tended to reserve veto power for legislation that they believed violated the constitution.
signing the tariff bill meant adams would surely be defeated in his re election bid.
the new tariff added fuel to the growing sectional differences plaguing the young nation.
summarizing describe the sectional economic differences in the united states during the early 1800s.
reading check.
the age of jackson 327 academic vocabulary criteria basic requirements focus on reaping what conclusions can you draw about the importance of the states rights debate after reading this section.
states rights debate when andrew jackson took office in 1829 he was forced to respond to the growing conflict over tariffs.
at the core of the dispute was the question of an individual state s right to disregard a law that had been passed by the u s congress.
nullification crisis early in his political career vice president john c calhoun had supported the criteria of a strong central government.
but in 1828 when congress passed the tariff of abominations calhoun joined his fellow southerners in protest.
economic depression and previous tariffs had severely damaged the economy of his home state south carolina.
it was only beginning to recover in 1828 some leaders in the state even spoke of leaving the union over the issue of tariffs.
in response to the tariff calhoun drafted the south carolina exposition and protest.
it said that congress should not favor one state or region over another.
calhoun used the protest to advance the states rights doctrine which said that since the states had formed the national government state power should be greater than federal power.
the doctrine challenged the idea of the supremacy and authority of a central government.
calhoun believed states had the right to nullify or reject any federal law they judged to be unconstitutional.
calhoun s theory was controversial and it drew some fierce challengers.
many of them were from the northern states that had benefited from increased tariffs.
these opponents believed that the american people not the individual states made up the union.
conflict between the supporters and the opponents of nullification deepened.
the dispute became known as the nullification crisis.
it became not only a crisis over the tariff but also a question about the ideas behind the constitution as a system of government.
although he chose not to put his name on his exposition and protest calhoun did resign from the vice presidency.
he was then elected to the senate where he continued his arguments in favor of nullification.
martin van buren replaced calhoun as vice president when jackson was re elected president.
the hayne webster debate the debate about states rights began early in our nation s history.
thomas jefferson and james madison supported the states power to disagree with the federal government in the virginia and kentucky resolutions of 1798 99 some of the delegates at the hartford convention supported states rights.
but calhoun s theory went further.
he believed that states could judge whether a law was or was not constitutional.
this position put the power of the supreme court in question.
the issue of nullification was intensely debated on the floor of the senate in 1830 robert y hayne senator from south carolina defended states rights.
he argued that nullification gave states a way to lawfully protest federal legislation.
daniel webster of massachusetts argued that the united states was one nation not a pact among independent states.
he believed that the welfare of the nation should override that of individual states.
jackson responds although deeply opposed to nullification jackson was concerned about economic problems in the southern states.
in 1832 he urged congress to pass another tariff that lowered the previous rate.
south carolina thought the slight change was inadequate.
the state legislature took a monumental step it decided to test the doctrine of states rights.
south carolina s first action was to pass the nullification act which declared the 1828 and 1832 tariffs null void and not binding upon this state its officers or citizens.
south carolina threatened to withdraw 8 chapter 1 section 1 bering land bridge p 6 paleo lndians p 6 migration p 6 hunter gatherers p 6 environments p 7 culture ip.
7 section 2 pueblos p 11 kivas p 11 totems p 12 teepees p 14 matrilineal p 14 iroquois league p 14 section 3 berbers p 16 mansa musa p 18 hajj p 18 mosques p 19 askia the great ip.
19 section 4 socrates ip.
22 plato p 22 aristotle p 22 reason ip.
22 democracy p 23 knights p 24 black death ip.
25 michelangelo p 26 leonardo da vinci p 26 johannes gutenberg ip.
27 joint stock companies p 27 academic vocabulary success in school is related to knowing academic vocabulary the words that are frequently used in school assignments and discussions.
in this chapter 10 other native americans resist other native americans decided to fight u s troops to avoid removal.
chief black hawk a leader of fox and sauk indians led his people in a struggle to protect their lands in illinois.
by 1832 however the sauk forces were running out of food and supplies and by 1850 they had been forced to leave.
in florida seminole leaders were forced to sign a removal treaty that their followers decided to ignore.
a leader named osceola called upon his people to resist with force and the second seminole war began.
osceola was captured and soon died in prison.
his followers however continued to fight.
some 4 000 seminole were removed and hundreds of others killed.
eventually u s officials decided to give up the fight.
small groups of seminole had resisted removal and their descendants live in florida today.
evaluating how effective was native american resistance to removal.
reading check second seminole war geography skills l interpreting maps 1 location in what parts of florida was the second seminole warfought.
2 place where was the last battle of the second seminole war fought.
i summary and preview president jackson i supported the removal of thousands of native americans from their traditional lands to federal territory.
in the next chapter review visual summary reviewing vocabulary terms and people 1 which of the following authors wrote about puritan life in the scarlet letter.
a emily dickinson c thomas gallaudet b herman melville d nathaniel hawthorne 2 which document expressed the complaints of supporters of women s rights.
a declaration of the c letters on rights of women women s rights b declaration of d seneca falls sentiments convention 3 as leader of the common school movement who worked to improve free public education.
a walt whitman c lyman beecher b horace mann d sojourner truth comprehension and critical thinking section 1 pages 438 442 4 a describe how did irish and german immigrants interact with the environments they found when they reached the united states.
b identify what political party was founded by nativists and what policies did it support.
c explain what conflicts arose in the cities.
how were the conflicts between immigrants and nativists resolved.
d analyze what factors caused u s cities to grow so fast.
e evaluate do you think that the benefits of city life outweighed its drawbacks.
section 2 pages 443 445 5 a describe who were some important transcen dentalists and what ideas did they promote.
b compare and contrast in what ways were transcendentalists and romantics similar and different.
new movements in america 4 c elaborate which movement appeals to you more american transcendentalism or romanticism.
section 3 pages 448 453 6 a identify what important reform movements became popular in the early 1800s.
b analyze why did education become an important topic for reformers in the 1800s.
what changes were made.
c predict how would the changes made to the care of the disabled change society.
d evaluate which reform movement do you think had the greatest effect on the united states.
section 4 pages 454 459 7 a recall what are the different reasons why people supported abolition.
b describe what contributions did frederick douglass make in the abolition movement.
c make inferences how did northerners and southerners differ in their opposition to abolition.
d evaluate which of the methods used by abolitionists to oppose slavery do you think was most successful.
section 5 pages 461 466 8 a recall what led many women to question their place in american society.
b make inferences why did female ractory workers like charlotte woodward support the women s rights movement.
c evaluate by 1860 do you think the women s movement had been successful.
explain your answer.
using the internet 9 activity creating visuals the liberator and north star were two newspapers that encouraged the end of slavery.
through your online book research the influence of abolitionist newspapers such as those written by william lloyd garrison and frederick douglass.
then create a visual display that illustrates how each newspaper represented the abolitionist point of view.
reading skills recognizing implied main ideas use the reading skills taught in this chapter you will read about the westward expansion of the united states a period filled with excitement and challenge.
then you will create an outline for a documentary film to be used in middle school history classes.
342 chapter to answer the question below.
16 write five sentences using the vocabulary words on page 4 choose three from the first list and two from the second.
each sentence should define the term.
social studies skills owirr interpreting diagrams use the social studies skills taught in this chapter 1 chapter 15 question of slavery is to be decided by popular sovereignty by the people who vote in the elections there in the newly organized territories of kansas and nebraska.
the act sparked violent conflict between pro slavery and antislavery groups.
skills interpreting maps 1 region in what part of the united states were the slave states located.
2 place what free state was added with the compromise of 1850.
ran from new orleans across texas and new mexico territory to southern california.
determined to have the railroad start in chicago douglas asked a few key southern senators to support his plan.
they agreed to do so if the new territory west of missouri was opened to slavery.
two new territories in january 1854 douglas introduced what became the kansas nebraska act a plan that would divide the remainder of the louisiana purchase into two territories kansas and nebraska and allow the people in each territory to decide on the question of slavery.
the act would eliminate the missouri compromise s restriction on slavery north of the 36 30 tine.
antislavery northerners were outraged by the implications.
some believed the proposal was part of a terrible plot to turn free territory into a dreary region.
inhabited by masters and slaves.
all across the north citizens attended protest meetings and sent anti nebraska petitions to congress.
even so with strong southern support and with douglas and president pierce pressuring their fellow democrats to vote for it the measure passed both houses of congress and was signed into law on may 30 1854 lost amid all the controversy over the territorial bill was douglas s proposed railroad to the pacific ocean.
congress would not approve the construction of such a railroad until 1862 kansas divided antislavery and pro slavery groups rushed their supporters to kansas.
one of the people who spoke out strongly against slavery in kansas was senator seward.
gentlemen of the slave states i accept your challenge in the cause of freedom.
we will engage in competition for kansas and god give the victory to the side which is stronger in numbers as it is in right.
william henry seward quoted in the impending crisis 1848 1861 by david m potter elections for the kansas territorial legislature were held in march 1855 almost 5 000 academic vocabulary implications things that are inferred or deduced a divided nation 485 pro slavery voters crossed the border from missouri voted in kansas and then returned home.
as a result the new legislature had a huge pro slavery majority.
the members of the legislature passed strict laws that made it a crime to question slaveholders rights and said that those who helped fugitive slaves could be put to death.
in protest antislavery kansans formed their own legislature 25 miles away in topeka.
president pierce however only recognized the pro slavery legislature.
reading check analyzing why did northerners dislike the kansas nebraska act.
focus on reaping what categories can you use to organize events in kansas.
bleeding kansas by early 1856 kansas had two opposing governments and the population was angry.
settlers had moved to kansas to homestead in peace but the controversy over slavery began to affect everyone.
in april 1856 a congressional committee arrived in kansas to decide which government was legitimate.
although committee members declared the election of the proslavery legislature to be unfair the federal government did not agree.
attack on lawrence the new pro slavery settlers owned guns and antislavery settlers received weapons shipments from friends in the east.
then violence broke out.
in may 1856 a proslavery grand jury in kansas charged leaders of the antislavery government with treason.
about 800 men rode to the city of lawrence to arrest the antislavery leaders but they had fled.
the posse took its anger out on lawrence by setting fires looting buildings and destroying presses used to print antislavery newspapers.
one man was killed in the pro slavery attack that became known as the sack of lawrence.
john brown s response abolitionist john brown was from new england but he and some of his sons had moved to kansas in 1855 the sack of lawrence made him determined to fight fire with fire and to strike terror in the hearts of the pro slavery people.
on the night of may 24 1856 along pottawatomie creek 486 brown and his men killed five pro slavery men in kansas in what became known as the pottawatomie massacre.
brown and his men dragged the pro slavery men out of their cabins and killed them with swords.
the abolitionist band managed to escape capture.
brown declared that his actions had been ordered by god.
kansas collapsed into civil war and about 200 people were killed.
the events in bleeding kansas became national front page stories.
in september 1856 a new territorial governor arrived and began to restore order.
brooks attacks sumner congress also reacted to the violence of the sack of lawrence.
senator charles sumner of massachusetts criticized pro slavery people in kansas and personally insulted andrew pickens butler a pro slavery senator from south carolina.
representative preston brooks a relative of butler s responded strongly.
on may 22 1856 brooks used a walking cane to beat sumner unconscious in the senate chambers.
dozens of southerners sent brooks new canes but northerners were out raged and called the attacker bully brooks.
brooks only had to pay a 300 fine to the federal court.
it took sumner three years before he was well enough to return to the senate.
summarizing what were some ofthe results ofthe intense division in kansas.
reading check.
the cartoon above shows preston brooks beating charles sumner with his cane.
sumner s only protection is a quill pen symbolically representing the law.
summary and preview the kansas nebraska act produced a national uproar.
in the next section you will read about divisions in political parties.
section 2 assessment wjt reviewing ideas terms and people 1 a identify what issues influenced the outcome ofthe election of 1852.
b draw conclusions why did northern and southern democrats support franklin pierce.
2 a recall what did the kansas nebraska act do.
b explain why did antislavery and pro slavery groups encourage people to move to kansas.
c evaluate would you have supported or opposed the kansas nebraska act.
3 a describe what was the pottawatomie massacre.
b analyze how did charles sumner s views on bleeding kansas create conflict.
c elaborate do you think preston brooks s punishment was reasonable.
why or why not.
critical thinking 4 sequencing review your notes on the kansas nebraska act.
then copy the graphic organizer shown below and use it to show how the act and later events led to violence in kansas.
v v v 5 taking notes on the trouble in kansas make some notes on the election of 1852 the kansas nebraska act and the events in kansas.
decide how your character feels about each of these.
how do these events affect your character.
a divided nation 4 section 3 teks 5c 7c 88 17b 18c 21a what you will learn.
political parties in the united states underwent change due to the movement to expand slavery.
the dred scottdecision created further division over the issue of slavery.
the lincoln douglas debates brought much attention to the conflict over slavery.
if you were there you are traveling through michigan in july 1854 as you pass through the town of jackson you see a crowd of several hundred people gathered under the trees.
you join them and find that it is a political rally.
antislavery supporters from different parties are meeting to form a new political party.
speakers promise to fight slavery until the contest be terminated.
how do you think this new party will affect american politics.
the split over the issue of slavery intensified due to political division and judicial decisions.
building background the slavery question continued to divide the country and lead to violence.
the issue not only dominated american politics in the mid 1800s but also brought changes in the makeup of american political parties.
key terms and people republican party p 488 james buchanan p 488 john c fremont p 489 dred scott p 489 roger b taney p 490 abraham lincoln p 490 lincoln douglas debates p 491 freeport doctrine p 492 taking notes use the graphic organizer online to take notes on the effects of political divisions and the dred scott case on the debate over slavery.
political parties undergo change democrat stephen douglas had predicted that the kansas nebraska act would raise a.
he was right.
the kansas nebraska act brought the slavery issue back into the national spotlight.
some whigs democrats free soilers and abolitionists joined in 1854 to form the republican party a political party united against the spread of slavery in the west.
democrats were in trouble.
those who supported the kansas nebraska act were not re elected.
the whig party also fell apart when northern and southern whigs refused to work together.
a senator from connecticut complained the whig party has been killed off by that miserable nebraska business.
some whigs and democrats joined the american party also known as the know nothing party.
at the party s convention delegates argued over slavery then chose former president millard fillmore as their candidate for the election of 1856 the democrats knew they could not choose a strong supporter of the kansas nebraska act such as president pierce or senator douglas.
they nominated james buchanan of pennsylvania.
buchanan had a great deal of political experience as polk s secretary of state.
most 488 chapter you will read about the civil war.
section 4 assessment a i reviewing ideas terms and people 1 a recall why did john brown want to seize the federal arsenal at harpers ferry.
b explain why did some abolitionists disagree with brown s actions.
2 a identify list the candidates in the presidential election of 1860 and what party each supported.
b predict how might abraham lincoln s victory in the election of 1860 lead to future problems.
3 a identify what states made up the confederate states of america.
b explain why did lincoln disagree with john j crittenden s plan to keep the union together.
c elaborate do you believe that the southern states had the right to secede.
why or why not.
critical thinking 4 summarizing review your notes on the significant people in the section.
then copy the graphic organizer below and use it to summarize the causes of secession.
5 taking notes on secession make some notes on the raid on harpers ferry the election of 1860 and the secession of the south.
decide how your character feels about each of these.
how do these events affect your character.
a divided nation social studies skills analysis critical thinking civic participation study assessing primary and secondary sources define the skill all historical information comes from primary and secondary sources.
primary sources are documents written by someone who witnessed or took part in an event.
they include diaries letters and artifacts such as paintings.
secondary sources are accounts of events written after the events have occurred.
they retell interpret and summarize information from primary sources.
history books biographies and computer software and databases are examples of secondary sources.
some sources such as interviews and news or media reports might be either depending on its content.
historical sources often disagree.
one writer s version of an event may be different from another writer s version.
you must assess the reliability of a source in order to weigh its value to you as a source of accurate information.
you can locate sources in a library online in newspapers or on television.
learn the skill use these guidelines to analyze and evaluate primary and secondary sources.
1 identify the nature of the material.
is it a firsthand eyewitness account or is it based on information provided by others.
2 evaluate the author.
if the material is a secondary source what qualifications does the author have.
if the material is a primary source what was the author s connection to the event.
3 determine the audience.
was the source meant to be seen by the public.
the intended audience can influence a source s content.
4 determine the purpose.
look for evidence of exaggeration opinion or bias that may have influenced the account.
5 look for documentation.
look for other information or evidence that supports the source s account.
compare sources whenever possible.
practice the skill the passage below concerns the attack on lawrence kansas that you read about in this chapter 2 2 human environment interaction why do you think columbus saw only the coastal area of mesoamerica.
maps and sailed into uncharted seas.
after more than a month with no sight of land the crew grew restless.
soon the crew saw signs of land birds and floating tree branches.
columbus promised a reward to him who first sang out that he saw land.
on october 12 1492 a lookout cried land.
ending the long journey from the canary islands.
the ships landed on an island in the bahamas.
columbus thought he had found a new route to asia.
instead he had reached another continent that was unknown to him.
columbus called the island san salvador which means holy savior.
columbus also visited another island he called hispaniola.
there he met the taino ty noh.
at that time europeans called asia the indies so columbus believing he was in asia called these native american people indians.
the taino lived in small farming communities.
in his journal columbus wrote that the taino were so generous that no one would believe it who has not seen it.
however columbus and his crew were not interested in taino culture but in gold.
after three months of exploring looking for gold and collecting exotic plants and animals columbus returned to spain.
columbus made three more journeys to the americas during his lifetime.
in 1504 he returned to spain in poor health.
columbus died two years later still believing that he had reached asia.
impact of columbus s voyages the voyages of columbus changed the way europeans thought of the world and their place in it.
a new era of interaction between europe and the americas had begun.
columbuss discovery also created conflict between european countries.
both spain and portugal wanted to add these lands to their growing empires.
in 1493 pope alexander vi originally from spain issued a decree that drew a new boundary for spain and portugal.
new empires in the americas 43 primary source letter christopher columbus 1494 two years after discovering the island of hispaniola columbus wrote a letter to the spanish king and queen outlining his ideas of its colonization.
most high and mighty sovereigns in the first place as regards the island of espanola inasmuch as the number of colonists who desire to go thither there amounts to two thousand owing to the land being safer and better for farming and trading 1 that in the said island there shall be founded three or four towns 2 that for the better and more speedy colonization of the said island no one shall have liberty to collect gold in it except those who have taken out colonists papers that each town shall have its alcalde mayor that there shall be a church and parish priests or friars to administer the sacraments to perform divine worship and for the conversion of the indians.
christopher columbus letter to the king and queen of spain 1494 analysis skills analyzing primary sources what were columbus s main concerns in founding a colony on hispaniola.
this imaginary line of demarcation divided the atlantic ocean.
spain could claim all land west of the line.
the portuguese king believed that this arrangement favored spain.
to prevent war the leaders of the two nations signed the treaty of tordesillas which moved the line of demarcation 800 miles further west.
this gave portugal more opportunity to claim lands unexplored by other europeans.
reading check.
identifying points of view why did columbus want to sail across the atlantic.
other explorers sail to the 1 americas j columbus s discoveries inspired others to sail i across the atlantic ocean.
in 1501 explorer i amerigo vespucci vuh spoo chee led a spanish fleet to the coast of present day j south america.
he was convinced the land he reached was not asia.
instead vespucci believed he had found a new world.
a ger man mapmaker labeled the continents across the ocean america in honor of vespucci.
europeans began using the names north america and south america for these lands.
in a spanish settlement in present day panama another explorer vasco nunez de balboa noon yays day bahl boh uh heard stories from local native americans about another ocean farther west.
balboa set out to find it.
for weeks he and his men struggled through thick jungle and deadly swamps.
in 1513 they reached the top of a mountain.
from this spot balboa saw a great blue sea the pacific ocean stretching out before him.
in 1519 ferdinand magellan muh jehl uhn a portuguese navigator set out with a spanish fleet to sail down the east coast of south america.
after sailing around the southern tip of the continent magellan continued into the pacific even though his ships were dangerously low on food and fresh water.
magellan s fleet sailed across the pacific ocean.
in the philippines magellan was killed in a battle with native peoples.
down to three ships the expedition continued sailing west into the indian ocean.
in 1522 the voyage s only remaining ship returned to spain.
only 18 members of magellan s original crew survived.
these sailors were the first people to circumnavigate or go all the way around the globe.
their entire journey was some 40 000 miles long.
european explorers and settlers took plants and animals with them to the americas.
they also brought back a variety of new plants and animals to europe asia and africa.
44 chapter 11 why might people leave their homes and travel long distances in search of gold.
the hills miners had to dig shafts and tunnels.
these tasks were usually pursued by mining companies rather than by individuals.
in 1853 california s yearly gold production peaked at more than 60 million.
individual success stories inspired many miners.
one lucky man found two and a half pounds of gold after only 15 minutes of work.
two african american miners found a rich gold deposit that became known as negro hill in honor of their discovery.
the vast majority of miners however did not become rich.
forty niner alonzo delano commented that the lean meager thin worn out and woebegone sorrowful miner might daily be seen at almost every point in the upper mines.
life in the mining camps mining camps sprang up wherever enough people gathered to look for gold.
these camps had colorful names such as hang town or poker flat.
miners in the camps came from many cultures and backgrounds.
most miners were young unmarried men in search of adventure.
only around 5 percent of gold rush immigrants were women or children.
the hardworking women generally made good money by cooking meals washing clothes and operating boardinghouses.
one such woman catherine haun recalled her first home in california.
we were glad to settle down and go housekeeping in a shed that was built in a day of lumber purchased with the first fee for neighbors we had a real live saloon.
i never have received more respectful attention than i did from these neighbors catherine haun quoted in ordinary americans edited by linda r monk haun s husband was a lawyer.
he concluded that he could make more money practicing law than he could panning for gold.
he was one of many people who made a good living supplying miners with food clothing equipment and other services.
miners paid high prices for basic necessities because the large amounts of gold in circulation caused severe inflation in california.
a loaf of bread for example might cost 5 cents in the east but it would sell for 50 to 75 cents in san francisco.
eggs sometimes sold for 1 apiece.
some settlers took full advantage of these conditions for free enterprise.
biddy mason and her family for instance had arrived in california as slaves.
a georgia slaveholder had brought them during the gold rush years.
mason quickly discovered that most californians opposed slavery particularly in the gold mines.
she and her family gained their freedom and moved to the small village of los angeles.
there she saved money until she could purchase some land.
over time mason s property increased in value from 250 to 200 000.
she became one of the wealthiest landowners in california a community leader and a well known supporter of charities.
expanding west 367 westward movement in the united states causes americans believe in the idea of manifest destiny.
the united states acquires vast new lands in the west.
pathfinders open trails to new territories.
gold is discovered in california.
effects native americans are forced off lands.
americans travel west to settle new areas.
the united states stretches to the pacific ocean.
california experiences a population boom.
the impact today today california is the nation s most populous state.
immigrants to california the lure of gold in california attracted miners from around the world.
many were from countries that had seen few immigrants to the united states in the past.
they were drawn to california by the lure of wealth.
for example famine and economic hardship in southeastern china caused many chinese men to leave china for america.
most hoped to find great wealth and then return home to china.
these immigrants were known in chinese as gam saan haak or travelers to gold mountain.
between 1849 and 1853 about 24 000 chinese men moved to california.
from far and near we came and were pleased wrote merchant lai chun chuen in 1855 chinese immigrants soon discovered that many americans did not welcome them however.
in 1852 california placed a high monthly tax on all foreign miners.
chinese miners had no choice but to pay this tax if they wanted to prospect for gold in california.
some chinese workers were the targets of violent attacks.
if the chinese miners dared to protest the attacks the legal system favored americans over immigrants.
despite such treatment many chinese immigrants still worked in the gold mines.
some looked for other jobs.
others opened their own businesses.
a newspaper reported chinese working as ploughmen laundry men placer miners woolen spinners and weavers domestic servants cigar makers and shoemakers.
in 1849 alone about 20 000 immigrants arrived in california not only from china but also from europe mexico and south america.
like most americans who sought gold these new arrivals intended to return home after they had made their fortunes.
however many decided to stay.
some began businesses.
for example levi strauss a german jewish immigrant earned a fortune by making tough denim pants for miners.
categorizing what types of people came to california hoping to benefit from the gold rush.
reading check.
impact on california during the spanish and mexican periods of settlement california s population grew slowly.
the arrival of the forty niners changed this dramatically.
population boom california s population explosion made it eligible for statehood only two years after being acquired by the united states.
in 1850 california became the 31st state.
however fast population growth had negative consequences for many californios and california native americans.
one early observer of the gold rush described why.
the yankee regarded every man but his own kind as an interloper trespasser who had no right to come to california and pick up the gold of free and enlightened citizens.
kelly quoted in the other californians by robert f heizer and alan f almquist 368 chapter 2 the group built boats which made it possible for them to travel around the florida panhandle.
the explorers continued along the gulf coast and eventually reached the mississippi river.
severe weather hit this group hard and many members of the expedition died.
cabeza de vaca s boat shipwrecked on what is now galveston island in texas.
only four men survived cabeza de vaca a moroccan bom slave named estevanico his spanish slaveholder and one other sailor.
each of the four survivors was captured and enslaved by native american groups living in the area.
after six years of captivity the men finally escaped.
they journeyed on foot throughout the north american southwest receiving help from native americans they met along the way.
in 1536 after turning south the group reached spanish settlements in mexico.
soon after their journey ended estevani co s slaveholder sold him to a spanish viceroy.
the viceroy assigned estevanico to serve as a guide for a new expedition he was sending into the southwest.
native americans killed the enslaved african in 1539 de vaca eventually returned to spain where he called for better treatment of native americans.
de vaca later wrote about his experiences in the first european book exclusively devoted to north america.
de vaca s book increased spanish interest in the new world.
his writings fueled the rumors that riches could be found in north america.
for two thousand leagues did we travel on land and by sea in barges besides ten months more after our rescue from captivity untiringly did we walk across the land during all that time we crossed from one ocean to the other we heard that on the shores of the south there are pearls and great wealth and that the richest and best is near there.
cabeza de vaca the journey of alvar nunez cabeza de vaca de vaca s account inspired other explorers to travel to north america.
in 1540 francisco vasquez de coronado set out estevanico was an enslaved african who traveled with cabeza de vaca.
to explore the north american southwest.
he wanted to find the legendary seven cities of gold that were rumored to exist there.
his expedition went through present day new mexico and arizona where a group of his men discovered the grand canyon.
coronado trekked through texas and 120a v geography skills interpreting maps 1 location what was the capital of the viceroyalty of peru.
2 place which viceroyalty included modern day mexico.
viceroyalty of new spain viceroyalty of peru capital of viceroyalty 0 1 000 2 000 miles 0 1 000 2 000 kilometers 100 w the impact today today christianity is the most commonly practiced religion in latin america.
the majority of latin american christians are roman catholics but an increasing number have joined protestant faiths.
through texas and oklahoma going as far north as kansas before turning around.
he never found the fabled cities of gold.
reading check comparing how were the expeditions of ponce de leon and coronado similar.
spanish treatment of native americans the journeys of the spanish explorers allowed spain to claim a huge empire in the americas.
spain s american colonies helped make the country very wealthy.
from 1503 to 1660 spanish fleets loaded with treasure carried 200 tons of gold and 18 600 tons of silver from the former aztec and inca empires to spain.
mexico and peru also grew food to help support spain s growing empire.
however these gains came with a price for native americans.
native peoples suffered greatly at the hands of the spanish.
forced labor by 1650 the spanish empire in the americas had grown to some 3 to 4 million people.
native americans made up about 80 percent of the population.
the rest were whites africans and people of mixed racial background.
settlers who came from spain were called peninsulares pay neen soo lahr ays and usually held the highest government positions.
to reward settlers for their service to the crown spain established the encomienda en koh mee en duh system.
it gave settlers the right to tax local native americans or to make them work.
in exchange these settlers were supposed to protect the native american people and convert them to christianity.
instead most spanish treated the native americans as slaves.
native americans were forced to work in terrible conditions.
they faced cruelty and desperate situations on a daily basis.
the spanish operated many plantations large farms that grew just one kind of crop.
plantations throughout the caribbean colonies made huge profits for their owners.
it took many workers to run a plantation however so colonists forced thousands of native americans to work in the fields.
indians who were taken to work on haciendas the vast spanish estates in central and south america had to raise and herd livestock.
other native americans were forced to endure the backbreaking work of mining gold and silver.
the forced labor and harsh treatment killed many native people in new spain.
0 chapter 7 p 240 241 chapter 2 murder if he killed a slave while punishing him.
enslaved africans on the other hand received harsh penalties for minor offenses such as breaking a tool.
runaways were often tortured and sometimes killed.
the treatment of enslaved africans varied.
some slaves reported that their masters treated them kindly.
to protect their investment some slaveholders provided adequate food and clothing for their slaves.
however severe treatment was very common.
whippings brandings and even worse torture were all part of american slavery.
generalizing how were enslaved africans treated in the americas.
reading check.
many slaves expressed themselves through art and dance.
dances were important social events in slave communities.
like most elements of slave culture art and dance were heavily influenced by african traditions.
identifying points of view why was religion important to slaves in the americas.
reading check i summary i wiped out and preview after disease much of the native american population colonists turned to slave labor.
in the next chapter you will learn about english colonies in the americas.
slave culture in the americas slaves in the americas came from many different parts of africa.
they spoke different languages and had different cultural backgrounds.
but enslaved africans also shared many customs and viewpoints.
they built upon what they had in common to create a new african american culture.
families were a vital part of slave culture.
families provided a refuge a place not fully under the slaveholders control.
however slave families faced many challenges.
families were often broken apart when a family member was sold to another owner.
in latin america there were many more enslaved males than females.
this made it difficult for slaves there to form stable families.
religion was a second refuge for slaves.
it gave enslaved africans a form of expression that was partially free from their slaveholders control.
slave religion was primarily christian but it included traditional elements from african religions as well.
religion gave slaves a sense of self worth and a hope for salvation in this life and the next.
spirituals were a common form of religious expression among slaves.
slaves also used songs and folktales to tell their stories of sorrow hope agony and joy.
section 5 assessment reviewing ideas terms and people 1 a recall why did so many native americans die after coming into contact with europeans.
j b summarize why did plantation owners turn to enslaved j africans as a labor force.
how did this lead to the creation j of the transatlantic slave trade.
2 a identify what was the middle passage.
b describe explain how enslaved africans were treated i after they reached the colonies in the americas j 3 a explain what are spirituals.
s b analyze how did religion and family provide a i refuge from the harsh life enslaved africans were forced to endure.
critical thinking f 4 identifying cause and effect review your notes on the slave trade.
use a chart like the one below to explain the causes and the effects of the slave trade.
5 writing about slavery add information about the f beginnings of slavery in the americas to your notes j include notes about slave culture.
what refuges did t enslaved people have from their suffering.
new empires in the americas 61 111 the slave system that arose in the american colonies was strongly influenced by geographic forces.
the climate of the southern colonies was suited to growing certain crops like cotton tobacco and sugarcane.
these crops required a great deal of labor to grow and to process.
to meet this great demand for labor the colonists looked to one main source enslaved africans.
v 1 tth america.
colonial slave ports slave ships sailed to slave ports where they unloaded their human cargo.
slave ports like boston newport and charleston were located near farming areas and the mouths of rivers.
south amerfc t1 the middle passage the terrifying and deadly voyage across the atlantic was known as the middle passage.
enslaved africans were chained and crowded together under ships decks on this long voyage as this drawing shows.
20 s the west indies africans were brought to the west indies to work on large sugar plantations.
sugarcane thrived in the west indies but it required huge amounts of labor to grow.
1 i slave forts began as trading posts.
r they were built near river mouths to provide easy access to both the sea and inland areas.
luis de senegal j africa james fort accra hl il l why assinie new england traders exchanged goods for slaves on the west african coast and then transported the slaves to the american colonies or to the west indies.
elmina slave fort west africa africa a slaves brought to the americas u 1493 1810 i kidnapped and taken to a slave ship mahommah 6 baquaqua was captured and sold into slavery as a young man.
in this 1854 account he recalls being taken to the african coast to board a slave ship.
i was taken down to the river and placed on board a boat the river was very large and branched off in two different directions previous to emptying itself into the sea we were two nights and one day on this river when we came to a place where the slaves were all put into a pen and placed with our backs to the fire when all were ready to go aboard we were chained together and tied with ropes round about our necks and were thus drawn down to the sea shore.
e 5 u 4 ililssiss of capricorn bsp 1493 1600 1601 1700 1701 1810 years geography skills i interpreting maps are i 1 location why were slave forts located where they were.
2 human environment interaction what geographic factors influenced the development of the atlantic slave trade.
social studies skills analysis critical thinking civic participation study framing historical questions define the skill j one of the most valuable ways that people gain knowledge is by asking effective questions.
an effective question is one that obtains the kind of information the person asking the question desires.
the ability to frame or construct effective questions is an important life skill as well as a key to gaining a better understanding of history.
asking effective historical questions will aid you in studying history and in conducting historical research.
learn the skill effective questions are specific straightforward and directly related to the topic.
when we do not obtain the information we want or need often it is because we have asked the wrong questions.
asking effective questions is not as easy as it seems.
it requires thought and preparation.
the following guidelines will help you in framing effective questions about history and other topics as well.
1 determine exactly what you want to know.
2 decide what questions to ask and write them down.
having written questions is very important.
they will help guide your study or research and keep you focused on your topic and goal.
you want to know.
for example if you wanted to know more about trade and the voyages of exploration that are discussed in chapter 16 p 533 i i this passage contains most of the same information but is shorter.
notali of the information is included.
508 chapter review visual summary use the visual summary below to help you review the main ideas of the chapter to answer the following question.
16 write a historical question for each of the five sections of this chapter 7 washington says farewell in 1796 washington decided not to run for a third presidential term.
he wrote that he was tired of public life and devoutly strongly wished for retirement.
he also wanted to remind americans that the people were the country s true leaders.
with the help of alexander hamilton and james madison washington wrote his farewell address.
in it he spoke about what he believed were the greatest dangers to the american republic.
among these were the dangers of foreign ties and political conflicts at home.
washington warned against forming permanent ties with other countries because choosing sides could draw the united states into war.
the nation would try to follow a course of non involvement for another century but some involvement with other governments seemed unavoidable.
he also worried about growing political conflicts within the nation.
washington believed that disagreements between political groups weakened government.
political unity he said was a key to national success.
washington left office warning the nation to work out its differences and protect its independence.
washington also warned against too much public debt.
he thought the government should try not to borrow money.
he wanted future generations to be protected from debt.
he concluded his speech by looking forward to his retirement and praising his country.
i anticipate.
the sweet enjoyment of good laws under a free government the ever favorite object of my heart.
reading check finding main ideas what issues did washington believe were most dangerous to the future of the new nation.
i summary and preview americans res i ponded to foreign and domestic conflict during washington s presidency.
in the next section you will read about the administration of john adams.
section 3 assessment i online quiz reviewing ideas terms and people 1 a describe what did washington s neutrality proclamation state.
b compare and contrast in what ways were jay s treaty and pinckney s treaty similar and different.
how did they affect areas important to the united states.
2 a identify who were the leaders of american indian and u s forces in the conflict in the northwest territory.
b predict what are some possible consequences of the treaty of greenville for american indians in the northwest territory.
3 a recall why did congress tax american made whiskey.
b explain how did the tax lead to the whiskey rebellion.
c elaborate why do you think that president washington personally led the army against westerners in the whiskey rebellion.
4 a identify what warnings did washington give the nation in his farewell address.
explain the impact of the address.
b draw conclusions why did washington not run for a third term as president.
critical thinking 5 categorizing review your notes on the challenges the young united states faced.
then categorize those challenges as either foreign or domestic in a graphic organizer like this one.
challenges foreign domestic vwritesmart 6 thinking about washington hamilton and jefferson in this section you read about the activities of these three men during a difficult time for our country.
what did you learn that you could add to a nobel prize nomination for any of these leaders.
i launching the nation 249 what you will learn john adams s presidency main ideas the rise of political parties created competition in the election of 1796 the xyz affair caused problems for president john adams.
controversy broke out over the alien and sedition acts.
if you were there you are a newspaper editor in virginia in 1798 you ve joined jefferson s political party which opposes the new president.
in fact your paper has printed many articles that criticize him calling him greedy and foolish.
you believe that s your right in a free country.
but now congress has passed a law that makes it illegal to criticize the government.
you could be arrested for your articles.
would you stop criticizing the government.
the development of political parties in the united states contributed to differing ideas about the role of the federal government.
key terms political parties p 250 federalist party p 250 democratic republican party 250 xyz affair p 252 alien and sedition acts p 253 kentucky and virginia resolutions p 253 building background people within the new united states had differing viewpoints on many issues.
personal rivalries among political leaders also created divisions in the new nation.
trying to limit dissent in the country the federal government passed several unpopular laws.
i taking notes use the graphic organizer online to take notes on the two political parties that emerged during the election of 1796 their views of government their candidates and the outcome of the election.
the election of 1796 the election of 1796 began a new era in u s politics.
for the first time more than one candidate ran for president.
political parties groups that help elect people and shape policies had begun to form during washington s presidency.
despite washington s warnings about political parties the rivalry between two parties dominated the 1796 election.
alexander hamilton helped found the federalist party which wanted a strong federal government and supported industry and trade.
the federalists chose john adams and thomas pinckney as candidates.
adams knew he was not well liked in the south or the west but he hoped people would support him after they thought about his years of loyal public service.
thomas jefferson and james madison founded the democratic republican party.
its members called republicans wanted to limit the federal government s power.
this party is not related to today s republican party.
they chose thomas jefferson and aaron burr as their candidates.
chapter 16 production of coal iron wheat and wool increased.
also the export of com wheat beef and pork to europe doubled.
in the south the export of resources decreased because of the union blockade.
finally the union had money.
it had a more developed economy banking system and a currency called greenbacks.
the south had to start printing its own confederate dollars.
some states printed their own money too.
this led to financial chaos.
taking advantage of the union s strengths general winfield scott developed a two part strategy 1 destroy the south s economy with a naval blockade of southern ports 2 gain control of the mississippi river to divide the south.
other leaders urged an attack on richmond virginia the confederate capital.
the south hoped to wear down the north and to capture washington d c confederate president jefferson davis also tried to win foreign allies through cotton diplomacy.
this was the idea that great britain would support the confederacy because it needed the south s raw cotton to supply its booming textile industry.
cotton diplomacy did not work as the south had hoped.
britain had large supplies of cotton and it got more from india and egypt.
reading check comparing what advantages did the north and south have leading up to the war.
resources of the north and south southern resources the confederacy had advantages as well.
with its strong military tradition the south put many brilliant officers into battle.
southern farms provided food for its armies.
the south s best advantage however was strategic.
it needed only to defend itself until the north grew tired of fighting.
the north had to invade and control the south.
to accomplish this the union army had to travel huge distances.
for example the distance from northern virginia to central georgia is about the length of scotland and england combined.
because of distances such as this the north had to maintain long supply lines.
in addition wilderness covered much of the south.
armies found this land difficult to cross.
also in virginia many of the rivers ran from east to west.
because of this they formed a natural defense against an army that attacked from the north to the south.
as a result northern generals were often forced to attack confederate troops from the side rather than from the front.
furthermore because southerners fought mostly on their home soil they were often familiar with the area.
north south southern exports do not include tennessee arkansas and mississippi.
analysis skilli analyzing visuals 1 do you think the north or the south could maintain better supply lines for their troops.
2 do you think the north or the south could provide more weapons for their troops.
the civil war 51 union and confederate soldiers early in the war uniforms differed greatly especially in the confederate army.
uniforms became simpler and more standard as the war dragged on.
union soldier analysis skill analyzing visuais how are the union and confederate uniforms and equipment similar and different.
preparing for war the north and the south now rushed to war.
neither side was prepared for the tragedy to come.
volunteer armies volunteer militias had sparked the revolution that created the united states.
now they would battle for its future.
at the start of the war the union army had only 16 xx soldiers.
within months that number had swelled to a half million.
southern men rose up to defend their land and their ways of life.
virginian thomas webber came to fight against the invading foe enemy who now pollute the sacred soil of my beloved native state.
when union soldiers asked one captured rebel why he was fighting he replied i m fighting because you re down here.
helping the troops civilians on both sides helped those in uniform.
they raised money provided aid for soldiers and their families and ran emergency hospitals.
dr elizabeth black well the first woman to receive a license to practice medicine organized a group that pressured president lincoln to form the u s sanitary commission in june 1861 the sanitary as it was called was run by clergyman henry bellows.
tens of thousands of volunteers worked with the u s sanitary commission to send bandages medicines and food to union army camps and hospitals.
some 3 000 women served as nurses in the union army.
training the soldiers both the union and confederate armies faced shortages of clothing food and even rifles.
most troops lacked standard uniforms and simply wore their own clothes.
eventually each side chose a color for their uniforms.
the union chose blue.
the confederates wore gray.
514 chapter.
as you read take notes on the inventions their inventors and how they changed life in the united states.
then choose one invention and design a newspaper advertisement to persuade readers to buy or use the invention.
united states 1807 robert fulton s clermont becomes the first commercially successful steamboat.
world 1790 the first steam powered mill opens in great britain.
380 chapter 16 primary source speech jefferson davis s inaugural address j in his inauguration speech jefferson davis gave the reasons southern leaders 5 believed they had a right to secede and he stated that they would do so peace l fully if allowed the south s right to secede is based on the american idea that governments rest on the consent of the governed and that it is the right of the people to alter or abolish them at will whenever they become destructive of the ends for which they were established actuated solely by the desire to preserve our own.
rights and promote our own welfare the separation by the confederate states has been marked by no aggression upon others and followed by no domestic convulsion1.
h he claimed that the liberties guaranteed to citizens and states in the declaration of independence the u s constitution and the bill of rights had been violated by attempts to limit the spread of slavery.
he compared the constitution of the new government with that of the united states saying that they were similar.
the main difference was the clear protection of slavery in the confederate constitution.
mutual interest will invite to good will and kind offices on both parts.
if however passion or lust of dominion should cloud the judgment or inflame the ambition of those states we must prepare to meet the emergency and to maintain by the final arbitrament2 of the sword the position which we have assumed among the nations of the earth but davis also spoke of the urgent need for an army and a navy.
davis speech only mentions equality once in a list of ideals that he counts as the south s ideals.
davis did not mention equality between the races even in reference to the lack of equal rights for african americans.
he also did not directly discuss the nature of the confederate government and union.
even leaders that strongly supported the confederate cause could not answer whether or not a southern state would have the rightto secede from the confederacy if it chose to in the future.
the issue would soon become hotly debated in virginia.
residents of western virginia wanted to remain part of the union and seceded from eastern virginia only a few months after the south s secession.
virginia s legislature fought the action but the region became the union state of l l esf virginia the next year.
1 domestic convulsion internal revolution 2 arbitrament decision davis defended the act of secession as a protection of the rights of slaveholders.
primary source speech w lincoln s first inaugural address lincoln s first inaugural address on march 4 1861 described his desire to maintain the union and prevent war with the southern states.
although slavery was a huge issue in the debate over secession lincoln did not say that he would work to free the slaves.
he stated that preserving the union was his primary goal even if that meant that slavery remained legal.
lincoln suggested that in a democratic government the correct course of action for the south was to work toward an amendment to the constitution instead of rejecting the union.
he stated his reasons for disagreeing with southern leaders on the issue of whether or not secession was legal.
no state upon its own mere motion can lawfully get out of the union and that resolves and ordinances to that effect are legally void lincoln knew that southern leaders had already considered this argument and that some were calling for armed rebellion.
they believed the constitution protected their liberty to own slaves.
in your hands my dissatisfied fellow countrymen and not in mine is the momentous issue of civil war.
the government will not assail you.
you can have no conflict without being yourselves the aggressors he pointed out that because the union was agreed to by every state all of them had to agree in order to break it.
lincoln warned that any revolutionary actions would be met with union military force.
primary source the first lines are some of the most quoted lines of any american speech.
this was the type of nation one where everyone was entitled to liberty and equality that the union troops fought and died for.
he hoped the dedication of the battlefield as a national cemetery would remind northerners of the soldiers sacrifice.
speech gettysburg address after the bloody battle of gettysburg lincoln gave a speech that supported the union s goal of continuing the fight for the union.
four score and seven years ago our fathers brought forth on this continent a new nation conceived in liberty and dedicated to the proposition that all men are created equal w e here highly resolve that these dead shall not have died in vain that this nation under god shall have a new birth of freedom and that government of the people by the people for the people shall not perish from the earth march 4 1861 abraham lincoln is inaugurated to his first term.
april 17 1861 may 21 1861 virginia arkansas tennessee and north carolina secede from the union.
january 1 1863 the emancipation proclamation goes into effect freeing slaves in rebelling territories.
november 19 1863 president lincoln delivers the gettysburg address.
515c chapter you will read about thomas jefferson s presidency.
reading check bsummary i formed t section 4 assessment i reviewing ideas terms and people 1 a recall what two political parties emerged before the election of 1796.
who were the founders of each party.
how did their views differ.
b analyze what effect did political parties have on the election of 1796.
c elaborate do you think it was difficult for adams and jefferson to serve together as president and vice president.
explain your answer.
2 a recall what was one of adams s first goals as president.
b make inferences why were federalists shocked by adams s decision to resume peace talks with the french.
3 a identify identify the foreign policy of john adams.
what did the alien and sedition acts state.
b explain what idea regarding states rights did the kentucky and virginia resolutions support.
c elaborate would you have supported the alien and sedition acts.
explain your answer.
critical thinking 4 contrasting review your notes on the election of 1796 and the formation of political parties.
then create a chart like this one identifying how each of the terms listed below reflected party disagreements.
xyz affair alien and sedition acts kentucky and virginia resolutions 5 gathering information about john adams take some notes about john adams s contributions that would support his nomination for the nobel prize then begin to compare and contrast all four leaders you have studied in this chapter.
which one will you nominate.
launching the nation 253 social studies skills analysis critical thinking civic participation making group decisions define the skill democracy is one of the most valued principles of american society.
it is based on the idea that the members of society or representatives they choose make the decisions that affect society.
decisionmaking would be much more efficient if just one person decided what to do and how to do it.
however that method is not at all democratic.
making decisions as a group is a complicated and difficult skill.
however it is an important one at all levels of society from governing the nation to making group decisions at school in the community and with your friends.
at every level the skill is based on the ability of the group s members to interact in effective and cooperative ways.
learn the skill think about the job the first congress faced after the constitution was ratified.
the nation was still millions of dollars in debt from the revolutionary war.
congress had to find a way to pay these debts as well as raise money to run the government.
they had to work together to find the best plan for the nation.
like that first congress being part of an effective group requires that you behave in certain ways.
1 identify the situation.
decide as a group what situation or problem the decision needs to address.
2 gather information.
each person in the group should gather information to develop his or her idea about what the best decision might be.
3 identify options and predict outcomes.
members of the group should contribute opinions and ideas for what the decision should be.
part of supporting your decision should be a description of what the outcome of your decision would be and why it would benefit the group as a whole.
4 discuss and compromise.
after everyone has contributed his or her opinions and thoughts on the decisions the group should work together to discuss the best option.
the final decision might include parts of several people s ideas.
5 implement the decision.
each member of the group should act according to the decision.
this might be as simple as going to see the same movie with your friends or it might involve each member of the group doing a different task to carry out the plan of the group.
practice the skill suppose that you are a member of the first congress.
with a group of classmates you must decide what and who should be taxed to raise the money the government needs.
when your group has finished answer the following questions.
1 did your group have a plan.
did it discuss what taxes to pass.
compared to other members how much did you take part in those activities.
2 how well did your group work together.
what role did you play in that.
3 was your group able to make a decision.
if not why.
if so was compromise involved.
do you support the decision.
explain why or why not.
i chapter 3 jamestown on a river.
2 human environment interaction what do you think would have been a commonly used method of transportation for people in this region.
powhatan confederacy jamestown fared better under john smith who took control of the colony and built a fort in 1608 he forced the settlers to work harder and to build better housing by creating rules that rewarded harder workers with food.
the colonists received help from the powerful powhatan confederacy of native americans after smith made an agreement with them.
the powhatan brought food to help the colonists and taught them how to grow com.
in 1609 some 400 more settlers arrived in jamestown.
that winter disease and famine once again hit the colony.
the colonists called this period the starving time.
by the spring of 1610 only 60 colonists were still alive.
jamestown failed to make a profit until colonist john rolfe introduced a new type of tobacco that sold well in england.
war in virginia john rolfe married pocahontas daughter of the powhatan leader in 1614 their marriage helped the colonists form more peaceful relations with the powhatan.
however pocahontas died three years later in england where she was visiting with rolfe.
in 1622 colonists killed a powhatan leader.
the powhatan responded by attacking the virginia settlers later that year.
fighting between the colonists and the powhatan continued for the next 20 years.
because the london company could not protect its colonists the english crown canceled the company s charter in 1624 virginia became a royal colony and existed under the authority of a governor chosen by the king.
finding main ideas what problems did the jamestown colonists face.
d history video save our history secrets of jamestown sbbbbbs reading check academic vocabulary authority power right to rule the english colonies 73 academic vocabulary factors causes daily life in virginia in early virginia people lived on scattered farms rather than in towns.
tobacco farmers established large farms called plantations.
tobacco was so valuable that it was sometimes used as money.
headright system these plantations were made possible in part by the headright system which was started by the london company.
under this system colonists who paid their own way to virginia received 50 acres of land.
a colonist could earn another 50 acres for every additional person brought from england.
rich colonists who brought servants or relatives to virginia gained large amounts of land.
primary source letter a note from virginia in this 1619 letter the secretary of the virginia colony john pory encouraged people to move to virginia.
as touching the quality of this country three things there be which in ferny ears may bring this co bony to perfection the english glow vineyards cattle all our riches for the present do consist in tobacco wherein one man by his own labor has in one year raised to himself to the vadue of zoo pounds sterlings and another by the means of sir.
servants has cleared at one crop n thousand pound english.
these be true yet indeed rare examples yet possible to be done by others from the power of words edited by t h breen analysis skill j analyzing primary sources how does this letter indicate the importance of tobacco in virginia.
labor in virginia colonists in virginia suffered very high death rates which led to labor shortages.
the majority of workers were indentured servants.
these servants signed a contract to work for four to seven years for those who paid for their journey to america.
expansion of slavery not all laborers in virginia came from europe.
a dutch ship brought the first africans to virginia in 1619 some africans were servants others had been enslaved.
some african servants became successful farmers when their contracts ended.
the demand for workers was soon greater than the supply of people willing to work as indentured servants.
over time the cost of slaves fell.
these factors led some colonists to turn to slave labor.
by the mid 1600s most africans in virginia were being kept in lifelong slavery.
bacon s rebellion as plantations grew the economy of jamestown began to expand.
soon colonial officials began to ask for more taxes.
during the mid 1600s poor colonists protested the higher taxes.
they were also upset about the governor s policies toward native americans.
they thought the colony was not well protected against attack.
in 1676 a group of former indentured servants led by nathaniel bacon attacked some friendly american indians.
bacon opposed the governor s policies promoting trade with american indians.
he also thought the colonists should be able to take the indians land.
when the governor tried to stop him bacon and his followers attacked and burned jamestown in an uprising known as bacon s rebellion.
at one point bacon controlled much of the colony.
he died of fever however and the rebellion soon ended.
analyzing what factors led to the increased use of slave labor in virginia.
reading check 4 chapter 3 history close up plymouth colony the pilgrims landed in a region of forests streams and rocky soil.
plymouth colony was surrounded by stakes that formed a wall of protection.
outside the wall were colonists crop fields.
analysis a skill.
analyzing visuals i what ways were plymouth colony and the indian village similar and different.
religion and government in new england massachusetts bay colony had to obey english laws.
however its charter provided more independence than did the royal charter of i virginia.
for example it created a general i court to help run the massachusetts colony t the puritan colonists turned this court into a type of self government to represent the needs of the people.
each town sent two or three delegates to the court.
after john winthrop served as the colony s first governor the general court elected the governor and his assistants.
in 1644 the general court became a two house or bicameral legislature.
politics and religion were closely linked in puritan new england.
government leaders were also church members and ministers often had a great deal of power in puritan communities.
male church members were the only colonists who could vote.
colonists became full members in the church by becoming what the puritans called god s elect or chosen.
reaching this status was a difficult process.
individuals had to pass a public test to prove that their faith was strong.
in 1636 minister thomas hooker and his followers left massachusetts to help found connecticut another new england colony.
the english colonies 81 ri biography anne hutchinson 1591 1643 in 1634 anne hutchinson emigrated with her family from england to the massachusetts bay colony.
after settling in boston she worked as a nurse and midwife.
she also hosted a bible study class that met in her home.
over time hutchinson began to question the teachings of the local ministers.
meanwhile her popularity grew.
after being banished from the colony hutchinson settled in rhode island and later long island.
she died in an american indian attack.
today we remember her as a symbol of the struggle for religious freedom.
drawing conclusions why do you think church leaders disliked hutchinson s ideas.
church and state crs religion affected government government leaders were church members.
ministers had great authority.
government affected religion government leaders outlawed certain religious views.
government leaders punished dissenters.
in 1639 hooker wrote the fundamental orders of connecticut.
this set of principles made connecticut s government more democratic.
for example the orders allowed men who were not church members to vote.
as a result some historians call hooker the father of american democracy.
the fundamental orders of connecticut also outlined the powers of the general courts.
not all puritans shared the same religious views.
minister roger williams did not agree with massachusetts leaders.
he called for his church to separate completely from the other new england congregations.
he also criticized the general court for taking land from american indians without paying them.
puritan leaders worried that williams s ideas might hurt the unity of the colony and they made him leave.
williams took his supporters to southern new england.
they formed a new settlement called providence.
this settlement later developed into the colony of rhode island.
in providence williams supported the separation of the church from the state.
he also believed in religious tolerance for all members of the community.
in boston an outspoken woman also angered puritan church leaders.
anne hutchinson publicly discussed religious ideas that some leaders thought were radical.
for example hutchinson believed that people s relationship with god did not need guidance from ministers.
hutchinson s views alarmed puritans such as john winthrop.
puritan leaders did not believe that women should be religious leaders.
puritan leaders put hutchinson on trial for her ideas.
the court decided to force her out of the colony.
with a group of followers hutchinson helped found the new colony of portsmouth later a part of the colony of rhode island.
although these differences among religious views caused some community conflicts they were also an important step in the development of religious freedom in the colonies.
chapter 16 union genera.
grant rose to shake hands with confederate general lee after the surrender.
grant allowed lee to keep his sword and lee s men to keep their horses.
m ias it important for grant and lee to shake hands.
why or why not.
sad and depressed at the downfall of a foe enemy who had fought so long and valiantly bravely and had suffered so much for a cause though that cause was i believe one of the worst for which a people ever fought i s grant battle cry of freedom as general lee returned to his troops general grant stopped union forces from cheering their victory.
the war is over grant said with relief.
the rebels are our countrymen again.
the effects of the war the civil war lasted four years from 1861 to 1865 and had deep and long lasting effects.
almost 620 000 americans lost their lives during the four years of fighting.
the defeat of the south ended slavery there.
the majority of former slaves however had no homes or jobs.
the southern economy was in ruins.
a tremendous amount of hostility remained even after the fighting had ceased.
the war was over but the question remained how could the united states be united once more.
section 5 assessment reviewing ideas terms and people 1 a identify what confederate general died from his wounds at chancellorsville.
b draw conclusions why was the union army defeated at chancellorsville.
2 a identify what was the gettysburg address.
b analyze why was geography important to the outcome of the battle of gettysburg.
why was the battle significant.
3 a recall what was the purpose of the wilderness campaign.
b draw conclusions in what way was the capture of atlanta an important victory for president lincoln.
4 a identify what events led to lee s surrender at appomattox courthouse.
b summarize what problems did the south face at the end of the war.
reading check predicting what problems might the union face following the civil war.
i summary and preview after four long i years the civil war ended with general critical thinking 5 supporting a point of view review your notes on the end of the civil war.
then copy the graphic organizer below.
use it to show the three events in this section that you think contributed most to the end of the civil war and explain why.
s on writing 6 taking notes on the end of the war reread this section and take notes on the battle of gettysburg the wilderness campaign the fall of atlanta and the south s surrender.
be sure to answer the following questions who.
lee s surrender at appomattox court house.
in the next chapter 16 chapter you ll learn about the result of these conflicts the american revolution.
section 5 assessment a reviewing ideas terms and people 1 a explain why did great britain raise taxes in its american colonies.
b evaluate which method of protesting taxes do you think was most successful for colonists.
2 a describe what events led to the boston massacre.
b elaborate why do you think john adams and josiah quincy agreed to defend the british soldiers that were involved in the boston massacre.
3 a recall what was the purpose of the tea act.
b draw conclusions what message did the boston tea party send to the british government.
4 a explain why did parliament pass the intolerable acts.
b draw conclusions why do you think the colo nists believed that these laws were intolerable.
i s critical thinking i i 5 identifying cause and effect review your notes.
on the laws passed by the british government.
then add a new column to your chart and identify the laws results.
law result 1.
5 mvwritesmart 6 gathering information now you have some information about the political situation in boston in the late 1700s.
why might someone from britain want to immigrate to boston at this time.
would you consider the city of boston rather than a whole colony for the subject of your infomercial.
the english colonies 103 social studies skills analysis critical thinking s v c.
3 participation study interpreting time lines define the skill knowing the sequence or order in which historical events took place is important to understanding these events.
time lines visually display the sequence of events during a particular period of time.
they also let you easily see time spans between events such as how long after one event a related event took place and what events occurred in between.
sequencing the life spans and major accomplishments of people helps you see when people s lifespans overlapped who might have been influenced by whom and what ideas and events happened around the same time.
in addition comparing time lines for different places makes relationships between distant events easier to identify and understand.
learn the skill follow these guidelines to read interpret and compare time lines.
1 determine each time line s framework.
note the years it covers and the periods of time into which it is divided.
2 study the order of events on each time line.
note the length of time between events.
compare what was taking place on different time lines around the same time period.
3 look for relationships between events.
pay particular attention to how an event on one time line might relate to an event on another.
practice the skill interpret the time lines below to answer the following questions.
1 what is each time line s framework.
2 how long was england without a king.
3 what event in england allowed the colonists to get rid of the dominion of new england in 1689.
4 how old was governor andros when the dominion of new england was formed.
leaders and events in the colonies 1641 massachusetts shews independence by passing 1590 1657 william own code of laws.
bradford signer of the mayflower compact 1637 1714 edmund andros governor of the dominion of new england 1659 virginia pledges loyalty to charles ii as king of england.
1666 massachusetts is united with other colonies in dominion of new england by king james ii.
1669 colonies disband dominion of new england and re establish separate governments.
1599 1656 1642 civil war breaks out oliver cromwell between king charles i lord protector of and parliament the commonwealth 1660 monarchy is restored charles ii becomes king.
1649 charles i is executed parliament takes power.
leaders and events in england 1666 parliament overthrows king james ii and puts new king on throne.
04 chapter 8 peaceful change of political power from one party to another the tied race led to the twelfth amendment 1804 which created a separate ballot for president and vice president.
when the election results came in jefferson and burr had won 73 electoral votes each to 65 for adams and 64 for pinckney.
the democratic republicans had won the election but the tie between jefferson and burr caused a problem.
under the constitution at that time the two candidates with the most votes became president and vice president.
the decision went to the house of representatives as called for in the constitution.
the house like the electoral college also deadlocked.
days went by as vote after vote was called each ending in ties.
exhausted lawmakers napped on the floor.
jefferson finally won on the thirty sixth vote.
the election marked the first time that one party had replaced another in power in the united states.
it is seen by some as the end of the early republic that began with the failure of the articles of confederation and creation of the constitution.
the election signaled that the new system of government would carry the nation through a peaceful transition of political power.
the problems with the voting system led congress to propose the twelfth amendment.
this amendment created a separate ballot for president and vice president.
analyzing information what was significant about jeffersons victory.
reading check.
the jefferson era 267 primary source speech jefferson s inaugural address on march 4 1801 thomas jefferson gave his first inaugural address.
in the following excerpt jefferson describes his thoughts on the nation s future.
by using phrases like these jefferson tries to reassure his political opponents.
here jefferson states his opinion of what is essential to good government.
let us then fellow citizens unite with one heart and one mind e very difference of opinion is not a difference of principle.
we have called by different names brethren1 of the same principle.
we are all republicans we are all federalists still one thing more fellow citizens a wise and frugal2 government which shall restrain men from injuring one another shall leave them otherwise free to regulate their n own pursuits of industry and improvement and shall not take from the mouth of labor the bread it has earned.
this is the sum of good government ix 1 brethren brothers 2 frugal thrifty this phrase shows jefferson s determination to keep government small.
analysis skill analyzing primarysources what words and phrases indicate jefferson s support for a small national government.
the impact today a monument to thomas jefferson was completed in 1943 and is one of the most frequently visited sites in washington d c jefferson s policies when jefferson took office he brought with him a style and political ideas different from those of adams and washington.
jefferson was less formal than his predecessors and he wanted to limit the powers of government.
jefferson is inaugurated americans looked forward with excitement to jefferson s first speech as president.
people from across the nation gathered in the new capital washington d c to hear him.
curious travelers looked with pride at the partially completed capitol building and at the executive mansion not yet called the white house.
the two buildings dominated the surrounding homes and forests.
small businesses dotted the landscape.
at one of these a modest boardinghouse the president elect was putting the finishing touches on his speech.
on the morning of march 4 1801 he left the boardinghouse and walked to the capitol.
the leader of a republic jefferson believed should not ride in fancy carriages.
jefferson read his speech in a quiet voice.
he wanted to make it clear that he supported the will of the majority.
he also stressed the need for a limited government and the protection of civil liberties.
from these humble surroundings in which jefferson delivered his speech washington eventually grew into a large and impressive city.
over the years the capitol and the executive mansion were joined by other state buildings and monuments.
jefferson who had long dreamed of a new national capital that would be independent of the interests of any one state was pleased to be a part of this process of building a federal city.
jefferson in office president jefferson faced the task of putting his republican ideas into practice.
one of his first actions was to select the members of his cabinet.
his choices included james madison as secretary of state and albert gallatin as secretary of the treasury.
jefferson would also benefit from the democratic republican party s newly won control of both houses of congress.
at jefferson s urging congress allowed the hated alien and sedition acts to expire.
jefferson i chapter 16 11 what do you think the artist is saying about politicians with this cartoon.
texas test practice directions read each question and write the letter of the best response.
1 use the map below to answer the following question.
the place where two major battles of the civil war were fought is indicated on the map by which letter.
a w b x c y d z 2 the battle of gettysburg was an important battle of the civil war because f it was an overwhelming confederate victory.
g the union armys advance on the confederate capital was stopped.
h it ended lees hopes of advancing into northern territory.
j it enabled the union to control the mississippi river.
3 overall command of confederate forces in virginia during most of the civil war was held by a jefferson davis.
b william tecumseh sherman.
c thomas stonewall jackson.
d robert e lee.
4 which of lincolns speeches and writings reflected the statement that all men are created equal.
f the emancipation proclamation g the first inaugural address 1861 h the second inaugural address 1865 j the gettysburg address 5 the tactics that sherman used against confederate armies in the south were based on what strategy.
a cutting off troops from their officers b a naval blockade of southern ports c destroying the souths resources and economy d hit and run attacks on major southern cities 6 in the war of 1812 the british navy blockaded american seaports in the hope that the u s economy would suffer and the united states would surrender.
which civil war strategy was similar.
f scotts plan to destroy the southern economy g shermans march to the sea h general ulysses s grants capture of vicksburg j admiral david farraguts defeat of new orleans 7 read the following quote from grant about lees surrender and use it to answer the question below.
zzwhat general lees feelings were i do not know.
he was a man of much dignity without expression on his face.
it was impossible to say whether he felt inwardly glad that the end had finally come or felt sad over the result and was too manly to show it.
whatever his feelings they were entirely hidden from me.
s grant adapted from personal memoirs of u s grant vol.
2 document based question what is your opinion about what lee might have been feeling during his surrender.
the civil war 54i multimedia connections click through history 7 aw reached the front izw when on loohtng sy the street i saw some o the men on horsehaek whata horrible sight.
i woe fully persuaded that the koma had aetuedly come at lust whatthey would do with us wus a fearful afoestlon to my young mind.
tiilie pierce aee 15 inter activities ft a young woman s account read the document to witness the arrival of confederate troops through the eyes of a gettysburg teenager.
jliilo h a citizen soldier watch the video to meet john burns the man who would come to be called the citizen hero of gettysburg.
r w al m sl i bill w j nr.
1 1 a family s story watch the video to discover the story of courage and commitment exhibited by one gettysburg family.
a gettysburg pennsylvania was a sleepy agricultural town of about 2 400 residents when the civil war arrived on its doorstep in the early summer of 1863 many of the town s men were elsewhere either fighting in the war or guarding their livestock in the countryside.
this left mostly women and children to endure the battle.
for three terrifying days they hid in basements or in tightly shuttered houses.
even after the battle finally ended the horrors continued as the gettysburg civilians emerged to find a scene of unimaginable death and destruction.
explore some of the personal stories and recollections of the gettysburg civilians online.
you can find a wealth of information video clips primary sources activities and more at f 71 1 the national cemetery watch the video to learn about the soldiers national cemetery and the speech president lincoln gave there.
texas essential knowledge and skills teks a 16b.
18 a 18c 21a 21c 22a 23a 23c 24b 27a 27b 27c 27d 28b 29a 29b 29c 291 29j 30a 30d section 1 rebuilding the south 552 the big idea the nation faced many problems in rebuilding the union.
section 2 the fight over reconstruction 558 the big idea the return to power of the pre war southern leadership led republicans in congress to take control of reconstruction.
section 3 reconstruction in the south 564 the big idea as reconstruction ended african americans faced new hurdles and the south attempted to rebuild.
section 4 reconstruction in the west 571b the big idea the great plains provided new opportunities for americans but also caused conflict with native americans in the region.
548 chapter to research.
find five sources on the internet that discuss the topic.
identify each source as primary or secondary.
list the author and describe why he or she is an authority or not.
then identify language in each source that indicates whether or not the source is valid.
compare and contrast the information in the sources then write a brief explanation of the topic.
verify the information you use between sources.
cite each source you are using in your explanation.
social studies skills interpreting time lines use the social studies skills taught in this chapter to answer the questions below.
21 look at the time line on page 104 write a brief description of the events described that includes their relationship to one another.
22 choose two major events from each section of the chapter 1790 1860 essential question how did slavery and agriculture affect the economy and society of the south.
texas essential knowledge and skills teks a 12a 12b 23a 23c 23d 26a 26b 27a 27d 28a 29a 29c 29h 291 29j section 1 growth of the cotton industry 414 the big idea the invention of the cotton gin made the south a one crop economy and increased the need for slave labor.
section 2 southern society 420 the big idea southern society centered around agriculture.
section 3 the slave system 424 the big idea the slave system in the south produced harsh living conditions and occasional rebellions.
cus on writing j writesmart biographical sketch in this chapter you will read how the culture of the south changed after the war.
predicting focus on reading when you read a story you can often predict what might come next in the story s logical progression by understanding what has already happened.
understanding predicting likewise when you study history you can use your knowledge of the past to predict a likely outcome of an event.
if you see a pattern to historical events the same pattern could apply to future events.
you have learned about the ways that americans have moved into new lands and the economic and political changes that have occurred in u s history.
recognizing a pattern to these changes can give you a better understanding of the past and help you make a prediction about how people responded or might respond to similar occurrences.
notice how one reader uses prior knowledge to predict what may happen.
by 1870 only small portions of the great plains remained unsettled.
for s most of the next two decades this land remained open range.
in march 1889 government officials announced that homesteaders could file claims j on land in what is now the state of oklahoma.
this land had belonged to creek and seminole indians.
within a month about 50 000 people rushed to oklahoma to stake their claims.
in all settlers claimed more than 2 million acres of former indian land in the famous oklahoma land rush and another 9 million over the next several years.
this huge wave of pioneers was the last chapter 4 reading check summarizing what did the second continental congress accomplish.
early battles while the congress discussed peace the massachusetts militia began to fight.
boston was a key city in the early days of the war.
both patriots and the british fought to hold it.
bunker hill desperate for supplies leaders in boston sent benedict arnold and a force of 400 men to new york state.
their objective was to attack the british at fort ticonderoga.
in may 1775 arnold captured the fort and its large supply of weapons.
meanwhile the poorly supplied patriots kept the british pinned down inside boston.
although british leaders were trying to form a battle plan they awoke on june 17 to a stunning sight.
the colonial forces had quietly dug in at breed s hill a point overlooking north boston.
the redcoats would have to cross boston harbor and fight their way uphill.
as the british force of 2 400 advanced 1 600 militia members waited.
low on gunpowder the commander ordered his troops not to fire until you see the whites of their eyes.
as they climbed the exposed hillside with their heavy packs the british soldiers were cut down.
twice they retreated.
stepping over the dead and wounded they returned for a third try.
the colonists were now out of ammunition and eventually they had to retreat.
this famous conflict is now known as the battle of bunker hill although it was actually launched from breed s hill.
while the patriots lost they proved they could take on the redcoats.
for the british the battle was a tragic victory.
to win they had sacrificed about double the number of patriot soldiers.
dorchester heights shortly after the battle of bunker hill general washington arrived in boston to command the continental army.
washington knew that he would need heavier guns to drive the british out of boston and he knew where to get them fort ticonderoga.
colonel henry knox was assigned to transport the captured cannons from fort ticonderoga to boston.
he successfully brought the heavy guns over 300 miles of rough terrain in the middle of winter.
when knox delivered the cannons washington was ready to regain control of boston.
on march 4 1776 washington moved his army to dorchester heights an area that overlooked boston from the south.
he stationed the cannons and his troops on nook s hill overlooking british general william howe s position.
when howe awoke the next morning and saw the patriots well positioned artillery he knew he would have to retreat.
the rebels have done more in one night than my whole army could do in months howe declared.
on march 7 howe retreated from boston to canada.
the birthplace of the rebellion was now in patriot hands.
reading check drawing inferences why was the geography of the boston area important in forming a battle plan.
i summary and preview some colonial i leaders became convinced that they could not avoid war with great britain.
in the next section you will read about another step toward war the writing of the declaration of independence.
section 1 assessment ml f online quiz reviewing ideas terms and people 1 a identify what was the first continental congress.
b make inferences why did the first continental congress send the declaration of rights to the king.
c elaborate why did king george iii refuse to consider the colonists declaration.
2 a identify who warned the colonists of the british advance toward lexington and concord.
b analyze why did the british army march on lexington and concord.
c elaborate what is meant by the expression shot heard round the world.
3 a describe what was the purpose of the second continental congress.
b draw conclusions were the delegates to the second continental congress ready to revolt against george iii.
c evaluate defend george ill s response to the declaration of rights and the olive branch petition.
4 a identify what leader captured fort ticonderoga.
b draw conclusions how was the continental army able to drive british forces out of boston.
c evaluate how would you evaluate the performance of the continental army in the early battles of the war.
critical thinking 5 categorizing review your notes on the early battles of the revolution.
then copy the graphic organizer below and use it to categorize events in the early days of the revolution.
some events will be attempts at peace others will be movement toward war.
attempts at peace movement toward war 6 thinking about the beginning you ll have about five minutes for your report and only a minute or twoto talk about the beginning of the war.
what are the one or two most important things you want to say.
which ideas from your notes on class lectures might you include in your summary.
16 chapter 17 the new south is stirred with the breath of a new life.
henry grady atlanta rebuilt quickly after the war becoming a leading railroad and industrial center.
newspaper editor henry grady gave stirring speeches about the need for industry in the south.
he became one of the best known spokesmen of the new south why might grady point to atlanta as a model for economic change.
people from rural areas came to work in the mills but african americans were not allowed to work in most of them.
southern mill life work in the cotton mills appealed to farm families who had trouble making ends meet.
as one mill worker explained it was a necessity to move and get a job rather than depend on the farm.
recruiters sent out by the mills promised good wages and steady work.
entire families often worked in the same cotton mill.
mills employed large numbers of women and children.
many children started working at about the age of 12 some children started working at an even earlier age.
women did most of the spinning and were valued workers.
however few women had the opportunity to advance within the company.
many mill workers were proud of the skills they used but they did not enjoy their work.
one unhappy worker described it as the same thing over and over again the more you do the more they want done.
workers often labored 12 hours a day six days a week.
cotton dust and lint filled the air causing asthma and an illness known as brown lung disease.
fast moving machinery caused injuries and even deaths.
despite the long hours and dangerous working conditions wages remained low.
however mill work did offer an alternative to farming.
reading check finding main ideas what did southern business leaders hope industry would do.
reconstruction in the north although most federal reconstruction policies were designed to reform the south they affected groups in the north as well.
there were many groups who worked to advance their own rights and interests during this time.
women and northern african americans the radical republicans passed many federal laws that required southern states to allow african american men to vote.
they based their cause on the ideal of equality found in the declaration of independence and the constitution.
women s suffragists began using these same arguments to support their own suffrage.
wyoming and utah granted women the vote in 1869 but their motivations were not just to ensure equal rights for women.
wyoming leaders hoped to attract more women residents while utahans hoped to counteract the rising number of non mormon voters.
african americans in the north faced less social discrimination than they did in the south but still faced racism and segregation.
in response some state governments passed laws that made segregation illegal.
some integrated their school systems.
still most states upheld the principle of separate but equal facilities.
a changing economy during the war and reconstruction the economy of the north and the west grew rapidly.
manufacturing commerce and rail transportation generated tremendous reconstruction 57 as the economy grew unions such as the united mine workers of america grew in membership and influence.
large companies grew by buying smaller companies and railroads made huge profits transporting goods and people.
tax revenue increased as well and governments were able to provide more services and make more investments.
between 1865 and 1873 almost 3 million immigrants arrived in the united states.
they provided a new pool of labor for the growing industrial economy.
the number of labor unions increased and they began to push for policies that protected workers.
reformers pressed for eight hour workday and fair pay laws.
in addition the increase in commercial and trading businesses led to a shift in the make up of the working class.
it now included a majority of professionals and white collar workers.
eventually the focus of the republican party began to move away from civil rights for african americans and toward reducing government corruption.
the acceptance of the compromise of 1877 signaled the end of the republican focus on reforming racial politics in the south.
reading check comparing and contrasting how was reconstruction in the north similar to and different from reconstruction in the south.
i summary and preview in this section i you learned about the end of reconstruction.
in the next chapter 4 independence is declared many colonial leaders agreed with paine.
in june 1776 the second continental congress began writing a document declaring independence.
a committee also created a seal for the new country with the latin motto epluribus unum or out of many one.
this motto recognized the new union of states.
a new philosophy of government the declaration of independence formally announced the colonies break from great britain.
in doing so it expressed three main ideas.
first thomas jefferson the document s main author argued that all people possess unalienable rights or rights that are a natural part of being bom and cannot be taken away.
these include the rights of life liberty and the pursuit of happiness.
next jefferson listed the complaints of the colonists.
he asserted that king george iii had violated the colonists rights by taxing them without their consent.
jefferson accused the king of passing unfair laws and interfering with colonial governments.
he also believed that stationing a large british army within the colonies was a burden.
third jefferson stated that the colonies had the right to break from britain.
influenced by the enlightenment ideal of the social contract he maintained that governments and rulers must protect the rights of citizens.
in exchange the people agree to be governed.
jefferson argued that king george iii had broken the social contract.
on july 4 1776 the continental congress approved the declaration of independence.
this act broke all ties to the british crown.
the united states of america was bom.
choosing sides the signing of the declaration made the rebellion a full scale revolt against britain.
those who supported it would be considered traitors.
colonists who chose to side with the british were known as loyalists often called tories.
the impact today the continental congress voted for independence on july 2 however because the declaration was not approved until july 4 the fourth is celebrated today as independence day.
primary source points of view choosing sides when ben franklin s son william was a child he helped his father experiment with lightning.
but by the time william had grown and the revolution started the two men viewed the conflict differently.
they exchanged letters on the subject.
am indeed of the opinion that the parliament has no right to make any law whatever binding on the colonies i know your sentiments differ from mine on these subjects.
you are a thorough government man which i do not wonder at nor do i aim at converting you.
i only wish you to act uprightly and steadily benjamin franklin quoted in the writings of benjamin franklin vol.
ill tt i think that all laws until they are repealed ought t to be obeyed and that it is the duty of those k who are entrusted with the executive part of government to see that they are so william franklin quoted in benjamin and william franklin by sheila l skemp how did the two men view the british government differently.
the american revolution 119.
mi signing the declaration of independence w k jefferson writes.
j the declaration jk of independence history historians estimate that 40 to 45 percent of americans were patriots while 20 to 30 percent were loyalists.
the rest were neutral.
because of persecution by patriots more than 50 000 loyalists fled the colonies during the revolution.
most went to canada where britain allowed them more self rule after the revolution.
in doing so they abandoned their homes and property.
divided allegiances tore apart families and friendships even benjamin franklin became separated from his loyalist son william.
native americans were at first encouraged by both sides to remain neutral.
by the summer of 1776 however both patriots and the british were aggressively recruiting indian fighters.
most sided with the british.
in northern new york four of the six iroquois nations fought for the british.
however the oneida and tuscarora helped the patriots even delivering food to the soldiers at valley forge.
drawing conclusions why would native americans have lost out no matter who won the war.
reading check unfinished business today we recognize that the declaration of independence excluded many colonists.
while it declared that all men are created equal the document failed to mention women enslaved africans or native americans.
the rights of these minorities would be subject to the rule of the majority.
women although many women were patriots the declaration did not address their rights.
at least one delegate s wife abigail adams tried to influence her husband john to include women s rights in the declaration.
in a failed effort she expressed her concerns remember the ladies and be more generous and favorable to them than your ancestors.
do not put such unlimited power into the hands of the husbands if particular care and attention is not paid to the ladies we are and will not hold ourselves bound by laws in which we have no voice or representation abigail adams quoted in notable american women 10 chapter 13 the south academic vocabulary aspect part clothing by sewing on designs from discarded scraps of material.
in this way they expressed their individuality and personalized the clothing assigned to them by the planters.
likewise many slaves did what they could to improve their small food rations.
some planters allowed slaves to keep their own gardens for vegetables and chickens for eggs.
other slaves were able to add a little variety to their diet by fishing or picking wild berries.
punishment and slave codes some planters offered more food or better living conditions to encourage slaves obedience.
however most slaveholders used punishment instead.
some would punish one slave in front of others as a warning to them all.
harry mcmillan recalled some of the punishments he had witnessed.
the punishments were whipping putting you in the stocks wooden frames to lock people in and making you wear irons and a chain at work.
then they had a collar to put round your neck with two horns like cows horns so that you could not lie down sometimes they dug a hole like a well with a door on top.
this they called a dungeon keeping you in it two or three weeks or a month or sometimes till you died inthere harry mcmillan quoted in major problems in the history of the american south volume i edited by paul d escott and david r goldfield to further control slaves actions many states passed strict laws called slave codes.
some laws prohibited slaves from traveling far from their homes.
literacy laws in most southern states prohibited the education of slaves.
alabama virginia and georgia had laws that allowed the fining and whipping of anyone caught teaching enslaved people to read and write.
summarizing how did slave holders control slaves.
reading check.
slave culture many enslaved africans found comfort in their community and culture.
they made time for social activity even after exhausting workdays in order to relieve the hardship of their lives.
although they were forced to immigrate to the united states their culture is one of the foundations of the current national identity especially in the worlds of music and religion.
family and community family was the most important aspect of slave communities and many slaves feared separationmorethantheyfearedpunishment.
josiah henson never forgot the day that he and his family were auctioned.
his mother begged the slaveholder who bought her to buy josiah too.
the slaveholder refused and henson s entire family was separated.
426 chapter 17 reforming government policies by the 1870s many native americans lived on reservations where land was usually not useful for farming or buffalo hunting.
many indians were starving.
government policies and corrupt officials kept supplies promised to the reservations from being delivered.
in 1869 ely s parker was appointed to head the bureau of indian affairs the first native american to hold that post.
during his two years in office the number of incidents between u s army troops and native american groups fell.
many social reformers believed that native americans should adopt the ways of white people in order to survive.
special schools were established that taught native american children anglo customs sometimes against the wishes of the children s parents.
in the late 1870s a paiute indian named sarah winnemucca called for reform.
she gave lectures on problems of the reservation system.
in 1881 writer helen hunt jackson published an influential book that pushed for reform of u s indian policy.
the dawes general allotment act of 1887 tried to lessen traditional influences on indian society by making land ownership private rather than shared.
the act also promised but failed to deliver u s.
citizenship to native americans.
after breaking up reservation land and giving parcels to individuals the government sold the remaining acreage.
the act took about two thirds of indian land.
end of the frontier by 1870 only small portions of the great plains remained unsettled.
for most of the next two decades this land remained open range.
in march 1889 government officials announced that homesteaders could file claims on land in what is now oklahoma.
within a month about 50 000 people rushed to oklahoma to stake their claims.
in all settlers claimed more than 2 million acres of former indian land in the famous oklahoma land rush and another 9 million over the next several years.
this huge wave of pioneers was the last chapter review visual summary reviewing vocabulary terms and people 1 what were american colonists who remained loyal to great britain called.
a whigs c royalists b loyalists d democrats 2 what was the name of the battle in which the patriots finally defeated the british.
a battle of saratoga c battle of yorktown b battle of new jersey d battle of valley forge 3 what was the name for the colonial military force created to fight the british.
a mercenaries c hessians b redcoats d continental army 4 who was the french nobleman who helped the patriots fight the british.
comprehension and critical thinking section 1 pages 112 116 5 a recall what actions did the first and second continental congresses take.
b analyze how did the events at lexington and concord change the conflict between great britain and the colonies.
c elaborate why do you think that control of boston early in the revolutionary war was important.
section 2 pages 118 121 6 a identify why is july 4 1776 a significant date.
b draw conclusions what effect did common sense have on colonial attitudes toward great britain.
a bernardo de galvez c baron von steuben b marquis de lafayette d lord dunmore c predict how might the content of the declaration of independence lead to questions over the issue of slavery.
the american revolution 141 section 3 pages 126 134 7 a describe what difficulties did the patriots experience in the early years of the war.
b analyze how did the patriots turn the tide of the war.
why was the battle of saratoga important.
c elaborate could the patriots have succeeded in the war without foreign help.
section 4 pages 135 139 8 a recall why did the british think they might find support in the southern colonies.
b make inferences why did it take more than two years for the british and the americans to agree to the terms of the treaty of paris.
c evaluate in your opinion what was the most important reason for the patriots defeat of the british.
reading skills main ideas in social studies use the reading skills taught at the beginning of the chapter texas test practice directions read each question and write the letter of the best response.
1 what action would a loyalist have been likely to take during the revolution.
a attend the continental congress b support the olive branch petition c support the declaration of independence d join the continental army 2 which of the following events took place last.
f the declaration of independence was issued.
g the second continental congress met.
h the battles at lexington and concord occurred.
j the battle of bunker hill took place.
3 why was the victory at the battle of saratoga so important to the patriot cause.
a it allowed the declaration of independence to be issued.
b it forced the british army to retreat from boston.
c it convinced france to aid the colonies in their fight.
d it caused the british government to give up the war.
4 the most brutal and destructive fighting of the war probably occurred f in the southern colonies.
g at valley forge.
h in new england.
j at lexington and concord.
5 the declaration of independences claim that people have a right to life liberty and the pursuit of happiness shows the influence of what enlightenment thinker from europe.
a jonathan edwards b john locke c king george iii d thomas paine 6 in what way was clarks battle strategy the same as john paul joness strategy.
f they both were badly outnumbered by the british.
g they both knew the colonial midwest region well.
h they both aimed to weaken the british by attacking their supply lines.
j they both survived the winter at valley forge.
7 read the following passage from thomas paines the crisis and use it to answer the question below.
these are the times that try mens souls.
the summer soldier and the sunshine patriot will in this crisis shrink from the service of his country but he that stands it now deserves the love and thanks of man and woman.
tyranny is not easily conquered yet we have this consolation with us that the harder the conflict the more glorious the triumph.
thomas paine the crisis 1776 document based question what point is paine trying to make in this passage.
the american revolution 143 h multimedia connections history i s revolution the american revolution 143 mc2 assignment write a biographical narrative about a person who lived in the early americas before or during the colonial period.
a biographical narrative you have been listening to and telling narratives all your life.
a biographical narrative a form of historical writing i is a true story about an event or brief period in a person s life.
1 asking questions try using i the 5i 1 how questions who.
to help you think of descriptive details.
ask questions such as who was this person.
what was he or she doing.
exactly where and when did the event occur.
how did the person or other people react to the event.
1 prewrite getting started think of all the people you read about in this unit.
which ones interested you most.
what particular events and situations in these people s lives seem most exciting or significant.
pick one of these events or situations as the subject of your narrative.
creating an interesting narrative make your narrative lively and interesting by including physical descriptions of people places and things using details that appeal to the five senses sight hearing touch smell taste specific actions that relate directly to the story you are telling dialogue between the people involved or direct quotations background information about the place customs and setting all relevant details and information needed to relate the events of the story and how they affected the person and perhaps history organize the events in your narrative in chronological order the order in which they occurred.
2 write you can use this framework to help you draft your narrative.
a writer s framework introduction grab your reader s attention with a striking detail or bit of dialogue.
introduce the historical person and setting using specific details.
set the scene by telling how the event or situation began.
body present actions and details in the order in which they occurred.
connect actions with transition words like first then next and finally.
provide specific details to make the person and the situation come alive.
conclusion wrap up the action of the narrative.
tell how the person was affected by what happened.
explain how the event or situation was important in the persons life and how it affected history.
14 unit1 3 evaluate and revise evaluating read through your completed draft to make sure your narrative is complete coherent and clear.
then look for ways to improve it.
evaluation questions for a biographical narrative does your introduction grab the reader s attention.
do you introduce the historical person and tell how i the event or situation began.
s do you include details to make the person place and event seem real.
i are the actions in the story in the order in which they occurred.
have you included all of the actions and details a reader would need to understand what happened.
does the conclusion tell how the event or situation affected the person and history.
showing sequence a clear sense of the sequence of events is important in any narrative.
here is a list of words that show those after next before now finally soon first still second etc.
then last when later while revising when you revise your narrative you may need to add transition words.
transition words help you link ideas between sentences and paragraphs.
notice the words in bold in the following sentences.
after cabeza de vaca and the other adventurers left the beach and started inland they separated into different groups.
later cabeza de vaca heard that many of the others had died.
still he never lost faith that he would reach his fellow spaniards in mexico.
4 proofread and publish proofreading throughout your narrative you used transition words to link events.
make sure that you have spelled the words correctly and have not confused them with other words.
for example be sure to use two l s in finally and not to mistake the transition word then for the comparative word than.
publishing one good way to share your biographical narrative is to exchange it with one or more classmates who have written about the same person you have.
after reading each other s narratives you can compare and contrast them.
how are your stories similar.
how do they differ.
writesmart use mywritesmartto create share and revise your paper.
5 practice and apply use the steps and strategies outlined in this workshop to write your biographical narrative.
our colonial heritage 145 the big idea americans carried on a vigorous debate before ratifying the constitution.
vwritesmart a newspaper editorial it is 1788 and you re writing an editorial for a local newspaper.
you want to convince your readers that the new constitution will be much better than the old articles of confederation.
in this chapter 14 section 1 nativists p 440 know nothing party ip.
440 middle class p 440 tenements p 442 section 2 transcendentalism p 443 ralph waldo emerson p 443 margaret fuller p 443 henry david thoreau p 443 utopian communities p 444 nathaniel hawthorne p 444 edgar allan poe p 445 emily dickinson p 445 henry wadsworth longfellow p 445 walt whitman p 445 section 3 second great awakening p 448 charles grandison finney ip.
448 lyman beecher p 448 temperance movement ip.
449 dorothea dix ip.
450 common school movement p 450 horace mann p 450 catharine beecher p 451 thomas gallaudet p 451 section 4 abolition p 454 william lloyd garrison p 455 american anti slavery society ip.
455 angelina and sarah grimke p 455 frederick douglass p 458 sojourner truth p 456 underground railroad ip.
456 harriet tubman p 458 section 5 elizabeth cady stanton p 464 lucretia mott ip.
464 seneca falls convention ip.
464 declaration of sentiments p 464 lucy stone ip.
465 susan b anthony ip.
465 as you read chapter 14 locate the main idea of any paragraph you do not understand.
academic vocabulary implicit p 440 abstract p 444 mew movements in america 43 section 1 teks 5c 10c 11c 12c 13b 21a 23a 23b 23c 25b 27b 28b what you will learn.
millions of immigrants mostly german and irish arrived in the united states despite anti immigrant movements.
industrialization led to the growth of cities.
american cities experienced urban problems due to rapid growth.
the population of the united states grew rapidly in the early 1800s with the arrival of millions of immigrants.
key terms nativists p 440 know nothing party p 440 middle class p 440 tenements p 442 taking notes use the graphic organizer online to take notes on the causes of immigration and urban growth.
immiqirsmts and unwin czhallan as if you were there it is 1850 and you are a german immigrant standing on the deck of a steamboat crossing lake erie.
other immigrants are on board but they are strangers to you.
soon you will arrive at your new home in cleveland ohio.
you ve been told that other germans have settled there.
you hope to find friends and work as a baker.
right now america seems very big and very strange.
what would you expect from your new life in america.
building background the revolutions in industry transportation and technology were not the only major changes in the united states in the mid 1800s.
millions of immigrants mostly from europe swelled the population.
some settled in the rich farmland of the midwest while others moved to cities.
millions of immigrants arrive in the mid 1800s large numbers of immigrants crossed the atlantic ocean to begin new lives in the united states.
more than 4 million of them settled in the united states between 1840 and 1860 most from europe.
more than 3 million of these immigrants arrived from ireland and germany.
many of them were fleeing economic or political troubles in their native countries.
fleeing the irish potato famine most immigrants from the british isles during that period were irish.
in the mid 1840s potato blight a disease that causes rot in potatoes left many families in ireland with little food.
more than a million irish people died of starvation and disease.
even more fled to the united states.
most irish immigrants were very poor.
many settled in cities in massachusetts new jersey new york and pennsylvania.
they worked at unskilled jobs in the cities or on building canals and 438 chapter 14 jakfln irican ajrits if you were there you are a teacher living in massachusetts in the 1840s.
some of your neighbors have started an experimental community.
they want to live more simply than present day society allows.
they hope to have time to write and think while still sharing the work.
some people will teach others will raise food.
you think this might be an interesting place to live.
what would you ask the leaders of the community.
i i 1 transcendentalists and utopian communities withdrew from american society.
2 american romantic painters and writers made important contributions to art and literature.
the big idea building background great changes were taking place in american culture.
the early 1800s brought a revolution in american j 1 thought.
artists writers and philosophers pursued their ideals and f developedtruly american styles.
l j t ranscendentalists some new england writers and philosophers found spiritual wisdom in transcendentalism the belief that people could transcend or rise above material things in life.
transcendentalists also believed that people should depend on themselves and their own insights rather than on outside authorities.
important transcendentalists included ralph waldo emerson margaret fuller and henry david thoreau.
new movements in art and literature influenced many americans in the early 1800s.
i key terms and people transcendentalism p 443 ralph waldo emerson p 443 margaret fuller p 443 henry david thoreau p 443 utopian communities p 444 nathaniel hawthorne p 444 edgar allan poe p 445 emily dickinson p 445 i henry wadsworth longfellow p 445 walt whitman p 445 wl i taking notes use the graphic organizer online to take notes on the new movements in art and literature.
walden pond where thoreau lived for two years movements in america 4 academic vocabulary abstract expressing a quality or idea without reference to an actual thing emerson was a popular writer and thinker who argued that americans should disregard institutions and follow their own beliefs.
what i must do is all that concerns me not what the people think he wrote in an essay called self reliance.
fuller edited the famous transcendentalist publication the dial.
thoreau advised even stronger self reliance and simple living away from society in natural settings.
he wrote his book walden after living for two years at walden pond.
he also wrote the essay civil disobedience after spending a night in jail.
he had been arrested for refusing to pay a tax in protest of the mexican american war and its role in the spread of slavery.
some transcendentalists formed a community at brook farm massachusetts in the 1840s.
it was one of many experiments with utopian communities groups of people who tried to form a perfect society.
people in utopian communities pursued abstract spirituality and cooperative lifestyles.
communities sprang up in new harmony oneida and elsewhere.
however few lasted for long.
reading check.
drawing inferences why did utopian communities last a short time.
american romanticism ideas about the simple life and nature also inspired painters and writers in the early and mid 1800s.
some joined the romantic movement that had begun in europe.
romanticism involved a great interest in nature an emphasis on individual expression and a rejection of many established rules.
these painters and writers felt that each person brings a unique view to the world.
they believed in using emotion to guide their creative output.
some romantic artists like thomas cole painted the american landscape.
their works showed the beauty and wonder of nature in the united states.
their images contrasted with the huge cities and corruption of nature that many americans saw as typical of europe.
american romanticism allowed americans to see themselves both as part of a european tradition of culture and as a new unique culture.
many female writers like ann sophia stephens wrote historical fiction that was popular in the mid 1800s.
new england writer nathaniel hawthorne wrote the scarlet letter during that period.
one of the greatest classics of romantic literature it explored puritan life in the 1600s.
hawthorne s friend herman 444.

