CHAPTER 18
Lesson 1
Students and the Counterculture
Lesson 2
The Feminist Movement
Lesson 3
Latino Americans Organize
The Story Matters...
The civil rights movement that began in the 1950s inspired other groups in American society to stage protests in the 1960s and 1970s. Students, women, and Latinos all formed organizations and began demanding changes in how American society treated them.
◄ Betty Friedan wrote her 1963 book The Feminine Mystique to describe a dissatisfaction many women felt about their social roles. The book also inspired many women to fight for equal rights.
PHOTO:
Bettmann/CORBIS 517
CHAPTER 18
Place andTime: United States 1960-1980
In 1968 Shirley Chisholm became the first African American woman elected to Congress,as; a representative for New York. In the House of Representatives, Chisholm suppor e equ opportunity for all and the Equal Rights Amendment. Phyllis Schlafly was an attorney who unsuccessfully ran for Congress in 1952. She became a conservative political activist and formed the organization Stop ERA, which campaigned to defeat the Equal Rights Amendment.
Step Into the Place
Read the quotes and look at the information presented on the map. U1& 9C, ioe, iof, 29A
DBQ
Analyzing Historical Documents How is the focus of Chisholm's argument general and how is Schlafly's specific?
PRIMARY SOURCE
M
Discrimination against women... is so widespread that it seems to many persons normal, natural, and right.... ... It is time we act to assure full equality of opportunity ... to women.
The argument that this amendment will not solve the problem of sex discrimination is not relevant.... Of course laws will not eliminate prejudice from the hearts of human beings. But that is no reason to allow prejudice to continue to be enshrined in our laws. **
—Representative Shirley Chisholm, from a speech before Congress, August 10,1970
PRIMARYSOURCE
This amendment will absolutely and positively make women subject to the draft. Why any woman would support such a ridiculous and un-American proposal as this is beyond comprehension.
Another bad effect of the Equal Rights Amendment is that it will abolish a woman's right to child support and alimony.
Under present American laws, the man is always required to support his wife and each child he has caused to be brought into the world.
Why should women abandon these good laws...?**
—Phyllis Schlafly, from the Phyllis Schlafly Report, February 1972
Step Into the Time

Making Connections
Research an individual or event from the time line. Write a
Eisenhower
1953-1961
Kennedy 1962 Cesar Chavez 1961-1963 and Dolores Huerta
L.
Johnson 19<S^- 196Q

,^Online!
MAP
Explore the interactive version of this map on Networks. Nixon
1969-1974
1970 United Farm Workers wins contract with grape growers
January 1973 Roe \i. Wade decision on abortion
February 1973 Native Americans dash with FBI at Wounded Knee
Ford
1974-1977
Carter
1977-1981
networks
There's More Online!
gf BIOGRAPHY Bob Dylan gf BIOGRAPHY Tom Hayden
gf BIOGRAPHY Mario Savio gf PRIMARYSOURCE Counterculture



Political Cartoon
gf VIDEO Counterculture
gf INTERACTIVE SELF-CHECK QUIZ
Reading HELPDESK
Academic Vocabulary
•	conformity
•	rationality
Content Vocabulary
•	counterculture
•	hippies
•	communes
TAKING NOTES:
Key Ideas and Details
Organizing As you read about the rise of youth culture and activism, use the major headings of this lesson to create an outline similar to the one below.

TEKS
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills 25A describe how the characteristics and issues in U.S. history have been reflected in various genres of art, music, film, and literature


LESSON!	'
Students and the-Counterculture
, women, and Latinos
tinmen, and Latinos?
IT MATTERS BECAUSE
B
The 1960s was one of the most tumultuous decades in American history. The decade also gave birth to a youth movement that challenged the American political syster and conventional middle-class values.
The Rise of the Youth Movement
guidingquestion How were the protest techniques used by student protesters similar to c different from those ofthe civil rights movement?
The roots of the 1960s youth movement stretched back to the 1951 In the decade after World War II, the country had enjoyed a time peace and prosperity. Prosperity did not extend to all, however. Some, especially the artists and writers ofthe beat movement, openly criticized American society. They believed American society had come to value conformity over independence and financial gain ovei spiritual and social advancement. At the same time, the civil right movement raised serious questions about racism in American society The nuclear arms race between the United States and the Soviet Union made many of the nation’s youth fear for the future. For many young people, the events of the 1950s had called into questi the wisdom of their parents and their political leaders.
The youth movement originated with the baby boomers, the huge generation born after World War II. By 1970, 58.2 percent o the American population was under 35 years old. The economic boom of the 1950s meant more families could afford to send theii children to college. College life gave young people a sense of freedon and independence. It was on college campuses across the nation that youth protest movements began and reached their peak.
Students for a Democratic Society
Young people were concerned about the injustices they saw in the nations political and social system. In their view, a small, wealthy elite controlled politics, and wealth was unfairly divided. These young people formed what came to be known as the New Left.
520
A prominent organization within the New Left was Students for a Democratic Society (SDS). It defined its views in a 1962 declaration known as the Port Huron Statement. Written largely by Tom Hayden, editor of the University of Michigan s student newspaper, the declaration called for an end to apathy and urged citizens to stop accepting a country run by big corporations and big government.
PRIMARY SOURCE
«... [H]uman degradation, symbolized by the Southern struggle against racial bigotry... the Cold War, symbolized by the presence of the Bomb, brought awareness that we ourselves, and our friends, and millions of abstract'others'... might die at any time....
Our work is guided by the sense that we may be the last generation in the experiment with living. »
—from the Port Huron Statement, 1962
SDS chapters focused on protesting the Vietnam War and other issues, including poverty, campus regulations, nuclear power, and racism.
The Free Speech Movement
Another movement that captured the nation’s attention in the 1960s was the free speech movement, led by Mario Savio and others at the University of California at Berkeley. The movement began in the fall of 1964, when the university decided to restrict students’ rights to distribute literature and to recruit volunteers for political causes on campus.
Like many college students, those at Berkeley were dissatisfied with practices at their university. Huge classes were divided into sections and taught by graduate students. Many professors claimed they were too busy with research to meet with students. Faceless administrators made rules that were not always easy to obey and imposed punishments for violations. Feeling isolated in this impersonal environment, many Berkeley students rallied to support the free speech movement.
The struggle between Berkeley’s students and administrators peaked on December 2, 1964, with a sit-in and powerful speech by Savio. Early the next morning, 600 police officers entered the campus and arrested more than 700 protesters. The arrests set off an even larger protest movement. Within days, a campus-wide strike had stopped classes. Many members of the faculty voiced
SKILLS PRACTICE
Pick a partner. Read the lesson on Students and Counterculture together. Take turns reading aloud bold-faced words, or other words in the lesson that you do not know. When your partner reads a word tell them what it means. When you read a word, have them tell you what it means. If you need help, ask your teacher.
conformity agreement in form, manner, or character
Members of SDS protest the Vietnam War.
CRITICAL THINKING
Identifying Central Ideas What are two issues that led to the activism of the members of SDS? The Politics of Protest 521
their support for the free speech movement. In the face of this growing opposition, the administration gave in to the students demands.
Soon afterward, the Supreme Court upheld students rights to freedom of speech and assembly on campuses. In a unanimous vote, the Court upheld the section ofthe Civil Rights Act assuring these rights in places offering public accommodations, which, by definition, included college campuses. The Berkeley revolt became a model for other student protests in the 1960s. The tactics used by the Berkeley protesters were soon being used in college demonstrations across the country.
B REAPING PROGRESS CHECK
Comparing and Contrasting What techniques did the students on the Berkeley campus use to protest for free speech?
counterculture a culture with values and beliefs different from those ofthe mainstream
hippies name for young Americans, especially during the 1960s, who rejected the conventions of established society
rationality the quality or state of being agreeable to reason
communes group living arrangements in which members share everything and work together
The Counterculture
guiding question Howdid the counterculture movement affect the nation?
While many young Americans in the 1960s sought to reform the system, othei rejected it entirely. They tried to create a new lifestyle based on flamboyant dress, rock music, drug use, and communal living. They created what became known as the counterculture, and the people were commonly called "hippie Hippie Culture
Originally, hippies rejected rationality, order, and traditional middle-class values. They wanted to build a utopia—a society that was freer, closer to nature, and full of love, tolerance, and cooperation. Many hippies wanted to drop out of society by leaving home. They wanted to live together in communes—group living arrangements in which members shared everything and worked together. Much of this was a reaction to the 1950s stereotype ofthe white-collar “man in the gray flannel suit” who led a constricted and colorless life. Singer-songwriter Bob Dylan expressed the counterculture beliefs through his lyrics:
PRIMARY SOURCE
** Come mothers and fathers throughout the land/and don't criticize what you can't understand/Yoi sons and your daughters are beyond your command/ Your old road is rapidly agin'/Please get out of 1 new one if you can't lend your hand/for the times they are a-changin' ”
—from "The Times They Are A-Changin',
Members ofthe counterculture often rejected the expectations of mainstream society.
CRITICAL THINKING
Making Inferences How does the style of dress shown express the counterculture's way of thinking? 522
HIPPIES
POLITICAL CARTOONS
THAT’5 THE TROUBLE WITH
YOU OLD FOQY CONSERVATIVES / ILL BET YOU STILL BELIEVE IN* THE LAW OF GRAVITY Z
Cartoonists critical of the counterculture and "hippies" often used humor to present their views. Exaggerations in clothing, facial expressions, and other characteristics help the cartoonist make his or her point.
How does the cartoonist focus the reader's attention on some hippie stereotypes? What does the cartoonist imply with this cartoon?
TELL
WiAA HE'S LATE WITH OUR. ALLOWANCE * HOW DOES HE EXPECT US TO GET THROUGH The college of our choice p This political cartoon depicts the skepticism many Americans had toward the counterculture and the hippie movement.
CRITICAL THINKING
1	Analyzing Primary Sources
What is the cartoonist saying is wrong with the counterculture?
2	Analyzing Visuals How does the cartoonist focus the reader's attention on some hippie stereotypes?
The Impact of the Counterculture
After a few years, the counterculture movement began to decline. The fashion and music of the counterculture, however, continued to affect American culture. More individualized dressing, including strands of beads, ragged blue jeans, and long hair for men, became generally accepted. Counterculture musicians made use of folk music and the rhythms of rock n’ roll. They wrote heartfelt lyrics that expressed the hopes and fears of their generation. Folk singers included Bob Dylan, who became an important voice of the movement, as did singers Joan Baez and Pete Seeger. Rock musicians included Jimi Hendrix, Janis Joplin, and The Who. The music and innovations of these artists continue to influence musicians today.
H READING PROGRESS CHECK
Making Connections What kind of society did the counterculture want to build?
LESSON 1 REVIEW
Reviewing Vocabulary
1.	Naming Why were young people who rebelled against mainstream society called the "counterculture"?
2.	Summarizing What did "conformity" mean to hippies in the 1960s?
Using Your Notes
J.
Making Connections Use the notes that you completed during the lesson to describe the relationship between student protesters and the hippies. Answering the Guiding Questions
4.	Comparing and Contrasting How were the protest techniques used by student protesters similar to and different from those of the civil rights movement?
5.	Synthesizing How did the counterculture movement affect the nation? 25A
Writing Activity
INFORMATIVE/EXPLANATORY
Suppose that you are a mainstream journalist in the late 1960s. Write a newspaper article about hippies. Describe their hair, clothes, values, and living arrangements. The Politics of Protest 523
Academic Vocabulary
tturfenb, women, and Latinos
apply to their protest actions'
women, and Latinos?
IT MATTERS BECAUSE
By the 1960s, many women had become dissatisfied with society's perception of women and what their proper roles should be. Some women began to join organizations dedicated to expanding opportunities for women. The Equal Rights Amendment stirred a national debate.
•	gender
•	compatible
Content Vocabulary
feminism
A
Renewed Women's Movement guiding question What events revitalized the women's movement?


TAKING NOTES:
Key Ideas and Details
Organizing As you read about the feminist movement, complete a graphic organizer similar to the one below by listing the main arguments for and against the Equal Rights Amendment (ERA).
Arguments For and Against the ERA	
For ERA	Against ERA
	
TEKS
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills 9B describe the roles of political organizations that promoted civil rights, including ones from African American, Chicano, American Indian, women’s, and other civil rights movements
9C identify the roles of significant leaders who supported various rights movements, including Martin Luther King Jr., Cesar Chavez, Rosa Parks, Hector P. Garcia, and Betty Friedan
continued on the next page
African Americans and college students were not the only groups seeking to change American society in the 1960s. By the middle of th decade, a new movement had emerged: the feminist, or women’s liberation, movement. Feminism is the belief that men and women should be equal politically, economically, and socially. The onset of World War II provided women with greater opportunity. After the war, however, many women returned to traditional roles. The new postwar emphasis on establishing families discouraged women from seeking employment.
Despite the popular emphasis on homemaking, the number of women who held jobs outside the home actually increased during the 1950s. Many women went to work to help their families maintain comfortable lifestyles. By 1960, about one-third of all married womei were part of the paid workforce. Yet many people continued to believe that women could better serve society by remaining in the home to influence the next generation of men.
Origins of the Movement
By the early 1960s, many women were increasingly resentful of a world where newspaper ads separated jobs by gender, banks denied women credit, and female employees often were paid less for the same work. Nearly half of American women worked by the mid-1960s but three-fourths of these women worked in lower-paying clerical, sales, or factory jobs, or as cleaning women and hospital attendants.
524
One stimulus that invigorated the womens movement was the Presidents Commission on the Status of Women. Its report highlighted the problems women faced in the workplace and helped create a network of feminist activists who lobbied for women’s legislation. In 1963 they won passage of the Equal Pay Act, which in most cases outlawed paying men more than women for the same job.
Many women who had stayed home were also discontent. Betty Friedan tried to describe the reasons for this in her 1963 book The Feminine Mystique. Friedan had interviewed women who had graduated with her from Smith College in 1942. She reported that while most had everything they could want in life, they felt unfulfilled. As the book became a best seller, women began reaching out to one another. They poured out their anger and sadness in what came to be known as consciousness-raising sessions. While they talked about their unhappiness, they were also building the base for a nationwide mass movement.
Congress gave the womens movement another boost by including them in the 1964 Civil Rights Act. Title VII of the act outlawed job discrimination not only on the basis of race, color, religion, and national origin, but also on the basis of gender. This provided a strong legal basis for the changes the women’s movement later demanded.
But simply having the law on the books was not enough. Even the agency charged with administering the Civil Rights Act—the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC)—ruled in 1965 that gender-segregated help-wanted ads were legal.
feminism the belief that men and women should be equal politically, economically, and socially
gender term applied to the characteristics of a male or female
The Time is NOW
By June 1966, Betty Friedan had returned to an idea that she and other women had been considering—the need for an organization to promote feminist goals. Friedan and others then set out to form the National Organization for Women (NOW). In October 1966 a group of about 30 women and men held the founding conference of NOW.
PRIMARYSOURCE
(continued from p. 524)
TEKS
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills 1OE describe the causes and key organizations and individuals ofthe conservative resurgence ofthe 1980s and 1990s, including Phyllis Schlafly, the Contract with America, the Heritage Foundation, the Moral Majority, and the National Rifle Association
10F describe significant societal issues of this time period
17D identify actions of government and the private sector such as the Great Society, affirmative action, and Title IX to create economic opportunities for citizens and analyze the unintended consequences of each
26A explain actions taken by people to expand economic opportunities and political rights, including those for racial, ethnic, and religious minorities as well as women, in American society
26D identify the political, social, and economic contributions of women such as Frances Willard, Jane Addams, Eleanor Roosevelt, Dolores Huerta, Sonia Sotomayor, and Oprah Winfrey to American society
M [T]he time has come to confront, with concrete action, the conditions that now prevent women from enjoying the equality of opportunity and freedom of choice which is their right, as individual Americans, and as human beings.**
NOW
Statement of Purpose, 1966 The new organization responded to frustrated housewives by demanding greater educational and career opportunities for women. NOW leaders denounced the exclusion of women from certain professions and from most levels of politics. NOW also was against the practice of paying women less than men for equal work. This had been prohibited by the Equal Pay Act, but was still commonplace.
When NOW set out to pass an Equal Rights Amendment to the Constitution, its membership rose to over 200,000. By July 1972, the movement had its own magazine, Ms. A key editor of Ms. was Gloria Steinem, an author who became one of the movement’s leading figures.
B reading progress check Synthesizing What were two of the forces that helped to bring the women's movement to life in the 1960s?
A group of men and women march together holding signs while participating in a 1976 ERA protest in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.
CRITICALTHINKING
Drawing Conclusions How might the success ofthe civil rights movement have encouraged women to organize? Feminist and writer Gloria Steinem drew attention to the problems facing women and fought for the ratification of the Equal Rights Amendment.
CRITICAL THINKING
Determining Cause and Effect What was one effect that Gloria Steinem had on the feminist movement? Successes and Failures
guiding QUESTION What political and economic gains did women make during this time?
During the late 1960s and early 1970s, the women’s movement fought to amend the Constitution and enforce Title VII of the Civil Rights Act. It also worked to repeal laws against abortion and pass legislation against gender discrimination in employment, housing, and education. As a leading voice in the womens movement, Steinem explained the need for such legislation.
PRIMARY SOURCE
UThe truth is that all our problems stem from the same sex based myths. We may appear before you a white radicals or the middle-aqed middle class or black soul sisters, but we are all sisters in fighting against these outdated myths. Like racial myths, they have been reflected in our laws.”
—Gloria Steinem, from testimony before a Senate subcommittee in support of the ERA, May 19
-Thinkim Like a —i
HISTORIAN |
Comparing and Contrasting
The emergence of social movements in the 1960s and 1970s has deep roots in American history. Social movements, historians contend, often share common goals—quality of life issues, political and democratic processes, economic and
environmental issues. The significance of the two decades is the concentration of all such issues in a small time span: gender equality at home and at work; political issues and processes; labor and civil rights causes; and environmental and health concerns.
The Equal Rights Amendment
The womens movement seemed to be off to a strong start when Congress passed the Equal Rights Amendment (ERA) in March 1972. The amendmei specified: “Equality of rights under the law shall not be denied or abridged by the United States or by any State on account of sex.” To become part of the Constitution, the amendment had to be ratified by 38 states. Many state did so—35 by 1979—but then significant opposition to the amendment began to build.
Opponents argued that it would take away some womens rights. These included the right to alimony in divorce cases and the right to have singlegender colleges. They feared it would eliminate womens exemption from tl draft and do away with laws that provided special protection for women in the workforce.
One outspoken opponent was Phyllis Schlafly, organizer of the Stop ERA campaign. By the end of 1979, five states had voted to rescind their approval. Many people had become worried that the amendment would give federal courts too much power to interfere with state laws. Unable to achieve ratification by three-fourths of the states by the deadline set by Congress, the ERA finally failed in 1982.
Equality in Education
One major achievement of the movement came in the area of education. Kathy Striebels experience illustrated the discrimination female students often faced in the early 1970s. In 1971 Striebel, a junior high school student in St. Paul, Minnesota, wanted to compete for her school’s swim team, but the school did not allow girls to join. Kathy’s mother, Charlotte, was a member o the local NOW chapter. Through it, she learned that St. Paul had recently banned gender discrimination in education. She filed a grievance with the city s human rights department, and officials required the school to allow Kathy to swim.
onuxiiy alter joining me team, Kathy beat out one of the boys and ea a spot at a meet. As she stood on the block waiting to swim, the opposinj coach declared that she was ineligible because the meet was outside St. Pa and thus beyond the jurisdiction of its laws.
In response, leaders of the women’s movement lobbied to ban gende iscrimination in education. In 1972 Congress responded by passing a lav
Tk C. ITL y,7 l,h‘ Edu“tit>”^ Amendments. One section. Title IX, pro lie e era y unded schools from discriminating against women
526
nearly all aspects of school operations, from admissions to athletics.
Title IX increased opportunities for women, but it also had some surprising and unintended consequences. Within just a few years, the number of women attending college surged, and by 1978 the majority of people attending college were women. By 2014, women made up approximately 58% of all college students.
Title IX also created new opportunities for women in college athletics, but it also increased expenses for colleges. If a college needed to add a womens sport, it would sometimes cancel a men’s sport in order to pay for it. In addition, prior to Title IX, the majority of coaches for women’s sports were women. But after Title IX, as women’s sports increased in funding and prestige, men were attracted to the field as well. Today, less than half of the coaches of women’s sports in college are women.
Right to Privacy and Roe v. Wade
The feminist movement worked to secure the right to make private
decisions, including reproductive decisions. A constitutional right to marital privacy was introduced in 1965 when the Supreme Court outlawed state bans on contraceptives for married couples in Griswold v. Connecticut.
The right to privacy was expanded beyond married couples when activists began challenging laws against abortion. Until 1973, the right to regulate abortion was reserved to the states. The original plan of the Constitution reserved most police power to the states. Police power refers to the state’s authority to enact laws impinging on personal or property rights in the interest of safety, health, welfare, and morality. Early in the country’s history, some abortions were permitted in the early stages of pregnancy. By the mid-1800s, however, states had passed laws prohibiting abortion, except to save the life of the mother. In the late 1960s, some states began adopting more liberal abortion laws. For example, several states allowed abortion if carrying a pregnancy to term might endanger the woman’s mental health or if she was a victim of rape or incest.
The big change came with the 1973 Supreme Court decision in Roe v. Wade. The decision stated that state governments could not regulate abortion during the first three months of pregnancy, a time that was ruled to be within a woman’s constitutional right to privacy. During the second three months of pregnancy, states could regulate abortions on the basis of the health of the mother. States could ban abortion in the final three months except in cases of a medical emergency. Those in favor of abortion rights cheered Roe v. Wade as a victory, but the issue was far from settled politically. The decision gave rise to the right-to-life movement, whose members consider abortion morally wrong and work toward its total ban.
After the Roe v. Wade ruling, the two sides began an impassioned battle that continues today. In the 1992 case Planned Parenthood v. Casey, the Supreme Court modified Roe v. Wade. The Court decided that states could place some restrictions on abortions. For example, doctors could be required to explain the risks and have patients give informed consent. Underage girls might now be required to inform their parents before getting an abortion, although the Court did strike down laws requiring women to notify their husbands before having an abortion. It also abandoned the rule that states could ban abortion only in the final trimester. Technology had enabled a fetus to be viable outside the womb much earlier in a pregnancy. States could now restrict abortion based on the viability ofthe fetus.
Tennis great Billie Jean King was a trailblazer in the effort to gain equality for women in sports. In 1972 Title IX banned educational discrimination against women in fields ranging from admissions to extracurricular activities.
CRITICAL THINKING
Predicting Consequences What consequence might Title IX have had on girls'involvement in school sports? The Politics of Protest
compatible capable of existing in harmony

WOMEN IN THE WORKFORCE
1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000
Year
Source: Historical Statistics ofthe United States: Earliest Times
to the Present, Volume 2.
The number of women in the workforce climbed steadily from the 1950s through the 1990s.
1	Comparing and Contrasting
By how much did the percentage of working women increase between 1950 and 2000?
2	Making Generalizations
What general trend do you see in women's participation in the workforce?
More women are working outside the home today in the United States than ever before.
CRITICALTHINKING
Making Connections How does the women's movement ofthe 1960s and 1970s help working women today? The Impact of the Feminist Movement
The women’s movement profoundly changed society. Since the 1970s many women have pursued college degrees and careers outside ofthe home. Many employers now offer options to help women make work life more compatible with family life, including flexible hours, on-site child care, and job sharing.
Even with those changes, a significant income gap between men and women still exists. A major reason for the gap is that many working women still hold lower-paying jobs such as bank tellers, administrative assistants, cashiers, schoolteachers, and nurses. Women have made the most dramatic gains in professional jobs since the 1970s. By 2000, women made up more than 40 percent of the nations graduates receiving medical
or law degrees.
READING PROGRESS CHECK
Explaining Why were Roe v. Wade, Title IX, and the Equal Pay Act cornerstones in the women's rights movement?
Reviewing Vocabulary
1.	Explaining What was the main goal of the feminist movement?
9B, 9C, 10F, 26A
Using Your Notes
2.	Comparing and Contrasting Review the notes that you
completed during the lesson to compare and contrast the
arguments for and against the Equal Rights Amendment.
9B, 10E, 10F, 26A
Answering the Guiding Questions
3.	Analyzing Cause and Effect What events revitalized the women's movement? 9B,9C,1OF,26A
4.	Identifying What political and economic gains did women m during this time? 17D, 26A, 26D
Writing Activity
ARGUMENT
Take a position either for or against the ratificati ofthe Equal Rights Amendment. Then write a newspaper editt convincing readers to support your position. 10F, 26A 528
etwirks V~'WI
here's More Online!
is* WHM
I BIOGRAPHY
Henry B. Gonzalez ' U . ’J s BIOGRAPHY Dolores Huerta j MAP
Latino Immigration "u s *' F
SLIDESHOW
Migrant Workers VIDEO
Cesar Chavez INTERACTIVE SELF-CHECK QUIZ
LESSON 3
Latino Americans Organize

NS • What did students, women, and Latinos r movement and apply to their protest actions? ed for students, women, and Latinos?
Reading HELPDESK
y
Academic Vocabulary •likewise • adequate
Content Vocabulary
•	repatriation
*	bilingualism
It Matters Because
Most Mexican Americans and Mexican immigrants lived in the Southwest. By the mid-twentieth century, more immigrants arrived from various parts of Latin America. Latinos formed civil rights organizations to challenge discrimination.
Latinos Migrate North
guiding question Why did many Mexicans migrate to the United States from the early to the mid-1900s, and how did this affect American society?
TAKING NOTES:
Key Ideas and Details
Sequencing Complete a time line similar to the one below by recording major events in the struggle of Latinos forequal civil and political rights.
fV
kTfKS Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills
9H evaluate changes and events in the United States that have resulted from the civil rights movement, including increased participation of minorities in the political process
9I describe how litigation such as the landmark cases of Brown v. Board of Education, Mendez v. Westminster, Hernandez v. Texas, Delgado v. Bastrop I.S.D., Edgewood I.S.D. v. Kirby, and Sweatt v. Painter played a role in protecting the rights of the minority during the civil rights movement
continued on p. 531
Americans of Mexican heritage have lived in what is now the United States since before the founding of the republic. In the twentieth century, Mexican immigration to the United States rose greatly, partly due to the turmoil of the Mexican Revolution that began in 1910. During the 1920s, half a million Mexicans immigrated to the United States through official channels. An unknown number entered the country through other means.
While some persons of Mexican heritage moved to northern states, most remained concentrated in the areas that were once the northern provinces of Mexico. In 1930, 90 percent of ethnic Mexicans in the United States lived in areas of the West and Southwest. As a result of heavy Mexican immigration, the ethnic Mexican population in Texas grew from 71,062 in 1900 to 683,681 in 1930. Southern California, likewise, had a large Spanish-speaking population.
Mexicans Face Discrimination
Across the Southwest, most Mexican Americans lived in barrios. Barrios were the product of a combination of the regions history and discrimination against Latinos. Los Angeles was founded as a Spanish town in 1781. A century later when English-speaking settlers arrived, they built around the older Spanish-speaking district. From 1900 to 1930, Mexican immigration increased the ethnic Mexican population of the city from as many as 5,000 to around 150,000. By then, the Spanish-speaking population was
The Politics of Protest
---------Analyzing----
Primary Sources
Ernesto Galarza on the Importance of the Barrio
it For the Mexicans the barrio was a colony of refugees. We came to know families from Chihuahua, Sonora, Jalisco, and Durango....
As poor refugees, their first concern was to find a place to sleep, then to eat and find work. In the barrio they were most likely to find all three, for not knowing English, they needed something that was even more urgent than a room, a meal, or a job, and that was information in a language they could understand.^
—from ^™^oy,1971
DBQ
MAKING INFERENCES
What was the most important benefit that the barrio offered new immigrants?
likewise in the same way; similarly
repatriation being restored or returned to the country of origin, allegiance, or citizenship
segregated in the eastern part of the city. Most lived in dilapidated housing and suffered high rates of infant mortality and disease.
In California and across the Southwest, employment discrimination meant that most ethnic Mexicans could find work only in low-paying jobs. Many worked as agricultural laborers. During the Great Depression, many Mexican Americans faced increased hostility and discrimination as unemployment rates soared. About one-third ofthe nations Mexican population returned to Mexico. Some left voluntarily, believing it would be easier to get by in Mexico. Others left as part of the repatriation—a series of deportations launched by federal officials. This included not only immigrants but often their American-born children as well.
During World War II, labor shortages in the Southwest led to the creation of the Bracero Program. Under this arrangement, Mexican workers entered into short-term labor contracts, mostly as low-wage farmworkers. Meanwhile, illegal immigration also increased. In 1954 Eisenhower’s administration launched a program intended to deport undocumented Latino immigrants. Police swept through barrios seeking undocumented immigrants. As a result, more than 3.7 million Mexicans were deported over the next three years.
The raids were criticized in the United States and in Mexico for intimidating people for simply “looking Mexican.” In addition, the program often failed to distinguish between individuals legally in the country—including U.S. citizens— and those who had entered illegally.
Other Latinos Arrive
Although Mexicans remained the largest group of Spanish-speaking newcomers in the 1950s, large numbers of Puerto Ricans arrived as well. American citizens since 1917, Puerto Ricans may move freely within American territory. After World War II, economic troubles prompted more than a million Puerto Ricans to move to the U.S. mainland. The majority settled in New York City, where they faced racial discrimination and high poverty levels.
The nation became home to more than 350,000 Cuban immigrants in the decade after the Cuban Revolution of 1959. Many were professionals and business owners who settled in the Miami, Florida, area. They were typically welcomed as refugees fleeing Communist oppression. By 1970, more than 9 million Latinos lived in the United States.
H READING PROGRESS CHECK
Determining Cause and Effect What international events encouraged Latinos to move to the United States, and how did this migration affect the nation?
CHARTS/GRAPHS
Shown here is a family of Mexican migrant workers who came to the United States as part ofthe Bracero Program during World War II.
1	Analyzing Information How
has the overall Latino population changed since 1950?
2	Making Inferences Based on the chart, what can you infer about the Latino population in the United States?
GROWTH OF LATINO POPULATION IN THE UNITED STATES
1910 1920 1930 1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000
Year
Source: Historical Statistics ofthe United States: Earliest Times to the Present Volume 1.
Latinos Organize
guidingquestion How was the Latino approach to gaining civil rights similar to and different from the African American civil rights movement?
Regardless of their citizenship status, people of Mexican heritage were often treated as outsiders by the English-speaking majority. Latinos formed organizations to work for equal rights and fair treatment.
In 1929 a number of Mexican American organizations came together to create the League of United Latin American Citizens (LULAC). The organization’s purpose was to fight
discrimination against persons of Latin American ancestry. Membership was limited to those of Latin American heritage who were U.S. citizens. LULAC encouraged assimilation into American society and adopted English as its official language.
In Mendez v. Westminster (1947), a group of Mexican parents won a lawsuit that challenged school segregation in California. Two years after the Mendez case, LULAC filed a similar lawsuit that aimed to end the practice of segregating Spanish-speaking children into “Mexican schools” in the state of Texas. During the 1950s, the organization was also a vocal critic of the abuses of deportation authorities. In 1954 the Supreme Court’s ruling in Hernandez v. Texas extended more rights to Latino citizens. The case ended the exclusion of Mexican Americans from juries in Texas.
Another Latino organization, the American GI Forum, was founded by Dr. Hector P. Garcia. The purpose of the GI Forum was to protect the rights of Mexican American veterans. After World War II, Latino veterans were excluded from veterans’ organizations. They were also denied medical services by the Veterans Administration.
The GI Forum’s first effort to combat racial injustice involved a Mexican American soldier killed during World War II. A funeral home refused to hold his funeral because he was Mexican American. The GI Forum drew national attention to the incident, and the soldier s remains were buried in Arlington National Cemetery. Under Dr. Garcia’s leadership, the organization broadened its scope and began to challenge discrimination against all Latinos. It helped pay the poll taxes of poor Hispanics so that they could vote, fought against segregated schools, helped fund the attorneys arguing Hernandez v. Texas, and worked to register Latino voters. In 1968, Garcia was appointed to the United States Commission on Civil Rights. Today the GI Forum has nearly 160,000 members across the United States.
D READING PROGRESS CHECK
Identifying What were the goals of Latino civil rights organizations?
Every member of a migrant worker family had to work to survive. Here, Mexican children pick cotton in Texas.
CRITICALTHINKING
Making Inferences What does this photograph indicate about economic opportunity for migrant farmworkers? SKILLS PRACTICE
After you have read the lesson on Latino Americans, pick a partner. Work with your partner to check and deepen each other’s understanding ofthe text. Take turns asking each other questions to see if you both understood the lesson. Ask questions about why Latinos moved north and south of the border. Ask why they formed protest groups. Ask what they achieved.
(continued from p. 529)
reus Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills
13B analyze the causes and effects of changing demographic patterns resulting from legal and illegal immigration to the United States
21A analyze the effects of landmark U.S. Supreme Court decisions, including Brown v. Board of Education, and other U.S. Supreme Court decisions such as Plessy v. Ferguson, Hernandez v. Texas, Tinker v. Des Moines, Wisconsin v. Yoder, and White v. Regester 21C evaluate constitutional change in terms of strict construction versus judicial interpretation
continued on the next page
The Politics of Protest 531
BIOGRAPHY
Cesar Chavez (1927-1993)
An Arizona native, labor leader Cesar Chavez grew up a Mexican American migrant farm laborer. He was a community organizer during the 1950s before founding the National Farm Workers Association, a forerunner ofthe United Farm Workers. A strong supporter of nonviolence, he led peaceful strikes and boycotts that were usually successful. His contributions earned Chavez a Presidential Medal of Freedom the year following his death.
CRITICAL THINKING
Making Inferences Why might Chavez have cared so much about farm laborers'rights? adequate sufficient for a specific requirement; completed to its minimum requirements
bilingualism the practice of teaching immigrant students in their own language
(continued from p. 531)
TEKS
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills 25B describe both the positive and negative impacts of significant examples of cultural movements in art, music, and literature such as Tin Pan Alley, the Harlem Renaissance, the Beat Generation, rock and roll, the Chicano Mural Movement, and country and western music on American society
26C explain how the contributions of people of various racial, ethnic, gender, and religious groups shape American culture
Protests and Progress
civil rights?
As the 1960s began, Latino Americans continued to face prejudice and limited access to adequate education, employment, and housing. Encouraged by the African American civil rights movement, Latinos launched a series of campaigns to improve their economic situation anden discrimination.
In the early 1960s, Cesar Chavez and Dolores Huerta organized two groups that fought for farmworkers. In 1965 the groups went on strike in California to demand union recognition, increased wages, and better benefits. When employers resisted, Chavez organized a national boycott of table grapes. Between 14 and 17 million citizens stopped buying grapes, and industry profits tumbled. In 1966 Chavez and Huerta merged their tw< organizations into the United Farm Workers (UFW). Chavez held a hunger strike in 1968 to support the effort. A UFW spokesman described the impact the hunger strike had on Chavez and the farmworkers: “After twenty-five days, Cesar was carried to a nearby park where the fast ended during a mass with thousands of farmworkers. He had lost thirty-five pounds, but there was no more talk about violence among the farmworkers.” The new union kept the boycott going until 1970, when the grape growers finally agreed to raise wages and improve working conditions.
Latino youths also became involved in civil rights. In 1967 college students in San Antonio, Texas, led by Jose Angel Gutierrez, founded the Mexican American Youth Organization (MAYO). MAYO organized walkouts and demonstrations to protest discrimination. One Texas walkou led to the creation of bilingual education at a local high school.
MAYO’s success and the spread of protests across the West and Southwest convinced Gutierrez to found a new political party in 1969. It was called La Raza Unida, or “the United People.” La Raza Unida mobilize Mexican American voters with calls for job-training programs and greater access to financial institutions. By the early 1970s, it had elected Latinos tc local offices in several cities with large Latino populations. A larger civil rights movement among Mexican Americans, many of whom began callinj themselves Chicanos, emerged. The movement fought against discrimination and celebrated ethnic pride.
In the late 1960s, many Latino leaders promoted bilingualism—the practice of teaching immigrant students in their own language while they also learned English. Congress supported this movement by passing the Bilingual Education Act in 1968, which directed school districts to set up classes for immigrants in their own language while they were learning English. This became politically controversial. Beginning in the 1980s, an English-only movement began. By the 2000s, more than half of the nation state legislatures had passed laws or amendments makin g English the official language of their state.
The Chicano Mural Movement
Efforts by Hispanic Americans to defend their civil rights and promote economic opportunity within their community were encouraged by a renewed sense of their ethnic and cultural identity. In the 1960s, a new arl movement egan in the urban southwest, particularly in the Mexican-
merican arrios of Texas and southern California. Artists, often working
532
with teams of volunteers from local communities, began creating large brightly colored murals on the walls of city buildings, schools, churches, highway overpasses, and apartment buildings.
The style ofthe murals was inspired by the works of artists Diego Garcia and Jose Orozco. The murals depicted Mexican American culture, which is why the movement came to be known as the Chicano Mural Movement. The style of the murals resembled the styles of art in ancient Mexico, but it reflected the characteristics and issues of the 1960s and 1970s.
The murals reminded Latinos of their cultural heritage and religion, portrayed economic and social problems, especially those facing farm workers and domestic workers, and challenged the racism of the era. Murals also included portraits of Cesar Chavez, famous Latino heroes from American, Mexican, and Texan history, pictures of missions, and religious scenes.
An important positive impact of the Chicano Mural Movement was that it helped remind Hispanics of their identity, their contributions to the United States, and encouraged them to support the struggle for their rights. As with all cultural movements that emphasize an ethnic identity, however, a potential negative effect of the movement was that it might also have
I contributed to division among communities, rather emphasizing common § ground among all Americans. In addition, of course, because it was a form 1 of public art, not everyone approved. Some people found some images I disturbing and others complained that the murals, despite their beautiful | colors and artistry, were like graffiti, and defaced public surfaces.
I H READING PROGRESS CHECK
0 ---------------------------
j Explaining How did Latinos work for the rights of farmworkers?
BIOGRAPHY
Dolores Huerta (1930-)
In 1955 Dolores Huerta helped found the Stockton chapter ofthe Community Service Organization (CSO). The group fought for Mexican American civil rights. Huerta led voter registration drives and worked for improved public services for farmworkers and other community residents.
In 1962 Huerta joined with Cesar Chavez to form the National Farm Workers Association (NWFA).

When the NWFA became the United Farmworkers (UFW), Huerta continued her activism on behalf of farmworkers by lobbying in Sacramento and Washington, D.C., against the farm owners' use of toxic pesticides that harmed workers, organizing strikes of field workers, and campaigning for candidates favorable to the farmworkers'causes.
LESSON 3 REVIEW
Reviewing Vocabulary
1.	Defining What was the repatriation? 13B
2.	Summarizing How has the bilingualism movement changed overtime? 26C
Using Your Notes
3.	Making Generalizations Review the notes that you completed
throughout the lesson, and then describe the successes and
setbacks of Latino activists in the twentieth century.
9B, 9C, 9H, 91,26A
Answering the Guiding Questions
4.	Analyzing Cause and Effect Why did many Mexicans migrate to the United States from the early to mid-1900s, and how did this affect American society? 13B
5.	Synthesizing How was the Latino approach to gaining civil rights similar to and different from the African American civil rights movement? 9B, 9C, 9H, 9l, 26A, 26D
6.	Synthesizing How did groups such as the United Farm Workers and La Raza Unida promote Latino civil rights? 9B, 9C, 26C, 26D
Writing Activity
INFORMATIVE/EXPLANATORY
Write an essay explaining the purpose ofthe strike against table-grape growers in the 1960s and how strikers planned to achieve their goals. 9B, 9C, 26A, 26D The Politics of Protest.
chapter is Assessment
Directions: On a separate sheet of paper, answer the questions below. Make sure you read carefully and answer all parts of the questions.
Lesson Review
Lesson 1
0 Making Connections Describe the connection between American prosperity, college attendance, and youth protest movements.
0 Drawing Inferences What might the name "Students for a Democratic Society" have suggested about this organization's goals?
0 Identifying Central Issues What was the major belief about society that drove many people into the counterculture?
0 Defining What aspects ofthe counterculture were
expressed in the rock and roll music ofthe 1960s? What are
some of the positive impacts of counterculture rock and
roll music? What are some of its negative impacts?
25A, 25B
Lesson 2
0 Describing What role did Betty Friedan play in the women's rights movement? 9C
0 Speculating What was the role of NOW, and why do you think the members of NOW included men (and not just women) in their founding conference? 9B
0 Summarizing What were the Educational Amendments,
and how did school athletics tie to these amendments?
17D
0 Comparing What strategies and techniques did the
feminist movement adopt from the civil rights movement?
9B
Lesson 3
0 Comparing and Contrasting Contrasting Describe the roles of LULAC, MAYO, and La Raza Unida in the Chicano civil rights movement. How are these groups similar? How are they different? 9B
0 Identifying Cause and Effect How did a national grape boycott impact workers' rights? What role did Cesar Chavez play in the boycott? 9C
© Making Inferences What organizations did Cesar Chavez and Dolores Huerta create? Why do you think they chose to merge their unions to form the UFW? What was the role ofUFW? 9C.26D
© Identifying What led Dolores Huerta to help found the CSO? What did Heurta do in the CSO? 9C, 26D
Exploring the Essential Questions
© Drawing Conclusions What actions did women's groups and Latinos use to expand their economic opportunities and political rights? 9B, 9C, 26A
© Drawing Conclusions What were the effects of the social changes for students, women, and Latinos?
Critical Thinking
© Theorizing Theorize about why music and musicians held such a significant place within the counterculture movement ofthe 1960s. Does music remain as significant to the youth of today?
0 Analyzing What was the effect ofthe Supreme Court's ruling in the case Hernandez v. Texas? 21A
© Summarizing What was the outcome of the Delgado v. Bastrop I.S.D Supreme Court case? 9i
0 Describing What role did Phyllis Schlafly play in the defeat ofthe Equal Rights Amendment? What were some of her reasons for opposing this amendment? 1OE
0 Analyzing Identify how Title IX created economic and social opportunities for women, and describe any unintended consequences ofthe legislation. 17D
Need Extra Help?
10	11	12	13	14	15	16	17	18	19
| Go to page	1520 1 520 1 522 | 522 1 525 | 525 1527 | 5241 5311532153215^1524151715^15^53^5261^
534
© Evaluating Write a brief description ofthe Chicano Mural Movement. How did this movement reflect some ofthe characteristics and issues ofthe time and help shape American culture? What are some ofthe positive aspects of the Chicano Mural Movement? What are some of its negative aspects? 25A, 25B, 26C
Social Studies Skills
0 Categorizing Refer to the various amendments, acts, or rights gained during this period and categorize them according to the group in society for whom they most impacted. Analyze the information noting balances or imbalances, or whether or not the change is still significant today. 29B
Evaluating Decisions What new movement arose from the Roe v. Wade decision, and how does that movement influence politics today? Explain whether the Supreme Court's decision was based on strict construction or a judicial interpretation of the Constitution. 21c
$ Identifying Central Issues What was one ofthe major issues that lead to the growth ofthe feminist movement in the 1960s? 1OF
Evaluating Events How did the success of MAYO contribute to increased participation of Latinos in the political process in the United States? 9H
® Creating Written Presentations Conduct research at the library or online to learn the impact on students of the Educational Amendments passed in 1972. Focus on how they changed the opportunities for girls and young women. Assemble a report describing landmark events and specific stories you find during youn'esea^ch.
© Analyzing Write an essay that explains why there was such a dramatic increase in the number of protests by students, women, and Latinos in the 1960s. 9B, 26A
© Creating Maps In the late 1960s, states near the United States'-Mexico border had a strong Latino rights' movement presence. Research the cities in the United States with high Latino populations during the late 1960s and early 1970s. Compare with populations today. Present this information in a map, citing your sources. Analyze whether there has or has not been a shift in regions of the United States with a strong Latino presence. 31A
Analyzing Primary Sources
Use the photo to answer the following questions.
This photo was published in Life magazine in 1965. It shows feminist leader and future cofounder of Ms. magazine Gloria Steinem holding a sign with a phrase made popular by the civil rights movement— "We Shall Overcome."
© Drawing Conclusions On Steinem's sign, why is the word "shall" underlined? 26A, 26C, 26D, 29A
© Making Connections How does the message of this photo relate to the work that Steinem did to help promote Title VII ofthe 1964 Civil Rights Act and make it popular with the public? 26A, 26C, 26D, 29A
e Analyzing Visuals In this photo, Steinem is seated indoors against a white background. How does this setting affect the message and impact of the photo?
Need Extra Help?
	20	21	22	23	24	25	26	27	28	29	30
[Gotopage		[siTT	527|	| 524 |	| 532 |	|517	|sn|	5171	1535	l5351	[535J
The Politics of Protest 535
Analyzing Visuals
Use the graph to answer the following questions.
Year
Source: Historical Statistics ofthe United States: Earliest Times to the Present, Volume 1.
0 Analyzing Geographic Distributions Which nationality makes up the majority of Latino Americans? What questions would you need to ask in order to explain the national origins of Latinos other than those from Mexico and Cuba? 31B
Q
Analyzing Geographic Patterns Why did the number of people of Cuban nationality begin to rise in the 1960s? Why did the growth ofthe Mexican population slow between 1960 and 1970? What questions do you need to pose to explain why Latino numbers in general began to rise rapidly from 1970 onward? 31B
Extended Response Question
Analyzing Changing Demographics Write an essay
describing the causes and effects of legal and illegal
immigration to the United States and explain how it has
changed the demographics ofthe United States. The essay
should have an introduction, at least three paragraphs,
and a conclusion. Be sure to use correct social studies
terminology when discussing key concepts about
immigration and changes in American society.
13B, 30A, 30B
Standardized Test Practice
© What role did Hector P. Garcia play in the Latino movement? 9C
A.
He founded the Gl Forum. B.
He founded the LULAC. C.
He co-founded the UFW. D.
He founded the MAYO. © How were minority rights protected in the case of Mendez v. Westminster? 9i
F.
It kept Mexican American school children from having to attend segregated schools. G.
It kept Mexican migrant workers from having to work long hours for low pay. H.
It made it more difficult for the government to deport Mexican Americans. J.
It gave Mexican Americans the right to vote. Need Extra Help?
	31	32	33	34	35
| Go to page	1 530 | 530 | 517 | 531 | 531 |
Politics and Economics
1968-1980
networks
There's More Online about the Nixon administration and how society changes overtime.	__
19
CHAPTER
Lesson 1
The Nixon Administration
Lesson 2
The Watergate Scandal
Lesson 3
Ford and Carter
Lesson 4
New Approaches to Civil Rights
Lesson 5
Environmentalism
The Story Matters...
Henry Kissinger and President Nixon reshaped U.S. foreign policy. As President Nixon's national security advisor, Kissinger assisted with diplomatic negotiations with the Soviet Union and the People's Republic of China, building bridges where there had previously been hostility.
◄ Henry Kissinger won the Nobel Peace Prize in 1973 for negotiating the Paris Peace Accords, which aimed to bring about a cease-fire in the Vietnam War and a withdrawal of American forces.
PHOTO:
Bettmann/CORBIS 537
