CHAPTER 8
Place andTime: United States 1920-1930
After the suffering of World War /, Americans were ready to enjoy life and eager to buy new goods that had not been available during the war. The new technology of the assembly line made the automobile much more affordable and spurred economic growth. The growing African American population in the North sparked new trends in literature, music, and art, and made African Americans a powerful political voice. Yet some people believed traditional society and morality were under attack, causing nativism and racism to increase in the 1920s.
Step Into the Place
Read the quotes and look at the information presented on the map. fZZ9 6B, 16A, 27A, 27C, 29a, 29H
Analyzing Historical Documents How do the following quote and the information in the map show how technology changed life in the 1920s?
DBQ
PRIMARYSOURCE
w Every piece of work in the shop moves; it may move on hooks on overhead chains going to assembly in the exact order in which the parts are required; it may travel on a moving platform, or it may go by gravity, but the point is that there is no lifting or trucking of anything other than materials.... No workman has anything to do with moving or lifting anything."
—Henry Ford describing his assembly line, from My Life and Work, 1922
Step Into the Time
Drawing Conclusions BTK.W-JTJdliljH'gl
Research an event from the time line. Write a paragraph explaining
1920 Prohibition begins

Harding
1921-1923
1922 Claude McKay's Harlem Shadows is published
fietw
Los Angeles
ATLANTIC
OCEAN
Dallas:
The discovery of large oilfields in the early twentieth century, many of them in Texas, touched off "oil crazes." By 1920 the national demand for oil had grown as more people drove cars and used petroleum-based products.
MEXICO
400 miles
0	200 km
Lambert Azimuthal Equal-Area projection
ucrw
Principal manufacturing cities 0 Slaughtering and meat packing 0 Textiles
g Iron and steel work A Automobiles and parts
Lumber and timber
Oil and gas drilling
'24 Membership	1925 Scopes trial
the Ku Klux	ignites debate over
in peaks	teaching of evolution
May 21,1927 Lindbergh completes first solo transatlantic flight
1927 The Jazz Singer is first	J
"talking"motion picture	I
Hoover
1929-1933
Aug. 27,1928 Kellogg-Briand Pact renounces war

T

networks
There's More Online!
Sf BIOGRAPHY Calvin Coolidge
BIOGRAPHY
Warren G. Harding BIOGRAPHY
Charles Evans Hughes CHART/GRAPH
Unemployment gf CHART/GRAPH U.S. Budget VIDEO
The Roaring Twenties INTERACTIVE SELF-CHECK QUIZ
LESSON 1
The Politics of the1920s
t^wassodalandeconomiclifediffeKntintlK tfthelate nineteenth century? • Howhas S&ieschanged overtime?
Reading HELPDESK
Academic Vocabulary
•	investigation
•	revelation
It Matters Because
Warren G. Harding's administration suffered from corruption and scandals. This damaged Americans' faith in their government. Harding's successor, Calvin Coolidge, worked to restore confidence, to promote a healthy U.S. economy, and to facilitate peace and restore economic stabilitv abroad.
Content Vocabulary
•	supply-side economics
•	cooperative individualism
•	isolationism
The Harding Administration
guiding question How was Harding's effort to return to "normalcy" prevented by political scandals?
TAKING NOTES:
Key Ideas and Details
Organizing As you read about Presidents Harding and Coolidge, create an outline similar to the one below to list features and accomplishments of their administrations.
The Politics of the 1920s
I.
The Harding Administration A. D.
II.
III.
A.
3.

TEK5
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills 
4F analyze major issues such as isolationism and neutrality raised by U.S. involvement in World War I, Woodrow Wilson’s Fourteen Points, and the Treaty of Versailles
continued on the next page
Born in 1865 in Corsica, Ohio, Warren G. Harding began his career in Ohio state politics. In 1898 voters elected Harding to the Ohio General Assembly, where he fit in comfortably with the powerful Ohio Republican political machine. In 1903 he was elected lieutenant governor. He became a U.S. senator in 1914. After serving one term, Harding ran for and won the presidency in 1920.
In his campaign, Harding promised “a return to normalcy” following the war. For Harding and his administration, a “return to normalcy” meant an end to progressive experimentation, an end to high taxes on the wealthy, and an end to government intervention in the economy. In particular, it meant an end to the economic controls imposed during World War I. The Harding administration committed itself to restoring economic growth and prosperity by getting the government out of the economy. His genial manner endeared him to the nation. People applauded the easygoing atmosphere of the Harding administration replacing the reform and war fervor of President Wilson’s last years.
Teapot Dome and Other Scandals
Harding made several notable appointments to the cabinet. These included former Supreme Court justice Charles Evans Hughes as secretary of state, former Food Administrator Herbert Hoover
260
as secretary of commerce, and business tycoon Andrew Mellon as secretary ofthe treasury. Many of his other appointments, however, were disastrous. He gave cabinet posts and other high-level jobs to friends and political allies from Ohio. Harding felt comfortable among his old friends, known as the Ohio Gang. Alice Roosevelt Longworth, daughter of President Theodore Roosevelt, described a typical evening in Harding’s White House study:
PRIMARYSOURCE
((The air [would be] heavy with tobacco smoke, trays with bottles containing every imaginable brand of whiskey.. .cards and poker chips at hand—a general atmosphere of waistcoat unbuttoned, feet on desk, and spittoons alongside.»
—from Crowded Hours, 1933
Several of these men used their influential posts for their own gain. Colonel Charles R. Forbes, an Ohio acquaintance of Harding’s, sold scarce medical supplies from veterans’ hospitals and kept the money for himself.
He cost the public about $250 million.
In June 1923, while traveling from Alaska to California, Harding became ill with what was probably a heart attack. He died in San Francisco on August 2, shortly before the news of the Forbes scandal broke. Early the next morning, the vice president, Calvin Coolidge, took the oath of office and became president.
The most famous scandal, known as Teapot Dome, began in early 1922. Harding’s secretary of the interior, Albert B. Fall, secretly allowed private interests to lease lands containing U.S. Navy oil reserves at Teapot Dome, Wyoming, and Elk Hills, California. In return, Fall received bribes from these private interests totaling more than $300,000. After the Wall Street Journal broke the story, the Senate launched an investigation that took most of the 1920s to complete. In 1929 Secretary Fall became the first cabinet secretary to go to prison.
Attorney general Harry Daugherty was investigated for accepting bribes from a German agent seeking to buy a German-owned company that had been seized by the U.S. government during World War I. Daugherty
(continued from p. 260)
TEKS
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills 16A analyze causes of economic growth and prosperity in the 1920s, including Warren Harding’s Return to Normalcy, reduced taxes, and increased production efficiencies
19C describe the effects of political scandals, including Teapot Dome, Watergate, and Bill Clinton’s impeachment, on the views of U.S. citizens concerning trust in the federal government and its leaders
investigation a systematic examination or official inquiry
POLITICAL CARTOONS
CORRUPTION IN GOVERNMENT
"Bargain Day in Washington"shows the U.S. Capitol the Washington Monument, the army, the White House, and the navy as having been "sold" to the highest bidder.
1	Comparing and Contrasting What similarity does the cartoon suggest between the White House and the
U.S.
Capitol? 2	Analyzing information
What does the cartoon imply about corruption in the federal government?
TheJazzAge 261
revelation an act
of revealing to view or making known
supply-side
economics an economic theory that lower taxes will boost the economy as businesses and individuals invest their money, thereby creating higher tax revenue
cooperative
individualism President Hoover's policy of encouraging manufacturers and distributors to form their own organizations and volunteer information to the federal government in an effort to stimulate the economy
refused to open Justice Department files to a congressional committee. He also refused to testify under oath, claiming immunity, or freedom from prosecution, on the grounds that he had had confidential dealings with President Harding. Daugherty was later dismissed by President Coolidge.
Teapot Dome and the other scandals of the Harding administration increased Americans’ distrust of the federal government and political leaders. This distrust added to the growing frustration with progressive policies caused by World War I. Many progressive ideas depended on efficient honest government to be effective. If the government was corrupt, it helped make the case for reducing the role of government in the economy.
"Silent Cal"Takes Over
Calvin Coolidge was very different from Harding. A critic joked that Coolidge could be “silent in five languages.” Coolidge quickly distanced himself from the Harding administration. However, he asked the most capable cabinet members—Hughes, Mellon, and Hoover—to remain. Coolidge believed that prosperity rested on business leadership and that government should interfere with business and industry as little as possible.
In the year following Harding’s death and the revelations of the scandals, Coolidge avoided crises and adopted policies intended to keep the nation prosperous. He easily won the Republican nomination for president in 1924. The Republicans promised the American people that the policies that had brought prosperity would continue. Coolidge won the election easily.
H READING PROGRESS CHECK
Comparing How did the Coolidge administration differ from the Harding administration?
ANALYZING PRIMARY SOURCES
Coolidge and Prosperity
After all, the chief business of the American people is business. They are profoundly concerned with producing, buying, selling, investing and prospering in the world....
In all experience, the accumulation of wealth means the multiplication of schools, the increase of knowledge, the dissemination of intelligence, the encouragement of science, the broadening of outlook, the expansion of liberties, the widening of culture.”
-----Calvin Coolidge, from a speech to newspaper editors, quoted in the
New York Times, January 18,1925
DBQ
Document Based Questions Drawing Condusions Why did Coolidge think that "the accumulation of wealth" was so important?
262
Policies of Prosperity
guidingquestion What government policies helped the economy recover from the postwar recession?
Andrew Mellon, a successful banker and industrialist, was secretary ofthe treasury under President Harding and the chief architect of economic policy. When Mellon took office, he had three major goals: to balance the budget, to reduce the governments debt, and to cut taxes. Mellon argued that if taxes were lower, businesses and some consumers would spend and invest their extra money. This would cause the economy to grow, and Americans would earn more money. The government then would collect more in taxes. This idea is known today as supply-side economics*
At Mellon’s urging, Congress dramatically reduced tax rates. By 1928, Congress had reduced the income tax rate most Americans paid to 0.5 percent, down from 4 percent. They cut the rate for the wealthiest Americans to 25 percent, down from 73 percent. The federal budget fell from $6.4 billion to less than $3 billion in seven years.
Secretary of Commerce Herbert Hoover also sought to promote economic growth. He tried to balance government regulation with his philosophy of cooperative individualism. This idea involved encouraging businesses to form trade associations that would voluntarily share information with the federal government. Hoover believed this system would reduce costs and promote economic efficiency.
H READING PROGRESS CHECK
Summarizing What strategies helped promote economic growth and recovery after World War I?
Trade and Arms Control
guiding question Doyou think it is possible to abolish war?
Before World War I, the United States was a debtor nation. By the end of the war, wartime allies owed the United States more than $10 billion in war debts. By the 1920s, the United States was the dominant economic power in the world. Under Secretary of State Charles Evans Hughes, the nation tried to use its economic power to promote peace and stability.
The Myth of Isolationism
Most Americans, tired of being entangled in the politics of Europe, favored isolationism. This is the idea that the United States will be safer and more prosperous if it stays out of world affairs. To many, it appeared that the United States had become isolationist. It had not ratified the Treaty of Versailles and had not joined the League of Nations. But in fact, the United States was too powerful and too interconnected with other countries economically to be truly isolationist. Instead of relying on armed force and the collective security ofthe League of Nations, the United States tried to promote peace by using economic policies and arms control agreements.
The Dawes Plan	1. K
Americas former allies, Britain and France, had difficulty making the payments on their immense war debts. Meanwhile, Germany was trying to make huge cash payments to these nations as punishment for starting t e war—payments that were crippling the German economy.
- Andrew Mellon
(1855-1937)
; Secretary ofthe treasury and i renowned art collector, Andrew W.
Mellon was responsible for ; reforming the U.S. tax structure
and reviving the national economy 1 following World War I. Born in ' Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, in 1855,
Mellon went to work at his father's bank when he was still in his teens. Eventually his father made Andrew the bank's owner, and he
: went on to supply funds for local i corporations, building his own ; empire in the process. He founded ' several profitable companies,
: including the Union Trust '• Company. This company was ; Mellon's chief source of income \ and proved so profitable that he ; was among the richest people in ; the United States by the 1920s. j In 1921 President Warren G.
Harding appointed Mellon i secretary ofthe treasury. In his i new role, he worked to reduce the
■	national debt in the wake of World ; War I by lowering taxes to allow
business expansion. Mellon held ; his position in the treasury
■	through the presidencies of Calvin
Coolidge and Herbert Hoover;
; however, his failure to fend off the
Great Depression caused him to resign in 1932. Andrew Mellon ; next served as U.S. ambassador to Britain, a position he held for a
year. He died in 1937.
isolationism a national policy of avoiding involvement in world affairs
TheJazzAge 263
To address this problem, in 1924 American diplomat Charles G. Dawes negotiated an agreement with France, Britain, and Germany. American banks would make loans to Germany to help it to make reparations payments. In exchange, Britain and France would accept less in reparations and pay back more on their war debts to the United States.
U.S. secretary of state Frank Kellogg is remembered today for promoting the Kellogg-Briand Pact, a treaty to outlaw war.
CRITICAL THINKING
Predicting Consequences What might happen today if the United States and other nations followed the key idea ofthe Kellogg-Briand Pact? The Washington Conference
Despite their debts, the major powers were involved in a costly postwar naval arms race. In 1921 the United States invited representatives from eight major countries—Britain, France, Italy, China, Japan, Belgium, the Netherlands, and Portugal—to Washington, D.C., to discuss disarmament. Secretary of State Charles Evans Hughes proposed a 10-year halt on the construction of new warships. The result was the Five-Power Naval Limitation Treaty between Britain, France, Italy, Japan, and the United States. But the conference also angered the Japanese because their navy was required to be smaller than those of the United States and Britain.
The Kellogg-Briand Pact
The Washington Conference inspired U.S. secretary of state Frank Kellogg and French foreign minister Aristide Briand to propose a treaty to outlaw war altogether. On August 27, 1928, the United States and 14 other nations signed the Kellogg-Briand Pact. All signing nations agreed to abandon war and to settle all disputes by peaceful means.
The London Naval Treaties
From January to April 1930, five nations met in London to extend the Washington Conference. The United States, Britain, France, Italy, and Japan agreed on ratios for war ships, halting the arms race through 1936. In 1934 Japan announced it would not extend the treaty past 1936, so the five nations met again in December 1935. The United States, Britain, and France again signed the treaty. Japan and Italy declined to sign the treaty.
H READING PROGRESS CHECK
Identifying What initiatives did the United States take in the 1920s to help ensure economic stability and peace in Europe?
LESSON 1 REVIEW
Reviewing Vocabulary
1.	Specifying What were some ways in which the United States showed signs of isolationism after World War I? 4F
Using Your Notes
2.	Comparing Name one important way in which the Harding and Coolidge administrations were alike in terms of political appointments.
Answering the Guiding Questions
3.	Drawing Conclusions How was Harding's effort to return to "normalcy" prevented by political scandals? 19C
4.	Cause and Effect What government policies helped the economy recover from the postwar recession? 16A
5.	Analyzing Do you think it is possible to abolish war?
Writing About History
ARGUMENT
Suppose that you are a farmer or business owner in the 1920s. Write a letter to your representatives in Congress about why tax cuts are a good or bad idea. 16A 264
Academic Vocabulary
disposable • credit
It Matters Because
In the 1920s, widespread ownership of automobiles, radios, and other innovations changed how Americans lived. The Coolidge administration tried to promote stability in international affairs and encouraged business growth.
Content Vocabulary
’ mass production assembly line ModelT
AKING NOTES:
ley Ideas and Details
Organizing As you read about the	;
ooming era of the 1920s, complete a raphic organizer like the one below to nalyze the causes of growth and	|
rosperity.	|
4
>
EK
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills j 6B analyze the impact of significant individuals such as Clarence Darrow,
William Jennings Bryan, Henry Ford, Glenn Curtiss, Marcus Garvey, and Charles A.
Lindbergh	I
continued on the next page
The Rise of New Industries
guiding question How did new industries change the lives ofAmericans in the 1920s?
By the 1920s, the automobile had become part of American life.
A 1925 survey conducted in Muncie, Indiana, found that 21 out of 26 families who owned cars did not have bathtubs with running water. As one farm wife explained, “You cant ride to town in a bathtub.”
Increased automobile ownership was just one example of Americans’ rising standard of living. Real per capita earnings soared 22 percent between 1923 and 1929 even as work hours decreased. In 1923 U.S. Steel cut its daily work shift from 12 hours to 8 hours. In 1926 Henry Ford cut the workweek for his employees from six days to five, and farm machinery company International Harvester instituted an annual two-week paid vacation for employees. Mass production, or large-scale manufacturing done with machinery, made these changes possible by increasing supply and reducing costs. Workers made more and the goods they bought cost less.
Ford, the Assembly Line, and the Model T
The moving assembly line divided operations into simple tasks and cut unnecessary motion to a minimum. In 1913 automaker Henry Ford installed the first moving assembly line at a plant in Highland Park, Michigan. By the following year, workers were building an automobile every 93 minutes. By 1925, a Ford car was rolling off the line every 10 seconds.
Ford’s assembly line product, the Model T, demonstrated the economic concept of elasticity, or how sensitive product demand is to price. In 1908, the Model T’s first year, the car sold for $850. In 1914 mass production reduced the price to $490. Ford also increased his
The Jazz Age 265
The popularity ofthe automobile led to an increase in American industries that produced materials needed to build cars.
CRITICAL Z;
Determining Cause and Effect How
was the rubber industry affected by the invention ofthe car?
workers’ wages in 1914 to $5 a day-doubling their pay-and reduced the workday to eight-hour shifts. He took these dramatic steps to win workers' loyalty and to undercut union organizers. By 1924, Model Ts were selling for $295, and Ford sold millions of them.
PRIMARY SOURCE
ii There is one rule for the industrialist and that is: Make the best quality of goods possible at the lowest
cost possible paying the highest wages possible.”
___Henry Ford, quoted in Mass Production, the Stock Market Crash, and the Great
Depression, 1996
Ford’s mass-production methods opened the door for new companies to manufacture cars. By the mid-1920s, General Motors and Chrysler competed successfully with Ford. The auto industry also spurred growth in the production of steel, petroleum, rubber, plate glass, nickel, and lead.
Cars revolutionized American life. They eased the isolation of rural families and let more people live farther from work. A new kind of worker, the auto commuter, appeared. Other forms of urban transportation, such as the trolley, became less popular.
(continued from p. 265)
reus Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills
16A analyze causes of economic growth and prosperity in the 1920s, including Warren Harding’s Return to Normalcy, reduced taxes, and increased production efficiencies
27B explain how specific needs result in scientific discoveries and technological innovations in agriculture, the military, and medicine, including vaccines
continued on the next page
Consumer Products
In response to rising disposable income, many other new goods came on the market. Americans bought such innovations as electric razors, facial tissues, frozen foods, and home hair color. Mouthwash, deodorants, cosmetics, and perfumes became popular products.
Companies created many new products for the home. As indoor plumbing became more common, Americans’ concern lor hygiene led to the development of numerous household cleaning products. New appliances advertised as labor-savers—such as electric irons, vacuum
mass production the
production of large quantities of goods using machinery and often an assembly line
assembly line a production system with machines and workers arranged so that each person performs an assigned task again and again as the item passes before him or her
Model T automobile built by the Ford Motor Company from 1908 until 1927
disposable remaining to a person after deduction of taxes and iiving expenses
cleaners, washing machines, and refrigerators—changed the way people cleaned their homes and clothing and prepared meals.
Birth ofthe Airline Industry
After the Wright brothers’ first successful flight in 1903, the aviation industry began developing. Leading the way was American inventor Glenn Curtiss, who invented ailerons—surfaces attached to wings that could be tilted to steer the plane. Ailerons made it possible to build rigid wings and much larger aircraft. The federal government began to support the airline industry. In 191f the postmaster general introduced the world’s first airmail service.
In 1925 Congress passed the Kelly Act, authorizing postal officials to hire private airplane operators to carry mail. The Air Commerce Act of 1926 provided federal aid to build airports. The transatlantic solo flight of former airmail pilot Charles Lindbergh in 1927 banished doubt about the potential of aircraft. By 1928, 48 airlines were serving 355 American cities.
The Radio Industry
In 1913 American engineer Edwin Armstrong invented a special circuit that made it practical to transmit sound via long-range radio. The radio industry began a few years later. In November 1920, the Westinghouse Company broadcast the news of Harding’s landslide election victory from station KDKA in Pittsburgh—one of the first public broadcasts in history. That success persuaded Westinghouse to open other stations.
In 1926 the National Broadcasting Company (NBC) set up a network of stations to broadcast daily radio programs. By 1927, almost 700 stations
Radio technicians prepare for the first NBC radio show, which was broadcast in 1926. Radio networks helped create a national community as people across the country could listen to the same political speeches, music, sports, news, and entertainment programs.
CRITICAL THINKING
Drawing Conclusions How might the growing nationwide availability of radio programs have affected Americans'sense of their culture? dotted the country. Sales of radio equipment grew from $10.6 million in 1921 to $411 million in 1929, by which time more than 12 million radios were in use across the country.
In 1928 the Columbia Broadcasting System (CBS) assembled a coast-to-coast network of stations to rival NBC. The two networks sold advertising time and hired musicians, actors, and comedians from vaudeville, movies, and the nightclub circuit to appear on their shows. Americans experienced the first presidential election campaign to use radio in 1928, when the radio networks sold more than $1 million in advertising time to the Republican and Democratic Parties.
H READING PROGRESS CHECK
Analyzing How did the new industries such as the automobile and radio change the way people lived?
The Consumer Society
guiding question How did attitudes toward credit and consumerism change in the 1920s?
Higher wages and shorter workdays resulted in a decade-long buying spree that kept the economy booming. Shifting from traditional attitudes of thrift and prudence, Americans in the 1920s enthusiastically accepted their new role as consumers.
Easy Consumer Credit
One notable aspect ofthe economic boom was the growth of individual borrowing. Credit had been available before the 1920s, but most Americans had considered debt shameful. Now attitudes toward debt started changing, as people began believing in their ability to pay their debts over time. Many listened to the sales pitch “Buy now and pay in easy installments,” and began to accumulate debt. Americans bought 75 percent of their radios and 60 percent of their automobiles on the installment plan. Some started buying on credit at a rate exceeding their income.
Mass Advertising
When Otto Rohwedder developed a commercial bread sheer in 1928, he faced a problem common to inventions: the invention sliced bread was
(continued from p. 266)
TEKS
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills 27C understand the impact of technological and management innovations and their applications in the workplace and the resulting productivity enhancements for business and labor such as assembly line manufacturing, time-study analysis, robotics, computer management, and just-in-time inventory management
28A analyze how scientific discoveries, technological innovations, and the application of these by the free enterprise system, including those in transportation and communication, improve the standard of living in the United States
credit an amount or sum of money placed at a person's disposal by a bank on condition that it will be repaid with interest
TheJazzAge 267
Stop TkitJ^
something no one knew they needed. To attract consumers, manufacturers turned to advertising, another booming industry in the 1920s.
Advertisers linked products with qualities associated with the modern era, such as progress, convenience, leisure, success, and style. Advertisers also preyed on consumers’ fears and anxieties, such as insecurities about ones status or weight. For example, a 1923 advertisement for face cream read: “These premature lines are only the troubles of a skin allowed to be too dry.... The society woman keeps her skin smooth and fresh season in and season out.”
The Managerial Revolution
By the early 1920s, many industries had already created modern organizational structures. Companies were split into divisions with functions such as sales, marketing, and accounting. Managers were hired to run these divisions, freeing executives and owners from the day-to-day running ofthe companies. The large numbers of new managers helped expand the middle class, adding to the nation’s prosperity. These new
developments in business organization generated more business profit, which improved the nation’s standard of living.
Five	tT	they could
Advertisements in the 1920s enticed buyers with new technology, endorsements, money-back guarantees, and quick credit approval.

PRIMARYSOURCE
M [l]t is not only by technical skill that modern civilization is sustained. It depends to a large degree c accumulated and invested capital.... Civilization and profits go hand in hand.w
—Calvin Coolidge, quoted in the New York Times, November 28,1921

In addition to these innovations in management, companies in the 1920s began conducting time and motion studies, applying the ideas in Frederick Tayler’s Principles of Scientific Management. They systematically broke down manufacturing work into small discrete tasks and then analyzed how best to use workers to do each task as efficiently as possible.
Henry Ford’s assembly line was an example of this approach. Time-study analysis made workers more productive, but in some ways it made work more difficult. Instead of a variety of changing tasks, workers on an assembly line had to do the same repetitive task over and over again.
CRITICAL THINKING
1 Drawing Conclusions Why did manufacturers offer money back when paid for at time of purchase?
2 Predicting Consequences What was the danger of buying products on credit?
Uneven Prosperity
Not all Americans shared in the economic boom. For example, thousands ol African Americans who held factory jobs during World War I were replaced by returning servicemen. Native Americans, though granted citizenship in 1924, were often isolated on reservations where there was little productive work. Also, many immigrants had difficulty finding work. Most were farmers and factory workers with pitifully low wages. Many people in the Deep South were also left out of the economic boom as the traditional agricultural economic base there eroded after the war.
D READING PROGRESS CHECK
Explaining How did changing attitudes about credit affect people's daily lives?
The Farm Crisis
guiding question Why did farmers miss out on the prosperity of the 1920s?
American farmers did not share in the prosperity ofthe 1920s. On average they earned less than one-third of the income of other American workers. Technological advances in fertilizers, seed varieties, and farm machinery allowed them to produce more, but higher yields without an increase in demand meant that they received lower prices. Between 1920 and 1921,
268
Although many people benefited from the economic boom of the 1920s, several groups did not share in the general prosperity. For many African Americans, such as this family in rural Georgia, the 1920s were a time of poverty.
CRITICAL THINKING
Comparing and Contrasting In the 1920s, how was the life of a factory worker who lived in a big city different from the life of a farmer living in a rural area?
corn and wheat prices declined considerably. Costs for improved farming technology, meanwhile, continued to increase.
Many factors contributed to this “quiet depression” in American agriculture. During the war, the government had urged farmers to produce more to meet the great need for food in Europe. Many farmers borrowed heavily to buy new land and new machinery to raise more crops. Sales were strong, prices were high, and farmers prospered. After the war, however, European farm output rose, and the debt-ridden countries of Europe had little money to spend on American farm products. In addition, Congress passed the Fordney-McCumber Act in 1922, making matters worse by raising tariffs dramatically. This dampened the American market for foreign goods and sparked a reaction in foreign markets against buying American agricultural products.
Congress tried to pass legislation to help farmers sell their surpluses, but President Coolidge vetoed the bills. He argued that with money flowing to farmers under the proposed law, they would be encouraged to produce even greater surpluses. Agriculture remained in recession throughout the 1920s.
D
Synthesizing What factors led to the growing economic crisis in farming?
SKILLS PRACTICE
Look back through the lesson at the headings, important words and pictures. Retell the story of the 1920s economy using words you know.
LESSON 2 R
Reviewing Vocabulary
1.	Explaining How did the assembly line help make cars affordable for more Americans? 16A, 27C, 28A
Using Your Notes
2.	Hypothesizing Review your notes on the economic growth of the 1920s. How might the economy of the 1920s have been different without the advertising industry? 16A
Answering the Guiding Questions
3.	Summarizing How did new industries change the lives of Americans in the 1920s? 16A, 27A, 27C, 28A
4.	Synthesizing How did attitudes toward credit and consumerism change in the 1920s?
5.	Identifying Cause and Effect Why did farmers miss out on the prosperity of the 1920s? 27A.27B
Writing Activity
ARGUMENT
Think about the advantages of buying an automobile for rural families of the 1920s. Then write an advertisement for a Model T aimed at a farm family of the era. 6B, 28A TheJazzAge 269
Academic Vocabulary

• source
deny
Content Vocabulary
•	nativism • creationism
•	anarchist • speakeasy
•	evolution
TAKING NOTES:
Key Ideas and Details
Organizing As you read about Americans'reactions to immigrants during the 1920s, complete a graphic organizer similar to the one below by filling in the causes and effects of anti-immigrant prejudices.
\ Anti-Immigrant,
Prejudices

TEKS
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills 5A evaluate the impact of Progressive Era reforms, including initiative, referendum, recall, and the passage ofthe 16th, 17th, 18th, and 19th amendments
6A analyze causes and effects of events and social issues such as immigration,
Social Darwinism, eugenics, race relations, nativism, the Red Scare, Prohibition, and the changing role of women
continued on p. 272
270
IT MATTERS BECAUSE
The 1920s are often called the Roaring Twenties because to many the decade seemed to be one long party. Many urban Americans celebrated the new "modern" culture. However, many rural Americans believed traditional society was under attack. Nativism and racism increased, women sought to break free of traditional roles, and supporters of the new morality clashed with those who supported more traditional values.
Nativism and Immigration Policies
,	Why did nativism strengthen during the 1920s, and how did the
government deal with the tensions?
The 1920s was a time of economic growth, but it was also a time of turmoil. An economic recession, an influx of immigrants, and cultural tensions combined to create an atmosphere of disillusionment and intolerance. The fear and prejudice many felt toward Germans and Communists during and after World War I expanded to include all immigrants. This triggered a general rise in racism and nativism—a belief that one’s native land needs to be protected against immigrants.
During World War I, immigration to the United States had dropped sharply. By 1921, however, it had returned to prewar levels, with the majority of immigrants coming from southern and eastern Europe. Many Americans blamed the bombings, strikes, and recession of the postwar years on immigrants. Many believed immigrants were taking jobs that would otherwise have gone to soldiers returning home from the war.
The Sacco-Vanzetti Case
The Sacco-Vanzetti case reflected the prejudices and fears ofthe era. On April 15, 1920, two men robbed and murdered two employees of a shoe factory in Massachusetts. Police subsequently arrested two Italian immigrants, Nicola Sacco and Bartolomeo Vanzetti, for the crime.
European Immigration, 1900-1924
CHARTS/GRAPHS
|
2 5 ©
United Germany Eastern Southern Kingdom	Europe Europe
Source: HistoricalStatistic $ of the (JailedStates: Milienial to idHion
Nicola Sacco and Bartolomeo Vanzetti were anarchists who were convicted of murdering two men during a 1920 armed robbery.
1	Making Connections From which two regions did the majority of immigrants come?
2	Drawing Conclusions Why
might Americans have thought that immigrants from eastern and southern Europe would have trouble fitting in with American society?
The case created a furor when newspapers revealed that the two men were anarchists, or people who oppose all forms of government. They also reported that Sacco owned a gun similar to the murder weapon and that the bullets used in the murders matched those in Saccos gun. The evidence was questionable, but the fact that the accused men were anarchists and foreigners led many people to assume they were guilty, including the jury. On July 14, 1921, Sacco and Vanzetti were found guilty and sentenced to death. After six years of appeals, Sacco and Vanzetti were executed on August 23, 1927.
nativism hostility toward immigrants
anarchist a person who believes that there should be no government
source the point at which something is provided
PRIMARYSOURCE
uI might have died, unmarked, unknown, a failure. Now we are not a failure. This is our career and our triumph.»
— Bartolomeo Vanzetti before his execution, The Letters of Sacco and Vanzetti, 2007
Return ofthe Ku Klux Kian
The group that most wanted to restrict immigration was the Ku Klux Kian, or KKK. The old KKK began in the South after the Civil War and used threats and violence to intimidate newly freed African Americans. The new Kian also targeted Catholics, Jews, immigrants, and other groups said to be “un-American.” William J. Simmons founded the new Ku Klux Kian in 1915, with a pledge to preserve America’s white, Protestant civilization. With the help of professional promoters to sell Kian memberships, more and more people joined. By 1924, membership was close to 4 million as it spread beyond the South into the North and West.
Kian membership began to decline in the late 1920s, mainly due to scandals and power struggles among its leaders. In addition, new restrictions on immigration deprived the Kian of one of its major issues. National Origins Act
American immigration policies became more restrictive in response to nativist groups like the KKK. Even some business leaders, who had favored immigration as a source of cheap labor, now saw the new immigrants as radicals. In 1921 President Harding signed the Emergency Quota Act, which restricted annual admission to the United States by ethnic group. In 1924 the National Origins Act made immigration restriction a permanent policy. The law set quotas at 2 percent of each national group represented in
— Analyzing-----
Primary sources
Ku Klux Kian Poster
DBQ
MAKING INFERENCES
In what way can the message in this Kian poster be construed as nativism?
TheJazzAge 271
(continued from p. 270)
TEKS
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills 6B analyze the impact of significant individuals such as Clarence Darrow, William Jennings Bryan, Henry Ford, Glenn Curtiss, Marcus Garvey, and Charles A. Lindbergh
13B analyze the causes and effects of changing demographic patterns resulting from legal and illegal immigration to the United States 26C explain how the contributions of people of various racial, ethnic, gender, and religious groups shape American culture
During the 1920s, fashions changed for women who wanted the glamorous look of movie stars.
Analyzing Visuals How do you think this woman portrays the attitude and "new morality" of the 1920s?
the U.S. Census of 1890—long before the heavy wave of Catholic and Jewish immigration from southern and eastern Europe. As a result, new Quotas deliberately favored immigrants from northwestern Europe.
Increasing Mexican Immigration
Employers still needed immigrants, a source of cheap labor, for agriculture, mining, and railroad work. Mexican immigrants could fill this need because the National Origins Act exempted natives of the Western Hemisphere from the quotas. Large numbers of Mexican immigrants had already begun moving to the United States due to the Newlands Reclamation Act of 1902. The act funded irrigation projects in the Southwest and led to the creation of large farms that needed thousands of workers. By the end of the 1920s, nearly 700,000 Mexicans had migrated to the United States.
QREADING PROGRESS CHECK
Contrasting How did the National Origins Act help deal with the tensions created by nativism?
A
Clash of Cultures guiding question Why doyou think some Americans feared the "new morality"?
Groups that wanted to restrict immigration also wanted to preserve what they considered to be traditional values. They feared that a “new morality” was taking over. This trend glorified youth and personal freedom and brought big changes—particularly to the status of women.
Changes for Women
Having won the right to vote in 1920, many women sought to break free from traditional roles. Women who attended college often found support to pursue careers. Many working-class women took jobs because they needed the wages, but work was also a way to break away from parental authority and establish financial independence. Romance, pleasure, and friendship
became linked to successful marriages. Sigmund Freud’s theories also affected peoples ideas about relationships, especially his theories about human sexuality. Womens fashions changed during the 1920s: women bobbed, or shortened, their hair and wore flesh-colored silk stockings.
Some women, known as flappers, smoked cigarettes, drank prohibited liquor, and wore makeup and sleeveless dresses with short skirts.
Many professional women made major contributions in science, medicine, law, and literature. In medicine, Florence Sabin’s research led to a dramatic drop in death rates from tuberculosis. Public-health nurse Margaret Sanger believed that families could improve their standard of living by limiting the number of children they had. She founded the American Birth Control League in 1921 to promote knowledge about birth control. During the 1920s and 1930s, the use of birth control increased dramatically, particularly in the middle class.
Religious Fundamentalism
While many Americans embraced the new morality of the 1920s, others feared that the country was losing its traditional values. They viewed the consumer culture, relaxed ethics, and changing roles of women as evidence of the nation’s moral decline. Many of these people, especially in rural towns, responded by joining a religious movement known as Fundamentalism, a name derived from a series of Christian religious pamphlets titled The Fundamentals, published by millionaire Lyman Stewart.
Fundamentalists believed that the Bible was literally true and without error. They defended the Protestant faith against ideas implying that human beings derived their moral behavior from society and nature, not God. In particular, they rejected Charles Darwin’s theory of evolution, which said that human beings had developed from lower forms of life over the course of millions of years. Instead, they believed in creationism—the belief that God created the world as described in the Bible.
Two popular evangelical preachers, Billy Sunday and Aimee Semple McPherson, stirred supporters by preaching in very nontraditional ways. Sunday, a former professional baseball player, drew huge crowds with his rapid-fire sermons and on-stage showmanship. McPherson conducted her revivals and faith healings in Los Angeles in a flamboyant theatrical style, using stage sets and costumes that expressed the themes of her highly emotional sermons.
In 1925 Tennessee outlawed any teaching that denied “the story of the Divine Creation of man as taught in the Bible,” or taught that man descended from a lower order of animals.” The American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU) advertised for a teacher willing to be arrested for teaching evolution. John T. Scopes, a biology teacher in Dayton, Tennessee, volunteered. At Scopes’s trial, William Jennings Bryan, a three-time presidential candidate, was the prosecutor representing the creationists. Clarence Darrow, one of the country’s most celebrated trial lawyers, defended Scopes. Scopes was found guilty and fined $100, although the conviction was later overturned on a technicality. The trial had been broadcast over the radio, and Darrow s blistering cross-examination of Bryan hurt the Fundamentalist cause.
PRIMARYSOURCE
evolution the scientific theory that humans and other forms of life have evolved over time
creationism the belief that God created the world and everything in it, usually in the way described in the Bible
deny to declare untrue
You can only protect your liberties in this world by protecting the other mans freedom. You can only be free if I am free.
—Clarence Darrow, address to the court in People v. Lloyd, 1920
speakeasy a place where alcoholic beverages are sold illegally
TheJazzAge 273
Prohibition
The movement to ban alcohol sales grew stronger in the early 1900s. When the Eighteenth Amendment went into effect in January 1920, the Volstead Act gave the U.S. Treasury Department the power to enforce Prohibition, marking a dramatic increase in federal police powers.
In the 1920s, Treasury Department agents made more than 540,000 arrests, but Americans still ignored the law. People flocked to secret bars called speakeasies to purchase alcohol. Liquor also was readily available in rural areas through bootlegging—the illegal production and distribution of alcohol. Huge profits could be made smuggling liquor from Canada and the Caribbean. Organized crime became big business, and gangsters used their money to corrupt local politicians. Al Capone, one of the most successful and well-known gangsters of the era, had many police officers, judges, and other officials on his payroll.
The battle to repeal Prohibition began almost as soon as the Eighteenth Amendment was ratified. The Twenty-first Amendment, ratified in 1933,
Prohibition led to the creation of a special federal bureau charged with stopping the sale of illegal alcohol. In this photo, a federal agent cracks open barrels of illegal rum to prevent it from being sold.
> CRiTlCALIHINKI^G
Analyzing Primary Sources The
Volstead Act greatly increased federal police powers. What elements of this photo convey a sense of power?
repealed the Eighteenth Amendment. Though diseases and some social problems were reduced, Prohibition did not improve society as dramatically as its supporters had hoped.
H REAPING PROGRESS CHECK
Identifying What political, social, and economic contributions did women make to American society in the 1920s?
LESSON 3 REVIEW
Reviewing Vocabulary
1.	Explaining Why were Sacco and Vanzetti considered anarchists, and how did that affect the result of their trial? 6A
Using Your Notes
2.	Making Connections Use your notes from this lesson to write a statement that makes a case for the connection between the causes of nativism and the rise ofthe Ku Klux Kian. 6A
Answering the Guiding Questions
3.	Identifying Cause and Effect Why did nativism strengthen during the 1920s, and how did the government deal with the tensions? 6A. 13B
4.	Drawing Conclusions Why do you think some Americans feared the "new morality"? 26C.26D
Writing About History
5.	argument Suppose it is the 1920s. Write a letter to your senator to persuade him to support Prohibition or its repeal. 5A, 6A
4
etw@rks
lere's More Online!
ademic Vocabulary
It matters because
The 1920s was an era of great artistic innovation and enormous change in popular culture. Artists and writers experimented with new techniques. Broadcast radio introduced the latest trends in music and entertainment. Motion pictures became a major leisure-time activity, and Americans began to fall in love with sports such as baseball and boxing.
Art and Literature
diverse • unify
ntent Vocabulary bohemian • mass media
KING NOTES:
y Ideas and Details
■anhino As you read about the 20s, complete a graphic organizer like !one below by filling in the main iracteristics of art, literature, and pular culture of the era.
ultural Movement	Main Characteristics
rt	
iterature	
opular Culture	
k
B
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills 1 25A describe how the characteristics and issues in U.S. history have been reflected in various genres of art, music, film, and literature
continued on p. 277
How did many artists and writers of the time describe the 1920s?
During the 1920s, American artists and writers challenged traditional ideas as they searched for meaning in the modern world. Many artists, writers, and intellectuals flocked to Manhattan’s Greenwich Village and Chicago’s South Side. The artistic and unconventional, or bohemian, lifestyle of these places allowed artists, musicians, and writers greater freedom of expression.
Modern American Art
European art movements greatly influenced the modernists of American art. Perhaps most striking was the diverse range of artistic styles, each attempting to express the individual, modern experience. American painter John Marin drew on the urban dynamics of New York City for inspiration:
fiaasia
[T]he whole city is alive; buildings, people, all are alive; and the more they move me the more I feel them to be alive.
It is this'moving of me'that I try to express, so that I may recall the spell I have been under and behold the expression ofthe different emotions that have been called into being. ”
—from Camera Work, No. 42-43, April-July, 1913
Painter Charles Sheeler applied the influences of photography and the geometric forms of Cubism to urban and rural American landscapes. Edward Hopper revived the visual accuracy of realism.
TheJazzAge 275
BIOGRAPHIES
Ernest Hemingway (1899-1961)
Ernest Hemingway was one of the most important American authors during the early 1920s. His writings focus on one theme—man's search for the meaning of life during a time filled with violence. Hemingway's writing style reflects his purpose. He writes in the simple and direct style that he learned while working as a journalist. His characters are often engaged in war or on a violent adventure like hunting or bullfighting. The main character almost always tries to face his challenges with a strong personal code of courage, professionalism, and skill. His first novel, The Sun Also Rises, was published in 1926. His two famous war novels, A Farewell to Arms and For Whom the Bell Tolls, were very popular when they were published and are still considered great American novels. In the 1950s, Hemingway won the Pulitzer Prize and the Nobel Prize in Literature for The Old Man and the Sea.
Willa Cather (1873-1947)
Journalist, poet, and novelist, Willa Cather was among the most important writers of the first half of the twentieth century. Her work was known for its unconventional approach to structure, humanity, beauty, and drama. Having spent much of her childhood on the Nebraska frontier, she often explored the pioneer life in her writing. Her first book of poetry, April Twilights, was published in 1903, and a short story collection, The Troll Garden, followed in 1905. She then spent six years working for McClure's Magazine until a fellow writer at the magazine encouraged her to return to fiction. Cather immediately went to work on a string of successful books, including 0 Pioneers! (1913), My Antonia (1918), and One o/Ot/rs (1922), for which she won the Pulitzer Prize for fiction.
bohemian unconventional; not bound by the rules of society
diverse being different from one another
SKILLS PRACTICE
Read the lesson on 1920s culture with a partner. Ask your partner questions about the lesson. Have your partner read aloud the sentences in the text that give the answer. Then have your partner ask you questions. Read aloud the sentences in the text that answer the questions.
His paintings conveyed a modern sense of disenchantment and isolation in haunting scenes. Georgia O’Keeffe’s landscapes and flowers were admired in many museums throughout her long life and are still admired today.
Much of American modern art in the 1920s focused on trying to portray the inner moods and feelings of people. As a result, much of the art was surreal or expressionist. It did not depict the outer world in a realistic way because it sought to use color and shape and lines to portray the inner world of people’s emotions, moods, and relationship to the outer world. This was a positive contribution of the art, because its themes had been generally unexplored by American artists in the past. On the other hand, surrealism and expressionism were often difficult for the general public to appreciate, and could be discouraging in their depiction of society as fragmented and discordant, and individuals as isolated.
Poets and Writers
Writers of the 1920s varied greatly in their styles and subject matter. Illinois poet and writer Carl Sandburg used common speech to glorify the Midwest. So did the novels of Pulitzer Prize winner Willa Cather, such as The Song of the Lark. Sinclair Lewis poked fun at small-town life in Main Street. Edith Wharton criticized upper-class ignorance and pretensions in her Pulitzer Prize-winning novel The Age of Innocence. In Greenwich Village, another Pulitzer Prize winner, Edna St. Vincent Millay, wrote about women’s inner lives.
Several poets influenced poetic style and subject matter. Some—such as Amy Lowell, Ezra Pound, and William Carlos Williams—used clear, concise images to express moments in time. Others, such as T. S. Eliot, criticized what they saw as a loss of spirituality in modern life.
276
Part of what made the 1920s feel new and modern was the rise of mass culture. Movies, which were very popular in the 1920s, brought Americans together in a shared experience.
Among playwrights, Eugene O’Neill was probably the most innovative. His plays, filled with bold artistry and modern themes, portrayed realistic characters and situations, offering a modern vision of life that often touched on the tragic. Long Day’s Journey Into Night is a memorable example.
Some American writers, disillusioned by World War I and the emerging consumer society, moved to Paris, a center of artistic activity. American experimental writer Gertrude Stein dubbed them a “Lost Generation.” Her Paris apartment became a home away from home for many writers.
Among them was Ernest Hemingway, who wrote moving novels about war and its aftermath, such as A Farewell to Arms.
Another visitor was F. Scott Fitzgerald. He criticized society’s superficiality in The Great Gatsby, in which colorful characters—some modeled after his wife Zelda, who was a dancer, painter, and novelist—chased futile dreams:
PRIMARY SOURCE
They were careless people, Tom and Daisy—they smashed up things and creatures and then retreated back into their money or their vast carelessness, or whatever it was that kept them together, and let other people clean up the mess they had made. **
—from The Great Gatsby, 1925
The literature of the 1920s had potentially both positive and negative impacts on American readers. On the one hand, by criticizing class pretensions, consumerism, and the pursuit of material goods, the literature of the era encouraged people to think seriously about how modern life was changing things.
On the other hand, literature also challenged traditional values and beliefs that might have played an important role in sustaining society. Many artists and writers of the 1920s attempted to portray the sense that modern life was meaningless, that moral progress was impossible, and that people were losing their relationships and connections. By saying that life has no meaning and nothing was constant, this type of literature implied there was little purpose to life and therefore no reason to try to achieve anything.
D READING PROGRESS CHECK
Describing Why did many artists, poets, playwrights, and novelists move to Paris in the 1920s?
Popular Culture
guiding question Why did many Americans have more time for entertainment, and how did they spend their time?
The economic prosperity and new technology ofthe 1920s provided many Americans with more spending money and leisure time. Millions of Americans eagerly watched sports and enjoyed music, theater, and other forms of popular entertainment.
Movies and Radio Shows
During the era of silent films, theaters hired piano players to provide music during the feature, while subtitles explained the plot. Audiences gathered
CRITICALTHINKING
Compare and Contrast How does seeing a movie today compare and contrast with what you observe in the photograph of early moviegoers? (continued from p. 275)
TEKS
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills 25B describe both the positive and negative impacts of significant examples of cultural movements in art, music, and literature such as Tin Pan Alley, the Harlem Renaissance, the Beat Generation, rock and roll, the Chicano Mural Movement, and country and western music on American society
26C explain how the contributions of people of various racial, ethnic, gender, and religious groups shape American culture
TheJazzAge 277
mass media medium of communication (such as television and radio) intended to reach a wide audience
unify to bring together with similar goals or ideas
to see such stars as Mary Pickford, Charlie Chaplin, Douglas Fairbanks, Sr., and Rudolph Valentino. In 1927 the golden age of Hollywood began with the first “talking” picture, The Jazz Singer.
Films of the 1920s reflected the issues and characteristics of the erain many ways. Some told stories of World War I and its aftermath, and were often blunt about the cost and impact of the war on people’s lives. Many told stories of complicated relationships between men and women and reflected the new morality and changing nature of relationships of the 1920s. Many films focused on Christian themes, dramatizing stories from the Bible and the values and beliefs of Protestant Christianity.
Famous songwriter Irving Berlin worked in New York Citys Tin Pan Alley, where composers wrote popular music. Berlin’s famous songs include “Puttin’ on the Ritz” and “White Christmas.” Radio broadcasts offered everything from classical music to comedy. In the popular show Amos ‘ri Andy, the troubles of two African American characters (portrayed by white actors) captured the nation’s attention.
The mass media—radio, movies, newspapers, and magazines aimed at a broad audience—did more than just entertain. They also fostered a sense of shared experience that helped unify the nation.
Sports
Sports such as baseball and boxing reached new heights of popularity in the 1920s, thanks to motion pictures and radio. Baseball star Babe Ruth became a national hero, famous for hitting hundreds of home runs. Fans also idolized boxer Jack Dempsey, who was world heavyweight champion from 1919 until 1926, when he lost the title to Gene Tunney. When Dempsey attempted to win back the title in 1927, one store sold $90,000 worth of radios in the two weeks before the event.
Newspaper coverage helped build enthusiasm for college football. One of the most famous players of the 1920s was Red Grange of the University of Illinois. He was known as the “Galloping Ghost” because of his speed and ability to evade the opposing team. The triumphs of Bobby Jones, the best golfer of the decade, and tennis players Bill Tilden and Helen Wills also thrilled sports fans. When swimmer Gertrude Ederle shattered records by swimming the English Channel in a little over 14 hours in 1927, Americans were enchanted.
B READING PROGRESS CHECK
Explaining Why did new national pastimes emerge during the 1920s, and what were some of the most popular new ways for Americans to spend their leisure time?
LESSON 4 REVIEW
Vocabulary Review
1.	Comparing How is today's mass media similar to that of the 1920s? 25A.25B
Using Your Notes
2.	Drawing Conclusions Review the notes that you completed during the lesson. Why do you think the art and literature of the 1920s had such a diverse range of styles? 25A, 25B, 26C
Answering the Guiding Questions
3.	Synthesizing How did many artists and writers of the time describe the 1920s? 25A, 26C
4.	Summarizing Why did many Americans have more time for entertainment, and how did they spend their time?
Writing Activity
NARRATIVE
Imagine that you are a teenager of the 1920s and youi parents have just purchased your family's first radio. Write about something you are excited to be able to listen to. 25A, 25B, 26C 8
ademic Vocabulary
it Matters because
symbolize • ongoing impact
The Harlem Renaissance was a creative era for African American artists. It sparked new trends in literature, music, and art. The growing African American population in the North meant an increasing number of African Americans had political power to continue the struggle for civil rights.

ntent Vocabulary iazz	• blues
KING NOTES:
y Ideas and Details
ganizing As you read about the ican American experience in the ’Os, complete a graphic organizer lilar to the one below by filling in causes and effects ofthe Harlem laissance.
auses	Effects
Harlem
_____Renaissance /
The Harlem Renaissance
'ii
What does the Harlem Renaissance reveal about African American culture
in the 1920s?
I
During World War I and the 1920s, hundreds of thousands of African Americans joined the Great Migration from the rural South to
; industrial cities in the North. Populations swelled in large Northern cities. Nightclubs and music filled these cities, particularly the New
{ York City neighborhood of Harlem. Artistic development, racial ] pride, and political organization combined in a flowering of African
American arts. This became known as the Harlem Renaissance.
The Writers
Claude McKay was the first important writer of the Harlem Renaissance. In his 1922 poetry collection, Harlem Shadows, McKay expressed a proud defiance and bitter contempt of racism. These were two major characteristics of Harlem Renaissance writing.
k
B
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills 6A analyze causes and effects of events and social issues such as immigration,
Social Darwinism, eugenics, race relations, nativism, the Red Scare, Prohibition, and the changing role of women
6B analyze the impact of significant individuals such as Clarence Darrow,
William Jennings Bryan, Henry Ford, Glenn Curtiss, Marcus Garvey, and Charles A. Lindbergh
continued on the next page
PRIMARY SOURCE
0 kinsmen! we must meet the common foe!
Though far outnumbered let us show us brave,
And for their thousand blows deal one deathblow!
What though before us lies the open grave?
Like men well face the murderous, cowardly pack,
Pressed to the wall, dying, but fighting back! ”
—from "If We Must Die" in African American Literature
TheJazzAge 279
(continued from p. 279)
TEKS
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills 13A analyze the causes and effects of changing demographic patterns resulting from migration within the United States, including western expansion, rural to urban, the Great Migration, and the Rust Belt to the Sun Belt
25A describe how the characteristics and issues in U.S. history have been reflected in various genres of art, music, film, and literature
25B describe both the positive and negative impacts of significant examples of cultural movements in art, music, and literature such as Tin Pan Alley, the Harlem Renaissance, the Beat Generation, rock and roll, the Chicano Mural Movement, and country and western music on American society
25C identify the impact of popular American culture on the rest ofthe world overtime
26A explain actions taken by people to expand economic opportunities and political rights, including those for racial, ethnic, and religious minorities as well as women, in American society
26C explain how the contributions of people of various racial, ethnic, gender, and religious groups shape American culture
jazz American style of music that developed from ragtime and blues and that uses syncopated rhythms and improvisation
symbolize to represent, express, or identify by a symbol
blues style of music evolving from African American spirituals and noted for its melancholy sound
Langston Hughes was a prolific, original, and versatile writer. He became a leading voice ofthe African American experience in America. Zora Neale Hurston wrote some of the first major stories featuring African American women as central characters. Other notable writers ofthe Harlem Renaissance include Countee Cullen, Alain Locke, and Dorothy West.
The literature of the Harlem Renaissance helped to instill a strong sense of pride, defiance, and confidence in African Americans. It encouraged resistance to racism and challenged stereotypes, and it also reminded African Americans of their roots and the difficulties they had already overcome. It helped lay the foundations for the civil rights movement that would begin after World War II.
If there was any negative impact of Harlem Renaissance literature, it lay within its own success. In helping instill pride and confidence, it also helped create a distinct and separate African American culture apart from the wider culture of the nation. This, in turn, contributed to the rise of movements advocating African Americans separate themselves from the rest of society in order to protect themselves, and preserve their own identity.
Jazz, Blues, and the Theater
New Orleans native Louis Armstrong moved to Chicago in 1922. There he introduced an early form of jazz, a musical style influenced by Dixieland and ragtime, with syncopated rhythms and improvisational elements. In Chicago, Armstrong broke away from the New Orleans tradition of group playing by performing highly imaginative solos on the cornet and trumpet.
Composer, pianist, and bandleader Edward “Duke” Ellington also had a special sound, a blend of improvisation and orchestration using different combinations of instruments. Like many other African American entertainers, Ellington got his start at the Cotton Club, the most famous nightclub in Harlem (but one that served only white customers). Years later, Ellington reflected on the music of the era by saying, “Everything, and I repeat, everything had to swing. And that was just it, those cats really had it; they had that soul. And you know you can’t just play some of this music without soul. Soul is very important.”
Bessie Smith seemed to symbolize soul. She became known as the Empress of the Blues. Smith sang of unfulfilled love, poverty, and oppression—the classic themes of the blues, a soulful style of music that evolved from African American spirituals.
Jazz reflected the characteristics and issues of the 1920s era in many ways. With its emphasis on improvisation, it reflected the feelings of many people that the 1920s was a time of experimentation and a breaking away from old rules and values. It expressed the individualism ofthe era, and because many of the popular jazz singers were women, it also reflected the new role of women in American society. Blues and soul music also enabled African Americans to give voice to their difficult social and economic position in American society.
Jazz had an enormously positive impact on society. It built a connection between African American culture and the rest of American society, helping to reduce racism by the shared experience of the music. Not everyone, however, appreciated the music at the time. During Prohibition, jazz music became associated with the speakeasies where alcohol was consumed illegally. As a result many people believed the music contributed to immoral behavior and threatened traditional values.
American jazz music was also one of the first American cultural expressions that had a significant impact on the rest ofthe world. In part
280
because of Americas role in ending World War I, many Europeans, especially in France, became fascinated with American culture. Many American jazz musicians visited Europe after World War I, and their performances helped develop a European audience for the music. Paris, in particular, became a center for jazz in Europe, just as it became home to many American expatriate writers in the years after the war.
Theater also flourished during the Harlem Renaissance. Shuffle Along, the first musical written, produced, and performed by African Americans, made its Broadway debut in 1921. The show’s success helped launch a number of careers, including those of Florence Mills and Paul Robeson. Robeson received wide acclaim for his performance in the title role of Eugene O Neills Emperor Jones. He also gained fame four years later for his work in the musical Show Boat. Robeson often appeared at the famous Apollo Theater in Harlem.
H READING PROGRESS CHECK
Making Generalizations What does the work of writers and performers of the Harlem Renaissance show about African American culture of the 1920s?
BIOGRAPHY
Zora Neale Hurston (1891-1960)
African Americans and 1920s Politics
guiding question How did African American leaders differ in their approaches to political actions during this decade?
In 1919 approximately 1,300 African American veterans of World War I marched through Manhattan to Harlem. W.E.B. Du Bois captured their sense of pride and defiance in a speech:
PRIMARY SOURCE
MWe return. We return from fighting. We return fighting. Make way for Democracy! We saved it in France,
and by the Great Jehovah, we will save it in the United States of America, or know the reason why.
—from The Crisis, May 1919
Zora Neale Hurston was one of the major literary voices of the Harlem Renaissance. Hurston presented a unique, insightful, and often quite humorous perspective of the African American experience through her work. She was also an accomplished traveler, anthropologist, and an instructor at North Carolina College for Negroes. She had great success with her novels, such as Jonah's Gourd Vine (1934), the perennial classic, Their Eyes Were Watching God (1937), and Moses, Man of the Mountain (1939). In 1942 she published her autobiography, Dust Tracks on a Road, to great acclaim.
Along with the Apollo Theater, the Cotton Club was one of the famous clubs in Harlem. Many performers launched careers by appearing on its stage.
CRITICALTHINKING
Making Generalizations How did Harlem nightclubs like the Cotton Club help promote African American performing arts?
TheJazzAge 281

The Great Migration 1917-1930
GEOGRAPHY CONNECTION
Thousands of African Americans migrated from the South to industrial cities during this decade.
HUMAN SYSTEMS
To what three Midwestern cities did many African Americans from the South migrate? THE USES OF GEOGRAPHY
in which cities did the greatest growth in the African American popuiation occur?
impact a lasting impression upon an individual or group
ongoing being in process; continuing
Growing Political Power in the North
World War I set the stage for African Americans to reenter American politics. The Great Migration of African Americans to the North had a significant impact as well. As their numbers grew in city neighborhoods, African Americans became an influential voting bloc. In 1928 African American voters in Chicago helped elect Oscar DePriest. He was the first African American representative in Congress from a Northern state.
The NAACP Battles Injustice
The National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP) battled hard against segregation and discrimination against African Americans. Its efforts focused primarily on lobbying public officials and working through the court system. The NAACP’s persistent protests against the horrors of lynching led to the passage of antilynching legislation in the House of Representatives in 1922. The Senate defeated the bill, but the NAACP s ongoing protests kept the issue in the news. This probably helped reduce the number of lynchings that took place.
In 1930 the NAACP joined with labor unions to launch a highly organized national campaign against the nomination of Judge John J. Parker to the U.S. Supreme Court. The North Carolina judge allegedly was racist and antilabor. By a narrow margin, the Senate refused to confirm Parkers nomination. This proved that African Americans had become a powerful political force.
282
Black Nationalism and Marcus Garvey
While the NAACP fought for integration and improvement in the economic and political position of African Americans, other groups began to emphasize black nationalism and black pride. Some began calling for African Americans to separate from white society.
A dynamic leader from Jamaica, Marcus Garvey captured the imagination of millions of African Americans with his Negro Nationalism. Garvey founded the Universal Negro Improvement Association (UNIA), aimed at promoting black pride and unity. He was inspired by Booker T. Washingtons call for self-reliance. The central message of Garvey’s Harlem-based movement was that African Americans could gain economic and political power by educating themselves.
Garvey also advocated separation and independence from whites. In 1920 he told his followers they would never find justice or freedom in America. He proposed leading them to Africa.
The emerging African American middle class and intellectuals distanced themselves from Garvey and his push for racial separation. The FBI saw UNIA as a dangerous catalyst for African American uprisings. Garvey also alienated key figures in the Harlem Renaissance by calling them “weak-kneed and cringing . . . [flatterers of] the white man.” Convicted of mail fraud in 1923, he served time in prison. In 1927 President Coolidge used Garvey’s immigrant status to have him deported to Jamaica.
Despite Garvey’s failure to keep his movement alive, he instilled millions of African Americans with a sense of pride in their heritage and inspired hope for the future. These feelings reemerged strongly in the 1950s and played a vital role in the civil rights movement of the 1960s.
Breadingprogb? v j .
Summarizing What differing steps did African Americans take to achieve political goals during the 1920s?
Marcus Garvey's "back to Africa" movement gave pride and hope to millions of African Americans.
CRITICAL THINKING
Comparing and Contrasting How did Marcus Garvey's approach to political action differ from that ofthe NAACP?
LESSON 5 REVi

f’A5 >■	j d
Reviewing Vocabulary
1.	Drawing Conclusions Why do you think the blues emerged as a main musical form ofthe Harlem Renaissance? 25A, 25B, 26C
Using Your Notes
2.	Synthesizing Review the notes that you completed during the lesson to determine how the Harlem Renaissance reflected the growing cultural and political power of African Americans. 13A, 25A, 25B.26C
Answering the Guiding Questions
3.	Explaining What does the Harlem Renaissance reveal about African American culture in the 1920s? 25A, 25B
4.	Contrasting How did African American leaders differ in their approaches to political actions during this decade? 6A, 6B, 26A, 26C
Writing Activity
INFORMATIVE/EXPLANATORY
Suppose that you witnessed African American men back from World War I marching through New York City and heard the beginnings ofW.E.B. Du Bois's speech. Write a paragraph describing the event, including the ideas and attitudes the event conveyed. 6A, 26A, 26C TheJazzAge 283
chapter 8 Assessment
Directions: On a separate sheet of paper, answer the questions below. Make sure you read carefully and answer all parts of the questions.
Lesson Review
Lesson 1
0 Identifying Describe two major scandals that plagued the Harding administration. What effect did these scandals have on American citizens? 19C
0 Analyzing What did President Warren Harding mean when he promised a "Return to Normalcy" and what policies did his administration pursue to promote economic growth and prosperity? 16A
0 Identifying Causes Which secretary ofthe treasury during the 1920s pushed for lower taxes? Why did he push for lower taxes and what term is used today to describe his ideas? 16A
0 Making Connections How did the Dawes plan prevent an economic crisis in Europe and help resolve the issues of war debt and reparations? 4F
Lesson 2
0 Analyzing How did increased production efficiencies lead to economic growth and prosperity in the 1920s? 16A
0 Analyzing How did technological innovations in the workplace, such as the assembly line and mass production, affect American workers and American businesses? 27C
0 Analyzing Identify four major scientific discoveries or technological innovations that occurred in the 1920s and explain how each improved the standard of living in the United States. 28A
0 Identifying What inventions and developments made the rise ofthe airline industry possible? 6B
0 Evaluating Explain how scientific discoveries and new technology contributed to the "quiet depression" among farmers in the 1920s. What policies did the government adopt that increased the problems of farmers? 27B
© Analyzing How did the American free enterprise system apply innovations in transportation to improve the American standard of living? What role did Henry Ford play in bringing about these developments? 6B, 28A
Lesson 3
© Identifying Cause and Effect Why was there a general rise in nativism in the 1920s? How did Congress respond to nativism? 6A
© Explaining What was the fundamentalist movement? What role did it play in shaping American culture? 26C
© Explaining How did women's roles change during the 1920s? What caused these changes and what were the effects? 6A
© Analyzing What action by Congress changed the demographic patterns of immigrants in the early 1920s? What effect did Congressional action have on the demographic pattern of immigrants? 13B
Lesson 4
© Making Connections Why did many members ofthe "Lost Generation" choose to leave the United States? How does the book The Great Gatsby reflect their view of American culture at the time? 25A
© Describing In what ways did Hollywood films ofthe 1920s express the issues and characteristics ofthe time? 25A
Lesson 5
© Identifying What was the impact of 1920s American popular culture on the rest ofthe world overtime? 25C
© Describing What major issues and characteristics ofthe 1920s were expressed in blues music? 25A
© Identifying Cause and Effect What caused the Great Migration and what effect did it have on the political power of African Americans? 6A, 13A
Need Extra Help?
©	©	0	o	o	0	©	©	©	©	©	©
263	265	265	265	266	268	265	270	273	272	271	mm* 277
284
© Analyzing Significance What impact did Marcus Garvey have on the African American community and what actions did he and his organization take to expand economic opportunity for African Americans? 6B, 13A, 26A
© Explaining What actions did the NAACP take in the 1920s to protect and expand the political rights of African Americans? 26A
Exploring the Essential Questions
0 Comparing and Contrasting How was the economy and society of the United States different in the 1920s from what it had been in the late 1800s?
Describing What were some ofthe positive effects of the music and literature ofthe Harlem Renaissance? What were some ofthe negative effects? 25B
Critical Thinking
Making Connections Explain how literature ofthe 1920s reflected the issues and characteristics ofthe era. 25A
Analyzing Evaluate the effects ofthe passage ofthe Eighteenth Amendment. How did this reform change American society? 5A,6A
Describing What was the managerial revolution ofthe 1920s? Explain how new management ideas were applied to the workplace and their impact on American business. How did these management innovations enhance the productivity of managers and workers? 27C
0 Describing What issues and characteristics of life in the 1920s did modern art try to portray? What was the positive impact of this type of art? What was its negative impact? 25A.25B
Social Studies Skills
Making Generalizations Pick one ofthe following cultural categories: Art, Music, Film, Literature. Research several artists, musicians, writers, or films from the 1920s in the category you have chosen. Identify the common elements and similar themes and ideas they shared. Prepare a presentation, either online, or on a poster board using images, quotes, audio
recordings if possible, and written descriptions that illustrate the common themes of 1920s culture. 25A, 29B
© Interpreting the Past After World War II, it was common for historians to argue that the United States turned isolationist after World War I, and that the isolationism was one of the causes of World War II. Do you agree with that viewpoint? Analyze U.S. policies toward other nations in the 1920s, and write a brief report on whether or not the United States was isolationist. Begin with an introduction where you define isolationism, then write two paragraphs and a conclusion giving your interpretation of the past. 4F.29C
DBQ
Analyzing Primary Sources
Read the following excerpts from writings by W.E.B. DuBois and Claude McKay and answer the questions that follow.
PRIMARY SOURCE
(( yye return. We return from fighting. We return fighting. Make way for Democracy! We saved it in France, and by the Great Jehovah, we will save it in the United States of America, or know the reason why.
—W.E.B. DuBois, The Crisis, May 1919
PRIMARY SOURCE
« 0 kinsmen! we must meet the common foe!
Though far outnumbered let us show us brave,
And for their thousand blows deal one deathblow!
What though before us lies the open grave?
Like men we'll face the murderous, cowardly pack,
Pressed to the wall, dying, but fighting back! »
—Claude McKay, If We Must Die, 1919
© Interpreting What event is DuBois referencing when he says "We return?" When he says "We saved it in France" and "we will save it in the United States" what is he referring to, and what is he calling on African Americans to do? 25A.25B
Need Extra Help?
	20	21	22	23	24	25	26	27	28	29	30	31
[Goto page	| 282		|258|	M	w	1 274 | 268 1 275 | 275 | 257 | 281 | 279 |
TheJazzAge 285
© Comparing What emotions are both W.E.B DuBois and Claude McKay trying to instill in African Americans with their writing? 25A, 25B
Analyzing Visuals
Use the cartoon to answer the following questions.
Identifying What incident is depicted in the cartoon? How do you know? 19C, 29A, 29H
© Interpreting Why do you think the artist named this cartoon the "White House Highway"? 19C, 29A, 29H
Extended Response Question
© Summarizing The policies ofthe Harding and Coolidge administrations were intended to promote economic growth and world peace. Write an essay explaining and summarizing the methods they used to create economic growth at home and to promote political and economic stability worldwide. Give your opinion as to whether they were successful or not and explain your reasoning. Your essay should include an introduction, several paragraphs, and a conclusion and should reference historical facts and details to support your conclusion. 4F, 16A
© Explaining Identify and describe the contributions of each ofthe following people to American culture in the 1920s: 25A
. Carl Sandburg
•	Edith Wharton
. Ernest Hemingway
•	Langston Hughes
•	Zora Neale Hurston
•	Bessie Smith
•	Duke Ellington
Standardized Test Questions
© The rise in the standard of living in the 1920s was partly the result of 16A, 28A
A increased government spending and new technology. B decreased consumer spending and free trade.
C new technology and more disposable income.
D lower wages and easy consumer credit.
© The Great Migration refers to the 13A
F arrival of large numbers of European immigrants.
G relocation of many American soldiers after
World War I.
H movement of Americans from farms to urban factory jobs.
J movement of southern African Americans to northern cities.
Need Extra Help?
	32	33	34	35	36	37
|Gotopage	I 260 I 260 | 260 | 275 | 265 | 281 1
286
The Great Depression Begins
1929-1932
networks
There's More Online about the Great Depression and its effects on society.
