CHAPTER 15
Place andTime: United States 1960-1968
The 1960s began with great optimism in the United States, as President John F. Kennedy seemed ready to lead the way from the fear and accusations of the 1950s to a New Frontier and to the moon itself. The threat of nuclear war and the assassination of Kennedy could not derail the drive for change. President Lyndon B. Johnson presided over landmark legislation meant to create a Great Society of wealth and equality for all.
Step Into the Place
Read the quotes and look at the information presented on the map. £02? 8A, 29a
DBQ
Analyzing Historical Documents Compare and contrast the tone in President Kennedy's speech and Premier Krushchev's letter. What clues does this give you about each author's point of view?
PRIMARYSOURCE
« Our goal is not the victory of might, but the vindication of right—not peace at the expense of freedom, but both peace and freedom, here in this hemisphere, and, we hope, around the world. God willing, that goal will be achieved.”
—President John F. Kennedy, from a speech delivered October 22,1962
PRIMARYSOURCE
«If, however, you have not lost your self-control and sensibly conceive what this might lead to, then, Mr. President, we and you ought not now to pull on the ends ofthe rope in which you have tied the knot of war, because the more the two of us pull, the tighter that knot will be tied. And a moment may come when that knot will be tied so tight that even he who tied it will not have the strength to untie it, and then it will be necessary to cut that knot....”
—Soviet premier Nikita Khrushchev, from a letter to President Kennedy, October 26,1962
Step Into the Time
Predicting Consequences
Choose an event from the time line that you think influenced the
March 1961 Peace Corps is created April 17,1961 Bay of Pigs invasion

Kennedy Oct. 1962 Cuban missile crisis 19tI~J963	Nov. 1963 Kennedy is
assassinated

I
Cuban Missile Ranges October 1962

The discovery by American intelligence agencies that the Soviet Union had placed long-range missiles in Cuba led to one of the most intense situations of the Cold War. The proximity of the missile bases to the United States posed a serious and immediate threat.
networks

There's More Online!
BIOGRAPHY
Esther Peterson ef biography Earl Warren CHART/GRAPH
Warren Court 
IL
27
? J'

Decisions
gf MAP Presidential Election of I960
gf VIDEO The Nixon-Kennedy Debate
B? INTERACTIVE SELF-CHECK QUIZ
LESSON 1
The New Frontier

fix society's problems? • I changed American society?
IT MATTERS BECAUSE
Reading HELPDESK
Academic Vocabulary
In the presidential election campaign of 1960, John F. Kennedy promised to move the nation into "the New Frontier." After narrowly winning the election, Kenned) succeeded in getting only part of his agenda enacted.
• commentator • arbitrary
The Election of 1960
guidingquestion How did the election of 1960 change the way candidates ran their camp
Content Vocabulary
•	missile gap
•	reapportionment
•	due process
TAKING NOTES:
Key Ideas and Details
Categorizing As you read, complete a graphic organizer similar to the one below by listing domestic successes and setbacks ofthe Kennedy administration.
Successes	Setbacks
	
	
	
TEKS
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills 

17D identify actions of government and the private sector such as the Great Society, affirmative action, and Title IX to create economic opportunities for citizens and analyze the unintended consequences of each
21A analyze the effects of landmark U.S. Supreme Court decisions, including Brown v. Board of Education, and other U.S. Supreme Court decisions such as Plessy v. Ferguson, Hernandez
continued on the next page
On September 26, 1960, at 9:30 p.m. Eastern Standard Time, an estimated 75 million people sat indoors and focused on their television sets. They were watching the first televised president^ debate. The debate marked a new era of television politics.
During the 1960 presidential race, both parties made substai use of television. The Democrats spent more than $6 million on television and radio spots, while the Republicans spent more th< $7.5 million. Television news commentator Eric Sevareid complained that the candidates had become “packaged products He declared that the “Processed Politician has finally arrived.”
The candidates differed in many ways. John F. Kennedy, the Democratic nominee and a senator, was a Catholic from a wealt Massachusetts family. Richard M. Nixon, the Republican nomin and current vice president, was a Quaker from California. He b grown up in a family that struggled financially. Kennedy seemec outgoing and relaxed. Nixon struck many as formal and stiff.
Although the candidates presented different styles, they differed little on key issues. Both promised to boost the econom and both portrayed themselves as “Cold Warriors,” determined stop the forces of communism. Kennedy expressed concern abo suspected "missile gap/ claiming the United States lagged beh the Soviets in weaponry. Nixon warned that the Democrats’ fisc policies would boost inflation and that only he had the foreign policy experience needed for the nation.
Kennedy s Catholic faith became an issue, just as AI Smiths Catholicism had in 1928. The United States had never had a Cathol president, and many Protestants had concerns about Kennedy.
450
Kennedy decided to confront this issue openly in a speech: “I believe in an America where the separation of church and state is absolute-where no Catholic prelate would tell the President (should he be a Catholic) how to act and no Protestant minister would tell his parishioners for whom to vote.”
The series of four televised debates influenced the elections close outcome. Kennedy won the popular vote by 118,574 out of more than 68 million votes cast, and the Electoral College by 303 votes to 219. Despite his narrow victory, Kennedy captured the imagination of the American public as few presidents had before him. During the campaign, many had been taken with Kennedy’s youth and optimism. His Inaugural Address reinforced this impression. In the speech, Kennedy declared that “the torch has been
commentator one who
comments, discusses, or reports in an expository manner, especially news on radio or television
missile gap a supposed shortage in the number of nuclear weapons possessed by the United States compared to the number the Soviet Union had
passed to a new generation” and called on citizens to take a more active role in making the nation better. “My fellow Americans,” he exclaimed, “ask not what your country can do for you—ask what you can do for your country.”
H READING PROGRESS CHECK
Explaining How was the presidential election of 1960 different from earlier campaigns?
The Kennedy-Nixon debates were the first presidential debates to be televised.
Kennedy Takes Office
guidingquestion What were some domestic policies initiated when Kennedy took office?
0
o
Upon entering office, President Kennedy set out to implement a legislative agenda that became known as the New Frontier. He hoped to increase aid to education, provide health insurance to the elderly, and create a Department of Urban Affairs. He would soon find that passing such legislation was no easy task on Capitol Hill. Although the Democrats had majorities in both houses of Congress, Kennedy was unable to push through many of his programs. His narrow victory had not helped many Democrats get elected. Those who did win, therefore, felt that they owed him nothing. In addition, Southern Democrats—a large part of the Democrats in Congress-saw Kennedy’s program as too expensive and, together with Republicans, were able to defeat many of Kennedy’s proposals.
(continued from p. 450)
TEKS
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills 21C evaluate constitutional change in terms of strict construction versus judicial interpretation
23A identify and analyze methods of expanding the right to participate in the democratic process, including lobbying, non violent protesting, litigation, and amendments to the U.S. Constitution
, The Presidential Election i960
Seven electors in Oklahoma voted for Nixon and one voted for Byrd. * Six electors in Alabama voted for Byrd and five voted for Kennedy.
ELECTORAL VOTE TOTAL:
POPULAR VOTE TOTAL:
68,838,219 0.73%
503,331
49.55%
34,108,157
49.72%
34,226,731
I
Kennedy (Democrat) I Nixon (Republican) Byrd (Democrat) I
Mixed GEOGRAPHY CONNECTION
Senator John F. Kennedy of Massachusetts narrowly defeated Vice President Richard Nixon in the 1960 presidential election.
THE WORLD IN SPATIAL TERMS
Which states gave one or more electoral votes to Harry Byrd?
PLACES AND REGIONS
What region of the nation went most solidly Republican?
syra.i
edy.
The New Frontier and the Great Sodety 451
-Thinking Like a ~]
HISTORIAN |
Determining Cause and Effect
When the Kennedy administration created the Presidential Commission on the Status of Women in 1961, its stated goal was to examine employment policies for women. The reasons for the formation of the commission, however, were not as clear. At the time, the Equal Rights Amendment (ERA) was considered politically dangerous and opposed by some labor leaders. The ERA was stuck in Congress because some thought it was too extreme a step in women’s rights. Some believe Kennedy created the commission to address the status of women, appeal to women voters, and avoid the politically-sensitive issue of the ERA. Others believe it was created to pay a political debt to Womens Bureau leader Esther Peterson, a supporter of Kennedy.
Successes and Setbacks
President Kennedy achieved some victories, particularly in improving t economy. Although the economy had soared through much of the 1950 had slowed by the end of the decade. To increase economic growth and create jobs, Kennedy advocated deficit spending and investing more fur in defense and space exploration. Such spending did indeed create jobs stimulate economic growth.
Kennedy also asked businesses to hold down prices and labor leade: to hold down pay increases. The labor unions in the steel industry agr< to reduce their demands for higher wages, but several steel companies raised prices sharply. Kennedy responded by threatening to have the Department of Defense buy cheaper foreign steel. He asked the Justice Department to investigate whether the steel industry was fixing prices. The steel companies backed down and cut their prices, but the victory caused strained relations with the business community.
In addition, the president pushed for tax cuts. When opponents argu that a tax cut would help only the wealthy, Kennedy asserted that lower t; meant businesses would have more money to expand. This, in turn, woul create new jobs and benefit everybody. However, Congress refused to pa: tax cut because of fears that it would cause inflation. Congress also block his plans for health insurance for senior citizens and federal aid to educa Congress did agree to Kennedy’s request to raise the minimum wage, his proposal for the Area Redevelopment Act, and the Housing Act. These a helped create jobs and build low-income housing in poor areas. Expanding Women's Rights
In 1961 Kennedy created the Presidential Commission on the Status of Women. The commission called for federal action against gender discrimination and affirmed the right of women to equally paid employment. The commission proposed the Equal Pay Act, which Kenn signed in 1963. Kennedy never appointed a woman to his cabinet. A nun of women, however, worked in other prominent positions in the administration, including Esther Peterson, assistant secretary of labor an director of the Womens Bureau of the Department of Labor.
A
New Focus on the Disabled In 1961 Kennedy convened the President’s Panel on Mental Retardatic The panel’s first report called for funding of research into developmer disabilities and educational and vocational programs for people with developmental disabilities. It also called for a greater reliance on residential, rather than institutional, treatment centers.
Responding to the report, Congress enacted the Mental Retardatio Facilities and Community Mental Health Centers Construction Act of This legislation provided grants to build research centers and grants tc states to construct mental health centers. It also provided funds to trai educational personnel to work with people with developmental disabil
In 1962 Eunice Kennedy Shriver, the president’s sister, began a da camp at her home for children with developmental disabilities. Camp Shriver, as it was first known, offered people with disabilities a chanci physically competitive. That effort later grew into the Special Olympi' program. The first Special Olympics Games were held in Chicago in 1 H reading progress check
Identifying What were the economic initiatives introduced by Kennedy aft taking office?
Warren Court Reforms
1 ;:’,,NGQUI '•>	: How'mPortantaresome of the Warren Court rulings for today's society?
In 1953 Earl Warren, governor of California, became chief justice of the United States. Under Warren’s leadership, the Supreme Court issued several rulings that dramatically reshaped American politics and society.
"One Person, One Vote"
Some of the Courts more notable decisions concerned reapportionment. By 1960, more Americans resided in urban than in rural areas, but many states electoral districts did not reflect this shift. In Tennessee, for example, a rural county with only 2,340 voters had one state representative, while an urban county with 133 times more voters had only seven. Thus, rural voters had far more political influence than urban ones. Some Tennessee voters took the matter to court, and their case, Baker v. Carr (1962), went to the Supreme Court. The Court ruled that federal courts had jurisdiction to hear lawsuits seeking to force states to redraw electoral districts. In Reynolds v. Sims (1964), the Court ruled that states must reapportion electoral districts along the principle of “one person, one vote,” so that all citizens’ votes would have equal weight, rather than giving arbitrary power to rural voters. The decision shifted political power from rural and often conservative areas to urban areas, where more liberal voters lived. It also boosted the political power of African Americans and Hispanics, who typically lived in cities.
reapportionment
the method states use to draw up political districts based on changes in population
arbitrary existing or coming about seemingly at random or as an unfair or unreasonable act of will
iiiiiiii ANALYZING SUPREME COURT CASES
BAKER v. CARR, 1962 REYNOLDS v. SIMS, 1964
Background of the Cases
Although many more Americans were living in urban areas, most states had not redrawn their political districts to reflect this shift. This gave rural voters more political influence than urban voters. In Beker v. Carr, the Supreme Court ruled on whether federal courts had jurisdiction in lawsuits seeking to force states to redraw their electoral districts. In Reynolds v. Sims, the Court decided whether uneven electoral districts violated the equal protection clause of the Fourteenth Amendment.
How the Court Ruled
In Beker v. Cerr, the Supreme Court ruled that federal courts can hear lawsuits seeking to force state authorities to redraw electoral districts. In Reynolds v. Sims, the Court ruled that the inequality of representation in the Alabama legislature did violate the equal protection clause. These rulings forced states to reapportion their political districts according to the principle of "one person, one vote."
The 1962 Supreme Court Seated, left to right: Associate Justices Tom Clark and Hugo Black, Chief Justice Earl Warren, Associate Justices William 0. Douglas and John Harlan; standing, left to right: Associate Justices Byron White, William Brennan, Potter Stewart, and Arthur Goldberg. Justices Byron White and Arthur Goldberg were appointed by Kennedy.
DBQ
Analyzing Historical Documents 0 Identifying Central Ideas What is the primary problem at issue in the Reynolds v. Sims case?
0 Making Inferences How do you think reapportionment according to "one person, one vote" changed state politics?
The New Frontier and the Great Society 453
When the Kennedy administration created the Presidential Commission on the Status of Women in 1961, its stated goal was to examine employment policies for women. The reasons for the formation of the commission, however, were not as clear. At the time, the Equal Rights Amendment (ERA) was considered politically dangerous and opposed by some labor leaders. The ERA was stuck in Congress because some thought it was too extreme a step in womens rights. Some believe Kennedy created the commission to address the status of women, appeal to women voters, and avoid the politically-sensitive issue of the ERA. Others believe it was created to pay a political debt to Womens Bureau leader Esther Peterson, a supporter of Kennedy.
Successes and Setbacks
President Kennedy achieved some victories, particularly in improving the economy. Although the economy had soared through much of the 1950s, it had slowed by the end of the decade. To increase economic growth and create jobs, Kennedy advocated deficit spending and investing more funds in defense and space exploration. Such spending did indeed create jobs and stimulate economic growth.
Kennedy also asked businesses to hold down prices and labor leaders to hold down pay increases. The labor unions in the steel industry agreed to reduce their demands for higher wages, but several steel companies raised prices sharply. Kennedy responded by threatening to have the Department of Defense buy cheaper foreign steel. He asked the Justice Department to investigate whether the steel industry was fixing prices. The steel companies backed down and cut their prices, but the victory caused strained relations with the business community.
In addition, the president pushed for tax cuts. When opponents argued that a tax cut would help only the wealthy, Kennedy asserted that lower taxes meant businesses would have more money to expand. This, in turn, would create new jobs and benefit everybody. However, Congress refused to pass th tax cut because of fears that it would cause inflation. Congress also blocked his plans for health insurance for senior citizens and federal aid to education Congress did agree to Kennedy’s request to raise the minimum wage, his proposal for the Area Redevelopment Act, and the Housing Act. These acts helped create jobs and build low-income housing in poor areas. Expanding Women's Rights
In 1961 Kennedy created the Presidential Commission on the Status of Women. The commission called for federal action against gender discrimination and affirmed the right of women to equally paid employment. The commission proposed the Equal Pay Act, which Kennedy signed in 1963. Kennedy never appointed a woman to his cabinet. A number of women, however, worked in other prominent positions in the administration, including Esther Peterson, assistant secretary of labor and director of the Womens Bureau of the Department of Labor.
A
New Focus on the Disabled In 1961 Kennedy convened the President’s Panel on Mental Retardation. The panel’s first report called for funding of research into developmental disabilities and educational and vocational programs for people with developmental disabilities. It also called for a greater reliance on residential, rather than institutional, treatment centers.
Responding to the report, Congress enacted the Mental Retardation Facilities and Community Mental Health Centers Construction Act of 196 This legislation provided grants to build research centers and grants to states to construct mental health centers. It also provided funds to train educational personnel to work with people with developmental disabilities
In 1962 Eunice Kennedy Shriver, the president’s sister, began a day camp at her home for children with developmental disabilities. Camp Shriver, as it was first known, offered people with disabilities a chance to physically competitive. That effort later grew into the Special Olympics program. The first Special Olympics Games were held in Chicago in 1968 P READING PROGRESS CHECK
Identifying What were the economic initiatives introduced by Kennedy after taking office?
2
Warren Court Reforms
guiding question How important are some ofthe Warren Court rulings for today's society?
In 1953 Earl Warren, governor of California, became chief justice ofthe United States. Under Warrens leadership, the Supreme Court issued several rulings that dramatically reshaped American politics and society.
"One Person, One Vote"
Some of the Courts more notable decisions concerned reapportionment. By 1960, more Americans resided in urban than in rural areas, but many states’ electoral districts did not reflect this shift. In Tennessee, for example, a rural county with only 2,340 voters had one state representative, while an urban county with 133 times more voters had only seven. Thus, rural voters had far more political influence than urban ones. Some Tennessee voters took the matter to court, and their case, Baker v. Carr (1962), went to the Supreme Court. The Court ruled that federal courts had jurisdiction to hear lawsuits seeking to force states to redraw electoral districts. In Reynolds v. Sims (1964), the Court ruled that states must reapportion electoral districts along the principle of “one person, one vote,” so that all citizens’ votes would have equal weight, rather than giving arbitrary power to rural voters. The decision shifted political power from rural and often conservative areas to urban areas, where more liberal voters lived. It also boosted the political power of African Americans and Hispanics, who typically lived in cities.
reapportionment
the method states use to draw up political districts based on changes in population
arbitrary existing or coming about seemingly at random or as an unfair or unreasonable act of will
iiTiffii ANALYZING SUPREME COURT CASES
BAKER v. CARR, 1962 REYNOLDS v. SIMS, 1964
Background ofthe Cases
Although many more Americans were living in urban areas, most states had not redrawn their political districts to reflect this shift. This gave rural voters more political influence than urban voters. In Baker v. Carr, the Supreme Court ruled on whether federal courts had jurisdiction in lawsuits seeking to force states to redraw their electoral districts. In Reynolds v. Sims, the Court decided whether uneven electoral districts violated the equal protection clause ofthe Fourteenth Amendment.
How the Court Ruled
In Baker v. Carr, the Supreme Court ruled that federal courts can hear lawsuits seeking to force state authorities to redraw electoral districts. In Reynolds v. Sims, the Court ruled that the inequality of representation in the Alabama legislature did violate the equal protection clause. These rulings forced states to reapportion their political districts according to the principle of"one person, one vote."
The 1962 Supreme Court. Seated, left to right: Associate Justices Tom Clark and Hugo Black, Chief Justice Earl Warren, Associate Justices William 0. Douglas and John Harlan; standing, left to right: Associate Justices Byron White, William Brennan, Potter Stewart, and Arthur Goldberg. Justices Byron White and Arthur Goldberg were appointed by Kennedy.
DBQ
Analyzing Historical Documents 0 Identifying Central Ideas What is the primary problem at issue in the Reynolds v. Sims case?
0 Making Inferences How do you think reapportionment according to "one person, one vote" changed state politics?
The New Frontier and the Great Society 453
In the Supreme Court case Miranda v. Arizona, attorneys argued that Ernesto Miranda (right) had no idea of his legal rights and should have been told that he had the right to a lawyer.
CRITICAL THINKING
Drawing Conclusions What can you conclude about what police told suspects before the establishment of Miranda rights? Extending Due Process
The Supreme Court began to use the Fourteenth Amendment to extend the Bill of Rights to the states. Originally, the Bill of Rights applied only to the federal government. Many states had their own bills of rights, but some federal rights did not exist at the state level. The Fourteenth Amendment states that “no state shall... deprive any person of life, liberty, or property without due process of law.” Due process means that the law may not treat individuals unfairly, arbitrarily, or unreasonably. The Court ruled in several cases that due process
meant applying the federal Bill of Rights to the states. In 1961 the Supreme Court ruled in Mapp v. Ohio that state courts could not consider evidence obtained in violation of the U.S. Constitution. In Gideon v. Wainwright (1963), the Court ruled that a defendant in a state court had the right to a lawyer, regardless of his or her ability to pay. In Escobedo v. Illinois (1964), the Court ruled that suspects must be allowed access to a lawyer and informed of their right to remain silent before being questioned. Miranda v. Arizona (1966) went further, requiring authorities to inform suspects of their right to remain silent; that anything they say can and will be used against them in court; and that they have a right to a lawyer. These warnings are known as Miranda rights.
due process a judicial requirement that laws may not treat individuals unfairly, arbitrarily, or unreasonably, and that courts must follow proper procedures and rules when trying cases
Prayer and Privacy
The Supreme Court also reaffirmed the separation of church and state. The Court applied the First Amendment to the states in Engel v. Vitale (1962), ruling that states could not compose official prayers and require those prayers to be recited in public schools. In Abington School District v. Schempp (1963), it ruled against state-mandated Bible readings in public schools. The Court ruled in Griswold v. Connecticut (1965) that prohibiting the sale and use of birth control devices violated citizens’ constitutional right to privacy. As with most rulings of the Warren Court, some people supported these decisions and others did not. What most people did agree upon, however, was the Court’s pivotal role in shaping national policy. These decisions continue to shape the way Americans act and behave today
H READING PROGRESS CHECK
Making Connections Which Warren Court rulings continue to be important today? Wh'
LESSON 1 REVIEW
Reviewing Vocabulary
1.	Drawing Conclusions Why would Americans have worried about a potential "missile gap"?
2.	Explaining What is the purpose of due process? 21A, 21C
Using Your Notes
3.	Making Generalizations Review the notes that you completed during the lesson. Describe why some parts of the Kennedy administration's agenda were refused by Congress, and why others were passed.
Answering the Guiding Questions
4.	Analyzing How did the election of 1960 change the way candidates ran their campaigns?
5.	Identifying What were some domestic policies initiated when Kennedy took office? 17D
6.	Evaluating How important are some of the Warren Court rulini for today's society? 21A, 21c
Writing Activity
INFORMATIVE/EXPLANATORY
Select one of the Supreme Cou rulings from this lesson as a case study. Using the Internet, resea additional background information about the case and the long-term impact of the ruling. Then write an essay presenting your findings. Essays should include an introduction, supporting paragraphs, and a conclusion. 21A, 21C, 23A 4
networks
There's More Online!
BIOGRAPHY
BuzzAldrin Ef BIOGRAPHY Neil Armstrong BIOGRAPHY
John Glenn |?f IMAGE The Berlin Wall IMAGE
Fidel Castro PRIMARYSOURCE
Kennedy's Inaugural Address Ef SLIDE SHOW The Space Prograr
Ef video The Space Race
Ef interactive self-check QUIZ

LESSON 2
JFK and the Cold War
V
'V
Reading HELPDESK
r
Academic Vocabulary
•	conventional • remove
•	institute
Content Vocabulary
•	flexible response
•	space race
TAKING NOTES:
Key Ideas and Details
Sequencing As you read the lesson, complete a graphic organizer similar to the one below to record the major events ofthe Cold War between 1959 and 1963.
TEKS
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills 2D explain the significance of the following years as turning points: 1898 (Spanish-American War), 1914-1918 (World War I), 1929 (the Great Depression begins), 1939-1945 (World War II), 1957 (Sputnik launch ignites U.S.-Soviet space race), 1968-1969 (Martin Luther King Jr. assassination and U.S. lands on the moon), 1991 (Cold War ends), 2001 (terrorist attacks on World Trade Center and the Pentagon), and 2008 (election of first black president, Barack Obama)
continued on the next page
j™
It Matters Because
During the Kennedy administration, ongoing tensions with the Soviet Union led to crises over Cuba and West Berlin. To contain communism and stay ahead in technology, President Kennedy created aid programs for developing nations and expanded the space program.
Containing Communism
guiding question How were President Kennedy's programs to combat communism different from the programs of previous administrations?
When John F. Kennedy entered the White House in 1961, the Cold War with the Soviet Union dominated all other concerns. He used a range of programs to try to stop the spread of communism. These included a conventional weaponry program to give the nations military more flexibility. The programs also included economic aid to Latin America and the creation of the Peace Corps to help developing nations.
A
More Flexible Response Kennedy took office at a time of growing global instability. Resentment at wealthy Western nations was on the rise in the developing world, often encouraged by the Soviet Union. Kennedy felt that Eisenhower had relied too heavily on nuclear weapons.
To allow for a "flexible response" to resist Communist movements, the president pushed for a buildup of troops and conventional weapons. He also expanded the Special Forces, an elite army unit used in limited conflicts.
Despite his commitment to flexible response, Kennedy had warned against a “missile gap” during his campaign. Although no gap actually existed, the United States began a massive build-up of intercontinental ballistic missiles (ICBMs) armed with nuclear warheads. At the time Kennedy took office, less than 20 ICBMS were deployed by the United States, and only 50 new Minuteman missiles were planned. The Soviet Union had less than 10 ICBNls
The New Frontier and the Great Society 455
John F. Kennedy delivered his inaugural speech on January 20,1961. He spoke of his generation's obligation to defend liberty. Seated at right is incoming Vice President Lyndon Johnson.
Identifying Central Ideas Why do
you think that President Kennedy chose to speak of defending liberty during his inaugural speech?
conventional nonnuclear
flexible response the
buildup of conventional troops and weapons to allow a nation to fight a limited war without using nuclear weapons
(continued from p. 455)
TEKS
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills 8A describe U.S. responses to Soviet aggression after World War II, including the Truman Doctrine, the Marshall Plan, the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, the Berlin airlift, and John F. Kennedy’s role in the Cuban Missile Crisis
8B describe how Cold War tensions were intensified by the arms race, the space race, McCarthyism, and the House Un-American Activities Committee (HUAC), the findings of which were confirmed by the Venona Papers
continued on the next page
ready to fire at the United States. Nonetheless, Kennedy decided to build 1000 Minutemen ICBMS. The decision continued the arms race for the remainder of the 1960s and into the 1970s. Tensions increased as the Sovi began their own mass production of missiles, and began to look for other ways to ensure they could match the firepower of the United States.
Aid to Other Countries
Kennedy wanted to renew diplomatic focus on Latin America, where governments were often in the hands of the wealthy few and many people lived in extreme poverty. In some countries, these conditions spurred the growth of left-wing movements aimed at overthrowing their government In his Inaugural Address, President Kennedy said, “To our sister republic south of our border, we offer a special pledge—to convert our good word into good deeds—in a new alliance for progress. . . .”
When the United States became involved in Latin America, it was usually to help existing governments stay in power and to prevent Communist movements from flourishing. Poor Latin Americans resente( this intrusion, just as they resented American corporations, whose presei was seen as a kind of imperialism.
The Alliance for Progress To improve relations between the United Stat and Latin America, Kennedy proposed the Alliance for Progress, a series of cooperative aid projects with Latin American governments. The Alliance was designed to create a “free and prosperous Latin America” that wou! be more stable and less likely to support Communist-inspired revolutions.
Over a 10-year period, the United States pledged $20 billion to help Latin American countries establish better schools, housing, health care, < fairer land distribution. The results were mixed. In some countries, the Alliance did promote real reform. In others, local rulers used the money keep themselves in power.
The Peace Corps Another program aimed at helping developing nations fight poverty was the Peace Corps. This program sent Americans to provide humanitarian services in developing nations. After rigorous training,
6
volunteers spent two years in countries that requested assistance. Among other projects. Peace Corps volunteers built roads, taught English, laid out sewage systems, and trained medical technicians.
The Cold War in Space
In 1961 Yury Gagarin (YUR.ee guh.GAHR.uhn), a Soviet astronaut, became the first person to orbit Earth. Again, as in 1957 with the launch of Sputnik, the first satellite, the Soviets had beaten the United States in the space race. Kennedy worried that Soviet successes in space might convince the world that communism was better than capitalism. Less than six weeks after the Soviet flight, the president went before Congress and declared:
I believe this Nation should commit itself to achieving the goal, before
this decade is out, of landing a man on the Moon.” Kennedy’s speech set in motion a massive effort to develop the necessary technology. In 1962 John Glenn became the first American to orbit Earth. Six years later, the United States sent three men into orbit in a capsule called Apollo. The capsule was launched using the Saturn V, the most powerful rocket ever built. The Saturn V gave both Apollo and its lunar module—which astronauts would use to land on the moon—enough velocity to reach the moon.
On July 16, 1969, a Saturn V lifted off in Florida, carrying three American astronauts: Neil Armstrong, Edwin “Buzz” Aldrin, and Michael Collins. On July 20, Armstrong and Aldrin boarded the lunar module, named Eagle, and headed down to the moon. Minutes later, Armstrong radioed NASA’s flight center in Texas: “Houston . . . the Eagle has landed.” Armstrong became the first human being to walk on the moon. As he set foot on the lunar surface, he announced: “That’s one small step for a man, one giant leap for mankind.” The United States had demonstrated its technological superiority over the Soviet Union.
In 1962 John Glenn was the first American to orbit Earth.
CR3TKAL THINKING
Making Generalizations In addition to being explorers, what other role did the U.S. astronauts play? space race the Cold War competition over dominance of space exploration capability
In addition, the moon landing represented a potential turning point in human history. For the first time, human beings had walked on the surface of another world. Although no one has gone any further from home in the nearly 50 years that have passed since the first moon landing, the success of the mission demonstrated that human beings might one day set out to colonize other worlds.
The space program also set in motion an enormous wave of technological innovation that continues to shape the world today. The requirement for clear communications with the astronauts led to improved transmission technology, making possible the use of satellites to transmit
(continued from p. 456)
TEKS
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills 8D explain reasons and outcomes for U.S. involvement in foreign countries and their relationship to the Domino Theory, including the Vietnam War
28B explain how space technology and exploration improve the quality of life
Neil Armstrong was the first person to walk on the moon.
To reach the moon, NASA developed the giant Saturn V rocket, which lifted a three-person capsule, called Apollo, and a landing craft, called the Lunar Module, into space. Once Apollo and the Lunar Module entered orbit around the moon, the Lunar Module carried two astronauts from the Apollo capsule down to the moon's surface.
The New Frontier and the Great Society 457
radio, phone, and television signals. It also led to the first wireless headsel Power requirements so far from home led to advances in battery technolo and solar cell technology. Navigational concerns led to improvements in computer technology, particularly involving the use of integrated circuits build computers that could fit in the space available.
Other inventions resulting from the space program that have improve our way of life include water filters, new types of insulation, flame resista: fabrics, the CAT scanner, memory foam for beds and chairs, and new typ of rubber, now used in running shoes and hiking boots. Innovations in robotics for the space program went on to benefit manufacturers around world and helped drive down the price of goods.
In general, the moon landing boosted the confidence of Americans ai enhanced the nation’s stature abroad. If the United States could put men < the moon, what could it not do? Three years later, in the wake of the succ of the Apollo missions, President Nixon approved the development of a r reusable spacecraft that would later be known as the Space Shuttle.
H REAPING PROGRESS CHECK
Analyzing Why do you think the space race was a part of President Kennedy's programs to combat communism?
Crises of the Cold War
guiding questions What was the most important foreign policy event of the Kennedy administrate Why was it the most important event?
President Kennedy’s efforts to combat Communist influence in other countries led to some of the most intense crises of the Cold War. At time these crises left Americans and people in many other nations wondering whether the world would survive.
The Bay of Pigs
The first crisis occurred in Cuba, only 90 miles (145 km) from Americai shores. There, Fidel Castro had overthrown the corrupt Cuban dictator
85°W
GEOGRAPHY CONNECTION
The Cuban Missile Crisis brought the United States and the Soviet Union to the brink of war.
THE WORLD IN SPATIAL TERMS
Wherein Cuba did the Bay of Pigs invasion begin?
PLACES AND REGIONS
Approximately how dose were the Soviet Union's nudear missiles in Cuba to the mainland United States?
58
Fulgencio Batista in 1959. At once, Castro established ties with the Soviet Union, instituted drastic land reforms, and seized foreign-owned businesses, many of which were American. Cuba’s alliance with the Soviets worried many Americans. Soviet premier Nikita Khrushchev was also expressing his hope to strengthen Cuba’s military.
Fearing that the Soviets would use Cuba as a base from which to spread revolution, President Eisenhower had authorized the CIA to secretly train and arm a group of Cuban exiles, known as Lu Brigada, to invade the island. His goal was to set off a popular uprising against Castro. When Kennedy became president, his advisers approved the plan. Kennedy agreed to the operation with some changes. On April 17, 1961, about 1,400 armed Cuban exiles landed at the Bay of Pigs on the south coast of Cuba. The invasion was a disaster. Lu Brigada s boats ran aground on coral reefs. Then Kennedy canceled their air support to keep the United States’s involvement a secret. The expected popular uprising never happened. Within two days, Castro’s forces killed or captured almost all the members of Lu Brigada.
The Bay of Pigs was a dark moment for the Kennedy administration. The incident exposed an American plot to overthrow a neighbor’s government. The disastrous outcome made the United States look weak and disorganized.
The Berlin Wall Goes Up
In June 1961, Kennedy faced another foreign policy challenge when he met with Soviet premier Nikita Khrushchev in Vienna, Austria. To stop Germans from leaving Communist East Germany for West Berlin, Khrushchev demanded that the Western powers recognize East Germany and withdraw from Berlin. Berlin was a city lying completely within East Germany. Kennedy refused and reaffirmed the West’s commitment to West Berlin.
Khrushchev retaliated by building a wall through Berlin, blocking movement between the Soviet sector and the rest of the city. Guards along the wall shot at people who tried to cross from East Berlin to West Berlin. The Berlin Wall stood as a symbol of Cold War divisions.
The Cuban Missile Crisis
During the summer of 1962, American intelligence learned that Soviet technicians and equipment had arrived in Cuba and that military construction was in progress. On October 22, Kennedy announced that the Soviet Union had placed long-range nuclear missiles in Cuba. This location made them a clear threat to the United States.
Kennedy ordered a naval quarantine to stop the delivery of more missiles, and demanded the existing missile sites be dismantled. He warned that if attacked, the United States would respond fully against the Soviet Union. Still, work on the missile sites continued. Nuclear warfare seemed more possible than ever.
Then, after a flurry of secret negotiations, the Soviet Union offered to remove the missiles if the United States promised not to invade Cuba.
The United States also agreed to remove its missiles from Turkey near the Soviet border.
In reality, neither Kennedy nor Khrushchev wanted nuclear war. Only lunatics or suicides, who themselves want to perish and to destroy the whole world before they die, could do this, wrote Khrushchev. We . . . want to live and do not at all want to destroy your country.” On October 28, the leaders reached an agreement. The world could breathe again.
institute to initiate or establish
SKILLS PRACTICE
When you are speaking, think about how the ideas connect. This is very important when explaining history. Describe the events ofthe Cuban Missile Crisis. Choose connecting words to show cause, comparison, contrast, sequence, or other connections.
remove to take away or change the location of
The New Frontier and the Great Society 459
President Kennedy's funeral procession and burial service were broadcast live over all three television networks.
The Cuban missile crisis forced the United States and the Soviet Unior consider the consequences of nuclear war. In August 1963, the two countri agreed to a treaty that banned testing nuclear weapons in the atmosphere, the long run, however, the missile crisis had consequences. Soviet leadersh saw Khrushchev as having agreed to a humiliating retreat, and he fell from power in 1964. The crisis also exposed the Soviets’ military inferiority and prompted a dramatic Soviet arms buildup, which the United States matche
Death of a President
Soon after the Senate ratified the test ban treat John F. Kennedy’s presidency ended shockingl) and tragically. On November 22, 1963, Kenned and his wife traveled to Texas. As the president motorcade rode slowly through the crowded streets of Dallas, gunfire rang out. Someone ha shot the president twice. Government officials sped Kennedy to a nearby hospital, where he w pronounced dead moments later.
Lee Harvey Oswald, the man accused of killir Kennedy, appeared to be a confused and embitter Marxist who had spent time in the Soviet Union, himself was shot to death while in police custody days after Kennedy’s assassination. The bizarre situation led some to speculate that the second gunman, local nightclub owner Jack Ruby, killed Oswald to protect others involved in the crime. Ir
CRITICAL THINKING
Predicting Consequences What effect do you think Kennedy's assassination had on how his presidency is remembered? 1964 a national commission headed by Chief Justice Warren concluded that Oswald was the lone assassin. The report of the Warren Commission left so questions unanswered. Theories about a conspiracy to kill the president hav persisted, though none has gained wide acceptance.
In the wake of the assassination, the United States and much of the world went into mourning. Kennedy was president for little more than 1,000 days. Yet he made a profound impression on most Americans. Kennedy’s successor, Vice President Lyndon Baines Johnson, set out to promote many of the programs that Kennedy left unfinished.
O READING PROGRESS CHECK
Interpreting Significance How do you think the assassination of President Ken affected the nation?
LESSON 2 REVIEW
Answering the Guiding Questions
4. Analyzing How were President Kennedy's programs to combat communism different from the programs of previot administrations? 8A.8D
Reviewing Vocabulary
1.	Explaining How was Kennedy's "flexible response" different from Eisenhower's strategy for containing communism? 8A, 8D
2.	Summarizing Why was the space race so important to the United States? 20,288
Using Your Notes
3. Making Generalizations Use the notes you completed during the lesson to describe which areas the Kennedy administration succeeded in, and which areas posed setbacks to the president's drive to win the Cold War. 8A.8B
5.	Synthesizing What was the most important foreign policy event of the Kennedy administration? Why was it the most important event? 8A
Writing Activity
INFORMATIVE/EXPLANATORY
Write two to three descriptivi paragraphs explaining how President Kennedy's programs affect world and the American people, both in his leadership and in his I
Using a Problem Solving Process Why Learn This Skill?
Life is full of choices. Imagine that you have just done poorly on a chemistry exam. You wonder why you cannot do better since you always go to class, take notes, and study for exams. In order to improve your grades, you need to identify the specific problem and then take actions to solve it.
Learning the Skill
There are six key steps you should follow that will help you through the problem-solving process.
1.	Identify the problem. Be specific.
Problems can be too big to be solved, but when broken into smaller problems, each in turn may be solvable. Focus on exactly one specific thing that is a problem and should be fixed.
2.	Gather information. This is critical. Many problems are the result of poor communication or a lack of facts. Be sure you have collected all the facts you need, that the facts are accurate and that you have a clear understanding of what everyone involved has said or done before.
3.	List and consider possible solutions. As much as possible keep emotion out of your thinking. People often are inclined to support a solution that makes them feel better or is in their interest, forgetting all of the other people who will be affected by the solution that is put in place.
4.	Consider the advantages and
disadvantages of each solution. Look at both short-term and long-term outcomes. A quick fix that does not take enough facts into account will just break down and cause new problems in the future.
5.	Now that you have listed and considered the possible options, choose the best solution to your problem and put it into effect.
32A
6.	Evaluate the effectiveness of the solution. Did it work? Is the problem solved? Has solving the problem created new problems? If so, return to the problem solving process.
Practicing the Skill
Go to the lesson, "The New Frontier" and reread the section, "Kennedy Takes Office". Use that information and the steps listed on this page to answer the following questions.
1.	What problem did Kennedy encounter in the summer of 1962 when American intelligence studied photos of Cuba?
2.	What options were available to the president to deal with the situation? What were the advantages and disadvantages of each solution?
3.	Explain the solution Kennedy implemented to solve his problem.
4.	Evaluate the effectiveness of Kennedy's solution. Was it successful? How do you determine this?
Applying the Skill
Problem Solving Do research at the library or online at a news website and identify a significant problem facing your local community. Gather information and be sure you have accurate data and a clear understanding ofthe situation. Write a comment that you could send to a newspaper or post online that describes the problem, lists the options, and their advantages and disadvantages. Propose a solution, and give your evaluation ofthe chosen solution.
461
IT MATTERS BECAUSE
Academic Vocabulary
confine • subsidy
Lyndon B. Johnson had decades of experience in Congre and was skilled in getting legislation enacted. When he became president, he moved quickly to push for passage civil rights and antipoverty bills.
mentfixsociety'sproblems? • Hi changed American society?
Johnson Takes the Reins

Content Vocabulary • consensus
TAKING NOTES:
Key Ideas and Details
Organizing As you read, complete a graphic organizer similar to the one below to list the social and economic programs started during Lyndon Johnson's administration.
TEKS
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills 17D identify actions of government and the private sector such as the Great Society, affirmative action, and Title IX to create economic opportunities for citizens and analyze the unintended consequences of each
24A describe qualities of effective leadership

guiding question How did President Johnson's experience in Congress help him get legislation passed?
Just hours after President Kennedy had been pronounced dead, Lyndon B. Johnson took the oath of office in the cabin of Air Force One. Days later, Johnson appeared before Congress and urged the nation to build on Kennedy’s legacy. Although the nation was booming, not all Americans shared in its prosperity. In his 1962 bo The Other America, Michael Harrington claimed that almost 50 million poor Americans lived largely hidden in slums, Appalacb the Deep South, and Native American reservations. Soon after taki office, Johnson decided to launch an antipoverty crusade. Johnson's Leadership Style
Lyndon Baines Johnson was born and raised in the “hill country” c central Texas, near the banks of the Pedernales River. Johnson remained a Texan in his heart, and his style posed a striking contrz with Kennedy’s. He was a man of impressive stature who spoke directly, convincingly, and even roughly at times. He earned a reputation as a man who got things done. He did favors, twisted ar bargained, flattered, and threatened in order to find consensus/ 01 general agreement. His ability to build coalitions had made him or the most effective and powerful leaders in Senate history.
Why was Johnson concerned about the poor? He had known hard times growing up, and had seen extreme poverty firsthand i brief career as a teacher in a low-income area. He also believed tl wealthy, powerful government should try to improve the lives of citizens. Finally, there was Johnson’s ambition. He wanted histor portray him as a great president.
462
AWar on Poverty	consensus general agreement
Before his death, Kennedy had plans for an antipoverty program and a civil rights
bill. Continuing these efforts seemed logical. Johnson knew that any program
linked to the slain president would be popular. In his State of the Union address in
1964, he said. Unfortunately, many Americans live on the outskirts of hope—
some because of their poverty, and some because of their color, and all too many
because of both. Our task is to help replace their despair with opportunity. This
administration ... declares unconditional war on poverty in America.”
By the summer of 1964, Johnson had convinced Congress to pass the
Economic Opportunity Act, which attacked inadequate public services,
illiteracy, and unemployment. The act established 10 new programs within
a new agency, the Office of Economic Opportunity (OEO). Many ofthe new
programs were directed at young, inner-city Americans.
The Neighborhood Youth Corps provided work-study programs to help
the underprivileged earn a high school diploma or college degree. The Job
Corps helped unemployed people ages 16-21 acquire job skills. One of the
more dramatic programs introduced was VISTA (Volunteers in Service to
America), which was essentially a domestic Peace Corps. VISTA put young
people with skills and community-minded ideals to work in poor
neighborhoods and rural areas to help people overcome poverty. Additional
programs included Upward Bound, which offered tutoring to high school
students, and a Work Experience Program, which provided day care and other
support for those in poor households to enable them to work.
The Election of 1964
Johnson quickly won public approval, but just as quickly had to run for the office he first gained through tragedy. The Republican candidate in the 1964 election was Senator Barry Goldwater of Arizona, known for his strong conservatism. “Extremism in the defense of liberty is no vice. Moderation in the pursuit of justice is no virtue,” Goldwater declared when accepting the nomination. Few Americans were ready to embrace Goldwater’s message, which seemed too aggressive for a nation nervous about nuclear war. On Election Day, Johnson won in a landslide, gaining more than 61 percent of the popular vote and winning all but six states in the Electoral College.
READING PROGRESS CHECK
Explaining What parts of Johnson's congressional background helped him get his legislation approved?
POVERTY RATE IN AMERICA, I960-;
CHARTS/GRAPHS
Source: U.S. Census Bureau.
Year
At left, an unemployed miner and his family posed on the porch of their Kentucky home in 1964.
Making Generalizations Based on the data in the chart, what decade had the greatest decrease in the poverty rate? Why do you think this was the case?
Analyzing Information Based on the data in the chart, how successful was Johnson's War on Poverty?
The New Frontier and the Great Society 463

WHAT WAS THE GREAT SOCIETY?
Health and Welfare	Education
The War on Poverty
Consumer and Environmental Protection
Medicare (1965) established a comprehensive health insurance program for all senior citizens; financed through the Social Security system.
Medicaid (1965) provided health and medical assistance to low-income families; funded through federal and state governments.
; Elementary and Secondary
[ EducationAct(1965)targeted
■	aid to students and funded related ; activities such as adult education
! and education consulting.
: Higher Education Act (1965)
■	supported college tuition
’ scholarships, student loans, and ; work-study programs for low-i and middle-income students.
Office of Economic Opportunity j
(1964) oversaw many programs to j improve life in inner cities, including j Job Corps, an education and job training program for at-risk youth.
Housing and Urban Development J
Act (1965) established new housing	j
subsidy programs and made federal	i
loans and public housing grants easier to obtain.
Clean Air Act (1963) and Water Quality Act (1965) supported development of standards and goals for water and air quality.
Highway Safety Act (1966) improved federal, state, and loca coordination and created training standards for emergency medica technicians.
Child Nutrition Act (1966) established a school breakfast program and expanded the school lunch and milk programs to improve nutrition.
i Project Head Start (1965) i funded a preschool program for j disadvantaged children.
Demonstration Cities and
Metropolitan Development Act
(1966) revitalized urban areas s through a variety of social and economic programs.
Fair Packaging and Labeling
Act (1966) required all consume products to have true and informative labels.
CHARTS/GRAPHS
1 Identifying Central Ideas
What was the purpose of the Water Quality Act and Clean Air Act?
The Great Society
guiding question Howdoes Great Society legislation influence current government programs and philosophies?
2 Analyzing Information Which Great Society program do you think had the most effect on American life? Why do you think so?
confine to limit or restrict
After his election, Johnson began working with Congress to create the “Great Society” he had promised during his campaign. His goals reflectec the times. The civil rights movement had brought racial inequalities to tl forefront, and the strong economy encouraged people to believe that pov could be reduced. Johnson noted the Great Society’s goals during a speec in May 1964, aiming not to confine government efforts but to form a soc “where the city of man serves not only the needs of the body and the demands of commerce but the desire for beauty and the hunger for community.”
SKILLS PRACTICE
Work with a partner. Take turns telling each other the information you learned in this lesson about the War on Poverty and the Great Society.
subsidy money granted by the government to achieve a specific goal that is beneficial to society
Johnson’s ambitious vision encompassed more than 60 programs initiated between 1965 and 1968, including Medicare and Medicaid. Medicare had strong support because it was offered to all senior citizens: about half of whom lacked health insurance. Medicare’s twin program, Medicaid, financed health care for welfare recipients living below the poverty line. These programs reflected New Deal ideals by entitling categories of Americans to benefits.
Great Society programs also strongly supported education. The Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 granted millions of dollars to public and private schools. Education efforts also extended to preschoolers through Project Head Start, for disadvantaged children wh had never looked at a picture book or scribbled with a crayon.”
Johnson also urged Congress to act on several pieces of legislation addressing urban issues. One created a new cabinet agency, the Departm of Housing and Urban Development, in 1965. Its first secretary, Robert Weaver, was the first African American to serve in the cabinet. A broad-based program informally called “Model Cities” authorized federal subsi to many cities to improve transportation, health care, housing, and polic
464
One notable Great Society measure changed the composition ofthe American population: the Immigration Act of 1965. This act ended the system established in the 1920s that gave preference to northern European immigrants. The new law opened wider the door ofthe United States to immigrants from all parts of Europe, Asia, and Africa.
The Great Society's Legacy
Great Society programs touched nearly every aspect of American life and improved many lives. In the years since Johnson left office, however, debate has continued over whether the Great Society was truly a success. In many ways, the impact of the Great Society was limited. Some programs did not work as well as hoped. In many cases, the programs grew so quickly they became unmanageable and difficult to evaluate.
Cities, states, and groups eligible for aid began to expect immediate and life-changing benefits. Other Americans opposed the massive growth of federal programs. When Johnson attempted to fund both his grand domestic agenda and the increasingly costly war in Vietnam, the Great Society eventually suffered. Some Great Society initiatives have survived, however, including Medicare and Medicaid, the Department of Transportation, the Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD), and Project Head Start. Overall, the programs provided some important benefits to poor communities and gave political and administrative experience to minority groups.
The Great Society’s attempt to create more economic opportunity did have some unintended consequences. The cost of Medicare began to expand rapidly, in part because of the rising costs of medical care and new medical technology, and in part because of the tendency of Congress to add more and more items to what Medicare covers. In addition, as baby boomers aged, the number of people signing up for Medicare became a greater proportion of the population. Because Medicare is an entitlement program, the government is obligated to make payments, and this has contributed to deficit spending and the rise in the national debt.
Critics of the Great Society have also argued that far from ending poverty, the various programs of the War on Poverty and Great Society actually fostered a culture of dependency and a new permanent “underclass.” According to this argument, people in the underclass were trapped, unable to improve their economic circumstances, because they had become too reliant on government programs.
B READING PROGRESS CHECK
Making Connections What government programs carry on the ideals ofthe Great Society?
LESSON 3 REVIEW
Reviewing Vocabulary
1.	Explaining Why is the ability to build a consensus an important skill for a leader? 24A
Using Your Notes
2.	Categorizing Use the notes you completed during the lesson to group the programs Johnson created into categories. 17D
Answering the Guiding Questions
3.	Analyzing How did President Johnson's experience in Congress help him get legislation passed? 24A
— Analyzing---------
Primary Sources
The Challenge of Poverty
M
The walls of the ghettos are not going to topple overnight, nor is it possible to wipe out the heritage of generations of social, economic and educational deprivation by the stroke of a Presidential pen. The war against poverty is a long-range undertaking. It requires staying power as well as a sense of urgency. M —New York Times editorial, January 1,1967
DBQ
USING CONTEXT CLUES
Based on its use in the passage above, what is the meaning of deprivation?
4.	Synthesizing How does Great Society legislation influence current government programs and philosophies? 17D
Writing Activity
INFORMATIVE/EXPLANATORY
What connections can you make between the ideals ofthe New Deal and those ofthe Great Society? Write a short essay in which you analyze efforts to extend New Deal goals through the Great Society, and evaluate the successes and failures of those efforts. 17D The New Frontier and the Great Society 465
chapter is Assessment
Directions: On a separate sheet of paper, answer the questions below. Make sure you read carefully and answer all parts of the questions.
Lesson Review
Lesson 1
0 Identifying What made the election of John F.
Kennedy noteworthy?
Q
Analyzing Even though Democrats controlled Congress, why was President Kennedy unable to pass all of the New Frontier programs he had proposed? 0 Analyzing What method did a group of Tennessee voters use to expand their right to participate in the democratic process? What changes did they bring about as a result of their actions? 23A
0 Describing What was the conflict between President Kennedy and the steel companies?
0 Explaining Explain the imbalance that existed in electoral districts prior to redrawing districts in 1964. What phrase did the Supreme Court use in the case of Reynolds v. Sims to explain why courts could force states to redraw voting districts? 21A, 23A
Lesson 2
0 Analyzing How did the arms race contribute to events in Cuba and intensify the Cold War? 8B, 8D
0 Making Connections What was the purpose of the Berlin Wall, and what did it come to symbolize?
0 Identifying What events and decisions propelled the end of Khrushchev's leadership in the Soviet Union?
0 Identifying What was the conclusion of the Warren Commission after President Kennedy's assassination?
© Evaluating Describe how Cold War tensions were intensified by the space race. 8B
Lesson 3
© Assessing How did the creation of Medicare reflect the ideals and goals of President Johnson's Great Society? 17D
© Analyzing Issues Why did President Johnson try to I Americans living in poverty? 17D
© Specifying How did the Immigration Act of 1965 bet change the demographic characteristics of the American population?
© Explaining Why did programs of the Great Society harken back to Roosevelt's New Deal and Truman's Fair Deal? 17D
Exploring the Essential Questions
© Categorizing Prepare a chart identifying how the policies and programs of Presidents Kennedy and Johi changed American society. Divide the chart into these categories: Economic Changes, Social Changes, Educai Changes, Political Changes, Technology Changes, and Military Changes. Indicate which changes continue to shape society today.
© Preparing Oral Presentations Write a two-minute speech answering the question "Can government fix society's problems?" Take a clear position for or again idea, and use evidence from the chapter to support yi position. 30A
Critical Thinking
© Evaluating Explain the concept of "due process" in Fourteenth Amendment. How did the Warren Court interpret this concept in the 1960s? Describe how the Court's decisions marked a shift from a strict construction of the Constitution and brought about constitutional change. 21A, 21c
© Analyzing What programs of the War on Poverty ai Great Society were intended to increase economic opportunities for Americans? What were the uninten consequences of those programs? 17D
© Making Connections Explain how space technoloc exploration has improved the quality of life. 28B
Need Extra Help?
Go to page-[ 45014511453 1 452 1 453 1 458 1 459 1 460 1 460 1 45^6^6^46^6^44^44^ 45414(3
466
Social Studies Skills
Q)
Using a Problem Solving Process Imagine you work for President Kennedy. The president has explained that the Soviets seem to be far ahead in space technology. Their success in putting the first satellite, and then the first man into orbit seems to be showing the world that communism is a better system than free enterprise and democracy. The president asks for ideas on how the United States can beat the Soviet Union in the space race. Prepare a briefing paper for the president recommending the United States begin work to put the first man on the moon. In the paper, apply a problem-solving process that walks the president through your thinking and explains why you are recommending this plan. 8B, 24A, 32A 0 Explaining Continuity and Change Explain the reasons why the United States helped organize and support the Bay of Pigs invasion. Describe the outcome ofthe invasion. 8D
0 Creating Graphs Conduct research at the library or online. Create a new graph from 1948 to the present showing which years the United States was in recession and which presidents were in power for which years on the graph. Then add a line showing the poverty rate from 1948 to the present. What conclusions can you draw from your graph? 31A, 31B
Q
Identifying Effective Leadership Even though many people disagreed with him, President Johnson was able to push through an ambitious set of domestic programs. What made President Johnson such an effective leader in domestic policy? What methods did he use to get support for his programs and what personal qualities improved his effectiveness? 24A Analyzing Primary Sources
Read the excerpt below from President Kennedy's inaugural address, and then answer the questions that follow.
PRIMARY SOURCE
Let every nation know, whether it wishes us well or ill, that we shall pay any price, bear any burden, meet any hardship, support any friend, oppose any foe, to assure the survival and the success of liberty...
In the long history ofthe world, only a few generations have been granted the role of defending freedom in its hour of maximum danger. I do not shrink from this responsibility—I welcome it. I do not believe that any of us would exchange places with any other people or any other generation. The energy, the faith, the devotion which we bring to this endeavor will light our country and all who serve it. And the glow from that fire can truly light the world.
And so, my fellow Americans, ask not what your country can do for you; ask what you can do for your country.»
F.
Kennedy, Inaugural Address, January 20,1961 © Analyzing Speeches What concerns is President Kennedy
responding to in this speech? What is endangered? And what
is he committing the nation to do? In addition to American
citizens, what audience Kennedy is addressing?
8A, 29A, 29H
© Evaluating Language What words and phrases does Kennedy use to evoke patriotism and encourage Americans to support his position? Given the language used, how would you interpret the validity ofthe president's comment we shall "pay any price?" 29A, 29H
Read the excerpt below, and then answer the questions that follow.
PRIMARYSOURCE
« We have in 1964 a unique opportunity and obligation—to prove the success of our system; to disprove those cynics and critics at home and abroad who question our purpose and our competence...
Unfortunately, many Americans live on the outskirts of hope— some because of their poverty, and some because of their color, and all too many because of both. Our task is to help replace their despair with opportunity.
This administration today, here and now, declares unconditional
war on poverty in America....It will not be a short or easy
struggle, no single weapon or strategy will suffice, but we shall not rest until that war is won. The richest Nation on earth can afford to win it. We cannot afford to lose it. ”
B.
Johnson State ofthe Union Address, 1964 Need Extra Help?
	20	21	22	23	24	25
|Gotopage	| 461 | 458 1 447 | 462 J 467 | 467 |
The New Frontier and the Great Society 467
Analyzing Primary Sources What is the historical context of Johnson's speech? Explain why the public would likely back the president's plans? 29A, 29H
© Evaluating Language What metaphor and language does Johnson use to get people to support his plan to reduce poverty? Why do you think he uses this kind of language? 29A, 29H
© Comparing and Corroborating Sources Compare the excerpts from Kennedy and Johnson's speeches. What goals do they share and what does that suggest is an important underlying concern for both administrations? What is a major difference in approach between the two speeches? 29A, 29D, 29E, 29H
Analyzing Visuals
Use the cartoon to answer the following question.
HERBLOCK’S CARTOON
G
Analyzing Visuals What does the boy represent, and why do you think the cartoonist made him so small? 29H © Making Inferences According to the cartoon, what is Johnson trying to do? 29H
Extended Response Questions
© Evaluating Write an essay describing the impact of Warren Court in the early 1960s. Do you think the Sup Court followed a strict construction interpretation of 1 Constitution, or that judicial interpretation changed tl way the Constitution was applied. Be sure to discuss t Court's impact on the First Amendment, on voting rig and on the rights of people accused of crimes. Youres should have an introduction, at least three paragraph and a conclusion. 21A, 21c
Explaining Imagine you are a reporter shortly after
Cuban Missile Crisis has ended. Write an article descri
Soviet actions in Cuba and President Kennedy's roleii
resolving the crisis. Your essay should have an
introduction, at least three paragraphs, and a condu:
8A,
Standardized Test Practice
© In which case did the Supreme Court extend the due process rights of someone accused of a crime by ded that defendants had a right to a lawyer even if they ( not afford one? 21A
A.
Mapp v. Ohio B.
Gideon v. Wainwright C.
Baker v. Carr D.
Engelv.Vitale © What achievement by the United States in 1969 mar important turning point in history? 2D
F.
The United States entered the war in Vietnam. 6. The United States launched the first satellite in orbit.
H.
The United States landed men on the moon. J.
The United State ended segregation in the Sou Need Extra Help?
	26	27	28	29	30	31	32	33	34
I
Go to page l«w| [w |«7 l«9| | 454 |457| 16
The Civil Rights Movement
1954-1968
networks
There's More Online about the civil rights movement.
CHAPTER
ESSENTIAL QUESTIONS
• Why do you think the civil rights movement made gains in postwar America? • What motivates a society to make changes? Lesson 1
The Movement Begi
Lesson 2
Challenging Segregation
Lesson 3
New Civil Rights Issues
The Story Matters...
The civil rights movement gained momentum rapidly after World War II. Supreme Court rulings, massive protests by civil rights groups, and new federal legislation all combined to make racial segregation illegal in the United States.
◄ Rosa Parks's refusal to give up her seat on a Montgomery, Alabama, bus was the spark that launched the Montgomery bus boycott in 19S5.
PHOTO:
Bettmann/CORBIS 469
