CHAPTER 13
Place andTime: United States 1945-1960
Relations between the Soviet Union and the other Allies soured as the Soviets established Communist governments in Eastern Europe. President Truman authorized billions of dollars of American aid to devastated European nations as well as to the Allies former enemies, Germany and Japan. Americans grew fearful of the possibility of Communists infiltrating the U.S. government, while others feared an attack with nuclear weapons. By the early 1950s, Americans were looking for someone or something that would make them feel secure.
Step Into the Place
Read the quotes and look at the information presented on the map. litti sa, 29a
DBQ
Analyzing Historical Documents How do the United States and the Soviet Union each seem to be interpreting the intentions ofthe other nation?
PRIMARYSOURCE
M [The] USSR still [believes] inantagonistic'capitalist encirclement'with which in the long run there can be no permanent peaceful coexistence.... In summary, we have here a political force committed fanatically to the belief that... it is desirable and necessary that the internal harmony of our society be disrupted, our traditional way of life be destroyed, the international authority of our state be broken, if Soviet power is to be secure.99
F.
Kennan, American diplomat, from "The Long Telegram," February 22,1946 PRIMARYSOURCE
« The more the war recedes into the past, the more distinct becomes... the division ofthe political forces operating on the international arena into two major camps.... The principal driving force ofthe imperialist camp is the U.S.A.... The cardinal purpose ofthe imperialist camp is to strengthen imperialism, to hatch a new imperialist war, to combat socialism and democracy, and to support reactionary and antidemocratic profascist regimes.”
—Andrey Zhdanov, adviser to Stalin, from Fora Lasting Peace for a People's Democracy, no. 1, November 1947
Step Into the Time
1950 Sen
1947 Truman	^49 u.S.and McCarthy!
Doctrine declared 1943 Berlin Western European U.S.StateC 1945 Franklin	Airlift begins nations form NATO containsCo
Roosevelt dies
Making Connections
Research an individual featured on the time line. Use your research
Truman
1945-1953
Lffore Online!
MAP
Explore the “ interactive version of this map on Networks.
TIMELINE
Explore the interactive version of the time line on Networks. 
The Global Cold War 1947-1955 J
PACIFIC
0	2,000 km
Miller projection
NEW > ZEALAND
I I NATO
1	1	Other Western allies
1	1	Warsaw Pact
1	1	Other Communist states |
----:------------:-----
60WV
3 COW
SOW
60W
90W
Eisenhower
PHILIPPINES OCEAN
%
'“‘lZ \

120°E
150W

networks
There's More Online!
BIOGRAPHY
Winston Churchill gf BIOGRAPHY Joseph Stalin BIOGRAPHY
Harry S. Truman Ef IMAGE Postwar Poland MAP
Divided Berlin & VIDEO The Berlin Wall Ef INTERACTIVE SELF-CHECK it.
LESSON 1
The Origins of the Cold War
QUIZ
HELPDESK
Academic Vocabulary • liberate • equipment
Content Vocabulary
•	charter
•	satellite nations
•	Iron Curtain
TAKING NOTES:
Key Ideas and Details
Organizing As you read, complete a graphic organizer similar to the one below by filling in the names of the conferences held during the last days of World War II and the outcomes of each.
Conferences	Outcomes
	
	
	
I™

TEKS
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills 7B evaluate the domestic and international leadership of Franklin D. Roosevelt and Harry Truman during World War II, including the U.S. relationship with its allies and domestic industry’s rapid mobilization for the war effort
continued on the next page
■yi// r»5p>'
frte CM Warshapepostwar rtandn/K nfhrtimmm wii
IT MATTERS BECAUSE
As World War II was coming to an end, the Allied power set up a peacekeeping organization to prevent future wi Soon, however, tensions arose over the amount of freec the Soviets would allow the nations they controlled.
Building a New World
guiding question How did the conferences at Dumbarton Oaks and Yalta attempt tosh the postwar world?
Well before the war ended, President Roosevelt had begun to thi about what the world would be like after the war. Many people ii the United States worried that the Great Depression would com( back. Others worried that the United States would return to isolationism, and let the rivalries between other countries lead t new wars. Roosevelt was determined, however, to build a new economic and political system that would preserve the peace an promote economic growth in the world.
The Bretton Woods System
President Roosevelt believed that high tariffs—like the Smoot-Hawley tariff of 1931—had helped cause the Great Depression, and his advisors were convinced that the best way to generate prosperity and economic growth after the war was to increase tl amount of trade between countries and to create institutions thi would keep the trade system stable.
In July 1944, Roosevelt organized a conference for the worlc nations except those that belonged to the Axis. The conference held at Bretton Woods, New Hampshire and established many international economic institutions that are still part of the wor economic system today.
The first organization set up at Bretton Woods was the World Bank. Its purpose was to help rebuild Europe after the war, and he! nations in Asia, Africa, and Latin America develop their economic The World Bank still performs this role today, loaning money to h
396
nations with their economic development. The second institution set up was the International Monetary Fund (IMF). Its purpose was to help countries with trade deficits. A trade deficit is when a country imports more than it exports. Countries with trade deficits have more of their money flowing out to buy foreign goods than they have flowing in from other countries who are buying their goods. The IMF was to use its funds to prevent trade wars and to prevent each country’s money from changing too much in value. The IMF continues to perform this function today.
In addition to these two institutions, the nations set up a new currency system. The U.S. dollar became the world’s reserve currency. All nations set an exchange rate between their currency and the dollar. The dollar in turn was put on a gold standard. One ounce of gold would equal 35 U.S. dollars, and the United States pledged to always keep enough gold in reserve so that anyone with dollars could convert them into gold on demand.
One ofthe positives of the Bretton Woods system was that it would prevent nations from using inflation to escape their debts. Everyone remembered that Germany had used inflation to make its currency almost worthless after World War I as a way to avoid paying its reparations debts. The Bretton Woods system would keep the world’s currencies stable and help keep the world at peace. The weakness of the system was that a gold standard limited the use of monetary policy to fight inflation or get out of a recession. By setting exchange rates, it also meant trade between nations could become unbalanced if the exchange rate did not accurately reflect the market value of goods being traded across borders.
(continued from p. 396)
TEKS
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills 12B identify and explain reasons for changes in political boundaries such as those resulting from statehood and international conflicts
15E describe the emergence of monetary policy in the United States, including the Federal Reserve Act of 1913 and the shifting trend from a gold standard to fiat money
17E describe the dynamic relationship between U.S. international trade policies and the U.S. free enterprise system such as the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) oil embargo, the General Agreement of Tariffs and Trade (GATT), and the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA)
19E evaluate the pros and cons of U.S. participation in international organizations and treaties
26D identify the political, social, and economic contributions of women such as Frances Willard, Jane Addams, Eleanor Roosevelt, Dolores Huerta, Sonia Sotomayor, and Oprah Winfrey to American society
Creating the United Nations
Roosevelt not only wanted to create a new global economic system, he also wanted a new political system to help prevent another world war. He believed one cause of World War II had been the American decision to stay out of the League of Nations after World War I. He wanted the United States and its allies to create a new international organization that would take an active role in preserving the peace.
In 1944, at the Dumbarton Oaks estate in Washington, D.C., delegates from 39 countries met to discuss the new organization, which was to be called the United Nations (UN). The delegates at the conference agreed that the UN would have a General Assembly, in which every member nation in the world would have one vote. The UN would also have a Security Council with 11 members. Five countries would be permanent members of the Security Council: Britain, France, China, the Soviet Union, and the United States. These five permanent members would each have veto power.
The advantage ofthe United Nations was that it put all ofthe great powers that had helped to defeat the Axis in the Security Council. This would force them to consult with each other and work together whenever the United Nations took action. The weakness ofthe United Nations was that the veto allowed any one member ofthe Security Council to stop the UN from taking action.
On April 25, 1945, representatives from 50 countries came to San Francisco to officially organize the United Nations and design its charter. The General Assembly was given the power to vote on resolutions and to choose the nonpermanent members of the Security Council. The Security Council was responsible for international peace and security. It could ask its members to use military force to uphold a UN resolution.
charter a constitution
The Cold War Begins 397
GEOGRAPHY CONNECTION
Germany and its capital Berlin were divided into four zones.
PLACES AND REGIONS
Which country controlled the smallest region of Germany?
THE WORLD IN SPATIAL TERMS
In what zone in the divided Germany was Berlin located? liberate to set free
Left to right: Churchill, Roosevelt, and Stalin. Leaders of the "Big Three" Allied nations met at the Yalta Conference to determine how to organize postwar Europe.
CRITICAL THINKING
Predicting Consequences How might allowing Stalin to influence the political landscape of Eastern Europe affect that region's later foreign policy? The Yalta Conference
In February 1945, with the war in Europe nearly over, Roosevelt, Church and Stalin met at Yalta—a Soviet resort on the Black Sea—to plan the postwar world. Several agreements reached at Yalta later played an important role in causing the Cold War.
A key issue discussed at Yalta was Poland. Shortly after the German; had invaded Poland in 1939, the Polish government fled to Britain. In E however, Soviet troops drove back the Germans and entered Poland. As they liberated Poland from German control, the Soviets encouraged Po Communists to set up a new government. As a result, two governments claimed the right to govern Poland: one Communist and one non-Communis President Roosevelt and Prime Minister Churchill both argued that the Poles should be free to choose their own government.
Stalin, however, quickly pointed out that every time invaders had enter Russia from the west, they had come through Poland. Eventually, the three leaders compromised. Roosevelt and Churchill agreed to recognize the Poli government set up by the Soviets. Stalin agreed it would include members < prewar Polish government, and free elections would be held as soon as pos The Declaration of Liberated Europe
After reaching a compromise on Poland, the three leaders agreed to issue the Declaration of Liberated Europe. The declaration echoed the Atlantic Charte asserting the right of all people to choose the form of government under wi they will live. The Allies promised that the people of Europe would be allow
create democratic institutions of their own
choice” and to create temporary governmen that represented “all democratic elements.” pledged “the earliest possible establishment through free elections of governments resp( to the will of the people.”
Dividing Germany
The conference then focused on Germany. Roosevelt, Churchill, and Stalin agreed to di Germany into four zones. Great Britain, the United States, the Soviet Union, and France
each control one zone. The same four countries would also divide the German capita city of Berlin into four zones, even though it was in the Soviet zone.
Although pleased with the decision to divide Germany, Stalin also demanded that Germany pay heavy reparations for the war damages it had caused. An agreement was reached that Germany could pay war reparations with trade goods and products, half of which would go to the Soviet Union. The Allies would remove industrial machinery, railroad cars, and other equipment from Germany as reparations. Later arguments about reparations greatly increased tensions between the United States and the Soviet Union.
Rising Tensions
The Yalta decisions shaped the expectations of the United States. Two weeks after Yalta, the Soviets pressured the king of Romania into appointing a Communist government. The United States accused the Soviets of violating the Declaration of Liberated Europe. Soon afterward, the Soviets refused to allow more than three non-Communist Poles to serve in the 18-member Polish government. There was also no indication that they intended to hold free elections in Poland as promised. On April 1, President Roosevelt informed the Soviets that their actions in Poland were not acceptable.
Yalta marked a turning point in Soviet-American relations. President Roosevelt had hoped that an Allied victory and the creation of the United Nations would lead to a more peaceful world. Instead, as the war came to an end, the United States and the Soviet Union became increasingly hostile toward each other. The Cold War, an era of confrontation and competition between the nations, lasted from about 1946 to about 1990.
Soviet Concerns
As the war ended, Soviet leaders became concerned about security. They wanted to keep Germany weak and make sure that the countries between Germany and the Soviet Union were under Soviet control. Soviet leaders also believed that communism was a superior economic system that would eventually replace capitalism. They believed that the Soviet Union should encourage communism in other nations. They accepted Lenin’s theory that capitalist countries would eventually try to destroy communism. This made them suspicious of capitalist nations.
American Economic Issues
While Soviet leaders focused on securing their borders, American leaders focused on economic problems. They believed that the Great Depression became so severe because nations reduced trade. They also believed that when nations stop trading, they are forced into war to get resources. By 1945, Roosevelt and his advisers were convinced that economic growth through world trade was the key to peace. They also thought that the free enterprise system, with private property rights and limited government intervention in the economy, was the best route to prosperity.
UN
Responses to the War In response to the atrocities of World War II, the United Nations held a General Assembly in December 1946. They passed a resolution that made genocide punishable internationally. The text of the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide became the first UN human rights treaty. Former First Lady Eleanor Roosevelt chaired a UN Commission on Human Rights in 1948. The international commission drafted the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, which promoted the inherent dignity of every human being and was a commitment to end discrimination.
equipment the articles or physical resources prepared or furnished for a specific task
The Cold War Begins 399
a READING PROGRESS CHECK
Identifying What agreements at the Yalta Conference contributed to the rise of the Cold War?
GEOGRAPHY CONNECTION
The "Iron Curtain" separated Communist nations in Eastern Europe controlled by the Soviet Union from non-Communist nations to the West.
THE WORLD IN SPATIAL TERMS
With which countries did East Germany share a border? PLACES AND REGIONS
How did the amountofterritory controlled by the Soviets compare with that of the rest ofEurope?
satellite nations nations politically and economically dominated or controlled by another more powerful country
Truman Takes Control
guiding question Why did the Potsdam Conference further increase tensions between the United St and the Soviet Union?
Eleven days after confronting the Soviets on Poland, President Roosevelt died Harry S. Truman became president. Truman was strongly anti-Communist. H believed World War II had begun because Britain had tried to appease Hitler, did not intend to make that mistake with Stalin. “We must stand up to the Russians,” he told Secretary of State Edward Stettinius the day he took office.
Ten days later, Truman did exactly that at a meeting with Soviet foreign minister Molotov. Truman immediately brought up Poland and demanded th Stalin hold free elections as he had promised at Yalta. Molotov took the unexpectedly strong message back to Stalin. The meeting marked an importa shift in Soviet-American relations and set the stage for further confrontations The Potsdam Conference
In July 1945, with the war against Japan still raging, Truman finally met Stalin at Potsdam, near Berlin. Both men had come to Potsdam to work a deal on Germany. Truman was now convinced that industry was criti to Germany s survival. Unless its economy was allowed to revive, the i of Europe would never recover, and the German people might turn to communism out of desperation.
Stalin and his advisers were convinced they needed reparations froi Germany. The war had devastated the Soviet economy. Soviet troops hs begun stripping their zone in Germany of its machinery and equipmcn use back home, but Stalin wanted Germany to pay much more.
400
• • Atjhe c°nference, Truman took a firm stand against heavy reparations. He insisted that Germany s industry had to be allowed to recover. Truman suggested the Soviets take reparations from their zone, while the Allies allowed in ustry to revive in the other zones. Stalin opposed this idea since the Soviet zone was mostly agricultural. To get the Soviets to accept the agreement,
Truman offered Stalin a small amount of industrial equipment from the other zones, but required the Soviets to pay for part of it with food shipments. He also offered to accept the new German-Polish border the Soviets had established.
Stalin did not like the proposal. At Potsdam, Truman learned of the successful U.S. atomic bomb tests. He hinted to Stalin that the United States had a new, powerful weapon. Stalin suspected Truman of trying to bully him. He thought the Americans wanted to limit reparations to keep the Soviets weak. Despite his suspicions, Stalin had to accept the terms. American and British troops controlled Germany’s industrial heartland, and there was no way for the Soviets to get reparations without cooperating.
The Potsdam Conference marked yet another increase in tensions.
The Iron Curtain Descends
Although Truman had won the argument over reparations, he had less success on other issues at Potsdam. The Soviets refused to make stronger commitments to uphold the Declaration of Liberated Europe.
The presence of the Soviet army in Eastern Europe ensured that pro-Soviet Communist governments would eventually be established in the nations of Poland, Romania, Bulgaria, Hungary, and Czechoslovakia.
The Communist countries of Eastern Europe came to be called satellite nations because they were controlled by the Soviets, as satellites are tied by gravity to the planets they orbit. Although not under direct Soviet control, these nations had to remain Communist and friendly to the Soviet Union. They also had to follow policies that the Soviets approved.
After watching the Communist takeover in Eastern Europe, the former British prime minister Winston Churchill coined a phrase to describe what had happened. On March 5, 1946, in a speech delivered in Fulton, Missouri, Churchill referred to an “iron curtain” falling across Eastern Europe. The press picked up the term, and for the next 43 years, it described the Communist nations of Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union. With the Iron Curtain separating Eastern Europe from the West, the World War II era had come to an end. The Cold War was about to begin.
D READING PROGRESS CHECK
Determining Cause and Effect How did the Potsdam Conference lead to greater tensions between the Americans and the Soviets?
LESSON 1 REVIEW
Reviewing Vocabulary
1.	Describing What was the geographic relationship between Soviet satellite nations and the Iron Curtain? 12B
Using Your Notes
2.	Determining Cause and Effect Use your notes to write a few sentences about the effects of the major conferences of World War jk
Answering the Guiding Questions
3.	Summarizing How did the conferences at Dumbarton Oaks and Yalta attempt to shape the postwar world? 7B, 19E
---Anal
Primary

RCES
Churchill on the Iron Curtain
shadow has fallen upon the scenes so lately lighted by the Allied victory.... From Stettin in the Baltic to Trieste in the Adriatic, an iron curtain has descended across the continent. Behind that line lie all the capitals of the ancient states of Central and Eastern Europe. Warsaw, Berlin, Prague, Vienna, Budapest, Belgrade, Bucharest and Sofia, all these famous cities and the populations around them lie in what I must call the Soviet sphere, and all are subject in one form or another, not only to Soviet influence, but to a very high and, in some cases, increasing measure of control from Moscow.
—Winston Churchill, from an address to Westminster College, Fulton, Missouri, March 5,1946
DBQ
ANALYZING PRIMARY
SOURCES
What words and phrases does Churchill use to convey his negative view of what is happening? Iron Curtain the political and military barrier that isolated Soviet-controlled countries of Eastern Europe after World War II
4.	Explaining Why did the Potsdam Conference further increase tensions between the United States and the Soviet Union? 7B
Writing Activity
NARRATIVE
Suppose that you were a student who saw Churchill deliver his famous "iron curtain" speech. Write a letter to a friend summarizing Churchill's ideas and giving your own opinions about the rising tensions between the Soviet Union and the West. 12B The Cold War Begins 401
networks
There's More Online!
BIOGRAPHY
Douglas MacArthur gf BIOGRAPHY Mao Zedong Sf IMAGE Berlin Airlift Ef IMAGE Harry S. Truman gf VIDEO The Berlin Crisis ef interactive self-check
QUIZ
LESSON 2
The Early Cold War Years
rtffd the Cold War shape postwar M War tensions affect
Reading HELPDESK
Academic Vocabulary
It Matters Because
President Truman worked to contain communism by supporting Greece, Iran, and West Germany. When Communist North Korea invaded South Korea, Truman ai the United Nations sent troops to aid South Korea.
• insecurity • initially
Content Vocabulary
•	containment
•	limited war
Containing Communism
guiding question What was the policy of containment?
Despite growing tensions with the Soviet Union, many American
TAKING NOTES:
Key Ideas and Details
Organizing As you read, use a graphic organizer similar to the one below to list early conflicts between the Soviet Union and the United States.

TEKS
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills 8A describe U.S. responses to Soviet aggression after World War II, including the Truman Doctrine, the Marshall Plan, the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, the Berlin airlift, and John F. Kennedy’s role in the Cuban Missile Crisis
continued on the next page
officials continued to believe cooperation with the Soviets was possible. In late 1945 the foreign ministers of the former Allies mf first in London, then in Moscow, to discuss the future of Europe and Asia. Although both British and American officials pushed fo free elections in Eastern Europe, the Soviets refused to budge. The Long Telegram
Increasingly exasperated by the Soviets’ refusal to cooperate, officials at the U.S. State Department asked the American Embass in Moscow to explain Soviet behavior. On February 22, 1946, diplomat George Kennan responded with what became known as the Long Telegram—a message, thousands of words long, explaining his views of the Soviets. According to Kennan, the Soviets’ view of the world came from a traditional “Russian sens of insecurity” and fear of the West, intensified by the communi ideas of Lenin and Stalin. Because Communists believed they we in a historical struggle against capitalism, Kennan argued, it was impossible to reach any permanent settlement with them.
Kennan proposed what became basic American policy throughout the Cold War: “a long-term, patient but firm and vigilant containmei of Russian expansive tendencies.” In Kennan’s opinion, the Soviet system had major economic and political weaknesses. If the Unitec States could keep the Soviets from expanding their power, it would only be a matter of time before their system would fall apart, beating communism without going to war. The Long Telegram
402
circulated w.dely ■„ Trumans administration and became the basis for the a minis ra ions po icy of containment—keeping communism within its present territory through diplomatic, economic, and military actions.
Crisis in Iran
While Trumans administration discussed Kennan’s ideas, a series of crises erupte uring the spring and summer of 1946. These crises seemed to prove that Kennan was right about the Soviets. The first crisis began in Iran.
During World War II, the United States had troops in southern Iran while Soviet troops held northern Iran to secure a supply line from the Persian Gulf. After the war, instead of withdrawing as promised, the Soviet troops remained in northern Iran. Stalin then began demanding access to Iran’s oil supplies. To increase the pressure, Soviet troops helped local Communists in northern Iran establish a separate government.
American officials saw these actions as a Soviet push into the Middle East. The secretary of state sent Stalin a strong message demanding that Soviet forces withdraw. At the same time, the battleship USS Missouri sailed into the eastern Mediterranean. The pressure seemed to work. Soviet forces withdrew, having been promised a joint Soviet-Iranian oil company, although the Iranian parliament later rejected the plan.
The Truman Doctrine
Frustrated in Iran, Stalin turned northwest to Turkey. There, the straits of the Dardanelles were a vital route from Soviet ports on the Black Sea to the Mediterranean. For centuries Russia had wanted to control this strategic route.
In August 1946, Stalin demanded joint control of the Dardanelles with Turkey.
Presidential adviser Dean Acheson saw this move as part of a Soviet plan to control the Middle East. He advised Truman to make a show of force. The president ordered the new aircraft carrier Franklin D. Roosevelt to join the Missouri in protecting Turkey and the eastern Mediterranean.
Meanwhile, Britain tried to help Greece. In August 1946, Greek Communists launched a guerrilla war against the Greek government.
British troops helped fight the guerrillas, but in February 1947, Britain informed the United States that it could no longer afford to help Greece due to Britain’s weakened postwar economy.
Shortly after, Truman went before Congress to ask for $400 million to fight Communist aggression in Greece and Turkey. His speech outlined a policy that became known as the Truman Doctrine. Its goal was to aid those who worked to resist being controlled by others. In the long run, it pledged the United States to fight the spread of communism worldwide.
insecurity the state of not being confident or sure
containment the policy or process of preventing the expansion of a hostile power
(continued from p. 402)
TEKS
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills 8C explain reasons and outcomes for U.S. involvement in the Korean War and its relationship to the containment policy
8D explain reasons and outcomes for U.S. involvement in foreign countries and their relationship to the Domino Theory, including the Vietnam War
continued on the next page
President Truman signs the Foreign Aid Assistance Act, providing aid to Greece and Turkey. The policy of supporting nations resisting Communist pressure became known as the Truman Doctrine.
CRITICALTHINKING
Identifying Central Ideas What was the main purpose of theTruman Doctrine? PRIMARY SOURCE
The peoples of a number of countries of the world have recently had totalitarian regimes forced upon them against their will. The Government of the United States has made frequent protests against coercion and intimidation, in violation of the Yalta agreement in Poland, Romania, and Bulgaria. At the present moment in world history nearly every nation must choose between alternative ways of life. The choice is too often not a free one.... I believe that it must be the policy of the United States to support free peoples who are resisting attempted subjugation by armed minorities or by outside pressures.
I believe that we must assist free peoples to work out their own destinies in their own way.
—President Truman, from his address to Congress, March 12,1947
The Marshall Plan
1 Meanwhile, postwar Western Europe faced grave problems. Economies ! were ruined, people faced starvation, and political chaos was at hand. In I June 1947, Secretary of State George C. Marshall proposed the European

i
MARSHALL PLAN AID TO MAJOR COUNTRIES,
1948-1951 Posing Questions About Geographic Distributions
Britain (the U.K.) received the largest amount of Marshall Plan aid. What questions do you need to ask to explain why the British received so much more aid? What would you predict is the reason?
Iff1 Posing Questions About
Geographic Patterns Based on the chart, which three countries' economies would you expect to recover most quickly? Why might that not be true? Write two questions you need to ask to know if your prediction is accurate.
Recovery Program, or Marshall Plan, which would give European nations American aid to rebuild their economies. Truman saw both the Marshall Plan and the Truman Doctrine as essential for containment. Marshall offered help to all nations planning a recovery program.
Although the Marshall Plan was offered to the Soviet Union and its satellite nations, the Soviets rejected it and developed their own economic program. This action further separated Europe into competing regions. Th Marshall Plan pumped billions of dollars in supplies, machinery, and food into Western Europe. The regions recovery weakened the appeal of communism and opened new markets for trade.
In his 1949 Inaugural Address, Truman proposed assistance for underdeveloped countries outside the war zone. The Point Four Program aimed to provide them with “scientific advances and industrial progress” for their improvement and growth. The Department of State administered the program until its merger with other foreign aid programs in 1953.
(continued from p. 403)
TBB
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills 19E evaluate the pros and cons of U.S. participation in international organizations and treaties
The Berlin Airlift
Truman and his advisers believed Western Europe’s prosperity depended on Germany’s recovery. The Soviets, however, still wanted Germany to pay reparations. This dispute brought the nations to the brink of war. By early 1948, American officials had concluded that the Soviets were trying to undermine Germany’s economy. In response, the United States, Britain, an France merged their German zones and allowed the Germans to have theii own government, creating the Federal Republic of Germany, which becam known as West Germany. They also agreed to merge their zones in Berlin and make West Berlin part of West Germany. The Soviet zone became the German Democratic Republic, or East Germany. West Germany was most! independent but not allowed to have a military.
The creation of West Germany convinced the Soviets they would neve] get the reparations they wanted. In June 1948, Soviet troops blockaded We Berlin hoping to force the United States to reconsider its decision or abandon West Berlin. Truman sent bombers capable of carrying atomic weapons to bases in Britain. Hoping to avoid war with the Soviets, he ordered the air force to fly supplies into Berlin rather than troops.
The Berlin Airlift began in June 1948 and continued through the sprir of 1949, bringing in more than two million tons of supplies to the city. Sta. finally lifted the blockade on May 12, 1949. The airlift symbolized Americ determination to contain communism and not give in to Soviet demands.
404
The Creation of NATO
The Berlin blockade convinced many Americans that the Soviets were bent on conquest. The public began to support a military alliance with Western Europe. By April 1949, an agreement had been made to form the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO)—a mutual defense alliance.
NATO initially included 12 countries: the United States, Canada, Britain, France, Italy, Belgium, Denmark, Portugal, the Netherlands, Norway, Luxembourg, and Iceland. NATO members agreed to come to the aid of any member who was attacked. For the first time, the United States had committed itself to maintaining peace in Europe. Six years later, NATO allowed West Germany to rearm and join its organization. This decision alarmed Soviet leaders. They responded by organizing a military alliance in Eastern Europe known as the Warsaw Pact.
H REAPING PROGRESS CHECK
Identifying Central Issues What was the main idea behind containment?
initially of or relating to the beginning; to start with
Developments in Asia and the Korean War
guiding question Why was the Korean War a major turning point in the Cold War?
The Cold War eventually spread beyond Europe. Conflicts also emerged in Asia, where events in China and Korea brought about a new attitude toward Japan and sent American troops back into battle in Asia less than five years after World War II had ended.
GEOGRAPHY CONNECTION
NATO was formed as an alliance to defend against an outside attack.
In response, the Soviet Union created its own alliance known as the Warsaw Pact.
The Chinese Revolution
In China, Communist forces led by Mao Zedong had been struggling against the Nationalist government led by Chiang Kai-shek since the late 1920s. During World War II, the two sides suspended their war to resist Japanese occupation. With the end of World War II, however, civil war broke out again. Although Mao and the Communist forces made great gains, neither side could win nor agree to a compromise.
HUMAN SYSTEMS
Which nations are the founding members of NATO?
PLACES AND REGIONS
Why was West Germany not a part of the original group of NATO nations? Korea's Border, 1950 and 1953
CRITICALTHINKING
Analyzing What geographical feature forms the border between China and North Korea? To prevent a Communist revolution in Asia, the United States sent the Nationalist government $2 billion in aid beginning in the mid-1940s. The Nationalists, however, squandered this advantage through poor military planning and corruption. By 1949 the Communists had captured the Chinese capital of Beijing, while support for the Nationalists declined.
In August 1949, the U.S. State Department discontinued aid to the Chinese Nationalists. The defeated Nationalists then fled to the small island of Formosa (now called Taiwan). The victorious Communists established the Peoples Republic of China in October 1949.
China’s fall to communism shocked Americans. To make matters worse, in September 1949 the Soviet Union announced that it had successfully tested its first atomic weapon. Then, early in 1950, the People’s Republic of China and the Soviet Union signed a treaty of friendship and alliance. Many Western leaders feared that China and the Soviet Union would support communis revolutions in other nations.
The United States kept formal diplomatic relations with only
the Nationalist Chinese in Taiwan. It used its veto power in the UN Securi Council to keep representatives of the new Communist People’s Republic of China out of the UN, allowing the Nationalists to retain their seat.
New Policies in Japan
The Chinese revolution brought about a significant change in American policy toward Japan. At the end of World War II, General Douglas MacArthur had taken charge of occupied Japan. His mission was to introduce democracy and keep Japan from threatening war again. Once the United States lost China as its chief ally in Asia, it adopted policies to encourage the rapid recovery of Japan’s industrial economy. Just as the United States viewed West Germany as the key to defending all of Europe against communism, it saw Japan as the key to defending Asia.
The Korean War
At the end of World War II, American and Soviet forces entered Korea to disarm the Japanese troops stationed there. The Allies divided Korea at tl 38th parallel of latitude. Soviet troops controlled the north, while Americ troops controlled the south.
As the Cold War began, talks to reunify Korea broke down. A Communist Korean government was organized in the north, while an American-backed government controlled the south. Both governments claimed authority over Korea, and border clashes were common. The Soviets provided military aid to the North Koreans, who quickly built an army. On June 25, 1950, North Korean troops invaded the south, driving back the poorly equipped South Korean forces.
Truman saw the Communist invasion of South Korea as a test of the containment policy and ordered American naval and air power into actit He then called on the United Nations to act. Because the Soviet Union w boycotting the Security Council over its China policy, Truman succeeds With the pledge of UN troops, he ordered General MacArthur to send American troops from Japan to Korea.
The American and South Korean troops were driven back into a sms pocket of territory near the port of Pusan. Inside the “Pusan perimeter, troops stubbornly resisted the North Koreans, buying time for MacArth to organize reinforcements.
406
Soldiers of the U.S. 2nd Infantry Division man a machine gun near the Chongchon River in Korea, November 20,1950.
CRITICAL THINKING
Identifying Central Ideas What was the objective of the United States during the Korean War? On September 15, 1950, MacArthur ordered a daring invasion behind enemy lines at the port of Inchon. The Inchon landing took the North Koreans by surprise. Within weeks they were in full retreat back across the 38th parallel. Truman then gave the order to pursue the North Koreans beyond the 38th parallel.
MacArthur pushed the North Koreans north to the Yalu River, the border with China.
China Enters the War The Communist Peoples Republic of China saw the advancing UN troops as a threat and warned them to halt their advance. When warnings were ignored, Chinese forces crossed the Yalu River in November. Hundreds of thousands of Chinese troops flooded across the border, driving the UN forces back across the 38th parallel.
As his troops fell back, an angry MacArthur demanded approval to
expand the war against China. He asked for a blockade of Chinese ports, the use of Chiang Kai-sheks Nationalist forces, and the bombing of Chinese cities with atomic weapons.
Truman Fires MacArthur President Truman refused MacArthur’s demands because he did not want to expand the war into China or to use the atomic bomb. MacArthur persisted, publicly criticizing the president and arguing that it was a mistake to keep the war limited. “There is no substitute for victory,” MacArthur insisted, by which he meant that if the United States was going to go to war, it should use all of its power to win.
A limited war was a form of appeasement, he argued, and appeasement “begets new and bloodier war.”
Determined to maintain control of policy and show that he commanded the military, an exasperated Truman fired MacArthur for insubordination in April 1951. Later, in private conversation, Truman explained: “I was sorry to have to reach a parting of the way with the big man in Asia, but he asked for it and I had to give it to him.”
MacArthur, who remained popular despite being fired, returned home to parades and a hero’s welcome. Many Americans criticized the president. Congress and military leaders, however, supported his decision and his Korean strategy. American policy in Asia remained committed to limited war—a war fought to achieve a limited objective, such as containing communism. Truman later explained his position:
limited war a war fought with limited commitment of resources to achieve a limited objective, such as containing communism
PRIMARY SOURCE
The Kremlin [Soviet Union] is trying, and has been trying for a long time, to drive a wedge between us and the other nations. It wants to see us isolated. It wants to see us distrusted. It wants to see us feared and hated by our allies. Our allies agree with us in the course we are following. They do not believe we should take the initiative to widen the conflict in the Far East. If the United States were to widen the conflict, we might well have to go it alone. **
—from an address to the Civil Defense Conference, May 7,1951
Armistice Ends Fighting By mid-1951, UN forces had pushed the Chinese and North Korean forces back across the 38th parallel. The war settled into a series of relatively small battles over hills and other local objectives. In July
,	1951, peace negotiations began at Panmunjom. As talks continued, the war
s became increasingly unpopular in the United States. After Dwight D.
I
Eisenhower was elected to the presidency in 1952, the former general traveled 1 to Korea to talk with commanders and their troops. He became determined to o
~ bring the war to an end.
The Cold War Begins 407
POLITICAL CARTOONS
In 1951 President Truman fired General Douglas MacArthur over disagreements about how to conduct the Korean War.
This cartoon suggests that General MacArthur had overstepped his authority in Korea.
1 Making Inferences What does the cartoon imply MacArthur was trying to do in Asia?
Analyzing Primary Sources Isthis cartoon supportive of General MacArthur or critical of him? Explain.
NOT A GENERAL'S JOB
'"'ll"«
SKILLS PRACTICE
_________ Work with a partner. Take turns asking one another questions about the causes of the Cold War. Answer one another’s questions about the Long Telegram, the Truman Doctrine, the Marshall Plan, the Berlin Airlift, and other important events.
Eisenhower quietly hinted to the Chinese that the United States might w a nuclear attack in Korea. The threat seemed to work. In July 1953, negotiate signed an armistice. The battle line between the two sides in Korea, which w very near the prewar boundary, became the border between North Korea an South Korea. A “demilitarized zone” (DMZ) separated them. American troo are still based in Korea, helping to defend South Korea’s border. There has never been a peace treaty to end the war. More than 33,600 American soldie died in action, and over 20,600 died in accidents or from disease.
Changes in Policy The Korean War marked a turning point in the Cold War. Until 1950, the United States had preferred to use political pressure ar economic aid to contain communism. After the Korean War began, the United States embarked on a major military buildup. The war also helped expand the Cold War to Asia. Before 1950, American efforts to contain communism focused on Europe. With the Korean War, the nation became more militarily involved in Asia. By 1954, the United States had signed defense agreements with Japan, South Korea, and Taiwan. The United State also formed the Southeast Asia Treaty Organization (SEATO) in 1954. Aid also began flowing to French forces fighting Communists in Vietnam.
H READING PROGRESS CHECK
Analyzing How did the Korean War change the course of the Cold War?
LESSON 2 REVIEW
1
Reviewing Vocabulary
1.	Defining What is the defining feature of limited war? 8C.8D
Using Your Notes
2.	Summarizing Review the notes you completed during the lesson to write a paragraph summarizing the major conflicts between the Soviet Union and the United States during the early years of the Cold War. 8A.8C
Answering the Guiding Questions
3.	Explaining What was the policy of containment? 8A, 8C
4.	Describing Why was the Korean War a major turning point i! Cold War? 8C,8D
Writing Activity
ARGUMENT
Write a letter to the editor of a newspaper expl why you agree or disagree with President Truman's firing of General MacArthur. 8C 408
TEKS 8A, 32B
Using A Decision-
Making Process
Why Learn This Skill?
Life is full of choices. It seems that almost all the time we are being asked to make decisions. While some decisions, such as what color of socks to wear, are not that important, others, such as whether or not to go to university, or what job to take can affect the rest of your life. History is also full of choices. Much of the work of historians is looking at the decisions people have made and trying to figure out why they made them and whether they had other choices. Learning a good decision-making process will help you make better choices for yourself, and help you understand historical choices made by others.
Learning the Skill
Follow these five steps to help you through the process of making good decisions.
1.	Identify the problem. What are you being asked to choose?
2.	Gather information about the problem, and clearly identify your options and the various alternatives that are possible.
3.	Try to predict the consequences for each option. Identify both positive and negative things that might happen for each option. Consider both short-term and long-term consequences. Sometimes short-term hardships can lead to long-term benefits that make the difficulties getting there worthwhile.
4.	Evaluate the consequences. This is the hardest step. How important are each of the positive and negative consequences, sometimes referred to as the costs and benefits, when weighed against each other?
5.	Make your decision. Know that once you make a decision and act on it, it causes new things to happen, possibly things you did not predict. Be prepared to stick to your decision if it is leading to something you want, even if it is hard to follow through. But if the decision leads to negative consequences you did not expect,
be prepared to start a new decisionmaking process.
Practicing the Skill
Decisions throughout history have affected the outcome of events and created the world we live in today. Each of the following events took place as a result of a decision made by a person or a group of people during the Cold War. Identify the alternatives and describe their consequences.
1.	The United States begins the Berlin airlift after Stalin cuts off surface transportation bringing supplies from the West.
2.	The Marshall Plan for rebuilding war-torn Western Europe is approved.
3.	President Truman relieves General Douglas MacArthur of his command for insubordination.
Applying the Skill
Making Decisions Do research at the library or online at a news website and identify a current issue facing the United States.
Identify the issue, then review the facts and what you already know about the issue. Identify various alternatives and determine the consequences for each. Use this information to evaluate both positive and negative consequences. Make a sound decision about which alternative would be best for you, and write a paragraph defending your decision.
409
networks
There's More Online!
Rosenberg
GRAPHIC NOVEL
Seeking Shelter" IMAGE
House Un-American Activities Committee PRIMARYSOURCE
Red Scare Ef VIDEO A New Red Scare
gf interactive self-check QUIZ
gf BIOGRAPHY Alger Hiss
sf BIOGRAPHY Julius & Ethel
D nc on horn	t,/l
• Hid

LESSON 3
The Cold War and American Society
■ ■
• How did the Cold War shape postwar How did Cold War tensions affect
IT MATTERS BECAUSE
Reading HELPDESK
Academic Vocabulary
manipulate • convince
Content Vocabulary
•	subversion
•	loyalty review program
•	perjury
•	censure
•	fallout
TAKING NOTES:
Key Ideas and Details
Outlining As you read, summarize the lesson content by using the major headings to create an outline similar to the one below.
The Cold War and American Society
I. A
New Red Scare A. The Truman Loyalty Review Program S. C.

TEKS
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills 8B describe how Cold War tensions were intensified by the arms race, the space race, McCarthyism, and the House Un-American Activities Committee (HUAC), the findings of which were confirmed by the Venona Papers continued on the next page
Fearing subversive activity, the government tried to root out Communists in government, Hollywood, and labor unions, while Americans learned to live with the threat o nuclear attack.
A
New Red Scare guiding question How did the post-World War II Red Scare compare and contrast with tht
one that followed World War I?
During the 1950s, rumors and accusations spawned fears that Communists were trying to take over the world. The Red Scare beg; in September 1945, when a clerk named Igor Gouzenko walked out of the Soviet Embassy in Ottawa, Canada, and defected. Gouzenko carried documents showing a Soviet effort to infiltrate government agencies in Canada and the United States, with the specific goal of obtaining information about the atomic bomb. The case stunned Americans. It implied that spies had infiltrated the American government. Soon the search for spies escalated into a general fear of Communist subversion, or effort to weaken a society and overthrow its government.
TheTruman Loyalty Review Program
In early 1947, President Truman established a loyalty review progr to screen all federal employees. Trumans action seemed to confirm suspicions that Communists had infiltrated the government and so added to fears that communism was sweeping the nation. Between 1947 and 1951, more than six million federal employees were screen for loyalty—a term difficult to define. A person might become a suspect for reading certain books, belonging to various groups, traveling overseas, or seeing certain foreign films. The Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) scrutinized some 14,000 people. Aboi 2,000 quit their jobs, many under pressure. Another 212 were fire< for questionable loyalty,” despite a lack of actual evidence.
410
HUAC and Anti-Communist Investigations
FBI director J. Edgar Hoover remained unsatisfied. In 1947 he went before the House Un-American Activities Committee (HUAC). Formed in 1938 to investigate subversive activities in the United States, HUAC had been a minor committee before Hoover s involvement. He urged HUAC to hold public hearings on Communist subversion to expose not just Communists but also “Communist sympathizers” and “fellow travelers.” Under Hoover s leadership, the FBI sent agents to infiltrate groups suspected of subversion and wiretapped thousands of telephones.
Hollywood on Trial One of HUAC s first hearings in 1947 focused on the film industry as a cultural force that Communists might manipulate to spread their ideas and influence. Future American president Ronald Reagan was head of the Screen Actors Guild at the time and, when called before HUAC, he testified that there were Communists in Hollywood. During the hearings, ten screenwriters, known as the “Hollywood Ten,” used their Fifth Amendment right to protect themselves from self-incrimination and refused to testify. The incident led producers to blacklist, or agree not to hire, anyone who was believed to be a Communist or who refused to cooperate with the committee.
The blacklist created an atmosphere of distrust and fear.
Alger Hiss In 1948 Whittaker Chambers, a magazine editor and former Communist Party member, told HUAC that several government officials were also former Communists or spies. One official Chambers named was Alger Hiss, a diplomat who had served in Roosevelt’s administration, attended the Yalta Conference, and helped organize the United Nations.
Hiss sued Chambers for libel, but Chambers testified that, in 1937 and 1938, Hiss had given him secret State Department documents. Hiss denied being either a spy or a member of the Communist Party, and he also denied ever having known Chambers.
The committee was ready to drop the investigation until California representative Richard Nixon convinced his colleagues to continue the hearings to determine who had lied. Chambers produced copies of secret documents, along with microfilm that he had hidden in a hollow pumpkin. These “pumpkin papers,” Chambers claimed, proved Hiss was lying.
A jury agreed and convicted Hiss of perjury, or lying under oath.
The Rosen bergs Another spy case centered on accusations that American Communists had sold secrets about the atomic bomb to the Soviets to help them produce a bomb in 1949. In 1950 the hunt for spies led the FBI to arrest Julius and Ethel Rosenberg, a New York couple who were members of the Communist Party. The government charged them with spying for the Soviets.
The Rosenbergs denied the charges but were condemned to death for espionage. Many people believed that they were simply victims caught in the wave of anti-Communist frenzy. Appeals and pleas for clemency failed, however, and the Rosenbergs were executed in June 1953.
Project Venona In 1946 American and British cryptographers, working for a project code-named “Venona,” cracked the Soviet Unions spy code, enabling them to read approximately 3,000 messages between Moscow and the United States collected during the Cold War. These messages confirmed extensive Soviet spying and ongoing efforts to steal nuclear secrets. The government did not reveal Project Venonas existence until 1995. The Venona documents provided strong evidence that the Rosenbergs were indeed guilty.
(continued from p. 410)
TEKS
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills 25A describe how the characteristics and issues in U.S. history have been reflected in various genres of art, music, film, and literature
subversion a systematic attempt to overthrow a government by using persons working secretly from within
loyalty review program
a policy established by President Truman that authorized the screening of all federal employees to determine their loyalty to the U.S. government
manipulate to operate or arrange manually to achieve a desired effect
convince to bring to belief, consent, or a course of action
perjury lying when one has sworn under oath to tell the truth
Although he had led the effort to develop the atomic bomb, scientist J. Robert Oppenheimer's left-wing views and opposition to the hydrogen bomb led to the suspension of his security clearance and controversial public hearings.
CRITICAL THINKING
Drawing Conclusions Why were people suspicious of Oppenheimer? BIOGRAPHY
Joseph McCarthy (1908-1957)
When Wisconsin politician Joseph McCarthy first ran for Senate in 1946, he claimed his opponent was "communistically inclined." His later accusations of Communist subversion made him a national figure. Between 1950 and 1954, McCarthy made headlines for his investigations of government departments and figures, despite his inability to build a solid case against anyone. His often wild accusations became the hallmark ofMcCarthyism.
The Red Scare Spreads
Many state and local governments, universities, businesses, unions, churches, and private groups also began efforts to find Communists. The University of California required its faculty to take loyalty oaths and fired 157 who refused. Many Catholic groups became anti-Communist and urged members to identify Communists within the Church. The Taft-Hartley Act of 1947 required union leaders to take oaths saying that they were not Communists. Many union leaders did not object. Instead, they launched efforts to purge their own organizations, eventually expelling 11 unions that refused to remove Communist leaders.
H READING PROGRESS CHECK
Comparing and Contrasting What was one way that the Red Scare of the 1950s ant the Red Scare ofthe 1920s were similar?
McCarthyism
guidingquestion Why did many Americans believe Senator McCarthy's accusations?
In 1949 the Red Scare intensified as the Soviet Union successfully tested an atomic bomb, and China fell to communism. To many Americans, these events seemed to prove that the United States was losing the Cold War.
In February 1950, little-known senator Joseph R. McCarthy gave a speech to a Republican women’s group in West Virginia. Halfway through his speech, McCarthy made a surprising statement when he claimed:
PRIMARYSOURCE
CRITICAL THINKING
Identifying Central Ideas What was the larger threat behind allowing McCarthyism to spread? M
While I cannot take the time to name all the men in the State Department who have been named a: members ofthe Communist Party and members of a spy ring, I have here in my hand a list of 205 that were known to the Secretary of State as being members ofthe Communist Party and who nevertheles: are still working and shaping the policy ofthe State Department.99 —quoted in The Fifties, 1
The Associated Press sent the statement nationwide. Reporters at an airport asked McCarthy to see his list. McCarthy replied that he would be happy to show it to them, but unfortunately, it was in his bag on the plane. In fact, the list never appeared. McCarthy, however, continued making charges.
McCarthy proclaimed that Communists were a danger at home and abroad. He distributed a booklet accusing Democratic Party leaders of corruption and of protecting Communists. McCarthy often targeted Secretary of State Dean Acheson, calling him incompetent and a tool of Stalin. He also accused George C. Marshall, former army chief of staff and secretary of state, of disloyalty. The prevailing anxiety about communism made many Americans willing to accept McCarthy’s claims.
The McCarran Act
In 1950, with McCarthy and others arousing fears of Communist spies, Congress passed the Internal Security Act, also called the McCarran Act. The act made it illegal to attempt to establish a totalitarian government ir the United States, and required all Communist-related organizations to publish their records and register with the United States attorney general. Communists could not have passports and, in cases of a national emergency, could be arrested and detained. Unwilling to punish people fi their opinions, Truman vetoed the bill, but Congress easily overrode his veto in 1950. Later Supreme Court cases limited the act’s scope.
412
McCarthy's Rise and Fall
In 1953 McCarthy became chairman of the Senate subcommittee on investigations, which forced government officials to testify about alleged Communist influences. Investigations became witch-hunts—searches for disloyalty based on weak evidence and irrational fears. McCarthy’s tactic of damaging reputations with vague, unfounded charges became known as McCarthyism.
McCarthy s sensational accusations put him in the headlines, and the press quoted him often and widely. He badgered witnesses and then refused to accept their answers. His tactics left a cloud of suspicion that he and others interpreted as guilt. People were afraid to challenge him.
In 1954 McCarthy began to look for Soviet spies in the United States Army During weeks of televised hearings, millions of Americans watched McCarthy question and bully officers, harassing them about trivial details and accusing them of misconduct. His popular support began to fade.
Finally, to strike back at the army’s lawyer, Joseph Welch, McCarthy brought up the past of a young lawyer in Welch’s firm who had been a member of a Communist-front organization while in law school. Welch, who was fully aware of the young man’s past, exploded at McCarthy for possibly ruining the young man’s career: “Until this moment, I think I never really gauged your cruelty or your recklessness. . . . You have done enough. Have you no sense of decency, sir, at long last? Have you left no sense of decency?”
Spectators cheered. Welch had said what many Americans had been thinking. Later that year, the Senate passed a vote of censure, or formal disapproval, against McCarthy. Although he remained in the Senate, McCarthy had lost all influence. He died in 1957.
H READING PROGRESS CHECK
Assessing Why were people prepared to accept McCarthy's claims?
Life During the Early Cold War
guiding question How did fears of nuclear war affect American society?
The Red Scare and the spread of nuclear weapons had a profound impact on American life in the 1950s. Fears of communism and war affected both ordinary Americans and government leaders.
1 Facing the Bomb
I
Americans were shocked when the Soviets successfully tested the more powerful hydrogen bomb, or H-bomb, in 1953. The United States had tested
i its own H-bomb less than a year earlier. Americans prepared for a surprise
— Analyzing — Supreme Court cases
Watkins v. United States, 1957
In 1954 labor organizer John Watkins testified before HUAC. He agreed to discuss his connections with the Communist Party and to identify people who were still members, but refused to talk about those who were no longer members. Watkins received a misdemeanor conviction for refusing to answer questions “pertinent to the question under inquiry’’ In 1957 he appealed his case to the Supreme Court. In a 6-to-l decision, the Supreme Court held that the activities of HUAC during its investigations were beyond the scope of the stated aims of the committee, as well as the authority of congressional powers.
DEFENDING
What argument would you make in support of John Watkins's position? Some Americans invested in personal bomb shelters stocked with food, believing it would allow them to survive a bomb blast.
CRITICAL THINKING
Interpreting Study the facial expressions of the members of this family. What can you interpret about the likely significance of the bomb shelter for this family? censure to express a formal disapproval of an action
fallout radioactive particles dispersed by a nuclear explosion
Determining Cause and Effect
The United States experienced two major Red Scares during the twentieth century: one during the 1920s, and one during the 1950s. Both of these scares occurred shortly after a major nation—first Russia, and later China— adopted a Communist form of government. As a historian, find the effect these scares had on American society and determine if they can be related.
Soviet attack. Schools created bomb shelters and held bomb drills to teach students to “duck-and-cover” to protect themselves from a nuclear bomb blast
Although “duck-and-cover” might have made people feel safer, it would not have protected them from nuclear radiation. Experts have note that for every person killed outright by a nuclear blast, four more would die later from fallout, the radiation left over after a blast. To protect themselves, some families built backyard fallout shelters.
Popular Culture in the Cold War
As worries about nuclear war and Communist infiltration filled the public imagination, Cold War themes soon appeared in films, plays, television, tl titles of dance tunes, and popular fiction. Matt Cvetic, an FBI undercover informant who secretly infiltrated the Communist Party, captivated readei with reports in the Saturday Evening Post in 1950. His story was later mad into the movie I Was a Communist for the FBI (1951). Another film, WalkE, on Beacon (1952), features the FBI’s activities in a spy case. In 1953 Arthui Miller’s thinly veiled criticism of the Communist witch-hunts, The Crucib, appeared on Broadway. The play remains popular today as a cautionary tale about how hysteria can lead to false accusations.
In 1953 a weekly television series, I Led Three Lives, about an undercover FBI counterspy who was also a Communist Party official, debuted. Popular tunes such as “Atomic Boogie” and “Atom Bomb Baby” played on the radio. The next year, author Philip Wylie published Tomorrow!, a novel describing the horrific effects of nuclear war on an unprepared American city. Wylie wrote his novel to educate the public about the horrors of atomic war.
One of the most famous and enduring works of this period is John Hersey’s nonfiction book Hiroshima. Originally published as the August h edition of The New Yorker magazine, the book provides six firsthand accou of the United States dropping the atomic bomb on Hiroshima, Japan. Not only did it make some Americans question the use of the bomb, but Hiroshima also underscored the real, personal horrors of a nuclear attack.
At the same time, the country was enjoying postwar prosperity and optimism. That spirit, combined with McCarthyism, fears of Communist infiltration, and the threat of atomic attack, made the early 1950s a time c contrasts. As the 1952 election approached, Americans were looking for someone or something that would make them feel more secure.
H REAPING PROGRESS CHECK
Analyzing How did the Cold War affect popular culture in the 1950s?
LESSON 3 REVIEW
Reviewing Vocabulary
1.	Evaluating What was the significance of Truman's loyalty review program? 8B
2.	Identifying Cause and Effect What was the effect ofthe Senate's vote of censure against McCarthy? 8B
Using Your Notes
3.	Summarizing Use the notes you completed during the lesson to write a paragraph summarizing how the early years ofthe Cold War affected American society. 8B
Answering the Guiding Questions
4.	Comparing and Contrasting How did the post-World War II Scare compare and contrast with the one that followed World \
5.	Drawing Inferences Why did many Americans believe Sena, McCarthy's accusations? 8B
6.	Describing How did fears of nuclear war affect American soc
Writing Activity
ARGUMENT
Consider the historical events surrounding the e Cold War era. Were HUAC and Senator McCarthy justified in investigating people who were suspected of being Communis Academic Vocabulary
• imply • response Content Vocabulary
It Matters Because
President Eisenhower believed developing new technology to deliver nuclear weapons would help prevent war. He also directed the CIA to use covert operations in the struggle to contain communism.
Massive Retaliation
•	massive retaliation
•	brinkmanship
•	covert
•	developing nation
•	military-industrial complex
TAKING NOTES:
Key Ideas and Details
Organizing As you read, complete a concept web similar to the one below by filling in aspects of Eisenhower's Cold War policies.
guiding question How were the policies of massive retaliation and brinkmanship different from previous military policies?
By the end of 1952, many Americans were ready for a change in leadership. The Cold War had much to do with that attitude. Many people believed that Truman’s foreign policy was not working. The Soviet Union had tested an atomic bomb and consolidated its hold on Eastern Europe. China had fallen to communism, and American troops were fighting in Korea.
Tired of the criticism and uncertain he could win, Truman decided not to run again. The Democrats nominated Adlai Stevenson, governor of Illinois. The Republicans chose Dwight D. Eisenhower, the general who had organized the D-Day invasion. Stevenson had little chance against a national hero who had helped win World War II. Americans wanted someone they could trust to lead the nation in the Cold War. Eisenhower won in a landslide. "More Bang for the Buck"
The Cold War shaped Eisenhower’s thinking from the moment he took office. He was convinced that the key to victory was not simply military might but also a strong economy. The United States had to show the world that the free enterprise system could produce a better society than communism. At the same time, economic prosperity would prevent Communists from gaining support in the United States and protect society from subversion.
As a professional soldier, Eisenhower knew the costs associated with large-scale conventional war. Preparing for that kind of warfare, he believed, was too expensive. “We cannot defend the
The Cold War Begins 415
4
In 1955 the U.S. Air Force unveiled the huge B-52 bomber, which could fly across continents to drop nuclear bombs. The B-52 is still in use today. ► CRITICALTHINKING Determining Cause and Effect How did Eisenhower's nuclear strategy lead to the development of new aircraft technology?
massive retaliation a
policy of threatening a massive response, including the use of nuclear weapons, against a Communist state trying to seize a peaceful state by force
IBff Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills
A
2D explain the significance of the following years as turning points: 1898 (Spanish-American War), 1914-1918 (World War I), 1929 (the Great Depression begins), 1939-1945 (World War II), 1957 (Sputnik launch ignites U.S.-Soviet space race), 1968-1969 (Martin Luther King Jr. assassination and U.S. lands on the moon), 1991 (Cold War ends), 2001 (terrorist attacks on World Trade Center and the Pentagon), and 2008 (election of first black president, Barack Obama)
8D explain reasons and outcomes for U.S. involvement in foreign countries and their relationship to the Domino Theory, including the Vietnam War
17C describe the economic impact of defense spending on the business cycle and education priorities from 1945 to the 1990s
27B explain how specific needs result in scientific discoveries and technological innovations in agriculture, the military, and medicine, including vaccines

nation in a way which will exhaust our economy” the president declare Instead of maintaining a large and expensive army, the nation “must be prepared to use atomic weapons in all forms.” Nuclear weapons, he said gave “more bang for the buck”
The Korean War had convinced Eisenhower that the United States could not contain communism by fighting a series of small wars. Such were unpopular and too expensive. Instead, wars had to be prevented] the first place. The best way to do that seemed to be to threaten to use nuclear weapons. This policy came to be called massive retaliation.
Eisenhower s emphasis on nuclear weapons required new technoloj deliver them. The president wanted to make sure that the United States could wage nuclear war even if the Soviets destroyed American bases ii Europe or Asia. This required technology that would allow the U.S. to: the USSR without needing bases overseas. At the same time, American forces had to be very difficult to destroy in one attack. If massive retali was to be an effective strategy, American nuclear weapons had to be deployed in a way that an enemy could not eliminate them all at once i surprise attack. For this reason, the United States began to build what1 later be referred to as the nuclear triad, a three part system made up ol range bombers, land-based missiles, and missile-carrying submarines.
In 1955 the U.S. air force unveiled the first part of the triad, the hu B-52 bomber which could fly across continents to drop nuclear bombs B-52 is still in use today. But because bombers could be shot down, Eisenhower also approved the development of intercontinental ballisti missiles (ICBMs) that could reach anywhere in the world in less than 30 minutes. The Atlas missile was the first American ICBM. It was als< to launch the first seven U.S. astronauts in the early 1960s. A modified version of the Atlas is still used today to launch satellites.
For the third part of the triad, Eisenhower also began a program t< submarines capable of launching nuclear missiles from underwater. Tl Polaris submarine was the first submarine ever built to launch long-ra missiles. The first Polaris submarine was deployed in 1960 and carriec 16 nuclear missiles.
The new policy enabled Eisenhower to cut military spending fror around $50 billion to about $34 billion by reducing the size of the an w ich was expensive to maintain. He then increased the U.S. nuclear arsenal from about 1,000 bombs in 1953 to about 18,000 bombs in 15
416
One result of the decision to focus on massive retaliation was the emergence of a new arms race. The United States and the Soviet Union began to compete in the development of missiles and bombers, and steadily expanded the size and power of their nuclear arsenal.
Brinkmanship
President Eisenhower s willingness to threaten nuclear war to maintain peace worried some people. Critics called this brinkmanship—the willingness to go to the brink of war to force the other side to back down— and argued that it was too dangerous. During several crises, however, President Eisenhower felt compelled to threaten nuclear war.
The Taiwan Crisis Shortly after the Korean War ended, a new crisis erupted in Asia. Although Communists had taken power in mainland China, Chinese Nationalists still controlled Taiwan and several small islands along Chinas coast. In the fall of 1954, China threatened to seize two of the islands. Eisenhower saw Taiwan as part of the “anti-Communist barrier” in Asia that needed to be protected at all costs.
When China began shelling the islands and announced that Taiwan would be liberated, Eisenhower asked Congress to authorize the use of force to defend Taiwan. He then warned that an attack on Taiwan would be resisted by U.S. naval forces and hinted that they would use nuclear weapons to stop an invasion. Soon afterward, China backed down.
The Suez Crisis The following year, a serious crisis erupted in the Middle East. Eisenhower wanted to prevent Arab nations from aligning with the Soviet Union. To build support among Arabs, Secretary of State Dulles offered to help Egypt finance the construction of a dam on the Nile River.
The deal ran into trouble in Congress, however, because Egypt had bought weapons from Communist Czechoslovakia. Dulles was forced to withdraw the offer. A week later,
Egyptian troops seized control of the Suez Canal from the Anglo-French company that had controlled it. The Egyptians intended to use the canal’s profits to pay for the dam.
In October 1956, British and French troops invaded Egypt.
Eisenhower was furious with Britain and France. The situation became even more dangerous when the Soviet Union threatened rocket attacks on Britain and France and offered to send troops to help Egypt. Eisenhower immediately put U.S. nuclear forces on alert, noting, “if those fellows start something, we may have to hit ’em— and, if necessary, with everything in the bucket.”
Pressured by the United States, the British and French called off the invasion. The Soviet Union had won a major diplomatic victory by supporting Egypt. Soon other Arab nations began accepting Soviet aid.
— Analyzing---------
Primary Sources
Secretary of State Dulles on Brinkmanship
You have to take chances for peace, just as you must take chances in war. Some say that we were brought to the verge of war. Of course we were brought to the verge of war. The ability to get to the verge without getting into the war is the necessary art.... If you try to run away from it, if you are scared to go to the brink, you are lost. We’ve had to look it square in the face.... We walked to the brink and we looked it in the face. We took strong action.
—John Foster Dulles, quoted in Rise to Globalism
DBQ
ANALYZING PRIMARY
SOURCES
Why did Dulles believe that brinkmanship strengthened U.S. foreign policy? brinkmanship the
practice of pushing a dangerous situation to the limit to force an opponent to backdown
An Atlas rocket lifts off carrying a payload to orbit. The Atlas missile was the first American intercontinental ballistic missile (ICBM). First developed in the 1950s, intercontinental ballistic missiles can deliver a nuclear warhead to any target in the world in less than 30 minutes. The Atlas rocket is still used today to launch satellites into orbit.
The Cold War Begins 417
SKILLS PRACTICE
Write new vocabulary words from this lesson on cards. Include the words imply, response, retaliation, brinkmanship, and covert as well as others that are new to you. Review your cards often until you can read the words quickly on sight.
covert not openly shown or engaged in; secret
developing nation
a nation whose economy is primarily agricultural
B READING PROGRESS CHECK
Contrasting How did Eisenhower's military policies contrast with those ofTrume
Covert Operations
guiding question Why did President Eisenhower want to use covert operations tocombat the spread of communism?
President Eisenhower relied on brinkmanship on several occasions, but hi knew it could not work in all situations. It could prevent war, but it could not prevent Communists from staging revolutions within countries. To d( this, Eisenhower decided to use covert, or hidden, operations conducted the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA).
Many of the CIA’s operations took place in developing nations— nations with primarily agricultural economies. Many of these countries blamed European imperialism and American capitalism for their problen Their leaders looked to the Soviet Union as a model of how to industriali: their countries. They often threatened to nationalize, or put under government control, foreign businesses operating in their countries.
One way to stop developing nations from moving into the Communis camp was to provide them with financial aid, as Eisenhower had tried to in Egypt. In some cases, however, in which the threat of communism seemed stronger, the CIA ran covert operations to overthrow anti-Ameri leaders and replace them with pro-American leaders.
Iran and Guatemala
Two examples of covert operations that achieved American objectives toi place in Iran and Guatemala. By 1953 Iranian prime minister Mohamme Mossadegh had nationalized the Anglo-Iranian Oil Company. He seemei ready to make an oil deal with the Soviet Union. The pro-American shah Iran tried to force Mossadegh out of office but failed and fled into exile. CIA quickly sent agents to organize street riots and arrange a coup that ousted Mossadegh and returned the shah to power.
The following year, the CIA intervened in Guatemala. In 1950, with Communist support, Jacobo Arbenz Guzman was elected president of Guatemala. After Arbenz Guzman assumed office in 1951, his land-refoi program took over large estates and plantations, including those of the American-owned United Fruit Company. In May 1954, Communist Czechoslovakia delivered arms to Guatemala. The CIA responded by arming the Guatemalan opposition and training them at secret camps ir Nicaragua and Honduras. Shortly after these CIA-trained forces invadec Guatemala, Arbenz Guzman left office.
Trouble in Eastern Europe
Covert operations did not always work as Eisenhower hoped. Stalin die in 1953, and a power struggle began in the Soviet Union. By 1956, Niki Khrushchev had emerged as the Soviet leader. That year Khrushchev delivered a secret speech to Soviet officials. He attacked Stalin’s policies and insisted that there were many ways to build a communist society. Although the speech was secret, the CIA obtained a copy of it and distributed copies of it throughout Eastern Europe and the world.
Many Eastern Europeans had long been frustrated with Communii rule. Hearing Khrushchev s speech further discredited communism. In 1956, riots erupted in Eastern Europe. By late October, a full-scale upr
418
“All the News That’s Rt to Print”
VOL.
CV1I..No. 36,414.* CI)C
Xcw Uork Stmts. LATE CITY EDITION
Cloudy and cool today and tonight Moatly (air tomorrow. T«a-,«r: »-55. Yminday, O.4-4U.
NEW YORK, SATURDAY, OCTOBER
FIVE CENTS
SOVIET FIRES EARTH SATELLITE INTO SPACE; IT IS CIRCLING THE GLOBE AT
M. P. H.; SPHERE TRACKED IN 4 CROSSINGS OVER U.S.
Sputnik was the world's first artificial satellite. It made news around the world and launched the space race. SputnikII, launched only a month after Sputnik, carried the first living creature into orbit—an "astro" dog named Laika.
Scientists prepare the first U.S. satellite, Explorer I, for launch in 1958.
had begun in Hungary. Although Khrushchev was willing to tolerate
greater freedom in Eastern Europe, he had never meant to imply that the	imply to express indirectly
Soviets would tolerate an end to communism in the region. Soon after the uprising began, Soviet tanks rolled into the capital of Hungary and crushed the rebellion.
Sputnik Launches the Space Race
As the United States began to develop ICBMs, Americans were stunned to
discover that the Soviet Union already had them. On October 4, 1957, the
Soviets demonstrated this technology by launching Sputnik, the first
artificial satellite to orbit Earth. Less than four months later, the United
States launched its first satellite, Explorer 1. Determined not to be beaten by
the Soviets, Eisenhower established the National Aeronautics and Space
Administration, or NASA, in late 1958 to begin developing a civilian space
program for the United States.
The Cold War Begins 419
President Eisenhower addressed ► concerns about communist activity in the Middle East by asking Congress to authorize military force to assist nations resisting a communist threat. This policy became known as the Eisenhower Doctrine.
Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev rose to power in the mid-1950s, following the death of longtime dictator Joseph Stalin.
CRITICAL TREKING
Drawing Conclusions Howdid covert operations around the world contribute to tensions between the United States and the Soviet Union?


Sputnik marked a turning point in history and the beginning of a new era—the use of satellites in space. Both nations in the Cold War began launching satellites to assist in communications and to spy on other nations. Today, satellites are a vital part of modern communications and travel. They transmit television, radio, and cell phone signals, and the satellites of the Global Positioning System (GPS) help drivers and pilots navigate.
The Eisenhower Doctrine
The United States was not the only nation using covert means to support its foreign policy. President Gamal Abdel Nasser of Egypt had
emerged from the Suez crisis as a hero to the Arab people, and by 1957 h had begun working with Jordan and Syria to spread pan-Arabism—the ic that all Arab people should be united into one nation.
Eisenhower and Dulles worried about Nasser’s links to the Soviets an feared he was laying the groundwork to take control of the Middle East. 1 late 1957, Eisenhower asked Congress to authorize the use of military for whenever the president thought it necessary to assist Middle East nation; resisting Communist aggression. The policy came to be called the Eisenhower Doctrine. It essentially extended the Truman Doctrine and t policy of containment to the Middle East.
In July 1958, Eisenhower’s concerns appeared to be confirmed when left-wing rebels, believed to be backed by Nasser and the Soviets, seiz< power in Iraq. Fearing his government was next, the president of Lebanon sought help. Eisenhower ordered 5,000 marines to Beiri the Lebanese capital. Once the situation stabilized, the U.S. forci withdrew.
A
Spy Plane Is Shot Down After the Hungarian uprising, Khrushchev reasserted Sovie power and the superiority of communism. Although he b supported “peaceful coexistence” with capitalism, he bej accusing the “capitalist countries” of starting a “feveris race.” In 1957, after the launch of Sputnik, Khrushcb boasted, “We will bury capitalism. . . . Your grande! *	will live under communism.”
Late the following year, Khrushchev demanded t withdrawal of Allied troops from West Berlin. Seen of State Dulles rejected Khrushchev’s demands. If the Soviets threatened Berlin, Dulles announced, NATC would respond, “if need be by military force.” Brinkmanship worked again, and Khrushchev backe down. Eisenhower invited Khrushchev to visit the United States in late 1959. The visit’s success led the 1 leaders to agree to hold a summit in Paris.
420
Shortly before the summit was to begin in I960, the Soviet Union shot down an American U-2 spy plane. At first Eisenhower claimed that the aircraft was a weather plane that had strayed off course. Then Khrushchev dramatically produced the pilot, Francis Gary Powers. Eisenhower refused to apologize, saying the flights had protected American security. In response, Khrushchev broke up the summit.
In this climate of heightened tension, Eisenhower prepared to leave office. In January 1961, he delivered a farewell address to the nation in which he pointed out that a new relationship had developed between the military establishment and the defense industry. He warned Americans to be on guard against the influence of this military-industrial complex in a democracy.
Although he had avoided war and contained communism, Eisenhower was frustrated. He had sent military advisers to South Vietnam to train a South Vietnamese army and also saw Fidel Castro establish a communist regime in Cuba. Eisenhower stated, “I confess that I lay down my official responsibilities in this field with a definite sense of disappointment. As one who has witnessed the horror and the lingering sadness of war ... I wish I could say tonight that a lasting peace is in sight.”
I IB READING PROGRESS CHECK
6
j Identifying Why did Eisenhower direct the CIA to use covert operations?
response something said or done as a reaction
military-industrial complex an informal relationship that some people believe exists between the military and the defense industry to promote greater military spending and influence government policy
The U-2 was America's most sophisticated spy plane. It was able to fly higher than any other plane at the time.
CRITICALTHINKING
Making Inferences Why was the U-2 used as a spy plane?
Reviewing Vocabulary
1.	Explaining What was the policy of brinkmanship?
2.	Contrasting How are developing nations primarily different from industrial nations? 80
Using Your Notes
J.
Evaluating Use the notes you completed during the lesson to consider Eisenhower's strategies for containing communism. Write a paragraph evaluating whether these strategies were success u. Explain your response. 8D Answering the Guiding Questions
4.	Contrasting How were the policies of massive retaliation and brinkmanship different from previous military policies? 27B
5.	Describing Why did President Eisenhower want to use covert operations to combat the spread of communism? 8D
Writing Activity
INFORMATIVE/EXPLANATORY
Write a short essay in which you explain Eisenhower's foreign policy goals and practices. Be sure to include details about how these policies influenced historical events. The Cold War Begins 421
|<\ j L i_ P u i i-
Understanding How Historians Interpret the Past
Why Learn This Skill?
As you have read about the history of the United States, you probably have realized that
j	historians do not always agree about why things
happened or agree about how events affected things that happened later. When you study history, it is easy to become confused unless you have some idea of how historians interpret the past and the different approaches they use.
Learning the Skill
I
The study of how historians approach history is called historiography. It is in some ways the history of historians and their different approaches to interpreting the past.
One of the important things to understand is that how people view history changes over time. This happens for several reasons. Sometimes an event has to happen before people realize a past event was important and needs to be studied. Historical interpretations also change over time because new information becomes available. For example, a country may open its archives. Another reason interpretations change over time is because historians look at different kinds of evidence.
There are three big questions for historians. The first is causation: Historians want to explain why something happened or why people made certain choices. The second issue is outcome: Historians want to explain what happened because of an event or choices people made. The third issue is meaning: Historians want to explain why a historical event matters.
There are several approaches historians take to answer these questions. The first is sometimes called intentionalism, or volitionalism. It has also been nicknamed "The Great Man" approach to history. It focuses on leaders, especially political leaders. It looks at who made key choices, and tries to figure out why they made those choices.
A second approach to history is structuralis A structural approach looks at the way things are organized, the rules and structures of the political system, the economy, and society. For example, instead of focusing on a president am his goals, ambitions, and choices, a structural^ might look at how the Constitution structures the president's role and forces him to make certain choices and limits his ability to make other choices.
A third approach to history is intellectualisi Intellectual historians assume that ideas are tl most important cause of things. They look at ideas, ideology, culture, and people's perceptions, so as to understand what happen
As you might expect, these three approacl can lead to very different histories of the same event. And within these approaches, historian narrow their emphasis even further. Some structuralists, for example, emphasize the role the economy alone, or the role of social classej Others focus just on the political system. Amc intellectual historians, some focus on ideology while others stress the role of culture.
Practicing the Skill
Read the following paragraphs, and then answer the questions that follow about interpreting the causes of the Cold War.
Over the years there have been many differeni arguments put forward for why the Cold War beg Historians have suggested Roosevelt made mistah Yalta, and did not stand up to Stalin soon enough, Some think Truman was too aggressive and unwil to compromise. Some argue that Stalin was authoritarian and paranoid and determined to cor everything he could. Others have suggested Stalir was a committed communist and determined to dt everything he could to spread communism into Europe. Some have suggested the Cold War was partly Churchill's responsibility. They suggest Br maneuvered the United States into taking over Britain's role of balancing power in Europe so as J protect the British Empire.
422
Historians have also argued that American capitalism and its desire for overseas markets led to the clash with the Soviets. Others think the fundamental clash was between a democratic republic based on individual rights versus a totalitarian communist system. Another group of historians point out that the Russians knew their history of being invaded from the West and just wanted a buffer zone on their border to protect themselves. Others think the American military was determined to avoid another Pearl Harbor and pushed for alliances and overseas bases to make sure America remained safe.
1.	In which theories above are historians practicing a volitional or intentionalist approach to the Cold War?
2.	What would a structuralist emphasize in trying to understand the causes of the Cold War?
3.	What theories about the cold war would intellectual historians favor?
Roosevelt, Churchill, and Stalin at the Yalta Conference in 1945
Applying the Skill
Conducting a Historical Inquiry Now that you understand the basic approaches historians take to history, conduct your own historical inquiry into some aspect of the Cold War. Identify a question about the Cold War you would like to answer. Write it down.
Gather sources that talk about the history related to your question. Collect a variety of sources: gather works by historians, as well as collections of primary sources that include speeches and government documents for the Cold War. If possible
I use a local library or online resources to examine old magazines and newspapers from the time you are studying. After gathering your sources, analyze them, making notes as to what they tell you. Write down a hypothesis, or possible explanation, for your original question.
I
Ask yourself if you are taking an f intentional, structural or intellectual approach to the question. Does thinking about the question that way suggest other sources to examine? Test your hypothesis against your sources. Do any of them contradict your idea? Do you need other sources to confirm your idea? Once you are confident you have a good answer to your question, prepare an article for a historical journal identifying your question, outlining your sources and findings, and presenting your conclusions.
423
■
V
chapter n Assessment
Directions: On a separate sheet of paper, answer the questions below. Make sure you read carefully and answer all parts of the questions.
Lesson Review
Lesson 1
0 Identifying Central Issues What decisions were made at Yalta, and what role did they play in the emergence of the Cold War? 7B
Q
Describing What was the Bretton Woods Conference? How did the decisions taken at Bretton Woods affect the international monetary system and the use of the gold standard? 15E.17E 0 Describing Describe the manner in which Germany was divided by Great Britain, the United States, the Soviet Union, and France. 7B
0 Evaluating What were the pros and cons of the United States joining the United Nations? What elements of the UN charter help the United States protect its interests? What were the potential weaknesses of the United Nations? 19E
0 Analyzing Information Why did the Allied victory and the creation of the United Nations not lead to a more peaceful world as President Roosevelt had hoped? 8A
0 Identifying How did the newly formed United Nations respond to the acts of genocide committed during World Warll?
Lesson 2
0 Identifying Central Issues What was the policy of
containment? How did it affect President Truman's
decision to send troops to fight in the Korean War?
8C, 8D
0 Making Connections How was American aid to Western Europe a key to containing communism? What was the legislation that proposed such aid? 8A
0 Determining Cause and Effect Explain the causes of the Korean War, the reasons the United States became involved, and outcome of U.S. involvement. 8C, 8D
Lesson 3
0 Interpreting Significance Following World War II, how did the Red Scare affect the United States? 8B
© Drawing Inferences How did Senator McCarthy's accusations of Communist influence affect domestic life and intensify Cold War tensions? 8B
© Describing In the early 1950s, in what ways did literatur and films about the H-bomb and communist spies reflect the characteristics and issues of the era? 25A
Lesson 4
© Analyzing Describe President Eisenhower's approach to defense spending in the 1950s. Why did he cut military spending and what effect did he expect it to have on the economy? 17C
© Explaining What was the role of brinkmanship in Eisenhower's foreign policy? Why was it controversial?
© Sequencing Events Describe the events that followed c a result of the distribution of Khrushchev's secret speech.
0 Comparing Compare the Eisenhower Doctrine with the Truman Doctrine. What action took place following the establishment of the Eisenhower Doctrine? 8D
© Summarizing Summarize the relationship between Khrushchev and Eisenhower at the end of Eisenhower's presidency.
Exploring the Essential Questions
0 Synthesizing Design a website describing the origins c
the Cold War and its effects on 1950s society. On a sheet
paper, describe the website and the way you would
organize the site's information. Include maps, biographi
and accounts of historic events to show ways Cold War
tensions affected postwar international relations. Prese
a visual presentation of your website to the class.
8A, 8B, 8C, 30A, 30B, 3OC
Need Extra Help?
1	2	3	4	5	6	7
9	10	11	12	13	14	15	16	17
I
Co to page | 398 | 396 | 398 | 397 | 397 | 399 | 402 | 405 | 410 | 411 | 414 | 416 | 417 | 418 | 393 |4211?
424
(D Understanding Relationships Among Events Howdid Cold War fears of nuclear war affect American society?
Critical Thinking
0 Assessing Describe the Berlin Airlift. Why did it begin? How did it enable the United States to respond to Soviet aggression without going to war? 8A
© Analyzing Describe the Truman Doctrine and the Marshall Plan. Explain how these policies were intended to prevent further Soviet aggression in Europe after World War II. 8A
0 Describing Explain the events that led to the creation of
NATO, and outline the terms of the NATO treaty. What were
some ofthe pros and cons of signing the NATO treaty and
becoming a member of this international organization?
8A, 19E
$ Interpreting Describe the relationship between U.S. international trade polices at the end of World War II and the U.S. free enterprise system. Describe the pros and cons of international trade treaties. 17E, 19E
Q
Analyzing Explain the reasons that Eisenhower adopted a policy of using the CIA to conduct covert operations during the Cold War. Identify two countries where he used this policy and the results ofthe covert intervention.
8D
Evaluating Explain why 1957 was a turning point in history. What event that year resulted in changes that continue to shape our world today? 2D
© Understanding Historical Interpretations Describe how Cold War tensions were intensified by the House Un-American Activities Committee (HUAC). How did historians initially interpret the Red Scare ofthe 1950s? In what way may the release ofthe Venona Papers in 1995 have changed those interpretations? 8B, 29C
Analyzing Primary Sources
Read the excerpt below, and answer the questions that follow.
In 1950 Margaret Chase Smith, the only woman in the Senate, was upset by Senator McCarthy's behavior. She had hoped that her colleagues would reprimand him. They failed to do so, and Smith then made her "Declaration of Conscience" speech.
PRIMARYSOURCE
« As a United States Senator, I am not proud ofthe way in which the Senate has been made a publicity platform for irresponsible sensationalism. I am not proud ofthe reckless abandon in which unproved charges have been hurled.... As an American, I am shocked at the way Republicans and Democrats alike are playing directly into the Communist design of 'confuse, divide, and conquer'.... I want to see our nation recapture the strength and unity it once had when we fought the enemy instead of ourselves.99
—Margaret Chase Smith, speech to Congress,
June 1,1950
Social Studies Skills
Using a Decision Making Process Imagine you work for President Eisenhower. The president has explained the country needs a strong military because of the threat from the Soviet Union and the United States is committed to containing communism. At the same time, the president is worried about the economy. He is concerned that a lot of government spending on the military will weaken the economy. Write a briefing paper for the president recommending the policy of massive retaliation. In the paper, apply a decision-making process that explains why you are recommending this decision. 17C, 27B, 32B
Making Connections What is the connection between Smith's point of view and the views ofMcCarthyism during the Red Scare? 8B, 29A, 29E
© Interpreting Speeches Why did Smith use the phrase "confuse, divide, and conquer"? 8B, 29A, 29E, 29H
Need Extra Help?
	19	20	21	22	23	24	25	26	27	28	29 ....,
[Goto page	1*^	| 404	| 403		| n/a	f«™l	14201	393	| 411 | 393	LjhJ
The Cold War Begins 425
Read the excerpt below, and answer the questions that follow.
PRIMARY SOURCE
« You have to take chances for peace, just as you must take chances in war. Some say that we were brought to the verge of war. Of course we were brought to the verge of war. The ability to get to the verge without getting into the war is the necessary art.... If you try to run away from it, if you are scared to go to the brink, you are lost. We've had to look it square in the face... We walked to the brink and we looked it in the face. We took strong action. **
—John Foster Dulles, quoted in Rise to Globalism
Interpreting Primary Sources What strategy is John
Foster Dulles describing? Why is he saying it is necessary?
8A, 29A, 29E, 29H
© Drawing Inferences Why do you think the Eisenhower
administration was able to make the policy Dulles is
describing work? What circumstances in the 1950s gave
the United States the ability to negotiate this way?
8A, 29B, 29H
Analyzing Visuals
Use the map to answer the following questions.
i < j American I I British
i. j French
I . i Soviet — Present-day Germany
----Uncertain border
-w

© Identify Central Issues Identify and explain the reasons for the changes in Germany's political boundaries after World War II. 12B
© Interpreting Geographic Distributions Based on the geography and control of the zones, what challenges would have existed for each of the Allied countries, and would any country have been more or less affected? 31
© Posing Questions About Geographic Distributions
What questions would you need to ask about the geographic distribution on the map in order to underst; why the Soviet Union was unwilling to take reparations from their zone only? 8A, 31B
Extended Response Question
Comparing and Contrasting Write an essay compari and contrasting the international leadership of Franklin Roosevelt at the Yalta conference with Harry Truman's leadership at the Potsdam conference. Compare the Un States' relationship with its allies at both conferences, identify the goals of Roosevelt and Truman, and evalua their success in achieving their goals. Your essay should have an introduction, at least four paragraphs, and a conclusion. 7B
Standardized Test Practice
© What political contribution did Eleanor Roosevelt make after World War II? 26D
A.
She chaired a UN commission on human rights to address and prevent genocide. B.
She chaired a UN commission on international tre and tariffs to help rebuild European economies. C.
She met with leaders of the Allied Powers at the Potsdam Conference. D.
She met with leaders of the Allied Powers at the Conference. © What scientific and technological innovation in the mi resulted from the American policy of brinkmanship?
F.	atomic bomb
G. B-52
H. U-2
spy plane J. armored tank Need Extra Help?
	30	31	32	33	34	35	36	37
| Go to page	I4’7	Lie]		|398|				
Postwar America
networks
There's More Online about life in America after World War II.
