CHAPTER 10
Place and Time: United States 1931-1941
Franklin D. Roosevelt and his administration had a monumental task in 1933. The Great Depression had affected millions of Americans. People began to demand help from the federal government. Promising a "New Deal" for the American people, President Roosevelt took immediate steps to put people back to work, strengthen the economy, and establish a safety net for the nation. Roosevelt's critics challenged his plan because never before had the federal government intervened so directly in the economy.
Step Into the Place
Read the quotes and look at the information presented on the map. SH316D, 16E, 29a, 29B
DBQ
Analyzing Historical Documents What different perspectives do these excerpts reveal about the role of government in the economy?
PRIMARY SOURCE
«So, first of all, let me assert my firm belief that the only thing we have to fear is fear itself— nameless, unreasoning, unjustified terror which paralyzes needed efforts to convert retreat into advance....
Our greatest primary task is to put people to work. This is no unsolvable problem if we face it wisely and courageously. It can be accomplished in part by direct recruiting by the Government itself, treating the task as we would treat the emergency of a war, but at the same time, through this employment, accomplishing greatly needed projects to stimulate and reorganize the use of our natural resources.w
—President Franklin D. Roosevelt, from his first Inaugural Address, March 4,1933
PRIMARY SOURCE
** Now what would I have my party do? I would have them re-dedare the principles that they put forth in that 1932 platform [reduce the size of government, balance the federal budget]....
Just get the platform of the Democratic party and get the platform of the Socialist party and... make your mind up to pick up the platform that more nearly squares with the record, and you will have your hand on the Socialist platform.
[I]t is all right with me, if they want to disguise themselves as Karl Marx or Lenin or any of the rest of that bunch, but I won t stand for their allowing them to march under the banner of Jackson or Cleveland.
E.
Smith, former Democratic presidential candidate, from a sDeech delivered January 25,1936 0	200 km
Lambert Azimuthal Equal-Area projection

Academic Vocabulary
•	apparent
•	ideology
•	fundamental
Content Vocabulary
•ament fix the economy? omic well-being of its citizens?
IT MATTERS BECAUSE
Franklin Delano Roosevelt was elected president in 1932, following his promise of a "New Deal" for Americans. In his first hundred days in office, he introduced a flood of legislation designed to rescue banks, industry, and agriculture and provide jobs for the unemployed.
•	polio
•	gold standard
•	bank holiday
•	fireside chats
TAKING NOTES:
Key Ideas and Details
Sequencing As you read about Roosevelt's first three months in office, complete a time line to record the major problems he addressed during this time.
TEKS
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills 

14A identify the effects of population growth and distribution on the physical environment
15E describe the emergence of monetary policy in the United States, including the Federal Reserve Act of 1913 and the shifting trend from a gold standard to fiat money
continued on p. 312
Roosevelt's Rise to Power
guiding question What qualities make an effective leader?
A distant cousin of Theodore Roosevelt, Franklin Delano Roosevelt grew up in Hyde Park, New York. In his youth, Franklin learned to hunt, ride horses, and sail; he also developed a lifelong commitment to conservation and a love of rural areas in the United States. Roosevelt was educated at Harvard and then at Columbia Law School. While at Harvard, he became friends with Theodore Roosevelts niece Eleanor, whom he later married.
Intensely competitive, Roosevelt liked to be in control. He also liked being around people. His charming personality, deep rich voice, and wide smile expressed confidence and optimism. In short, his personality seemed made for a life in politics.
Roosevelt began his political career in 1910 when he was elected to the New York State Senate. He earned a reputation as a progressive reformer. Three years later, he became assistant secretary of the navy in the Wilson administration. In 1920 his reputation (and famous surname) helped him win the vice-presidential nomination on the unsuccessful Democratic ticket.
After losing the election, Roosevelt temporarily withdrew from politics. The next year, he caught the dreaded paralyzing disease polio. Although there was no cure, Roosevelt refused to give in. He began a vigorous exercise program to restore muscle control. With heavy steel braces on his legs, he was able to seem to walk short distances by leaning on a cane and someone’s arm and swinging his legs forward from his hips.
310
While recovering from polio, Roosevelt depended on his wife and his aide Louis Howe to keep his name prominent in the New York Democratic Party. Eleanor Roosevelt became an effective public speaker, and her efforts kept her husband s political career alive.
By the mid-1920s, Roosevelt was again active in the Democratic Party.
In 1928 he ran for governor of New York. He campaigned hard to show that his illness had not slowed him down, and he narrowly won the election.
Two years later, he was reelected in a landslide. As governor, Roosevelt oversaw the creation of the first state relief agency to aid the unemployed.
Roosevelts popularity in New York paved the way for his presidential nomination in 1932. Americans saw in him an energy and optimism that gave them hope despite the tough economic times. After Roosevelt became president, his serenity and confidence amazed people. When one aide commented on his attitude, Roosevelt replied, “If you had spent two years in bed trying to wiggle your big toe, after that anything else would seem easy.”
In mid-June 1932, when the country was deep in the Depression, Republicans gathered in Chicago and nominated Herbert Hoover to run for a second term as president. Later that month, the Democrats also held their national convention in Chicago. When Roosevelt won the nomination, he broke with tradition by flying to Chicago to accept it in person. His speech set the tone for his campaign:
Eleanor Roosevelt (1884-1962)
\ Eleanor Roosevelt transformed ' the role of First Lady. She traveled,
; toured factories and coal mines,
! and met with workers, then told
her husband what people were ; thinking. She was a strong i supporter of civil rights and urged
him to stop discrimination in New
Deal programs. After President ; Roosevelt's death, she was : appointed a delegate to the ; United Nations in 1946, where
she helped draft the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights.
|........................ .........
CRITICAL THINKING
Predicting Consequences How
might Franklin Roosevelt's political career have been different if Eleanor
t had not been his wife?
PRIMARYSOURCE
«Let it be from now on the task of our Party to break foolish traditions.... [I]t is inevitable that the main issue of this campaign should revolve about... a depression so deep that it is without precedent.... Republican leaders not only have failed in material things, they have failed in national vision, because in disaster they have held out no hope.... I pledge you, I pledge myself, to a new deal for the American people."
—speech delivered to the Democratic National Convention, July 2,1932
From that point forward, Roosevelt’s policies for ending the Depression became known as the New Deal. Roosevelt’s confidence that he could make things better contrasted sharply with Herbert Hoovers apparent failure to do anything effective. On Election Day, Roosevelt won in a landslide, winning the electoral vote in all but six states.
H READING PROGRESS CHECK
Interpreting What characteristics did Roosevelt have that made him popular with Americans?
polio abbreviated term for poliomyelitis, an acute infectious disease affecting the skeletal muscles, often resulting in permanent disability and deformity
apparent appearing to be fact as far as can be understood
Franklin Roosevelt delivers his first Inaugural Address.
CRITICAL THINKING
Interpreting Why was it important that Franklin Roosevelt inspired optimism among so many Americans? Roosevelt and the New Deal 311
(continued from p. 310)
TEKS
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills 16D compare the New Deal policies and its opponents’ approaches to resolving the economic effects of the Great Depression
16E describe how various New Deal agencies and programs, including the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the Securities and Exchange Commission, and the Social Security Administration, continue to affect the lives of U.S. citizens
19A evaluate the impact of New Deal legislation on the historical roles of state and federal government 26D identify the political, social, and economic contributions of women such as Frances Willard, Jane Addams, Eleanor Roosevelt, Dolores Huerta, Sonia Sotomayor, and Oprah Winfrey to American society
gold standard a monetary standard in which one ounce of gold equals a set number of dollars
bank holiday closing of banks during the Great Depression to avoid bank runs
ideology a system of thought that is held by an individual, group, or culture
The Hundred Days
GUIDING QUESTION
Why are the first hundred days so important for a president? Roosevelt won the presidency in November 1932, but the situation grew worse between the election and his inauguration. Unemployment continued to rise and bank runs increased. People feared that Roosevelt would abandon the gold standard and reduce the value of the dollar to fight the Depression. Under the gold standard, one ounce of gold equaled a set number of dollars. To reduce the value of the dollar, the United States would have to stop exchanging dollars for gold. Many Americans and foreign investors with deposits in American banks decided to take their money out of the banks and convert it to gold before it lost its value.
Across the nation, people stood in long lines with paper bags and suitcases, waiting to withdraw their money from banks. By March 1933, more than 4,000 banks had collapsed, wiping out nine million savings accounts. In 38 states, governors declared bank holidays—closing the remaining banks before bank runs could put them out of business.
By the day of Roosevelts inauguration, most of the nations banks were closed. One in four workers was unemployed. Roosevelt knew he had to restore the nation’s confidence. “First of all,” he declared in his Inaugural Address, “let me assert my firm belief that the only thing we have to fear is fear itself.... This nation asks for action, and action now!”
SKILLS PRACTICE
As you read about the First New Deal, use a graphic organizer of your choice to take notes about the different approaches to ending the Depression. After completing the lesson, use your notes to write a summary of what you read.
The New Deal Begins
Roosevelt and his advisers came into office bursting with ideas about how to end the Depression. Roosevelt had no clear agenda, nor did he have a strong political ideology. He argued, “The country needs bold, persistent experimentation. . .. Above all, try something.”
The new president sent bill after bill to Congress. Between March 9 and June 16, 1933—which came to be called the Hundred Days—Congress passed 15 major acts to resolve the economic crisis. These programs made up what would be called the First New Deal.
A
Divided Administration Although he alone made the final decision about what policies and programs to pursue, Roosevelt depended on his advisers for new ideas. He deliberately chose advisers who disagreed with one another because he wanted to hear many different points of view.
One influential group of President Roosevelt’s advisers supported the belief that if the government agencies worked with businesses to regulate wages, prices, and production, they could lift the economy out of the Depression. A second group of advisers, who distrusted big business and felt business leaders had caused the Depression, wanted government planners to run key parts of the economy. A third group of advisers supported former president Woodrow Wilson’s “New Freedom” philosophy. They wanted Roosevelt to break up big companies and allow competition to set wages, prices, and production levels. This group of advisers also thought that the government should impose regulations to keep economic competition fair.
HREADING PROGRESS CHECK
Summarizing What were the key accomplishments during Roosevelt's first hundi days in office?
312
Banks and Debt Relief
GUIDING QUESTION
Why did Roosevelt broadcast "fireside chats"? Roosevelt knew that very few of the new programs would work as long as the nation’s banks remained closed. Before he did anything else, he had to restore peoples confidence in the banking system. Within a week of his taking office, the Emergency Banking Relief Act was passed. The new law required federal examiners to survey the nation’s banks and issue Treasury Department licenses to those that were financially sound.
On March 12, Roosevelt addressed the nation by radio. Sixty million people listened to this first of many “fireside chats.” He said, “I assure you that it is safer to keep your money in a reopened bank than under the mattress. When banks opened on March 13, deposits far outweighed withdrawals. The banking crisis was over.
With confidence in the banking system restored, Roosevelt then proceeded to use powers granted in the Emergency Banking Relief Act to take the dollar off the gold standard. In June Congress went further, passing a law that made all contracts payable only in legal tender. No one could demand gold in payment or use gold to pay for things.
Almost immediately, inflation began. This was exactly what the president wanted. The purpose of going off the gold standard was to cause inflation, what Roosevelt called “reflation” because he believed the dollar was overvalued from decades of deflation. Roosevelt wanted to cause inflation to help people in debt.
When money inflates, it loses value. Debts become easier to pay because the money owed is not worth as much anymore. At the same time, inflation causes prices to go up, earning more money for farmers and others who were suffering from low prices for their goods. The United States stayed off the gold standard for about nine months, until the president thought the dollar’s value had fallen far enough. In early 1934, Roosevelt set a new price for the gold standard, where one ounce of gold equaled 35 U.S. dollars.
fireside chats radio broadcasts made by Roosevelt to the American people to explain his initiatives
TheFDICand SEC
Many of Roosevelt s advisers wanted to go further, pushing for new regulations for banks and the stock market. Roosevelt agreed, and supported the Securities Act of 1933 and the Glass-Steagall Banking Act. The Securities Act required companies that sold stocks and bonds to provide complete and truthful information to investors. The Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) was created to regulate the stock market and stop fraud. The Glass-Steagall Act separated commercial banking from investment banking. Commercial banks handle everyday transactions and could no longer risk depositors money through stock speculation. The act also created the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) to provide government insurance for bank deposits. The creation of the FDIC increased public confidence in the banking system.
In creating the FDIC and the SEC, Congress changed the historical role of state and federal governments in financial matters. Until the New Deal, the regulation of banks had been the responsibility of state governments Today banks can have a federal charter or a state charter, and be subject to ot federal and state regulations. Similarly, up until 1933, the operation of stock markets had been generally unregulated. Under the laissez-faire ideas oft e fate 1800s, the idea that the federal government should impose ru es on a market where people met to buy and sell stocks was never seriously considere . The great crash of 1929 changed people’s thinking.
Roosevelt and the New Deal 313
The FDIC still exists today. It guarantees bank deposits up to $250,000 for all member banks and is funded by insurance premiums paid by the banks, not by taxpayer money. The FDIC supervises the operations of over 4500 banks nationwide making sure they are sound, and comply with all financial regulations and consumer protection laws. You can tell if a bank is insured by the FDIC by looking for the “Member FDIC” logo on bank windows, paper documents, and websites.
The SEC also still exists, regulating the operations of the nations stock markets. It inspects stock brokers, investment advisors, and agencies that rate stocks. It investigates reports of fraud, insider trading, and works to prevent companies from misleading investors with false information. The SEC does not insure investments. Investing in companies always carries risk and investors can lose their money. The SEC’s role is not to protect investments, but to prevent fraud and make sure investors are given correct information so they can make good investment decisions.
Mortgage and Debt Relief
Terrified of losing their homes and farms, many Americans cut back on spending to make sure they could pay their mortgages. Roosevelt responded by introducing policies to help Americans with their debts. For example, the Home Owners’ Loan Corporation bought the mortgages of home owners who were behind in their payments. It then restructured the loans with longer repayment terms and lower interest rates.
The Farm Credit Administration (FCA) helped farmers refinance their mortgages. These loans saved millions of farms from foreclosure. Although the FCA may have slowed economic recovery by making less money available to lend to more efficient businesses, it did help many desperate and impoverished people hold onto their land.
Both the HOLC and the FCA represented a dramatic expansion ofthe federal government’s role in the economy. Never before had the federal government been involved in helping people with their mortgages.
H READING PROGRESS CHECK
Summarizing How did the government restore confidence in the banking system?
Farms and Industry
guiding question How did New Deal legislation try to stabilize agriculture and industry?
Many of Roosevelt’s advisers believed that both farmers and businesses were suffering because prices were too low and production too high. To help the nation’s farmers, Congress passed the Agricultural Adjustment Act. The act was based on a simple idea—that prices for farm goods were lo because farmers grew too much food. Under this act, the government’s Agricultural Adjustment Administration (AAA) would pay farmers not to rai certain livestock, grow certain crops, and produce dairy products. Over the ne two years, farmers withdrew millions more acres from cultivation and receive! more than $1 billion in support payments. The program met its goal, althougl raising food prices in a depression drew harsh criticism. Also, not all farmers benefited. Thousands of tenant farmers, many of them African Americans, los their jobs and homes when landlords took their fields out of production.
The government turned its attention to manufacturing in June 1933, with the National Industrial Recovery Act (NIRA). Once passed, this law authorize the National Recovery Administration (NRA) to suspend antitrust laws and a owed business, labor, and government to cooperate with rules, or codes of 1
314
competition, for each industry. Codes set prices, established minimum wages, shortened workers’ hours to create more jobs, permitted unionization, and helped businesses develop industry-wide rules of fair competition. The NRA revived a few industries, but the codes were difficult to administer. Employers disliked that the NRA allowed workers to form unions. They also argued that paying minimum wages forced them to raise prices. After the NRA was instituted, industrial production fell. The NRA was declared unconstitutional in 1935.
H READING PROGRESS CHECK
Specifying How was the Agricultural Adjustment Act intended to stabilize the agricultural industry?
GEOGRAPHY CONNECTION
THE WORLD IN SPATIAL TERMS
What states other than Tennessee benefited from the TVA projects? PLACES AND REGIONS
Why do you think the majority of the projects were located in eastern Tennessee?
Relief Programs
guidingquestion How did New Deal programs differ from President Hoover's attempts to combat the Depression?
Many of President Roosevelt’s advisers emphasized tinkering with prices and providing debt relief to solve the Depression. Others maintained that the Depression’s fundamental cause was low consumption. They thought getting money into the hands of needy individuals would be the fastest remedy. Because neither Roosevelt nor his advisers wanted to give money to the unemployed, they supported work programs for the unemployed.
The decision to create federal work programs marked yet another change in the historical roles of state and federal government. Until the depression, relief programs run by government were rare, but when they have been set up, they had always been funded and managed by state and local governments. During the Hoover administration relief aid had, for the first time, been sent from the federal government to state governments to help them fund jobs
fundamental being of central importance
Roosevelt and the New Deal 315
This poster for the Civilian Conservation Corps (CCC) expresses the optimism ofthe New Deal.
CRITICAL THINKING
Drawing Conclusions How did the CCC provide opportunities for work, play, study, and health?
programs. But the New Deal went even further, with the creation of several federally managed job programs that bypassed the state governments entirely,
The CCC	u 1
The most highly praised New Deal work relief program was the Civilian Conservation Corps (CCC). The CCC offered unemployed young men 18-25 years old the opportunity to work under the direction of the forestry service planting trees, fighting forest fires, and building reservoirs. To prevent a repeat ofthe Dust Bowl, the workers planted a line of more than 200 million trees, known as a Shelter Belt, from north Texas to North Dakota.
The young men lived in camps near their work areas and earned $30 a month, $25 of which was sent directly to their families. The average CCC worker returned home after six to twelve months, better nourished and with greater self-respect. CCC programs also taught more than 40,000 of their recruits to read and write. By the time the CCC closed down in 1942, it had put 3 million young men to work outdoors—including 80,000 Native Americans, who helped reclaim land they had once owned. After a second Bonus Army march on Washington in 1933, Roosevelt added some 250,000 veterans to the CCC as well.
FERA and the PWA
A few weeks after authorizing the CCC, Congress established the Federal Emergency Relief Administration (FERA). Roosevelt chose Harry Hopkins, a former social worker, to run FERA. Initially, it did not create projects for the unemployed. Instead, it gave money to state and local agencies to fund their relief projects.
After meeting with Roosevelt to discuss his new job, Hopkins took the next two hours to spend $5 million on relief projects. When critics charged that some of the projects did not make sense in the long run, Hopkins replied, “People don’t eat in the long run—they eat every day.”
In June 1933, Congress authorized another relief agency, the Public Works Administration (PWA). One-third of the nation’s unemployed were in the construction industry. To put them back to work, the PWA began building highways, dams, schools, and other government facilities.
The PWA awarded contracts to construction companies. By insisting that contractors not discriminate against African Americans, the agency broke down some of the racial barriers in the construction trades.
The CWA
By the fall of 1933, neither FERA nor the PWA had reduced unemployment significantly, and Hopkins realized that unless the federal government acted quickly, a huge number of unemployed citizens would be in severe distress once winter began. After Hopkin; explained the situation, President Roosevelt authorized him to set u] the Civil Works Administration (CWA).
Hiring workers directly, the CWA employed 4 million people, including 300,000 women. The agency built or improved 1,000 airports, 500,000 miles of roads, 40,000 school buildings, and 3,500 playgrounds a parks. The program spent nearly $1 billion in just five months. Although the CWA helped many people get through the winter, President Rooseve was alarmed by how quickly the agency was spending money. He did no want Americans to get used to the federal government providing them v jobs. Warning that the Civil Works Administration would “become aha with the country, Roosevelt insisted that it be shut down the following spring. Hopkins summarized what the CWA had accomplished:
16
POLITICAL CARTOONS
THE NEW DEAL
This political cartoon from 1933 depicts the efforts made by President Roosevelt to end the Great Depression with his New Deal.
I
President Roosevelt tries to "prime" the economic pump using taxpayer dollars to get the economy going again.
1	Analyzing Primary Sources How
does the artist feel about the New Deal?
2	Analyzing Visuals What symbols are used to convey the artist's message?
PRIMARY SOURCE
“ Long after the workers of CWA are dead and gone and these hard times are forgotten, their effort will be remembered by permanent useful works in every county of every state. &
—from Spending to Save: The Complete Story of Relief, 1936
Connections to
Today
Emergency Economic Stabilization Act
Success of the First New Deal
During his first year in office, Roosevelt convinced Congress to pass an astonishing array of legislation. The First New Deal did not restore prosperity, but it reflected Roosevelt’s zeal for action and his willingness to experiment. Banks were reopened, many more people retained their homes and farms, and more people were employed. Perhaps the most important result of the First New Deal was a change in the spirit of the American people. Roosevelt’s actions had inspired hope and restored Americans’ faith in their nation.
B READING PROGRESS CHECK
Identifying How did the relief programs help combat the Depression?
LESSON 1 REVIEW

Government relief programs and legislation to help banks and other financial institutions are still enacted today. In 2008 the Emergency Economic Stabilization Act became law. It provided up to $700 billion to the secretary of the treasury to buy mortgages and other troubled assets from the country’s banks “to promote financial market stability.”
Reviewing Vocabulary
1.	Defining How did polio affect President Roosevelt's character and physical abilities?
2.	Explaining What did people fear would happen if the nation went off the gold standard? 15E
Using Your Notes
3.	Summarizing Use the notes you completed during the lesson to write a short paragraph summarizing how Roosevelt addressed the major problems during his first three months in office. 160,16E
Answering the Guiding Questions
4.	Identifying What qualities make an effective leader?
5.	Making Inferences Why are the first hundred days so important fora president?
6.	Describing Why did Roosevelt broadcast "fireside chats"?
7.	Analyzing How did New Deal legislation try to stabilize agriculture and industry? 160
8.	Contrasting How did New Deal programs differ from President Hoover's attempts to combat the Depression? 16D, 19A
Writing Activity
ARGUMENT
If you were an adviser to President Roosevelt, what ideas would you suggest to end the Depression? Provide an argument for why your ideas would work. 16D, 16E, 19A Roosevelt and the New Deal 317
The First New Deal When
FDR took office in 1933, the economy had been getting worse for more than three years. During the first one hundred days of his presidency, he oversaw 15 major pieces of legislation that attempted to revive the nation s economy and provide relief to the unemployed. Never before had the federal government intervened so directly in the economy. Key to stopping the economic downslide was FDR's ability to inspire confidence that the nation’s economic problems could be solved.
VOCABULARY
induction
process of placing someone in office
vigor
strength or force
framework
a basic supporting part or structure
shiftless
lacking in ambition, lazy
laissez faire
idea that government should not regulate the economy
revival
a renewal, coming alive again
INAGURAL ADDRESS,
1933 “I am certain that my fellow Americans expect that on my induction into the Presidency I will address them with a candor and a decision which the present situation of our nation impels. This is preeminently the time to speak the truth, the whole truth, frankly and boldly....
So, first of all, let me assert my firm belief that the only thing we have to fear is fear itself— nameless, unreasoning, unjustified terror which paralyzes needed efforts to convert retreat into advance. In every dark hour of our national life a leadership of frankness and vigor has met with that understanding and support ofthe people themselves which is essential to victory.
I am convinced that you will again give that support to leadership in these critical days....
This Nation asks for action, and action now.
Our greatest primary task is to put people to work. This is no unsolvable problem, if we face it wisely and courageously. It can be accomplished in part by direct recruiting by the Government itself, treating the task as we would treat the emergency of a war, but at the same time, through this employment accomplishing greatly needed projects to simulate and reorganize the use of our natural resources.”
—President Franklin D. Roosevelt, first inaugural address, delivered March 4,1933,
Excerpted from The Public Papers and Addresses of Franklin D. Roosevelt
“During the whole ’33 one-hundred days, Congress, people didn’t know what was going on, the public couldn’t understand these thing that were being passed so fast. They knew something was happening, something goodfc them. They began investing and working and hoping again....
The bank rescue of 1933 was probably the turning point ofthe Depression. When people were able to survive the shock of having all th banks closed, and then see the banks open up ... there began to be confidence. The public helped itself, after it got confidence. It marked the revival of hope.... A Depression is much like a run on a bank. It’s a crisis of confidence.”
—Raymond Moley, original member of FDF “brains-tru:
ORAL HISTORY INTERVIEW
“What Roosevelt and the New Deal did wast turn around and face the realities.... A hundred years from now, when historians loc back on it, they will say a big corner was turned. People agreed that old things didn’t
work. What ran through the whole New Deal was finding a way to make things work.
Before that, Hoover would loan money to farmers to keep their mules alive, but wouldn’t loan money to keep their children alive. This was perfectly right within the framework of classical thinking. If an individual couldn’t get enough to eat, it was because he wasn’t on the ball. It was his responsibility. The New Deal said: Anybody who is unemployed isn’t necessarily unemployed because he’s shiftless....
Great quantities [of letters] came pouring in, letters from everywhere. .. They were proposals from people, solutions to all sorts of problems. Some of them crackpot, some of them quite good. Everybody had suggestions. The country was aware, as it never was before, that it was on the edge of something...
Laissez faire as such certainly did not come to an end with the New Deal. We still have a tremendous amount of freedom of decisionmaking in the individual corporate enterprise. The new element is the government’s positive responsibility for making our economy run.”
—Economist Gardiner C. Means, economic adviser in the Roosevelt administration
[lira Analyzing Historical Documents
1.	Acquiring Information What is the “present situation” that President Roosevelt references in the first paragraph? What does President Roosevelt claim is the “greatest primary task?”
2.	Evaluating Language and Context What words and phrases does Roosevelt use in this speech to build confidence and trust and to convince people help is coming and that they do not have to be afraid anymore?
3.	Finding the Main Idea What appears to be the main idea of Hoover’s book based on this excerpt?
4.	Analyzing Historical Questions Critics of Roosevelt at the time and later, suggested he was undermining the free enterprise system. What do the comments by Gardiner Means suggest was the administration’s viewpoint on free enterprise? What does he say is different from a laissez-faire approach?
CONTEMPORARY BOOK,
1934 “Even if the government conduct of business could give us the maximum of efficiency instead of least efficiency, it would be purchased at the cost of freedom. It would increase rather than decrease abuse and corruption, stifle initiative and invention, undermine the development of leadership, cripple the mental and spiritual energies of our people and the forces which make progress....
The nation seeks for solution of its many difficulties. These solutions can come alone through the constructive forces from the system built upon Liberty. They cannot be achieved by the destructive forces of Regimentation. The purification of Liberty from abuses, the restoration of confidence in the rights of men, the release of the dynamic forces of initiative and enterprise are alone the methods by which these solutions can be found and the purpose of American life assured....”
—Former president Herbert Hoover in his book, The Challenge to Liberty (1934)
◄ A crowd confronts police at the locked gates of a bank shortly after Roosevelt’s Inauguration
5.	Answering Historical Questions Look at the photo of the bank holiday. What effect do you think it had when people arrived at the bank to find they could not get their money out? Why does Raymond Moley think their reaction was a good thing in the long run?
6.	Corroborating Based on Roosevelt’s speech, what does he appear to think is the biggest obstacle facing his administration? How do the two interviews corroborate what Roosevelt said in his inaugural speech?
7.	Evaluating Frame of Reference What are Herbert Hoover’s basic assumptions about the government and the economy? How does his frame of reference affect your opinion about the validity of his ideas? Why else might you question the validity of his arguments?
319
networks
There's More Online! gf BIOGRAPHY Charles Coughlin
BIOGRAPHY
Huey Long Ef biography Francis Townsend Ef CHART/GRAPH Wagner Act Ef CHART/GRAPH
First & Second New Deals
Ef SLIDESHOW New Deal
Opponents
r'" pH	f
*20A ?< monTH 7or TH 6oYRSof AGE THE SPEHDt
MOn£T Wfuu 'TvT’f^ £ or CREDIT jw Tur
Economic chz
LESSON 2
The Second New Deal
ST VIDEO
The New Deal INTERACTIVE SELF-CHECK QUIZ

itizens?
IT MATTERS BECAUSE
Reading HELPDESK
Academic Vocabulary
•	benefit • thereby
•	finance
Criticism of the New Deal led President Roosevelt to introduce new legislation in 1935. These laws created the Works Progress Administration, the National Labor Relations Board, and the Social Security Administration.
Content Vocabulary
•	deficit spending
•	binding arbitration
•	sit-down strike
TAKING NOTES:
Key Ideas and Details
Organizing As you read about President Roosevelt's Second New Deal, complete a graphic organizer similar to the one below by filling in his main legislative successes during this period.
Legislation	Provisions
	
	
	

TEKS
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills 16D compare the New Deal policies and its opponents’ approaches to resolving the economic effects of the Great Depression
continued on p. 322
Launching the Second New Deal
guidingquestion Why did President Roosevelt decide to introduce new legislation to fight the Depression?
President Roosevelt was tremendously popular during his first two years in office, but opposition to his policies began to grow. New Deal programs had created more than 2 million new jobs. More than 10 million workers remained unemployed, however, and the nation’s total income was about half of what it had been in 1929. Criticism From Right and Left
Roosevelt faced hostility from both the political right and the left. The right wing had long believed that the New Deal regulated business too tightly. Opponents thought that it gave the federal government too much power over the states. By late 1934, the right wing increased its opposition as Roosevelt started deficit spending, abandoning a balanced budget and borrowing money to pay for his programs. Many business leaders became alarmed at the growing deficit.
Some on the left, however, believed that the New Deal had not gone far enough. They wanted even more economic intervention to shift wealth from the rich to middle-income and poor Americans. One outspoken critic was Huey Long. As governor of Louisiana, Long had championed the poor. He improved schools, colleges, and hospitals, and built roads and bridges. These benefits made him popular, and he built a powerful but corrupt political machine. In 1930 Long was elected to the U.S. Senate. In 1934 he established the Share Our Wealth Society to “pull down these huge piles of gold until there shall be a real job, not a little old sow-belly, black-eyed pea job but a real spending
320
money, beef-steak and gravy... Ford in the garage ... red, white, and blue job for every man.” Long planned to run for president in 1936.
Roosevelt also faced a challenge from Catholic priest and popular radio host Father Charles Coughlin. Once an ardent New Deal supporter, the Detroit resident had grown impatient with its moderate reforms. He called for inflating the currency and nationalizing the banking system. In 1934 he organized the National Union for Social Justice, which some Democrats feared would become a new political party.
A third challenge came from California physician Francis Townsend. He proposed that the federal government pay citizens over age 60 a pension of $200 a month. Recipients would have to retire and spend the entire check each month. Townsend believed that the plan would increase spending and free up jobs for the unemployed. His proposal attracted millions of supporters, especially older Americans, who mobilized as a political force for the first time. Together, the three men had supporters around the country. Roosevelt faced the possibility of a coalition that would prevent his reelection.
TheWPA
In 1935 Roosevelt launched a series of programs, now known as the Second New Deal, to generate greater economic recovery. Among these new programs was the Works Progress Administration (WPA), the New Deal’s largest public works program. Between 1935 and 1941, the WPA employed 8.5 million workers and spent $11 billion to construct about 650,000 miles of roadways, 125,000 public buildings, 853 airports, more than 124,000 bridges, and more than 8,000 parks. One WPA program, called Federal Number One, financed artists, musicians, theater people, and writers.
Artists created murals and sculptures for public buildings; musicians set up orchestras and smaller musical groups; playwrights, actors, and directors wrote and staged plays; and writers recorded the stories of those who had once been enslaved and others whose voices had not often been heard.
SKILLS PRACTICE
Pick a partner. Read the lesson on the Second New Deal together. Help one another with difficult sentences. Explain what a sentence means if your partner does not know. Ask them for help if you have trouble. Ask a teacher for help with difficult sentences when you need it.
deficit spending
government practice of spending borrowed money rather than raising taxes, usually in an attempt to boost the economy
benefit something that promotes well-being or is a useful aid
finance to provide money for a project
The Supreme Court's Role
In May 1935, in Schechter Poultry Corporation v. United States, the Supreme Court struck down the authority of the National Recovery Administration. The Schechter brothers had been convicted of violating the NRAs poultry code. The Court ruled that the Constitution did not allow Congress to delegate its legislative powers to the executive branch, and therefore the NRA’s codes were unconstitutional. Roosevelt worried that the ruling suggested the Supreme Court could strike down the rest of the New Deal. Roosevelt knew he needed a
new series of programs to keep voters’ support. He called congressional leaders to a White House conference and thundered that Congress could not go home until it passed his new bills.
That summer, Congress passed Roosevelt’s programs.
B READING PROGRESS CHECK
Synthesizing What factors encouraged Roosevelt to introduce the Second New Deal? Some, including Dr. Francis Townsend, criticized the New Deal for not going far enough to relieve the economic troubles of poor and middle-class Americans.
CRITICAL THINKING
Comparing and Contrasting How did the political left's criticisms of the New Deal differ from those of the political right?
TH F
TBwnsenb Tt AH 200. ?£R month -Forthose qve
SoYKSofage The SPEND.*.
lG otTh
M«Yw,LL-purTHEC0NTb
orCREMT|NTdr
OF

1
ANALYZING PRIMARY SOURCES
There were many viewpoints on the New Deal. Some opponents believed it was undermining American society. Others thought it did not go far enough.
(S It is not easy for me to stand up here tonight and talk to the American people against the Democratic Administration. This is not easy... during my whole public life I put patriotism above partisanship. And when I see danger, I say danger—What are these dangers that I see? The first is the arraignment of class against class... In my time I have met some good and bad industrialists. I have met some good and bad financiers, but I have also met some good and bad laborers, and this I know, that permanent prosperity is dependent upon both capital and labor alike.
«So now, ladies and gentlemen, we come to that plan of mine.. .for the redistribution of wealth and for guaranteeing comforts and conveniences to all humanity out of this abundance in our country. I hope none will be horror-stricken when they hear me say that we musl limit the size ofthe big man's fortune in order to guarantee a minimum of fortune, life and comfort to the little man; but, if you are, think first that such is the declaration on which Roosevelt rode into the nomination and election of President. While my urgings are declared b some to be the average of a madman... if you will listen to me you wi find that it is restating the laws handed down by God to man; you will find that it was the exact provision of the contract and law ofthe Pilgrim Fathers who landed at Plymouth in 1620.99
And I also know that there can be no permanent prosperity in this country until industry is able to employ labor, and there certainly can be no permanent recovery upon any governmental theory of 'soak the rich'and'soakthe poor'99
—"Betrayal ofthe Democratic Party," Alfred E. Smith, keynote address to the Liberty League, 1936
AI
Smith was elected governor of New York four times. He was the Democratic Party's nominee for president in 1928. —from "Share OurWealth,"Huey Long radio address, 1935
Huey Long was a United States senator from Louisiana.
DBQ
Document Based Questions Q
Comparing and Contrasting In what ways are Huey Long's and Alfred E. Smith's concerns exactly the opposite c each other? Q
Analyzing Do you agree with Long or with Smith? Or do you disagree with them both? Explain your opinion. (continued from p. 320)
TEKS
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills 16E describe how various New Deal agencies and programs, including the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the Securities and Exchange Commission, and the Social Security Administration, continue to affect the lives of U.S. citizens 19A evaluate the impact of New Deal legislation on the historical roles of state and federal government
19B explain constitutional issues raised by federal government policy changes during times of significant events, including World War I, the Great Depression, World War II, the 1960s, and 9/11
21C evaluate constitutional change in terms of strict construction versus judicial interpretation
Reforms for Workers and Senior Citizens
guiding question Howdid the Wagner Act and the Social Security Act affect Americans?
When the Supreme Court struck down the NRA, it also invalidated the section of the NIRA that gave workers the right to organize. Democrats knew that the working-class vote was key to winning reelection in 1936. They also believed that unions could help end the Depression because higl union wages would give workers more money to spend, thereby boosting t economy. Opponents disagreed, arguing that high wages forced companies to charge higher prices and hire fewer people. Despite these concerns, Congress pushed ahead with new labor legislation.
The Wagner Act
In July 1935, Congress passed the National Labor Relations Act, also called the Wagner Act. This act guaranteed workers the right to unionize and bargain collectively. It also established the National Labor Relations Board (NLRB), which organized factory elections by secret ballot to determine whether workers wanted a union. The NLRB could also investigate employers’ actions and. stop unfair practices. The Wagner Act also set up a process called binding arbitration, whereby dissatisfied union members took their complaints to a neutral party who would listen to both sides and decide on the issues.
322
The Wagner Act led to a burst of labor activity. In 1935 John L. Lewis, leader ofthe United Mine Workers, helped form the Committee for Industrial Organization (CIO), which set out to organize unions that included all workers, skilled and unskilled, in a particular industry. First, it focused on the automobile and steel industries, two of the largest industries in which workers were not yet unionized. Organizers used new tactics to get employers to recognize the unions. For example, during sit-down strikes, employees stopped work inside the factory and refused to leave.
This technique prevented management from sending in replacement workers. It was a common CIO tactic for several years.
In late December 1936, the United Auto Workers (UAW), a CIO union, began a sit-down strike at General Motors plant in Flint, Michigan. Family, friends, and others passed food and other provisions to them through windows. Violence broke out when police launched a tear gas assault on strikers, wounding 13, but the strike held. On February 11, 1937, General Motors recognized the UAW as its employees sole bargaining agent. The UAW became one of the most powerful unions in the United States.
U.S.
Steel, the nation’s largest steel producer and a long-standing opponent of unionizing, decided it did not want to repeat GM’s experience. In March 1937, the company recognized the CIO’s steelworkers union. Smaller steel producers did not follow suit and suffered bitter strikes. By 1941, however, the steelworkers union had won contracts throughout the industry. In the late 1930s, employees in other industries worked hard to gain union recognition from their employers. Union membership tripled from roughly 3 million in 1933 to about 9 million in 1939.
In 1938 the CIO changed its name to the Congress of Industrial Organizations and became a federation of industrial unions.
Social Security
After passing the Wagner Act, Congress began work on one of the United States’s most important pieces of legislation. This was the Social Security Act, which provided some financial security for older Americans, unemployed workers, and others. Roosevelt and his advisers viewed the bill primarily as an insurance measure. Workers earned the right to receive benefits because they paid special taxes to the federal government, just as they paid premiums in buying a life insurance policy. The legislation also provided modest welfare payments to others in need, including people with disabilities and poor mothers with dependent children.
Some critics did not like the fact that the money came from payroll taxes imposed on workers and employers, but to Roosevelt these taxes were crucial.
— Analyzing-----
PRIMARY SOURCES
The GM Strike
Beds were made up on the floor of each car, the seats being removed if necessary....
I could not see—and I looked for it carefully—the slightest damage done anywhere to the General Motors Corporation. The nearly completed car bodies, for example, were as clean as they would be in the salesroom, their glass and metal shining.^
—Bruce Bliven, from "Sitting Down in Flint," The New Republic,
January 27,1937
DBQ
DRAWING CONCLUSIONS
How do the strikers seem to have I acted during the strike?
thereby because of that
binding arbitration
process in which a neutral party hears arguments from two opposing sides and makes a decision that both must accept
sit-down strike
method of boycotting work by sitting down at work and refusing to leave the establishment
Sit-down strikers at the GM Fisher body plant in Flint, Michigan, took over the plant in late December 1936. Their action led to a national strike that lasted until February 11,1937.
CRITICAL THINKING
Analyzing Primary Sources What did the atmosphere within the GM Fisher plant seem to be during the strike? Roosevelt andthe New Deal 323
The Social Security Act provided small incomes to millions of Americans who were unable to work through no fault of their own.
PRIMARY SOURCE
CRITICAL THINKING
Predicting Consequences How might Social Security have changed Americans' sense of personal economic security? We put those payroll contributions there so as to give the contributors a legal, moral, and political right to collect their pensions and their unemployment benefits. With those taxes in there, no... politician can ever scrap my social security program.”
—quoted in "Memorandum on Conference with FDR Concerning Social Security Taxation,’19)
What Roosevelt did not anticipate was that Congress would later horror from the Social Security fund to pay for other programs without raising payroll taxes.
The core of Social Security was the monthly retirement benefit, which people collected when they stopped working at age 65. Unemployment insurance supplied a temporary income to workers who had lost their jobs.
Social Security continues to be a part of American life today. When Americans find themselves unemployed, they can draw on their unemployment insurance from Social Security for many weeks while they look for a new job. In addition, of course, Americans who have contributed t the Social Security system are eligible for a pension benefit when they retire.
In 2013, the government paid out over 1.3 trillion dollars in Social Security payments, approximately 37% of all federal government spending that year.
Social Security dramatically changed the role of the federal governmen It was the first example of what came to be called “entitlement” programs. An entitlement program is not simply a form of welfare or relief. It is a payment from the government that Americans are entitled to receive, in pa because they have paid into the system regularly with deductions from thei paychecks, and in part because the law imposes a requirement on the government to make the payments.
Social Security was controversial at the time it was passed, and remains a source of political debate today, in part because even though Americans are entitled to their Social Security payments, the federal government has borrow) against the Social Security fund in the past, and is now forced to borrow more money to pay its Social Security obligations. With the federal government deeply in debt and continuing to use deficit spending in almost every budget, concerns have arisen as to whether Social Security can remain solvent and the U.S. government will be able to meet its obligations. Social Security establishe the principle that the federal government should be responsible for those who through no fault of their own, were unable to work.
Q READING PROGRESS CHECK
Evaluating What were some benefits ofthe Wagner Act and the Social Security t for the American public?
Vocabulary Review
1.	Defining What happens when the federal government starts a policy of deficit spending? 16D, 19A
2.	Explaining What was one unique feature of sit-down strikes?
Using Your Notes
3.	Summarizing Review the notes that you completed during the lesson, and then summarize the provisions of Roosevelt's major legislation of the Second New Deal. 16D, 16E, 19A
Answering the Guiding Questions
4.	Identifying Cause and Effect Why did President Roosevelt decide to introduce new legislation to fight the Depression? tf
5.	Analyzing How did the Wagner Act and the Social Security A< affect Americans? 16D,16E,19A
Writing Activity
ARGUMENT
Choose a person or group who criticized the New Deal. Write an editorial to the local newspaper expressing why readers should be in support of or in opposition to that viewpo 324
networks
There's More Online!
gf BIOGRAPHY Mary McLeod Bethune
CHART/GRAPH
Monthly Unemployment Rate zf GRAPHIC ORGANIZER
New Deal Coalition
GRAPHIC ORGANIZER
Relief, Reform, Recovery rf IMAGE Court Packing Reaction
VIDEO
The ^lew Deal Coalition INTERACTIVE SELF-CHECK QUIZ
LESSON 3
The New Deal Coalition
IliH
i i SsSs :
assii«il::'
> « Can government fix the economy? ible for the economic well-being of its citizens?
Reading HELPDESK
It Matters Because
cademic Vocabulary
recovery • mediate
President Roosevelt was reelected in a landslide in 7 936. Early in his second term, however, his court-packing plan and a new recession hurt him politically. The Fair Labor Standards Act, the last significant piece of New Deal legislation, provided new protections for workers.



mtent Vocabulary court-packing broker state safety net
KING NOTES:
y Ideas and Details itlining As you read, create an tline similar to the one below.
lie New Deal Coalition
Roosevelt’s Second Term A.
3.
C.
k
B
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills i 2D explain the significance of the	j
following years as turning points: 1898	J
(Spanish-American War), 1914-1918 (World 1 War I), 1929 (the Great Depression begins), \ 1939-1945 (World War II), 1957 (Sputnik \ launch ignites U.S.-Soviet space race),
1968-1969 (Martin Luther King Jr. assassination and U.S. lands on the moon),
1991 (Cold War ends), 2001 (terrorist	\
attacks on World Trade Center and the	\
Pentagon), and 2008 (election of first black president, Barack Obama)	'
continued on the next page 1
Roosevelt's Second Term
guiding question Why do you think Roosevelt easily won reelection?
In 1936 millions of voters owed their jobs, mortgages, and bank accounts to the New Deal. Many African Americans, who had reliably voted Republican since Reconstruction, switched their allegiance to the Democratic Party. Women and African Americans had made modest gains, thanks to the support of Eleanor Roosevelt, who toured the country and recounted her experiences to her husband. She persuaded him to address some of their problems in his New Deal programs. A Democratic Party coalition emerged, including not just the white South but also African Americans, farmers, workers, immigrants, women, progressives, and intellectuals.
The Election of 1936
The Republicans nominated Kansas governor Alfred Landon as their presidential challenger. He wanted to “free the spirit of American enterprise,” but could not convince most voters change was needed. Roosevelt won more than 60 percent of the popular vote.
The Court-Packing Plan
Although the New Deal was popular, the Supreme Court saw things differently. In January 1936, it declared the Agricultural Adjustment Act unconstitutional. Cases pending on Social Security and the Wagner Act meant that the Court might strike down other New Deal programs.
Roosevelt was furious. After his reelection, he tried to change the Court’s political balance. He sent Congress a bill that would increase the number of justices and allow the president to appoint an additional
Roosevelt and the New Deal 325
court-packing the act of a
leader to change the political balance of power in a nation's judiciary system by appointing judges who will rule in favor of his or her policies
recovery an economic upturn, as after a depression
(continued from p. 325)
TEKS
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills 19A evaluate the impact of New Deal legislation on the historical roles of state and federal government
19B explain constitutional issues raised by federal government policy changes during times of significant events, including World War I, the Great Depression, World War II, the 1960s, and 9/11
20B evaluate the impact of relationships among the legislative, executive, and judicial branches of government, including Franklin D. Roosevelt’s attempt to increase the number of U.S. Supreme Court justices and the presidential election of 2000
continued on the next page
Mary McLeod Bethune, shown with Eleanor Roosevelt, became the first African American woman to head a federal agency.
CRITICAL THINKING
Comparing and Contrasting What mood does the photograph convey? justice if a sitting justice who had served 10 years did not retire within six months of reaching age 70. The bill, if passed, would have allowed Roosevelt to appoint up to six new justices.
The court-packing plan, as it was called, was a major political mistake. Many Southern Democrats feared new justices would overturn segregation. African American leaders worried future justices might oppose civil rights. Many Americans thought the plan gave the president too much power. The Court appeared to back down, narrowly upholding the constitutionality of both the Wagner Act and the Social Security Act. Soon after, a conservative justices resignation allowed Roosevelt to appoint a justice who supported the New Deal
Although the bill was quietly killed and Roosevelt achieved his goal of changing the Court’s view of the New Deal, the court-packing plan hurt his reputation. Moreover, it caused conservative Democrats to work with Republicans to block any further New Deal proposals.
The Recession of 1937
Roosevelt’s problems continued. In early 1937, the economy seemed to be on the verge of recovery. Industrial output was almost back to pre-Depression levels, and many people believed the worst was over. Concerned about rising debt, Roosevelt ordered the WPA and the PWA to be cut significantly. Unfortunately, he cut spending just as the first Social Security payroll taxes took $2 billion out of the economy. By the end of 1937, about 2 million peop were out of work.
A debate over the value of government spending arose within the administration. The leaders of the WPA and the PWA cited a new economic theory called Keynesianism (KAYN • zee • uh • nih • zuhm), which held that government should spend heavily in a recession to jump-start the economy.
At first, Roosevelt was reluctant to begin deficit spending again. Some critics believed the recession proved the public was becoming too dependent on government spending. But in early 1938, with no recovery i sight, Roosevelt asked Congress for $3.75 billion for the PWA, the WPA, and other programs.
HREAPING PROGRESS CHECK
Determining Cause and Effect What factors helped Roosevelt win a landslide victory in 19.
The New Deal Ends
guiding question What impact has New Deal legislation had on federal and state governments?
In his second Inaugural Address, Roosevelt had pointed out that despite progrf in climbing out of the Depression, many Americans were still poor:
PRIMARYSOURCE
** I see one-third of a nation ill-housed, ill-dad, ill-nourished.... The test of our progress is not whe we add more to the abundance of those who have much; it is whether we provide enough for those1 have too little.**
from The Public Papers and Addresses of Franklin D. Roosevelt: The Constitution Prevail:
The Last New Deal Reforms
One ofthe presidents goals for his second term was to provide better housin for the nations poor. Eleanor Roosevelt, who had toured poverty-stricken Appalachia and the rural South, strongly urged the president to do somethin Roosevelt responded with the passage of the National Housing Act, which established the United States Housing Authority. This organization received
500 million to subsidize loans to builders willing to construct low-cost hous
Roosevelt also sought to help the nation’s tenant farmers. About 150,000 white and 195,000 Afncan American tenant farmers were expelled from farms when landlords took their land out of production under the AAA To stop this trend, Congress created the Farm Security Administration to give loans to tenants so they could purchase farms.
The last major piece of New Deal reform was the Fair Labor Standards Act, which abolished child labor, limited the workweek to 44 hours for most workers, and set the first federal minimum wage at 25 cents an hour. The recession of 1937 enabled Republicans to win seats in Congress in the midterm elections of 1938. Together with conservative Southern Democrats, they began blocking further New Deal legislation. By 1939, the New Deal era had come to an end.
(continued from p. 326)
TEKS
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills 21C evaluate constitutional change in terms of strict construction versus judicial interpretation
26D identify the political, social, and economic contributions of women such as Frances Willard, Jane Addams, Eleanor Roosevelt, Dolores Huerta, Sonia Sotomayor, and Oprah Winfrey to American society
The New Deal's Legacy
The onset of the Great Depression in 1929 was a major turning point in American history. The economic crisis of the Depression led to the New Deal, which fundamentally changed the relationship between the American people and the federal government. As a result of the Depression, the power of the federal government to intervene in the economy significantly increased.
At the same time, the historical role of the state governments and their relationship to the federal government began to shift as well. Increasingly the federal government took on a regulatory role that had previously been left to state governments. In addition, state governments began to look to the federal government as a source of additional funds to help them afford state programs and provide aid in difficult economic circumstances.
The New Deal did not end the Depression, but it did give many Americans a stronger sense of security and stability. As a whole, the New Deal tended to balance competing economic interests. Supreme Court decisions in 1937 and 1942 further increased federal power over the economy and allowed it to mediate between competing groups.
In taking on this mediating role, the New Deal established what some have called the broker state, in which the government works out conflicts among different interests. This broker role has continued under the administrations of both parties ever since. The New Deal also brought about a new public attitude toward government. Roosevelts programs had succeeded in creating a safety net—safeguards and relief programs that protected people against economic disaster. Throughout the hard times of the Depression, most Americans maintained a surprising degree of confidence in the American system.
H READING PROGRESS CHECK
Evaluating How did the New Deal change how government worked?
mediate to attempt to resolve conflict between hostile people and groups
broker state role of government to work out conflicts among competing interest groups
safety net something that provides security against misfortune; specifically, government relief programs intended to protect against economic disaster
LESSON 3 REVIEW
Reviewing Vocabulary
1.	Stating What was Roosevelt's court-packing plan? 20B.21C
2.	Defining What is a broker state? 2D.19A
3.	Explaining How does a safety net work? 19A
Using Your Notes
4.	Summarizing Review the notes that you completed during the lesson. What were the key events of the final years
Answering the Guiding Questions
5.	Synthesizing Why do you think Roosevelt easily won reelection?
6.	Evaluating What impact has New Deal legislation had on federal and state governments? 19A, 20B
Writing Activity
ARGUMENT
Do you think that Roosevelt's solution to the 1937 recession was the best one? Write a short essay in which you give your opinions about Roosevelt's actions and describe your own ideas about ways that could have eased the crisis. 16D Roosevelt and the New Deal 327
V
chapter io Assessment
Directions: On a separate sheet of paper, answer the questions below. Make sure you read carefully and answer all parts of the questions.
Lesson Review
Lesson 1
0 Identifying Central Issues What were the Hundred Days?
0 Describing Explain why Roosevelt asked Congress to abandon the gold standard, and then later restore it.
How did these decisions reflect his administration's monetary policy? 15E
0 Identifying Describe the different perspectives on government regulation of business among Roosevelt's advisors. Why did Roosevelt assemble an administration made up of so many people with differing viewpoints? 16D
0 Describing How did the Glass-Steagall Act reduce the risk of loss for people who deposit money in banks? 16E
0 Interpreting What was the initial response to Roosevelt's fireside chats?
Lesson 2
0 Summarizing What did Roosevelt's opponents think about the work and policies established in the first two years of his presidency? 16D
0 Identifying Cause and Effect Why was the Wagner Act enacted? 16D
0 Summarizing Explain the idea ofthe Social Security system, why it was passed, and how it is supposed to function. 16E
Lesson 3
0 Evaluating Why was the court-packing plan so controversial? Explain the implications ofthe plan on the relationship between the legislative, executive, and judicial branches of government. 20B
0 Analyzing Which groups were a part ofthe New Deal coalition?
■
7ziq|
0 Identifying What decisions by Roosevelt may have contributed to the Recession of 1937?
© Explaining Think about all of the changes that occurred during the New Deal, and then explain why 1929 and the onset ofthe Great Depression is a turning point in American history. 2D
Exploring the Essential Questions
© Presenting a Point of View Imagine you are running fi Congress during the Great Depression and that you are preparing for a political debate with a member ofthe opposing party. Prepare your opening statement answering the question: "Is government responsible for the economic well-being of its citizens?"
© Assessing Write a paragraph to analyze this question: "Can the government fix the economy?" Use evidence frt Roosevelt's New Deal programs to answer the question.
Critical Thinking
© Describing What was the purpose ofthe Agricultural Adjustment Act? What problems did it create?
© Drawing Conclusions What conclusions can you draw about the decision to establish the Works Progress Administration (WPA)? What were some ofthe long-teri effects of WPA projects?
© Evaluating What constitutional issues were raised by federal government's efforts to end the Great Depressic Describe how the Supreme Court responded to the New Deal. Did its rulings reflect a strict construction ofthe Constitution? Explain why or why not. 19B, 21C
0 Explaining How did the Home Owners' Loan Corporal help individuals by buying the mortgages of people wh were behind in their payments? How did the program f the banking industry and communities?
Need Extra Help?
328
(J) Drawing Conclusions How does the Social Security Administration continue to affect the lives of U.S. citizens today? 16E
© Identifying What financial protection do Americans have today because of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation that they did not have before Roosevelt's New
Deal Program? Why is this protection significant?
16E, 29B
© Explaining Cause and Effect What impact did the Wagner Act have on the labor movement? What techniques did workers use to force employers to meet their demands?
© Evaluating How did the New Deal change the historical roles of the state and federal governments? In what way did these changes mark a departure from the original ideas of the Constitution? 19A, 19B
© Drawing Conclusions What were Eleanor Roosevelt's political and economic contributions during her years as first lady? 26D
Social Studies Skills
$ Explaining Continuity and Change Why did large numbers of African Americans shift from supporting the traditional support of the Republican Party and begin voting for Roosevelt and other Democratic candidates?
© Applying Chronology and Sequencing Using the
library, or online sources, research the programs created
during the first hundred days of Roosevelt's
administration. Create a timeline of the programs. List
each of the major acts and programs passed by Congress in
order and identify the date they passed. Then use the
timeline to explain which groups of people were targeted
for help in the first 100 days of the administration.
2C, 29B
© Extrapolating Review the various New Deal programs discussed in the chapter. Select one that you think is still useful today, or could be used or adapted to solve a current problem. Write a paragraph explaining what group or groups of people it would help and how it would do^so.
!£££] Analyzing Primary Sources
Read the excerpt from Franklin Roosevelt's inaugural address, and then answer the questions that follow.
PRIMARY SOURCE
(( Our greatest primary task is to put people to work. This is no unsolvable problem if we face it wisely and courageously. It can be accomplished in part by direct recruiting by the Government itself, treating the task as we would treat the emergency of a war. Our Constitution is so simple and practical that it is possible always to meet extraordinary needs by changes in emphasis and arrangement without loss of essential form.
We do not distrust the future of essential democracy."
—Franklin Roosevelt's inaugural address
© Analyzing Primary Sources What does Roosevelt think is the most important thing to accomplish? How does he propose to do it? 29A
© Identifying Central Issues What unspoken fear does Roosevelt address? 29A
Read the excerpt from Eleanor Roosevelt's autobiography, and then answer the questions that follow.
PRIMARY SOURCE
« This trip to the mining areas was my first contact with the work being done by the Quakers. I liked the idea of trying to put people to work to help themselves. The men were started on projects and taught to use their abilities to develop new skills. The women were encouraged to revive any household arts they might once have known but which they had neglected in the drab life of the mining village.... It was all experimental work, but it was designed to get people off relief, to put them to work building their own homes and to give them enough land to start growing food.99
—The Autobiography of Eleanor Roosevelt, 1937
© Drawing Conclusions According to Eleanor Roosevelt, what were benefits of the Quaker project? 29A, 29H
© Making Connections What does this say about Eleanor
Roosevelt's views on government aid to the poor?
29A, 29H
Need Extra Help?
19 20 21
22	23	24	25	26	27	28
t 23
|fio to page
324 313 322 327
325 312 307 318 321
Roosevelt and the New Deal 329
Analyzing Visuals
Use the graph to answer the following questions.
Positive/Negative Employment Rates (0 = Average Employment Rates)
0 Analyzing Graphs What does the zero line represent on the graph? Based on the graph's pattern, what was the state ofthe economy in 1941? 29H
(J) Explaining Based on what you know about the New Deal and the events ofthe era, what caused the dramatic decline in employment in late 1937? What is significant about the decline? 29H
Use the map to answer the following questions.
© Identifying How did the distribution of population in the Tennessee Valley Authority (TVA) impact the physical environment? Why do you think the Tennessee River Valley was chosen for this project? 14A, 29H, 31B
Need Extra Help?
Extended-Response Questions
© Compare and Contrast Write a brief essay comparing the policies ofthe New Deal with the approaches advocated by political opponents on the right and the lefi of the political spectrum. What were their main objection to the New Deal? How did Roosevelt structure the New Deal to build political support and counter the complaint of opponents? 16D
© Expository Look up the full text of Roosevelt's first inaugural address to the nation on March 4,1933, either online or at a library. Imagine that you are a newspaper reporter who covered the inauguration and is now lookir back at Roosevelt's first 100 days in office. Write a news article describing the mood ofthe nation at the time ant the promises that Roosevelt made to the nation. Describ what Roosevelt was trying to do in the speech. Use evidence from the speech and from the chapter to expla what Roosevelt accomplished in his first 100 days and whether he lived up to his promises in the speech. 29t
Standardized Test Practice
© How do citizens today benefit from the policies ofthe Securities and Exchange Commission that were made during the New Deal? 16E, 29B
A.
Today's investors receive information from compar about the stocks they own. B.
Today's investors can make more money than evei before because ofthe regulations. C.
Today's investors have their stock purchases insuri by the government. D.
Today's investors can buy and sell stocks wheneve they wish. © Which New Deal program insured citizens'bank depos and improved public confidence in the banking systen
F. FCA
G. SEC
H. FDIC J. NIRA
ISotopage | 307 | 307 | 307 | 326131^^0^^0^^^^^
330
A
World in Flames networks
There's More Online about the United States and World War II.
1931-1941
CHAPTER
11
Lesson 1
The Origins of World War II
Lesson 2
From Neutrality to 1/1/ar
Lesson 3
The Holocaust
The Story Matters...
After Japanese forces attacked American forces at Pearl Harbor on December 7,1941, thousands of men and women volunteered to serve in the U.S. military. With the U.S. declaration of war, American soldiers were thrown into a fight to the death between fascism and democracy.
U.S.
Navy serviceman Dorie Miller was a cook on the USS 14/esf Virginia docked at Pearl Harbor, Hawaii, on December 7,1941. He heroically took over an antiaircraft gun when his commanding officer was fatally wounded. He later won the Navy Cross for his courageous actions during the battle. On November 25,1944, Miller was officially listed as "presumed dead" a year after his escort cruiser was torpedoed in the Pacific. PHOTO:
Library of Congress 331
