CHAPTER 12
Place and Time: The world 1941-1945
After Germany invaded Poland, President Roosevelt expanded the army and built up the country's defenses. After the bombing of Pearl Harbor, the United States was at war. The United States increased the defense budget and rapidly increased production of aircraft, ships, and equipment. The nation was now fighting a war that involved Europe, Africa, and the Pacific.

Step Into the Place
Read the quote and look at the information presented on the map. £B9 7B, 7e, 29a, 29H, 31b
How did the scale of World War II influence Roosevelt's feelings about democracy?
December 7, 1941: The Japanese attacked Pearl Harbor, Hawaii.
Global Scale of World War II
1942: German subm< attacked and sank hu of Allied freighters
PRIMARYSOURCE
The preservation ofthe spirit and faith ofthe nation does, and will, furnish the highest justification for every sacrifice that we may make in the cause of national defense.
In the face of great perils never before encountered, our strong purpose is to protect and to perpetuate the integrity of democracy. For this we muster the
spirit of America, and the faith of America.
We do not retreat. We are not content to stand still. As Americans, we go forward, in the service of our country....”
D.
Roosevelt, Third Inaugural Address, January 20,1941 Step Into the Time
Determining Cause	BH33SESI3
Determining Cause and Effect Choose a WWII event from the time line and
imeTiTfcTsi JrirZTi HlalliTal
PACIFIC OCEAN
1942: After having several ships sunk by German submarines, Brazil declared war on the Axis. 1944: Brazil sent 25,000 troops to fight alongside the U.S. Army in Europe.
Main Allied Countries I I Other Allied Countries I. . I Main Axis Countries I I Other Axis Countries & Battle
0	3000 km
Robinson projection
F.
Roosevelt 1933-1945

WORLD
3000 miles i
tankers along thee
June 25,1941 Roosevelt bans February 1942 Japanese* discrimination in defense industries relocation ordered
Decembers, 1941 United States May1942 Women's Army At enters World War II	Corps established

!tw@rks
More Online!
MAP
Explore the “ interactive version of this map on Networks.
r-f TIMELINE Explore the M interactive version of the
time line on Networks.
4RC77C OCE71A/
'Xs/
ex
PHOTOS: left page (t)Library of Congress (b)detail/White House Collection/The White House Historical Association; fight page detail/White House Collection/The White House Historical Association
i - »
networks
BIOGRAPHY
Oveta Culp Hobby I Ef BIOGRAPHY Henry Kaiser I
Ef BIOGRAPHY A. Philip Randolph ’
Ef CHART/GRAPH Output of Military Products
sf MAP Japanese Relocation Camps Ef map Migration in the United States Ef slideshow Japanese
There's More Online!

LESSON 1
Wartime America
Sf SLIDESHOW The Real Rosie ef video Women at War Ef INTERACTIVE SELF-CHECK QUIZ
Internment
of sacrifices does war require!
Reading HELPDESK
Academic Vocabulary
draft « coordinate
justify
IT MATTERS BECAUSE
After World War I, America returned to isolationism. When l nation entered World War II in 1941, its armed forces rankei nineteenth in might, behind the tiny European nation of Belgium. Three years later, the United States was producing 40 percent of the world's arms.
Content Vocabulary
•	disenfranchised
•	cost-plus
•	Sunbelt
•	zootsuit
•	victory suit
•	rationing
•	victory garden
TAKING NOTES:
Key Ideas and Details
Organizing Use the following graphic organizer to list changes for women and minorities during the war.
	Changes
Women	
African Americans	
Native Americans	
Hispanic Americans	
Japanese Americans	
1
1
Building the Military
guidingquestion What roles did minorities and women play in the armed forces during World War II?
Within days of Germany’s attack on Poland in 1939, President Roosevelt expanded the army to 227,000 soldiers. Before the spring of 1940, many Americans had opposed a peacetime draft Opinions changed after France surrendered to Germany in June 1940. In September of that year, Congress approved the Selectiv Training and Service Act—a plan for the first peacetime draft in American history—by a wide margin.
The man responsible for taking the flood of recruits and buildii large modern army capable of engaging the armed forces of Germai and Japan was General George C. Marshall, chief of staff of the U.S. Army and Roosevelt’s chief military advisor. Marshall would guide largest expansion of the army in American history from fewer than 190,000 men at the time the war began in Europe in 1939 to over 8 million men by the war’s end.
You're in the Army Now
More than 60,000 men enlisted in the month after the attack on Pe< Harbor. At first, the flood of recruits overwhelmed the army’s train facilities and equipment supplies. In 1940 the Department of Agricul had transferred over 350,000 acres to the War Department. New ba such as the Naval Air Station in Jacksonville, Florida, were built, an existing ones such as Eglin Air Force base were expanded. Many reci lived in tents rather than barracks, carried sticks representing guns practiced maneuvers with trucks labeled “TANK.”
358
New recruits were given physical exams and injections against smallpox and typhoid. Then they were issued uniforms, boots, and available equipment, and sent to basic training for eight weeks. Trainees drilled and exercised constantly and learned how to work as a team. Basic training helped break down barriers between soldiers. Recruits came from all over the country, and training together created tight relationships among the troops.
A
Segregated Military Although basic training promoted unity, most recruits did not encounter Americans from every part of society. At the start ofthe war, the U.S. military was segregated. African Americans were organized into their own units, but white officers generally commanded them. Military leaders typically assigned them to construction and supply units.
Pushing for "Double V" Not all African Americans wanted to support the war. As one African American college student noted: “The Army jim-crows us.... Employers and labor unions shut us out. Lynchings continue. We are disenfranchised .. . [and] spat upon. What more could Hitler do to us than that?” Nevertheless, most agreed that they should support their country. One leading African American newspaper, the Pittsburgh Courier, launched the “Double V” campaign to urge readers to support the war to win a double victory over Hitler’s racism abroad and racism at home.
African Americans in Combat Under pressure from African American leaders, President Roosevelt ordered the armed services to recruit African Americans and to put them into combat. He also promoted Colonel Benjamin 0. Davis, Sr., the highest-ranking African American officer, to the rank of brigadier general.
In early 1941, the air force created its first African American unit, the 99th Pursuit Squadron. Trained in Tuskegee, Alabama, the pilots became known as the Tuskegee Airmen. Commanded by Lt. Colonel Benjamin O. Davis, Jr., the squadron helped win the Battle of Anzio in Italy. Three other Tuskegee squadrons protected American bombers as they flew to their targets. Known as the 332nd Fighter Group, these squadrons flew 200 such missions without losing a single member to enemy aircraft. Also, the African American 761st Tank Battalion was commended for service during the Battle of the Bulge.
Other Minorities in the Military Although Japanese Americans were not allowed to serve at first, as the war progressed second-generation Japanese Americans served in the 100th Infantry Battalion and the 442nd Regimental Combat Team. Almost half had been in internment camps in
TEKS
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills 7B evaluate the domestic and international leadership of Franklin D. Roosevelt and Harry Truman during World War II, including the U.S. relationship with its allies and domestic industry’s rapid mobilization for the war effort
7C analyze the function ofthe U.S. Office of War Information
7D analyze major issues of World War II, including the Holocaust; the internment of German, Italian, and Japanese Americans and Executive Order 9066; and the development of conventional and atomic weapons
7F evaluate the military contributions of leaders during World War II, including Omar Bradley, Dwight Eisenhower,
Douglas MacArthur, Chester A. Nimitz,
George Marshall, and George Patton
7G explain the home front and how American patriotism inspired exceptional actions by citizens and military personnel, including high levels of military enlistment; volunteerism; the purchase of war bonds; Victory Gardens; the bravery and contributions of the Tuskegee Airmen, the Flying Tigers, and the Navajo Code Talkers; and opportunities and obstacles for women and ethnic minorities
17A describe the economic effects of World War II on the home front such as the end ofthe Great Depression, rationing, and increased opportunity for women and minority employment
continued on the next page
draft a system used for choosing people from the population to serve in the military
disenfranchise to deprive of the right to vote
SKILLS PRACTICE
CHARTS/GRAPHS
U.S. ARMED FORCES,
1939-1946 Source: Historical Statistics ofthe United States,
1	Comparing and Contrasting
In which years were the armed forces at their highest and lowest levels?
2	Drawing Conclusions Between which two years was there the greatest increase in the armed services? What happened during this time period that might account forthe increase?
I
When you hear new academic vocabulary words, be sure to use them to help build your understanding of them. This section uses the academic terms “draft,” “coordinate” and “justify”. Include these words in sentences you write and in discussions with your classmates.
America and World Warll 359
— Analyzing-----
Primary Sources
Broadened Perspectives
66 Entrance into the Army in August, 1942, widened my horizons literally as well as experientially: for the first time I travelled beyond a 200 mile radius from Newark. I marveled at the flatness of the prairie in Illinois.... Stops at posts in Miami Beach, Florida, and Richmond, Virginia, were my introduction to the American South. M
—Carl Degler, from The History Teacher, vol. 23,1990
DBQ
DRAWING CONCLUSIONS
Why might entering the army have changed a person's perspective?
(continued from p. 359)
TCKS
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills 19B explain constitutional issues raised by federal government policy changes during times of significant events, including World War I, the Great Depression, World War II, the 1960s, and 9/11
27B explain how specific needs result in scientific discoveries and technological innovations in agriculture, the military, and medicine, including vaccines
the Southwest. Together these units became the most decorated in the history of the United States military. Approximately 500,000 Hispanic Americans served in the armed forces despite racial hostility against them. By the end ofthe war, 17 Hispanic Americans had received the Medal of Honor.
About one-third of all able-bodied Native American men aged 18-50 served in the military during the war. More than 400 Navajo marines served as “code talkers,” relaying critical information and orders over fielc radios as spoken messages coded in their own language.
Of the half million Jewish Americans who served in the military, approximately 52,000 were decorated for bravery. Because so many European Jews died as a result of the Holocaust, American Jews took on increased leadership in the worldwide Jewish community.
Although the military did not end all segregation during the war, it di integrate military bases in 1943 and steadily expanded the role of African Americans within the armed forces. These successes paved the way for President Truman’s decision to fully integrate the military in 1948. Women Join the Armed Forces
Women also joined the armed forces. The army enlisted them for the firs time but barred them from combat. Many army jobs were administrative and clerical. Filling these jobs with women freed more men for combat.
Congress first allowed women in the military in May 1942 by creatin: the Women’s Army Auxiliary Corps (WAAC). It appointed War Departm official Oveta Culp Hobby as WAAC’s first director. Many women were unhappy that WAAC was not part of the regular army, however. About a year later, the army replaced the WAAC with the Women’s Army Corps (WAC), and Hobby became a colonel.
The coast guard, navy, and marines followed suit and set up women’s units. Another 68,000 women served as nurses in the army and navy. Ab 300 women serving as Women Airforce Service Pilots (WASPs) made me than 12,000 flights to deliver planes to the war effort.
H READING PROGRESS CHECK
Summarizing How did the status of women and minorities in the armed forces change during the war?
1
2
CHARTS/GRAPHS
MOBILIZING INDUSTRY
Determining Cause and Effect
When did tank production begin to drop? Why might this be so?
Predicting Consequences
How might the changes in industrial production toward the end ofthe war have affected employment in the late 1940s?
Source: The Big V. American Logistics in World War SI.
Industrial workers watch as new tanks rol out ofthe factory.
360
American Economy in Wartime
GUIDING QUESTION
Howdidthe U.S. government mobilize the economy for war? Fighting a global war troubled President Roosevelt, but not British prime minister Winston Churchill, who knew that victory depended on industry. He compared the American economy to a gigantic boiler: “Once the fire is lighted under it there is no limit to the power it can generate.”
Converting the Economy
War production increased rapidly after the attack on Pearl Harbor, helped by existing government plans to build thousands of warplanes and a “Two-Ocean navy. Roosevelt believed that government and business had to work together to prepare for war. He created the National Defense Advisory Committee and asked business leaders to serve on the committee. The president and his advisers believed that giving industry incentives to produce goods quickly was the best way to rapidly mobilize the economy.
Normally, the government asked companies to bid on contracts to produce military equipment, a slow process. Instead, the government signed cost-plus contracts, agreeing to pay a company the cost to make a product plus a guaranteed percentage as profit. Under the cost-plus system, the more—and faster—a company produced, the more money it made. Although not cheap, the system got war materials produced quickly and in quantity. Cost-plus convinced many companies to convert to war production, and Congress authorized the Reconstruction Finance Corporation (RFC) to make loans to companies wanting to convert.
American Industry Gets the Job Done
By the fall of 1941, much had already been done to prepare the economy for war, but it was still only partially mobilized. The attack on Pearl Harbor changed everything. By the summer of 1942, almost all major industries and some 200,000 companies had converted to war production. Together they made the nation’s wartime “miracle” possible.
cost-plus a government contract to pay a manufacturer the cost to produce an item plus a guaranteed percentage
ANALYZING PRIMARY SOURCES
The Value of Vehicles
PRIMARYSOURCE
*Ohe greatest advantage... the United States has enjoyed
on the ground in the fighting so far [was]... the jeep and the two-and-a-half-ton truck. These are the instruments which moved and supplied United States troops in battle, while the German Army... depended heavily on animal transport.... The United States, profiting from the mass production achievements of its automotive industry... had mobility that completely outclassed the enemy. **
—General George C. Marshall, chief of staff for the U.S. Army, quoted in Miracle of World War II
DBQ
Analyzing Historical Documents Making Inferences Why was U.S. mobility such an important advantage?
j-
America and World War II 361
Tanks Replace Cars The automobile industry was uniquely suited to mass-producing military goods. Automobile pla began making trucks, jeeps, and tanks. M< production was critical because the count: that could move troops and supplies most quickly usually won the battle.
Automobile factories produced rifles, helmets, artillery, and dozens of other pie of military equipment along with vehicles Henry Ford created an assembly line near Detroit for the enormous B-24 “Liberator bomber. The factory went on to build mo than 8,600 aircraft. Overall, the auto industry made nearly one-third of all wartime military equipment.
Building Liberty Ships Ford’s remarka achievement in aircraft production was it than matched by Henry Kaiser’s shipyard German submarines were sinking Ameri< cargo ships at a terrifying rate. The Unite States had to find a way to build cargo sh
During World War II, millions of American women took jobs in wartime factories.
CRITICAL THINKING
Making Connettions What was the long-term impact of women's wartime participation in the labor force? as quickly as possible. Kaiser’s method emphasized speed and results. Instead of building an entire ship in one place from the keel up, parts w prefabricated and brought to the shipyard for assembly.
Kaiser’s shipyards built many kinds of ships, but they were best knov for basic cargo ships called Liberty ships. When the war began, it took 244 days to build the first Liberty ship. After Kaiser shipyards applied th mass-production techniques, average production time dropped to 41 dai Kaiser’s shipyards built 30 percent of all American ships constructed dui the war.
As war production grew, controversies between business leaders, government agencies, and the military increased. President Roosevelt created the War Production Board (WPB) to direct priorities and production goals. Later he set up the Office of War Mobilization to settle disputes among the different agencies.
H READING PROGRESS CHECK
Explaining How did the government work to quickly prepare the American ecoi for the war effort?
Life on the Home Front
guiding question How did World War II change life for women and minorities in the United States?
The war dramatically changed American society. Unlike much of Euro] and Asia, which experienced devastation, America benefited somewha from the war. Mobilizing the economy finally ended the Great Depress creating almost 19 million new jobs and nearly doubling the average family s income. As an Ohio worker noted, “[O]ne of the important thi that came out of World War II was the arrival of the working class at a status level in this society. . . . The war integrated into the mainstream whole chunk of society that had been living on the edge.”
The improvement in the economy did not come without cost. Families had to move to where the defense factories were located. Housing conditions were terrible. The pressures and prejudices of the era led to strikes, race riots, and rising juvenile delinquency. Goods were rationed and taxes were higher. Workers earned more money, but also worked longer hours.
When the war began, American defense factories wanted to hire white men. With so many men in the military, however, there simply were not enough white men to fill all ofthe jobs. Under pressure to produce, employers began to recruit women and minorities.
Women in Defense Plants
During the Great Depression, many people believed married women should not work outside the home, especially if they took jobs that could go to men trying to support their families. Most working women were young, single, and employed in traditional female jobs such as domestic work or teaching. The wartime labor shortage, however, forced factories to recruit married women for industrial jobs traditionally reserved for men.
Although the government hired nearly 4 million women, primarily for clerical jobs, the women working in the factories captured the publics imagination. The great symbol of the campaign to hire women was “Rosie the Riveter,” a character from a popular song by the Four Vagabonds. The lyrics told of Rosie, who worked in a factory while her boyfriend served in the marines. Images of Rosie appeared on posters, in newspapers, and in
nWTi ANALYZING SUPREME COURT CASES
KOREMATSU v. UNITED STATES, 1944
Background to the Case
During World War 11, President Roosevelt's Executive Order 9066 and other legislation gave the military the power to exclude people of Japanese descent from areas that were deemed important to U.S. national defense and security. In 1942 Toyosaburo Korematsu refused to leave San Leandro, California, which had been designated as a "military area" based on Executive Order 9066. Korematsu was found guilty in federal district court of violating Civilian Exclusion Order No. 34. Korematsu petitioned the Supreme Court to review the federal court's decision.
How the Court Ruled
In their decision, the majority of the Supreme Court, with three dissenting, found that, although exclusion orders based on race are constitutionally suspect, the government is justified in time of "emergency and peril"to suspend citizens'civil rights. A request fora rehearing ofthe case in 1945 was denied.
Japanese American women and their children
talk together at the Heart ofthe Mountain Relocation Camp.
Q
Drawing Conclusions Why did the Supreme Court find in favor ofthe government in this case, even though the justices were suspicious of exclusion based on race? Q
Suggesting a Solution Under what circumstances, if any, do you think the government should be able to suspend civil liberties of all or specific groups of American citizens? America and World War II 363
Sunbelt a new industrial region in southern California and the Deep South that developed during World War II
coordinate to harmonize or bring into common action, movement, or condition
-Thinkina Like a —i
HISTORIAN |
Distinguishing Fact from Opinion
When In Defense of Internment: The Case for “Racial Profiling” in World War II and the War on Terror was published in 2004, many historians were outraged. Author Michelle Malkin supported the decision to put Japanese Americans in internment camps. The Historians’ Committee for Fairness said it was “contradicted by several decades of scholarly research.” Malkin wrote that Roosevelt had evidence that some spying was taking place on the West Coast, and that Roosevelt was protecting national security.
zoot suit men's clothing of extreme cut typically consisting of a thigh-length jacket with wide padded shoulders and baggy, pleated pants with narrow cuffs
magazines. Eventually 2.5 million women worked in shipyards, aircraft factories, and other manufacturing plants.
By the end of the war, the number of working women had increased from 12.9 million to 18.8 million. Although most women were laid off or their jobs voluntarily after the war, their success permanently changed American attitudes about women in the workplace.
African Americans Demand War Work
Factories hired women, but they resisted hiring African Americans. Frustrated by the situation, A. Philip Randolph, the head of the Brotherh of Sleeping Car Porters—a major union for African American railroad workers—decided to act. He informed President Roosevelt that he was organizing a march on Washington “in the interest of securing jobs... in I national defense and . . . integration into the . . . military and naval force
On June 25, 1941, Roosevelt issued Executive Order 8802, which sta “there shall be no discrimination in the employment of workers in defei industries or government because of race, creed, color, or national origi To enforce the order, he created the Fair Employment Practices Commission, the first federal civil rights agency since Reconstruction.
Mexican Farmworkers
The wartime economy also benefited Mexicans. In 1942 the federal government arranged for Mexican farmworkers to help harvest crops in Southwest as part of the Bracero Program, which continued until 1964. More than 200,000 Mexicans came to work during the war. Many also helped build and maintain railroads. Migrant workers thus became important to the Southwest’s economic system.
q READING PROGRESS CHECK
Describing What changes did women and minorities experience as a result of economic mobilization?
A
Nation on the Move guidingquestion How did the wartime relocation of many Americans affect U.S. government and sot
The wartime economy created millions of new jobs, leading 15 million Americans to move to find work. The growth of southern California and cities in the Deep South created a new industrial region—the Sunbelt. C with war industries had to find room for the thousands of arriving worke Tent cities and parks filled with tiny trailers sprang up. Congress authors $150 million for housing in 1940. In 1942 Roosevelt created the National Housing Agency (NHA) to coordinate government housing programs. Racism Leads to Violence
Many African Americans left the South for jobs in war factories in the North and West. However, African Americans often faced suspicion an intolerance. Racial violence erupted in Detroit on Sunday, June 20, 194. Fighting between white and African American teens triggered a citywk riot that left 25 African Americans and 9 whites dead.
In Los Angeles, the fear of juvenile crime and racism against Mexican Americans became linked in the “zoot suit” riots. Popular with Mexican American teenagers, zoot suits had very baggy, pleated pants and an overstuffed, knee-length jacket with wide lapels. Most men, to conserve fab
364
Americans donated pots, tires, tin cans, car bumpers, broken radiators, and rusting bicycles to scrap drives held during World War II.
CRITICAL THINKING
Drawing Conclusions How did holding scrap drives help the government prevent shortages?
for the war, wore a "victory suit" with no vest, no cuffs, a short jacket, and narrow lapels. In June 1943, after hearing rumors that zoot-suiters had attacked several sailors, some 2,500 soldiers and sailors attacked Mexican American neighborhoods in Los Angeles.
Japanese, German, and Italian American Relocation
When Japan attacked Pearl Harbor, many Americans turned their anger against Japanese immigrants and Japanese Americans. On February 19, 1942, President Roosevelt signed Executive Order 9066 allowing the War Department to declare any part of the United States a military zone and to remove people from that zone as needed. He must have felt justified four days later when a Japanese submarine surfaced north of Santa Barbara, California, and shelled an oil refinery. Most of the West Coast was declared a military zone, and people of Japanese ancestry were evacuated to 10 internment camps farther inland.
In 1988 President Ronald Reagan apologized to Japanese Americans on behalf of the U.S. government and signed legislation granting $20,000 to each surviving Japanese American who had been interned.
Thousands of people of German and Italian descent also had their freedom restricted. All unnaturalized residents of German and Italian descent aged 14 years or over were deemed enemy aliens and subject to regulations including travel restrictions and the seizure of personal property. More than 5,000 were arrested and sent to live in military internment camps.
D READING PROGRESS CHECK
Determining Cause and Effect How did both voluntary and forced movement during World War II change the United States?
Daily Life in Wartime
guiding question What steps did the government take to stabilize wages and prices?
Both wages and prices began to rise quickly during the war because of the high demand for workers and raw materials. Worried about inflation, Roosevelt created the Office of Price Administration and Civilian Supply
, (OPACS) and the Office of Economic Stabilization (OES) to regulate wages ; and certain prices. At the end of the war, prices had risen only about half i as much as they had during World War I.
i While OPACS and OES worked to control inflation, the War Labor<
, Board (WLB) tried to prevent strikes. Most American unions issued a no J strike pledge,” instead asking the WLB to mediate wage disputes. By the * end of the war, the WLB had helped settle more than 17,000 disputes.
Support and Sacrifices
5 High demand for raw materials and supplies created shortages. OPACS | began rationing, or limiting the purchase of, many products to make sure ! enough were available for military use. Households picked up a book of j rationing coupons every month for different kinds of food. When people * bought food, they had to have enough coupon points to cover their I purchases. Meat, sugar, fats, oils, processed foods, coffee, shoes, and gasoline
victory suit a men's suit with no vest, no cuffs, a short jacket, and narrow lapels, worn during World War II in order to save fabric for the war effort
justify to prove or to show to be just, right, or reasonable
rationing restricting the amount of an item an individual can have due to a limited supply
America and World War II 365
were all rationed. Driving distances were restricted, and the speed limit v set at 35 miles per hour to save gas and rubber.
Americans also planted gardens in backyards, schoolyards, city parks and empty lots to produce more food for the war effort. The government
victory garden garden	encouraged victory gardens by praising them in film reels, pamphlets, an
planted by dtizens during war to	official statements. The government organized scrap drives to collect rubb
raise vegetables for home use,	tin, aluminum, and steel.
leaving more for the troops	The federal government spent more than $300 billion during World W
II—more money than it had spent from Washingtons administration to th end of Franklin Roosevelt’s second term. Congress raised taxes, although i as high as Roosevelt requested due to public opposition to large tax increa As a result, the extra taxes collected covered only 45 percent of the wars ci
To make up the difference, the government issued war bonds. Buying b< is a way to loan money to the government. In exchange for the money, the government promised to repay the bonds’ purchase price plus interest at soi future date. Individual Americans demonstrated their patriotism and commitment to winning the war by buying nearly $50 billion worth of war bonds. Banks, insurance companies, and other financial institutions bought rest—more than $100 billion worth of bonds.
Despite the hardships, the overwhelming majority of Americans believe the war had to be fought. Although the war brought many changes to the U States, most Americans remained united behind one goal—winning the wa: Hollywood Goes to War
In 1942 President Roosevelt created the Office of War Information (0\ The OWI’s role was to improve the public’s understanding of the war ai act as a liaison office with the various media. The OWI established det; guidelines for filmmakers, including a set of questions to be considers before making a movie, such as, “Will this picture help win the war?” P READING PROGRESS CHECK
Evaluating How did the Office of Price Administration and Civilian Supply assur there were enough supplies for military use?
LESSON 1 REVIEW
Reviewing Vocabulary
1.	Explaining How did cost-plus contracts help the United States prepare for war? 7B
Using Your Notes
2.	Evaluating Use the notes that you completed during the lesson to evaluate which groups benefited from the war, and how they did so. 7G.17A
Answering the Guiding Questions
3.	Summarizing What roles did minorities and women play in the armed forces during World War II? 7G
4.	Analyzing How did the U.S. government mobilize the economy for war? 7B.17A
5.	Assessing How did World War II change life for women am minorities in the United States? 7G, 17A
6.	Mailing Connections How did the wartime relocation of r Americans affect U.S. government and society? 17A
7.	Specifying What steps did the government take to stabili; wages and prices? 17A
Writing Activity
INFORMATIVE/EXPLANATORY
Think about what you learned about women and minorities in the workforce durii World War I. Write a short essay in which you compare the i of women and minorities in the workforce during World Wt and World War II. 7G.17A 366
etworks
here's More Online!
BIOGRAPHY
Chester Nimitz IMAGE
Battle of Tarawa IMAGE
Kamikaze Pilots PRIMARYSOURCE
Code Breaking VIDEO
Forced Labor in Asia INTERACTIVE SELF-CHECK QUIZ
° Z -
k

hilippin&^ea jeon
PHILIPPINES
Leyte Gulf * 123-26,1944jt LESSON 2
The War in the Pacific
ds of sacrifices does war require?
HELPDESK
Academic Vocabulary
code
Content Vocabulary
amphtrac • kamikaze
it matters because
The early battles ofthe war required changes in strategy from all sides. In the Pacific, the Battle of Midway was a major turning point against the Japanese. After that American victory, Admiral Nimitz and General MacArthur led American forces in a steady advance across the Pacific.
Holding the Line Against Japan
guidingquestion Why was the Doolittle Raid important for U.S. forces in the Pacific?
TAKING NOTES:
Key Ideas and Details
Organizing Use the following graphic organizer to record the major battles discussed and the victor in each.
TfljS Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills
7D analyze major issues of World War II, including the Holocaust; the internment of German, Italian, and Japanese Americans and Executive Order 9066; and the development of conventional and atomic weapons
7E analyze major military events of World War II, including the Battle of Midway, the U.S. military advancement through the Pacific Islands, the Bataan Death March, the invasion of Normandy, fighting the war on multiple fronts, and the liberation of concentration camps
continued on the next page
Admiral Chester Nimitz, the commander of the United States Navy in the Pacific, began planning operations against the Japanese navy. Although the Japanese had badly damaged the American fleet at Pearl Harbor, they had missed the American aircraft carriers, which were at sea on a mission. The United States had several carriers in the Pacific, and Nimitz was determined to use them. In the days just after Pearl Harbor, however, Nimitz could do little to stop Japan’s advance into Southeast Asia.
The Fall of the Philippines
A few hours after bombing Pearl Harbor, the Japanese attacked American airfields in the Philippines. Two days later, they landed troops. The American and Filipino forces defending the Philippines were badly outnumbered. Their commander, General Douglas MacArthur, retreated to the Bataan Peninsula. Using the peninsula’s rugged terrain, the troops held out for more than three months.
By March, in desperation, the troops ate cavalry horses and mules. The lack of food and supplies, along with diseases such as malaria, scurvy, and dysentery, took their toll. The women of the Army Nurse Corps worked on Bataan in primitive conditions. Patients slept in the open air. One nurse, Rose Meier, reported, “If we needed more room, we got our axes and chopped some bamboo trees down.”
America and World War II 367
General Douglas MacArthur (1880-1964)
General Douglas MacArthur graduated from West Point in 1903. One of his first military assignments was in the Philippines, site of his later World War II defeat and subsequent victory. In 1904 he was appointed aide-de-camp to his father, General Arthur MacArthur, in Japan. Following his World War II success in the Pacific, he was appointed Supreme Commander, Allied Powers (SCAP), in Japan. There he decreased Japan's military and helped reestablish its economy.
CRITICAL THINKING
Evaluating What is the significance of MacArthur's early military experience in the Philippines and Japan? Realizing MacArthur’s capture would demoralize the American people, President Roosevelt ordered the general to evacuate to Australia. MacArthur promised, <lI came through, and I shall return.
On April 9, 1942, the weary defenders of the Bataan Peninsula final surrendered. Nearly 78,000 prisoners of war were forced to march-sicl exhausted, and starving—65 miles (105 km) to a Japanese prison camp. Almost 10,000 troops died on this march, which was later to be called t! Bataan Death March. Private Leon Beck was taken prisoner when Bataa surrendered and took part in the Bataan Death March for 13 days befor escaping. He later recalled:
PRIMARY SOURCE
(continued front p. 367)
TEKS
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills 7F evaluate the military contributions of leaders during World War II, including Omar Bradley, Dwight Eisenhower, Douglas MacArthur,
Chester A. Nimitz, George Marshall, and George Patton
7G explain the home front and how American patriotism inspired exceptional actions by citizens and military personnel, including high levels of military enlistment; volunteerism; the purchase of war bonds; Victory Gardens; the bravery and contributions of the Tuskegee Airmen, the Flying Tigers, and the Navajo Code Talkers; and opportunities and obstacles for women and ethnic minorities
continued on the next page
^They'd halt us in front of these big artesian wells... so we could see the water and they wouldn us have any. Anyone who would make a break for water would be shot or bayoneted. Then they we there. Finally, it got so bad further along the road that you never got away from the stench of deatl There were bodies laying all along the road in various degrees of decomposition—swollen, burst o maggots crawling by the thousands....»
—from Death March: The Survivors ofBatai
Sixty-six women nurses were also captured and sent to the University o Santo Tomas in Manila. They remained there—with 11 navy nurses anc some 3,000 Allied civilians—until early in 1945.
Although the troops in the Bataan Peninsula surrendered, a small f held out on the island of Corregidor in Manila Bay. Finally, in May 194 Corregidor surrendered. The Philippines had fallen to the Japanese. The Doolittle Raid on Tokyo
Even before the Philippines fell, President Roosevelt was searching for; way to raise the morale of the American people. He wanted to bomb Tc but American planes could reach Tokyo only if an aircraft carrier brouj them close enough. However, Japanese ships in the North Pacific preve carriers from getting near Japan.
In early 1942, a military planner suggested replacing the carrier’s u; short-range bombers with long-range B-25 bombers that could attack f farther away. The only problem was that, although B-25s could take off from a carrier, the bombers could not land on its short deck. After attac Japan, they would have to land in China.
President Roosevelt put Lieutenant Colonel James Doolittle in command of the mission to bomb Tokyo. At the end of March, a crane loaded sixteen B-25s onto the aircraft carrier Hornet. The next day, the Hornet headed west across the Pacific. On April 18, American bombs f on Japan for the first time.
Japan Changes Strategy
While Americans rejoiced in the air force’s success, Japanese leaders w< aghast at the raid. Those bombs could have killed Emperor Hirohito, w was revered as a god. The Doolittle Raid convinced Japanese leaders to change their strategy.
Before the raid, the Japanese navy had disagreed about the next ste The officers in charge of the navy’s planning wanted to cut American supply lines to Australia by capturing the south coast of New Guinea. 1 commander of the fleet, Admiral Yamamoto, wanted to attack Midway Is and—the last American base in the North Pacific west of Hawaii. Yamamoto believed that attacking Midway would lure the American fl< into battle and enable his fleet to destroy it.
368
These Navajo code talkers assigned to a Pacific-based marine regiment relay orders using a field radio.
CRITICAL THINKING
Evaluating What advantages did the code talkers provide to American forces?
6
o
x
After Doolittles raid, the Japanese war planners dropped their opposition to Yamamoto’s idea. The American fleet had to be destroyed to protect Tokyo from bombing. The attack on New Guinea would still go ahead, but only three aircraft carriers were assigned to the mission. All of the other carriers were ordered to assault Midway.
The Battle of the Coral Sea
The Japanese believed that they could safely proceed with two attacks at once because they thought their operations were secret. What the Japanese did not know was that an American team of code breakers based in Hawaii had already broken the Japanese navy’s secret code for conducting operations.
In March 1942, decoded Japanese messages alerted the United States to the Japanese attack on New Guinea. In response, Admiral Nimitz sent two carriers, the Yorktown and the Lexington, to intercept the Japanese in the Coral Sea.
There, in early May, carriers from both sides launched all-out airstrikes against each other. Although the Japanese sank the Lexington and badly damaged the Yorktown, the American attacks prevented the Japanese from landing on New Guinea’s south coast and kept the supply lines to Australia open.
The Navajo Code Talkers
When American marines stormed an enemy beach, they used radios to communicate. Using radios, however, meant that the Japanese could intercept and translate the messages. In the midst of the battle, there was no time to use a code-machine. Acting upon the suggestion of Philip Johnston, an engineer who had lived on a Navajo reservation as a child, the marines recruited Navajos to serve as “code talkers.”
The Navajo language had no written alphabet and was known only to the Navajo and a few missionaries and anthropologists. The Navajo recruits developed code words, using their own language, that stood for military terms. For example, the Navajo word jay-sho, or buzzard, was code for bomber; lo-tso, or “whale,” meant battleship; and ni-ma-si, or potatoes, stood for grenades.
Code talkers proved invaluable in combat. They could relay a message in minutes that would have taken a code-machine operator hours to encipher and transmit. During the Battle of Iwo Jima, code talkers transmitted more than 800 messages during the first 48 hours as the marines struggled to
(continued from p. 368)
TEKS
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills 27B explain how specific needs result in scientific discoveries and technological innovations in agriculture, the military, and medicine, including vaccines
code a signal or symbol used to represent something that is to be kept secret
The Navajo language is not a written language, and only a small number of people understand it.
CRITICALTHINKING
Drawing Conclusions What was the advantage of having a code that the Japanese could not decipher? GEOGRAPHY CONNECTIONCHAR
The Battle of Midway was fought predominantly by aircraft.
THE WORLD IN SPATIAL TERMS
When did Japan launch the attack on Midway? PHYSICAL SYSTEMS
Why were aircraft carriers so vital to the war in the Pacific? 
get ashore under intense bombardment. Sworn to secrecy, their mission not revealed until 1971. In 2001 Congress awarded the code talkers the Congressional Gold Medal for their unique contribution during the wa
H READING PROGRESS CHECK
Explaining What did the Doolittle Raid on Tokyo accomplish?
Battle of Midway
guiding question Why was the Battle of Midway a turning point in the war in the Pacific?
Back at Pearl Harbor, the code-breaking team now learned ofthe plan attack Midway. With so many ships at sea, Admiral Yamamoto transmi the plans for the Midway attack by radio, using the same code the Americans had already cracked.
Admiral Nimitz had been waiting for the opportunity to ambush tl Japanese fleet. He immediately ordered carriers to take up positions ne Midway. Unaware that they were heading into an ambush, the Japanese launched their aircraft against Midway on June 4, 1942. The American were ready. The Japanese ran into a blizzard of antiaircraft fire, and 38 planes were shot down. As the Japanese prepared a second wave to attack Midway, aircraft from the American carriers Hornet, Yorktown, Enterprise then launched a counterattack. The American planes caugh Japanese carriers with fuel, bombs, and aircraft exposed on their flight d< Within minutes, three Japanese carriers were reduced to burning wre<
370
A fourth was sunk a few hours later, and Admiral Yamamoto ordered his remaining ships to retreat.
The Battle of Midway was a turning point in the war. The Japanese navy lost four large carriers—the heart of its fleet. Just six months after Pearl Harbor, the United States had stopped the Japanese advance. The victory was not without cost, however. The battle killed 362 Americans and 3,057 Japanese.
g REAPING PROGRESS CHECK
Explaining Why was the United States able to ambush the Japanese at Midway and turn the tide of the war?
Driving Back Japan
guiding questions What was the military strategy behind "island-hopping"? Was it successful?
The American plan to defeat Japan called for a two-pronged attack. The Pacific Fleet, commanded by Admiral Nimitz, would advance through the central Pacific by “hopping” from one island to the next, closer and closer to Japan. Meanwhile, General MacArthur’s troops would advance through the Solomon Islands, capture the north coast of New Guinea, and then launch an invasion to retake the Philippines.
Island-Hopping in the Pacific
By the fall of 1943, the navy was ready to launch its island-hopping campaign, but the geography of the central Pacific posed a problem. Many of the islands were coral reef atolls. The water over the coral reef was not always deep enough to allow landing craft to get to the shore. If the landing craft ran aground on the
— Analyzing-----
Primary sources
Sherrod on the Battle of Tarawa
Two more Marines scaled the seawall, [one] carrying a twin-cylindered tank strapped to his shoulders, the other holding the nozzle of the flamethrower.... [A] khaki-clad figure ran out the side entrance. The flamethrower... caught him in its withering stream of intense fire. As soon as it touched him, the [Japanese soldier] flared up like a piece of celluloid. He was dead instantly... charred almost to nothingness.^
—Robert Sherrod, from Tarawa: The Story of a Battle
DBQ
DRAWING CONCLUSIONS
Based on this excerpt, how do you think fighting continued?
GEOGRAPHY CONNECTION
120°E
140°E



Other troops fighting in the Pacific included the American Volunteer Group (AVG), known as the Flying Tigers, who helped defend China against Japanese forces.
CRITICALTHINKING
Analyzing Information How did aircraft help support the troops on the ground?
amphtrac an amphibious tractor used to move troops from ships to shore
reef, the troops would have to wade to the beach. As some 5,000 United States Marines learned at Tarawa Atoll, wading ashore coul cause very high casualties. Tarawa, part of the Gilbert Islands, was the navy’s first objective. The Japanese base there had to captured in order to put air bases in the nearby Marshall Islands.
When the landing craft hit the reef, ai least 20 ships ran aground. The marines h to plunge into shoulder-high water and wa several hundred yards to the beach. Raked I
Japanese fire, only one marine in three made ashore. Once the marines reached the beach, t battle was still far from over.
Although many troops died wading ashore, on< vehicle had been able to cross the reef and deliver its
troops onto the beaches. The vehicle was a boat with tank tracks, nicknamed the “Alligator.” This amphibious tractor, or amphtrac, had been invented in the late 1930s to rescue people in Florida swamps. It had never been used in combat, and the navy decided to buy only 2 of them in 1941. If more had been available at Tarawa, American casualties probably would have been much lower.
More than 1,000 marines died on Tarawa. Photos of bodies lying crumpled next to burning landing craft shocked Americans back home. Ma people began to wonder how many lives would be lost in defeating Japan.
The next assault—Kwajalein Atoll in the Marshall Islands—went mu more smoothly. This time all of the troops went ashore in amphtracs. Although the Japanese resisted fiercely, the marines captured Kwajalein and nearby Eniwetok with far fewer casualties.
After the Marshall Islands, the navy targeted the Mariana Islands. Ameri< military planners wanted to use the Marianas as a base for a new heavy bomb the B-29 Superfortress. The B-29 could fly farther than any other plane in the world. From airfields in the Marianas, B-29s could bomb Japan. Admiral Nin decided to invade three of the Mariana Islands: Saipan, Tinian, and Guam. Despite strong Japanese resistance, American troops captured all three by August 1944. A few months later, B-29s began bombing Japan.
MacArthur Returns
As the forces under Admiral Nimitz hopped across the central Pacific, General Douglas MacArthur’s troops began their own campaign in the southwest Pacific. The campaign began by invading Guadalcanal in the Solomon Islands, east of New Guinea, in August 1942. It continued until early 1944, when MacArthur’s troops finally captured enough islands to surround the main Japanese base in the region. In response, the Japanesi withdrew their ships and aircraft from the base, although they left 100,0 troops behind to hold the island.
Worried that the navy’s advance across the central Pacific was leavin him behind, MacArthur ordered his forces to leap nearly 600 miles (9661 to capture the Japanese base at Hollandia on the north coast of New Guinea. Shortly after securing New Guinea, MacArthur’s troops seized t island of Morotai—the last stop before the Philippines.
To take back the Philippines, the United States assembled an enormous invasion force. In October 1944, over 700 ships carrying more than 160,000
372
PHOTO:
Digital Stock/CORBIS/Royalty troops sailed for Leyte Gulf in the Philippines. On October 20, the troops beg; to land on Leyte, an island on the eastern side of the Philippines. A few hours after the invasion began, MacArthur headed to the beach. Upon reaching the shore, he strode to a radio and spoke into the microphone: “People ofthe Philippines, I have returned. By the grace of Almighty God, our forces stand again on Philippine soil.”
To stop the American invasion, the Japanese sent four aircraft carriers toward the Philippines from the north and secretly dispatched another fleet from the west. Believing the Japanese carriers were leading the main attack, most of the American carriers protecting the invasion left Leyte Gulf and headed north to stop them. Seizing their chance, the Japanese warships to the west raced through the Philippine Islands into Leyte Gulf and ambushed the remaining American ships.
The Battle of Leyte Gulf was the largest naval battle in history. It was also the first time that the Japanese used kamikaze attacks. Kamikaze means “divine wind” in Japanese. It refers to the great storm that destroyed the Mongol fleet during its invasion of Japan in the thirteenth century. Kamikaze pilots would deliberately crash their planes into American ships, killing themselves but also inflicting severe damage. Luckily for the Americans, just as their situation was becoming desperate, the Japanese commander, believing more American ships were on the way, ordered a retreat.
Although the Japanese fleet had retreated, the campaign to recapture the Philippines from the Japanese was long and grueling. More than 80,000 Japanese were killed; fewer than 1,000
surrendered. MacArthur’s troops did not capture Manila until March 1945. The battle left the city in ruins and more than 100,000 Filipino civilians dead. The remaining Japanese retreated into the rugged terrain north of Manila; they were still fighting in August 1945 when word came that Japan had surrendered.
an
kamikaze during World War II, a Japanese suicide pilot whose mission was to crash into his target
Victory in the Battle of Leyte Gulf enables MacArthur to return to the Philippines.
CRITICAL THINKING
Analyzing Visuals How does the photo represent the success ofthe island-hopping strategy? D READING PROGRESS CHECK
Describing How did the United States Navy successfully drive back Japanese forces in the Pacific?
LESSON 2 REVIEW

Reviewing Vocabulary
1.	Explaining Explain how amphtracs helped the marines land more safely on Pacific islands. 7D, 278
Using Your Notes
2.	Explaining Use your notes on major Pacific battles to explain the causes and effects ofthe effort to defeat the Japanese in 1942. 7E
Answering the Guiding Questions
J.
Assessing Why was the Doolittle Raid important for U.S. forces in the Pacific? 7E, 7F 4.	Drawing Conclusions Why was the Battle of Midway a turning point in the war in the Pacific? 7E
5.	Evaluating What was the military strategy behind "islandhopping"? Was it successful? 7E
Writing Activity
ARGUMENT
Suppose you are a journalist in 1971 reporting on the government's disclosure about the Navajo code talkers. Write a newspaper article informing Americans how the code talkers assisted the marines at the Battle of Iwo Jima. 7G America and World War II 373
networks
There's More Online!
BIOGRAPHY
Omar Bradley BIOGRAPHY George C. Marshall ef BIOGRAPHY George Patton
MAP
The Battle of Stalingrad Ef VIDEO The War in Europe
INTERACTIVE SELF-CHECK QUIZ
LESSON 3
The War in Europe
•	target • intense
•	briefly
Content Vocabulary
Halting the Germans
guidingquestion Why did Churchill and Roosevelt want to attack German-controlled ai North Africa before areas in Europe?
•	periphery
•	convoy system
TAKING NOTES:
Key Ideas and Details
Organizing Use the following graphic organizer to record the major battles discussed and when each was
fought.
international leadership of Franklin D. Roosevelt and Harry Truman during World War II, including the U.S. relationship with its allies and domestic industry’s rapid mobilization for the war effort
continued on the next page
Since 1940, U.S. military strategists had discussed with Presiden Roosevelt the pressures of a two-front war. He wanted to get U.S troops into battle in Europe, but Prime Minister Churchill did n believe the United States and Britain were ready to invade Eurof Instead, the prime minister wanted to attack the periphery, or edges, of the German empire. Roosevelt eventually agreed, andi July 1942, he ordered the invasion of Morocco and Algeria—tw( French territories indirectly under German control.
The Battle for North Africa
Roosevelt decided to invade for two reasons. The invasion woul give the army some experience without requiring a lot of troops It would also help the British troops fight the Germans in Egypt Most of Britain’s empire, including India, Hong Kong, Singapon Malaya, and Australia, sent supplies to Britain through Egypt’s Suez Canal.
German general Erwin Rommel, whose success earned him nickname “Desert Fox,” commanded the “Afrika Korps.” After a 12-day battle at the Egyptian coastal city of El Alamein, the Brit secured the Suez Canal and forced Rommel to retreat in Novem
1942.	Despite this defeat, German forces remained a serious thr in North Africa.
Later that month, American troops commanded by General Dwight D. Eisenhower invaded North Africa. When the Americ advanced into the mountains of western Tunisia, they fought th German army for the first time. At the Battle of Kasserine Pass,
the Americans were outmaneuvered and outfought. They suffered roughly 7,000 casualties and lost nearly 200 tanks. Eisenhower fired the general who led the attack and put General George Patton in command. The American and British forces finally pushed the Germans back. On May 13, 1943, the last German troops in North Africa surrendered.
The Battle of the Atlantic
After Germany declared war on the United States, German submarines entered American coastal waters. American cargo ships were easy targets, especially at night when the glow from the cities in the night sky silhouetted the vessels. To protect the ships, citizens on the East Coast dimmed their lights every evening and put up special “blackout curtains.”
If they had to drive at night, they did so with their headlights off.
By August 1942, German submarines had sunk about 360 American ships along the East Coast, including many oil tankers. The loss of so many ships convinced the U.S. Navy to set up a convoy system in which cargo ships traveled in groups escorted by warships. The convoy system improved the situation dramatically, making it much more difficult for a submarine to torpedo a cargo ship and escape without being attacked.
The spring of 1942 marked the high point of the German submarine campaign. In May and June alone, more than 1.2 million tons of shipping were sunk. Yet in those same two months, American and British shipyards built more than 1.1 million tons of new shipping. At the same time, American airplanes and warships began to use new technology, including radar, sonar, and depth charges, to locate and attack submarines. As the new technology began to take its toll on German submarines, the Battle of the Atlantic turned in favor of the Allies.
(continued from p. 374)
tbb Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills
7D analyze major issues of World War II, including the Holocaust; the internment of German, Italian, and Japanese Americans and Executive Order 9066; and the development of conventional and atomic weapons
7E analyze major military events of World War II, including the Battle of Midway, the U.S. military advancement through the Pacific Islands, the Bataan Death March, the invasion of Normandy, fighting the war on multiple fronts, and the liberation of concentration camps
continued on the next page
periphery the outer boundary of something
target something or someone fired on or marked for attack
convoy system a system in which merchant ships travel with naval vessels for protection
The Battle of Stalingrad
Adolf Hitler was convinced that defeating the Soviet Union depended on destroying the Soviet economy. In May 1942, he ordered his army to capture strategic oil fields, factories, and farmlands in southern Russia and Ukraine. The city of Stalingrad, which controlled the Volga River and was a major railroad junction, was the key to the attack. If the German army captured Stalingrad, they would cut off the Soviets from the resources they needed to stay in the war.
A
British tank successfully navigates a wide ditch in the desert outside a town in North Africa. CRITICALTHINKING
Analyzing Primary Sources Howdo you think the environment made combat in North Africa challenging? 
A
Soviet gun crew fights against Nazi forces in Stalingrad. Only one day after the Nazis publicly boasted that the city would fall to them, the Red Army turned the tide ofthe battle. CRITICALTHINKING
Analyzing Images Howdoyou think the environment made combat in Stalingrad difficult? When German troops entered Stalingrad in mid September, Stalin ordered his troops to hold the city all costs. The Germans were forced to fight from ho to house, losing thousands of soldiers in the process Unlike the Soviets, they were not equipped to fight in the bitter cold. On November 23, Soviet reinforcements arrived and surrounded Stalingrad, trapping almost 250,000 German troops. When the battle ended in February 1943, some 91,000 Germai had surrendered. Only 5,000 of them survived the Soviet prison camps. Each side lost nearly half a million soldiers. The Battle of Stalingrad put the Germans on the defensive.
(continued from p. 375)
TEKS
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills 7F evaluate the military contributions of leaders during World War II, including Omar Bradley, Dwight Eisenhower, Douglas MacArthur,
Chester A. Nimitz, George Marshall, and George Patton
26F discuss the importance of congressional Medal of Honor recipients, including individuals of all races and genders such as Vernon J. Baker, Alvin York, and Roy Benavidez
H REAPING PROGRESS CHECK
Explaining What was Roosevelt's purpose in invading North Africa?
Striking Germany and Italy
guiding question IV/iof were the goals of strategic bombing in Germany and the invasion of Sicily!
The Allied invasion of North Africa in November 1942 had shown that a large-scale invasion from the sea was possible. The success of the landinj convinced Roosevelt to meet again with Churchill to plan the next stage the war. In January 1943, Roosevelt headed to Casablanca, Morocco, tor the prime minister.
At the Casablanca Conference, Roosevelt and Churchill agreed to step up the bombing of Germany. The goal of this new campaign was “the progressive destruction of the German military, industrial, and economic system, and the undermining of the morale of the German people.” The Allies also agreed to attack the Axis on the island of Sicily. Churchill called Italy the “soft underbelly” of Europe. He was convinced that the Italians would quit the war if the Allies invaded their homeland Strategic Bombing
The Allies had been bombing Germany even before the Casablanca Conference. Britain’s Royal Air Force had dropped an average of 2,300 (2,093 t) of explosives on Germany every month for more than three y< The United States Eighth Army Air Force had dropped an additional 1, tons (1,365 t) of bombs during the last six months of 1942. These numl were small, however, compared to the massive new campaign. Between January 1943 and May 1945, the Royal Air Force and the United States Eighth Army Air Force dropped approximately 53,000 tons (48,2301) of explosives on Germany every month.
The bombing campaign did not destroy Germany’s economy or undermine German morale, but it did cause a severe oil shortage and wrecked the railroad system. It also destroyed so many aircraft factork that Germany s air force could not replace its losses. By the time the Al landed in France, they had control of the air, ensuring that their troop: would not be bombed.
Striking the Soft Underbelly
As the bombing campaign against Germany intensified, plans to invad Sicily also moved ahead. General Dwight D. Eisenhower commanded invasion, with General Patton and British general Bernard Montgome)
376
heading the ground forces. The invasion began before dawn on July 10,
1943.	Despite bad weather, the Allied troops made it ashore with few casualties. A new amphibious truck delivered supplies and artillery to the soldiers on the beach.
Eight days after the troops came ashore, American tanks smashed through enemy lines and captured the western half of the island. Patton’s troops then headed east, while the British attacked from the south. By August 17, the Germans had evacuated the island.
The attack on Sicily created a crisis within the Italian government. The king of Italy, Victor Emmanuel, and a group of Italian generals decided that it was time to depose Mussolini. On July 25, 1943, the king invited the dictator to his palace. “My dear Duce,” the king began, “it’s no longer any good. Italy has gone to bits. Army morale is at rock bottom. The soldiers don’t want to fight anymore. . . . You can certainly be under no illusion as to Italy’s feelings with regard to yourself. At this moment, you are the most hated man in Italy.” The king then arrested Mussolini, and the new Italian government began negotiating a surrender to the Allies.
Following Italy’s surrender, however, German troops seized control of northern Italy, including Rome, and returned Mussolini to power.
The Germans then took up positions near the heavily fortified town of Cassino. The terrain near Cassino was steep, barren, and rocky. Rather than
GEOGRAPHYt__________
The war against Germany and Italy was fought on three fronts.
THE WORLD IN SPATIAL TERMS
How much west-to-east territory did the Axis control neartheendofl942? PLACES AND REGIONS
What Allied victories are shown in North Africa?
Vernon Baker (1919-2010) U.S. Army Company C,
370th Regiment, 92nd Infantry Division
On April 5,1945, First Lieutenant Vernon Baker and his platoon advanced toward Castle Aghinolfi, a German stronghold in the mountains nearViareggio, Italy. Baker and about 25 others moved ahead ofthe group, and Baker successfully destroyed an observation post, a dugout, and three machine gun positions.
In 1996 his actions earned him a Medal of Honor"for conspicuous gallantry and intrepidity at the risk of his own life above and beyond the call of duty in action on 5 and 6 April 1945."This made Baker one of seven African American World War II veterans to receive belated recognition for their service.
CRITICAL THINKING
Drawing Conclusions Why were Baker's actions so important to the assault on Castle Aghinolfi? attack such difficult terrain, the Allies landed at Anzio, behind German lines. Instead of retreating, however, as the Allies had hoped, the Germans surrounded the Allied troops near Anzio.
It took the Allies five months to break through the German lines at Cassino and Anzio. Finally, in late May 1944, the Germans retreated.
Less than two weeks later, the Allies captured Rome. Fighting in Italy continued, however, for another year. The Italian campaign was one ofthe bloodiest in the war, with more than 300,000 Allied casualties.
The Tehran Conference
Roosevelt wanted to meet with Stalin before the Allies invaded France.
In late 1943, Stalin agreed, proposing that Roosevelt and Churchill meet him in Tehran, Iran.
The leaders reached several agreements. Stalin promised to launch a full-scale offensive against the Germans when the Allies invaded France in 1944. Roosevelt and Stalin then agreed to divide Germany after the war so that it would never again threaten world peace. Stalin promised that once Germany was defeated, the Soviet Union would help the United States against Japan. He also accepted Roosevelt’s proposal of an international peacekeeping organization after the war. Part of the agreement proclaimed:
PRIMARYSOURCE
M
The common understanding which we have here reached guarantees that victory will be ours. Ant as to peace—we are sure that our concord will win an enduring Peace. We recognize fully the supren responsibility... to make a peace which will command the goodwill ofthe overwhelming mass of th peoples ofthe world and banish the scourge and terror of war for many generations.99 —from the Tehran Declaration, December 1,
B READING PROGRESS CHECK
Evaluating What did Roosevelt and other leaders hope to accomplish by attackim Germany and Italy?
The D-Day Invasion
guiding question What if D-Day had failed and Germany had defeated the Allies in Europe?
After the conference in Tehran, Roosevelt headed to Cairo, Egypt, where 1 and Churchill continued planning an invasion of France to force German) again fight the war on two fronts. One major decision still had to be made The president had to choose the commander for Operation Overlord—the code name for the invasion. Roosevelt selected General Eisenhower. Planning Operation Overlord
Hitler had fortified the French coast along the English Channel, but he d not know when or where the Allies would land. The Germans believed tl landing would be in Pas-de-Calais—the area of France closest to Britain. The Allies encouraged this belief by placing dummy equipment along the coast across from Calais. The real target was farther south, a 60-mile stre of five beaches along the Normandy coast.
The selection of a site for the largest amphibious landing in history wa one ofthe biggest decisions of World War II. Allied planners considered coastlines from Denmark to Portugal in search of a sheltered location with firm flat beaches within range of friendly fighter planes in England. There
ad to be enough roads and paths to move jeeps and trucks off the beache
378
and to accommodate the hundreds of thousands of American, Canadian, and British troops set to stream ashore following the invasion. An airfield and a seaport that the Allies could use were also needed. Most important was a reasonable expectation of achieving the element of surprise.
Planners also discussed who should lead France after the invasion. General Eisenhower had informed Charles de Gaulle that the French Resistance forces would assist in the liberation of Paris, but President Roosevelt was not sure he trusted de Gaulle and refused to recognize him as the official French leader.
By the spring of 1944, more than 1.5 million American soldiers, 12,000 airplanes, and 5 million tons (4.6 million t) of equipment had been sent to England. Only setting the invasion date and giving the command to go remained. The invasion had to begin at night to hide the ships crossing the English Channel. The ships had to arrive at low tide so that they could see the beach obstacles. The low tide had to come at dawn so that gunners bombarding the coast could see their targets. Paratroopers, who would be dropped behind enemy lines, needed a moonlit night to see where to land. Perhaps most important of all was good weather. A storm would ground the airplanes, and high waves would swamp landing craft.
Given all these requirements, there were only a few days each month to begin the invasion. The first opportunity was from June 5 to 7, 1944. Eisenhower’s planning staff referred to the day any operation began by the letter D. The invasion date, therefore, came to be known as D-Day. Heavy cloud cover, strong winds, and high waves made June 5 impossible.
The weather was forecast to improve briefly a day later. The Channel would still be rough, but the landing ships and aircraft
briefly for a short time
Allied troops from various parts ofthe British coast headed for Normandy beaches for the D-Day invasion.
CRITICALTHINKING
Determining Cause and Effect How did the D-Day invasion turn the tide ofWorldWarll?
— Analyzing-----
primary Sources
Fighting at Omaha Beach
f^Two hundred yards out, we took a direct hit.... Somehow or other, the ramp door opened up ... and the men in front were being struck by machine gun fire. Everyone started to jump off into the water.... The tide was moving us so rapidly.... We would grab out at some of those underwater obstructions and mines built on telephone poles and girders, and hang on. We’d take cover, then make a dash through the surf to the next one, fifty feet beyond. &
—Lieutenant John Bentz Carroll, from D-Day: Piercing the
Atlantic Wall, 1994
DBQ
MAKING INFERENCES
Based on this description, what can you infer about the manner ofthe landing on Omaha Beach?
intense existing in an extreme degree
SKILLS PRACTICE
__________ Explain the events of one of the major battles in World War II. Before you start, think about interesting and specific details of the battle. Include as many of these details as you can in your explanation.
could operate. After looking at forecasts one last time, shortly after midnight on June 6, 1944, Eisenhower gave the final order: “OK, we’ll go.”
The Longest Day
Nearly 7,000 ships carrying more than 100,000 soldiers headed for Normandy’s coast. At the same time, 23,000 paratroopers were dropped inland, east and west of the beaches. Allied fighter-bombers raced up and down the coast, hitting bridges, bunkers, and radar sites. At dawn, Allied warships began a tremendous barrage. Thousands of shells rained down o the beaches, code-named “Utah,” “Omaha,” “Gold,” “Sword,” and “Juno.”
The American landing at Utah Beach went well. The German defenses were weak, and in less than three hours, the troops had captured the bead and moved inland, suffering fewer than 200 casualties. On the eastern flank, the British and Canadian landings also went well. By the end of the day, British and Canadian forces were several miles inland.
Omaha Beach, however, was a different story. Surrounded at both ends by cliffs that rose wall-like from the sea, Omaha Beach was only foui miles long. The entire beach overlooked a 150-foot high bluff, and there were only five ravines leading from the beach to the top of the bluff. The Germans had made full use of the geographic advantage the high bluff gave them. They dug trenches and built concrete bunkers for machine guns at the top of the cliffs and positioned them to guard the ravines leading to the beach. Under intense German fire, the American assault almost disintegrated.
General Omar Bradley, commander of the American forces landing at Omaha and Utah, began making plans to evacuate. Slowly, however, the American troops began to knock out the German defenses. More landing craft arrived, ramming their way through the obstacles to get to the bead Nearly 2,500 Americans were either killed or wounded on Omaha, but by early afternoon, Bradley received this message: “Troops formerly pinned down on beaches . . . [are] advancing up heights behind beaches.” By the end of the day, nearly 35,000 American troops had landed at Omaha, and another 23,000 had landed at Utah. More than 75,000 British and Canadi; troops were on shore as well. The invasion had succeeded.
H READING PROGRESS CHECK
Summarizing Why was it so important that all ofthe conditions be met before Eisenhower could order D-Day to begin? What would have happened if the invasic had failed?
Reviewing Vocabulary
1.	Explaining Explain how using the convoy system helped the United States begin winning the Battle ofthe Atlantic. 7E
Using Your Notes
2.	Sequencing Review the notes you completed during the lesson and use them to sequence the major Allied victories. 7E, 7F
Answering the Guiding Questions
3.	Analyzing Why did Churchill and Roosevelt want to attack German-controlled areas in North Africa before areas in Europe? 7B,7E
4.	Determining Cause and Effect What were the goals of strate bombing in Germany and the invasion of Sicily? 7D, 7E
5.	Speculating What if D-Day had failed and Germany had defea the Allies in Europe? 7E
Writing Activity
NARRATIVE
American soldiers invading Normandy on D-Day showed extreme bravery in the face of enormous difficulties. Imagine that you are one ofthe first soldiers approaching Omal Beach by water. Write a description ofthe beach and the atmosphere ofthe moment. Be sure to include sensory words. 380
MAP
Japanese Entrenchment on IwoJima MAP
Axis Expansion and Retreat MAP
The Atomic Bomb at Hiroshima VIDEO
The Atomic Bomb etw@rks
here's More Online!
IMAGE
IwoJima Photograph LESSON 4 The War Ends
Content Vocabulary • hedgerow • napalm
ON • What kinds of sacrifices does war require?
It Matters Because
Fierce fighting in both Europe and the Pacific during 1945 led to the defeat of the Axis powers. As the war ended, the Allies began war-crimes trials as part of a plan to build a better world.
TAKING NOTES:
Key Ideas and Details
Outlining As you read, create an outline of the section similar to the one below, using the major headings as the main points.
The War Ends
I.
The Third Reich Collapses A. I
TEKS
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills 2D explain the significance of the following years as turning points: 1898 (Spanish-American War), 1914-1918 (World War I), 1929 (the Great Depression begins), 1939-1945 (World War II), 1957 (Sputnik launch ignites U.S.-Soviet space race), 1968-1969 (Martin Luther King Jr. assassination and U.S. lands on the moon), 1991 (Cold War ends), 2001 (terrorist attacks on World Trade Center and the Pentagon), and 2008 (election of first black president, Barack Obama)
continued on the next page
The Third Reich Collapses
guiding question Why W675 the Battle of the Bulge so important to the Allied forces?
Although D-Day had been a success, it was only the beginning. Surrounding many fields in Normandy were hedgerows—dirt walls, several feet thick, covered in shrubbery—built to fence in cattle and crops. They also enabled the Germans to fiercely defend their positions. The battle of the hedgerows ended on July 25, 1944, when 2,500 U.S. bombers blew a hole in the German lines, enabling U.S. tanks to race through the gap.
As the Allies broke out of Normandy, the French Resistance— French civilians who had secretly organized to resist the German occupation—staged a rebellion in Paris. When the Allies liberated Paris on August 25, the streets were filled with French citizens celebrating their victory.
The Battle of the Bulge
As the Allies advanced toward the German border, Hitler decided to stage one last desperate offensive. His goal was to cut off Allied supplies coming through the port of Antwerp, Belgium. The attack began just before dawn on December 16, 1944. Six inches (15 cm) of snow covered the ground, and the weather was bitterly cold. Moving rapidly, the Germans caught the American defenders by surprise. As the German troops raced west, their lines bulged outward, and the attack became known as the Battle of the Bulge.
Eisenhower ordered General Patton to the rescue. Three days later, faster than anyone expected in the midst of a snowstorm, Patton’s troops slammed into the German lines. As the weather cleared, Allied aircraft began hitting German fuel depots.
America and World War II 381
hedgerow an enclosure made of dirt walls covered in shrubbery built to fence in cattle and crops
On Christmas Eve, out of fuel and weakened by heavy losses, the German troops driving toward Antwerp were forced to halt. Two days later, Pattons troops broke through to the German line. Fighting continued for three weeks, but the United States had won the Battle of the Bulge. On January 8 the Germans began to withdraw, having suffered more than 100,000 casualties. They had very few resources left to prevent the Allies from entering Germany.
The War Ends in Europ
While American and Britis forces fought to liberate France, the Soviets attacks German troops in Russia. I the end of the Battle of the Bulge, the Soviets had driven Hitler’s forces out < Russia and across Poland. By February 1945, the Soviets were only 35 miles (56 km) from Germany’s capital, Berlin.
Soviet troops crossed Germany’s eastern border while American forces attacked its western borde By the end of February 1945, American troops he reached the Rhine River, Germany’s last major line < defense in the west. On March 7, American tanks
American troops march through the snow on January 31,1945, during the Battle ofthe Bulge.
CRITICAL THINKING
Making Inferences Looking at the photo, what can you infer about the conditions during the Battle ofthe Bulge? (continued from p. 381)
TCKS
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills 7D analyze major issues of World War II, including the Holocaust; the internment of German, Italian, and Japanese Americans and Executive Order 9066; and the development of conventional and atomic weapons 7E analyze major military events of World War II, including the Battle of Midway, the U.S. military advancement through the Pacific Islands, the Bataan Death March, the invasion of Normandy, fighting the war on multiple fronts, and the liberation of concentration camps
continued on the next page
crossed the Rhine. As
German defenses crumbled, American troops raced east to within 70 mil (113 km) of Berlin. On April 16, Soviet troops finally smashed through tl German defenses and reached the outskirts of Berlin five days later.
Deep in his Berlin bunker, Adolf Hitler knew the end was near. On Ap: 30, 1945, he committed suicide. On May 7, 1945, Germany accepted the te: for an unconditional surrender. The next day—May 8, 1945—was proclain V-E Day, for “Victory in Europe.”
Q READING PROGRESS CHECK
Explaining Why was the Battle of the Bulge such a disastrous defeat for German)
Japan Is Defeated
guiding question Doyou agree or disagree with President Truman's decision to drop the atomic bo Explain your reasons.
Unfortunately, President Roosevelt did not live to see the defeat of Germany. On April 12, 1945, while vacationing in Warm Springs, Geor he died of a stroke. His vice president, Harry S. Truman, became presid during this difficult time.
The next day, Truman told reporters: “Boys, if you ever pray, pray me now. . . . When they told me yesterday what had happened, I felt li
382
the moon, the stars, and all the planets had fallen on me.” Despite his	despite in spite of
feelings, Truman began at once to make decisions about the war. Although
Germany surrendered a few weeks later, the war with Japan continued, and
Truman was forced to make some of the most difficult decisions ofthe war
during his first six months in office.
The Battle of Iwo Jima
On November 24, 1944, bombs fell on Tokyo. Above the city flew 80 B-29 Superfortress bombers that had traveled more than 1,500 miles (2,414 km) from new American bases in the Mariana Islands. Many of their bombs missed the targets. By the time the B-29s reached Japan, they did not have enough fuel left to fix their navigational errors or to adjust for high winds. The pilots needed an island closer to Japan so the B-29s could refuel. American military planners chose Iwo Jima.
Iwo Jima was perfectly located, roughly halfway between the Marianas and Japan, but its geography was formidable. It had a dormant volcano at its southern tip and rugged terrain with rocky cliffs, jagged ravines, and dozens ol caves. Volcanic ash covered the ground. Even worse, the Japanese had built a vast network of concrete bunkers connected by miles of tunnels.
On February 19, 1945, some 60,000 marines landed on Iwo Jima. As the troops leaped from the amphtracs, they sank up to their ankles in the soft ash and were pounded by Japanese artillery. The marines crawled inland, attacking the Japanese bunkers with flamethrowers and explosives. More than 6,800 marines were killed capturing the island. Admiral Nimitz later wrote that, on Iwo Jima, “uncommon valor was a common virtue.”
(continued from p. 382)
TEKS
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills 7F evaluate the military contributions of leaders during World War II, including Omar Bradley, Dwight Eisenhower, Douglas MacArthur,
Chester A. Nimitz, George Marshall, and George Patton
27B explain how specific needs result in scientific discoveries and technological innovations in agriculture, the military, and medicine, including vaccines
Firebombing Japan
While American engineers prepared airfields on Iwo Jima, General Curtis LeMay, commander of the B-29s based in the Marianas, changed strategy. To help the B-29s hit their targets, he ordered them to drop bombs filled with napalm—a type of
jellied gasoline. The bombs would not only explode but would also start fires. Even if the B-29s missed their targets, the fires they started would spread to the intended targets.
The use of firebombs was very controversial because the fires would also kill civilians; however, LeMay could think of no other way to destroy Japans war production quickly. Loaded with firebombs,
B-29s attacked Tokyo on March 9,
1945. As strong winds fanned the flames, the firestorm grew so intense that it sucked the oxygen out of the air, asphyxiating thousands. As one survivor later recalled:
napalm a type of jellied gasoline
U.S.
Marines raise the American flag after the capture of Iwo Jima. More than 6,800 marines were killed before the island was captured. CRITICALTHINKING
Determining Cause and Effect How might the Battle of Iwo Jima have been a factor in President Truman's decision to drop the atomic bomb?
PRIMARY SOURCE
« The fires were incredible... with flames leaping hundreds of feet into the air.... With every passini moment the air became more foul... the noise was a continuing crashing roar.... Fire-winds filled wi burning particles rushed up and down the streets. I watched people... running for their lives.... The flames raced after them like living things, striking them down.... Wherever I turned my eyes, I sawpe ... seeking air to breathe.^
—quoted in American Heritage New History of World
The firebombing of Tokyo killed more than 80,000 people and destro more than 250,000 buildings. By the end of June 1945, Japan’s six key industrial cities had been firebombed. By the end of the war, the B-29s h: firebombed 67 Japanese cities.
The Invasion of Okinawa
Despite the massive damage that firebombing caused, there were few signs ii the spring of 1945 that Japan was ready to quit. Many American officials believed the Japanese would not surrender until Japan had been invaded. To prepare for the invasion, the United States needed a base near Japan to stock supplies and build up troops. Iwo Jima was small and still too far away. Milit planners chose Okinawa—only 350 miles (563 km) from mainland Japan.
American troops landed on Okinawa on April 1, 1945. Instead of defending the beaches, the Japanese troops took up positions in the island’s rugged mountains. To dig the Japanese out of their caves and bunkers, the American troops had to fight their way up steep slopes agai constant machine gun and artillery fire. More than 12,000 American soldiers, sailors, and marines died during the fighting, but by June 22,1' Okinawa had finally been captured.
The Terms for Surrender
Shortly after the United States captured Okinawa, the Japanese empero Hirohito, urged his government to find a way to end the war. The biggt problem was the American demand for unconditional surrender. Many Japanese leaders were willing to surrender, but on one condition: Hirol had to stay in power.
American officials knew that the fate of Hirohito was the most impo issue for the Japanese. Most Americans, however, blamed the emperor ft war and wanted him removed from power. President Truman was reluct to go against public opinion. Furthermore, he knew the United States w: almost ready to test a new weapon that might force Japan to surrender without any conditions. The new weapon was the atomic bomb.
The Manhattan Project
In 1939 Leo Szilard, a Jewish physicist who had fled Nazi persecution, learned that German scientists had split the uranium atom. Szilard ha< been the first scientist to suggest that splitting the atom might release enormous energy. Worried that the Nazis were working on an atomic bomb, Szilard convinced the world’s best-known physicist, Albert Ein: to sign a letter Szilard had drafted and send it to President Roosevelt, letter, Einstein warned that by using uranium, “extremely powerful be of a new type may ... be constructed.”
Roosevelt responded by setting up a scientific committee to study issue. In 1941 the committee met with British scientists who were alrc working on an atomic bomb. The Americans then convinced Rooseve begin a program to build an atomic bomb.
384
The secret American program to build an atomic bomb was code-named the Manhattan Project and was headed by General Leslie R. Groves. The first breakthrough came in 1942, when Szilard and Enrico Fermi, another physicist, built the world’s first nuclear reactor at the University of Chicago. Groves then organized a team of engineers and scientists to build an atomic bomb at a secret laboratory in Los Alamos, New Mexico.
Physicist J. Robert Oppenheimer led the team. On July 16, 1945, they detonated the world’s first atomic bomb in New Mexico.
Hiroshima and Nagasaki
Even before the bomb was tested, American officials began debating how to use it. Admiral William Leahy, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, opposed using the bomb because it would kill civilians. He believed an economic blockade and conventional bombing would convince Japan to surrender. Secretary of War Henry Stimson wanted to warn the Japanese about the bomb and tell them their emperor could stay in power if they surrendered. Secretary of State James Byrnes, however, wanted to drop the bomb on Japan without any warning.
President Truman later wrote that he “regarded the bomb as a military weapon and never had any doubts that it should be used.” His advisers had warned him to expect massive casualties if the United States invaded Japan. Truman believed it was his duty as president to use every weapon available to save American lives.
ANALYZING PRIMARY SOURCES
o
o
nuclear relating to the nucleus of an atom
A key figure ofthe nuclear age, Enrico Fermi proved a nuclear reaction could be initiated, controlled, and stopped.
CRITICALTHINKING
Identifying Central Ideas Why was Enrico Fermi's work on nuclear reactions so important?
People continue to debate whether President Truman's decision to drop atomic bombs on Japan was the best way to end World War II.
M
The world will note that the first atomic bomb was dropped on Hiroshima, a military base.... If Japan does not surrender, bombs will have to be dropped on her war industries and, unfortunately, thousands of civilian lives will be lost.... Having found the bomb we have used it. We have used it against those who attacked us without warning at Pearl Harbor, against those who have starved and beaten and executed American prisoners of war, against those who have abandoned all pretense of obeying international laws of warfare.
We have used it in order to shorten the agony of war, in order to save the lives of thousands and thousands of young Americans.”
S.
Truman, radio report to the American people, August 9,1945 Harry S. Truman President of the United States
«It is my opinion that the use of this barbarous weapon at Hiroshima and Nagasaki was of no material assistance in our war against Japan. The Japanese were already defeated and ready to surrender because ofthe effective sea blockade and the successful bombing with conventional weapons....
William Leahy Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff
The lethal possibilities of atomic warfare in the future are frightening. My own feeling was that in being the first to use it, we had adopted an ethical standard common to the barbarians ofthe Dark Ages. I was not taught to make war in that fashion, and wars cannot be won by destroying women and children.”
—William Leahy, from / Was There, 1950
DBQ
Analyzing Historical Documents 0 Identifying Points of View What reasons does Truman offer to justify the use of the atomic bomb?
Q
Summarizing Why does Leahy say he was against using the bomb? WMW—WWWW 1 nil Ml—  ■■■ I—
America and World War II 385
The United States dropped an atomic bomb that destroyed the Japanese city of Hiroshima.
CRITICAL THINKING
Analyzing Primary Sources What details in the picture illustrate the effect of the atomic bomb? The Allies threatened Japan with “prompt and utter destruction” if t nation did not surrender, but the Japanese did not reply. Truman then ordered the military to drop the bomb. On August 6, 1945, a B-29 bomb named Enola Gay dropped an atomic bomb, code-named “Little Boy,” 01 Hiroshima, an important industrial city.
The bomb destroyed about 63 percent of the city. Between 80,000 ar 120,000 people died instantly, and thousands more died later from burn and radiation sickness. Three days later, on August 9, the Soviet Union declared war on Japan. Later that day, the United States dropped anothe atomic bomb, code-named “Fat Man,” on the city of Nagasaki, killing between 35,000 and 74,000 people. Faced with such massive destructioi and the shock of the Soviets joining the war, Hirohito ordered his government to surrender. On August 15, 1945—V-J Day—Japan surrendered. The long war was over.
Putting the Enemy on Trial
In August 1945, the United States, Britain, France, and the Soviet Union created the International Military Tribunal (IMT) to punish German an Japanese leaders for war crimes. The tribunal held trials in Nuremberg, Germany, where Hitler had staged Nazi Party rallies.
Twenty-two German leaders were prosecuted at the Nuremberg Tri< Three were acquitted, 7 were given prison sentences, and 12 were sentei to death. Trials of lower-ranking leaders continued until April 1949, lea to 24 more executions and 107 prison sentences.
Similar trials were held in Tokyo. The IMT for the Far East charged 25 Japanese leaders with war crimes. The Allies did not indict Hirohito fearing that any attempt to put the emperor on trial would lead to an uprising. Eighteen Japanese defendants were sentenced to prison. The i were sentenced to death by hanging.
386
The trials punished many of the people responsible for World War II and the Holocaust, but they were also part of the American plan for building a better world. As Robert Jackson, chief counsel for the United States at Nuremberg, said in his opening statement to the court: “The wrongs we seek to condemn and punish have been so calculated, so malignant and so devastating, that civilization cannot tolerate their being ignored because it cannot survive their being repeated.”
World War II: A Turning Point
The years 1939-1945 were a major turning point in world history. By the end of World War II, large areas of the world’s great powers—Britain, France, Germany, Japan and the Soviet Union—lay devastated. Germany and Japan were occupied by foreign armies. Some 25 million people had been killed. Japans empire was gone and the European empires would never fully recover. Over the next three decades, nearly all of the subject peoples of the British, French, and Dutch empires would gain their independence. New countries in Africa, Asia, and the Middle East were born. The Middle Eastern conflict between the new nation of Israel and the Arab nations was itself a direct result of World War II.
The war also opened a new era in American history. The American economy was undamaged, and by the mid-1940s it was producing over 35 percent of the entire world’s gross domestic product. A vast American military force was deployed in Europe and Asia, and it also controlled the world’s first nuclear weapons. The United States had emerged as the world’s strongest economic and military power. It was in a position of such strength and dominance that a new term—superpower—was later coined to describe its relationship to the rest of the world.
Only one other country had the potential to rival the United States at the end of the war. The Soviet Union, although devastated from Germany’s invasion, had built its own enormous army and industrial capacity. Soviet troops were in control of Eastern Europe, and communist ideas posed the only real ideological challenge to American ideas of democracy, free enterprise, and limited government. Although World War II had put an end to Nazism, the struggle had left Europe divided, and the resulting tensions between former allies would soon lead to a new international conflict known as the Cold War.
B READING PROGRESS CHECK
Analyzing What arguments did Truman consider when deciding whether to use the atomic bomb?
LESSON 4 REVIEW
Reviewing Vocabulary
1.	Explaining Explain why napalm bombs are highly destructive.
Using Your Notes
2.	Summarizing Using the notes you completed during the lesson on factors that led to the end of World War II, explain how the Allies achieved victory in Europe and over Japan. 7D, 7E, 7F
Answering the Guiding Questions
3.	Analyzing Why was the Battle of the Bulge so important to the Allied forces? 7E,7F
4.	Defending Do you agree or disagree with President Truman's decision to drop the atomic bomb? Explain your reasons. 7D
Writing Activity
NARRATIVE
Suppose that you are in a large U.S. city when news of victory over Japan comes. Describe the celebrations and the mood of the people. America and World War II 387
Using Secondary
Sources
Why Learn This Skill?
Secondary sources are everywhere. Every history book is a secondary source, including this textbook. Any book, article, document, website, or other presentation of information that discusses or describes information that originates somewhere else is a secondary source. Primary sources are where scholars get information: primary sources include data, facts, documents, letters, quotes, interviews, original photos, art, speeches, transcripts and other materials that people create as part of their activities. Secondary sources are efforts by people to comment on primary sources and try to understand what they mean and what they are telling us about people's activities. Learning to use secondary sources will help you figure out whether those sources are presenting a complete and accurate picture of a topic or event and whether you can rely on the information they present.
Learning the Skill
When writing a secondary source, historians typically combine many primary sources and other secondary sources together to create the historical narrative. The goal of a secondary source is to analyze and interpret primary sources, then synthesize, or combine, them so that generalizations and evaluations about history are possible. Secondary sources are what stitch all the evidence together into a presentation of events that we call history.
The reason you analyze a secondary source is to figure out what an author's main ideas and argument is, and to determine whether you agree with it or not, and why.
Follow these steps:
1.	First, ask yourself what you are trying to accomplish with the secondary source.
Are you trying to acquire information? Or are you trying to analyze or answer historical questions?
2.	Who is the author? What are his or her credentials? Do they have training or a background that makes you think you trust their work?
3.	Who published the secondary source? Does that indicate any possible bias am special motive for the work that might make you suspicious of its conclusions:
4.	Look at the secondary source. Whenw it written? Examine its title and table o contents. What clues does it provide as the topic of the work and the approach author is taking.
5.	Does the secondary source have footm or endnotes where it cites the primary sources it uses to prove its ideas? Does have a bibliography listing all of the sources of evidence used to prepare the work?
6.	What kind of sources are being used? the secondary source using mostly otl secondary sources, or is it using many primary sources? This is important if want to use the secondary source to acquire information. You have to be si its information is reliable.
7.	If it is using primary sources, what kii are being used? Are they reliable? Dot the author generally rely on one partii kind of primary source to support his her conclusions? Are there any weaknesses or biases in the types of primary sources being used? Might tf author be led to the wrong conclusion relying on one type of source too muc
8.	Figure out the author's argument. Th: important if you are using the seconc source to analyze or answer historica questions. Look at the work's introdu and conclusion. What are the major questions or issues the author is tryii explain? Is the author trying to be objective, clearly separating facts froi opinions? Or is the author making a strong emotional argument with a v< clear opinion and all the facts seem t support that opinion?
388
8*
9. Think about the author's conclusions. Do they make sense to you? What kind of evidence could be used to disprove them? Did the author examine sources that challenge his ideas and explain how they fit into the work?
Practicing this Skill
Practice this skill with this text you are using. This text is a secondary source. Let's analyze your textbook.
1.	Can the textbook be used to acquire information? Can the textbook be used to analyze and answer historical questions? Explain.
2.	Who are the authors of this program? What are their credentials? What else have they written? Do you think they can be trusted to be professional?
3.	Who published your textbook? What is their purpose? Is there likely to be a bias in what they publish?
4.	Does the textbook use primary sources? What kinds?
5.	Does your textbook have one single argument or focus on only one major issue? Why or why not?
6.	Pick one chapter in your textbook and analyze it as a secondary source. Try to identify its main argument and how it analyzes and explains the historical questions of the time period the chapter covers.
Applying the Skill
! There has been much controversy over the years about the American decision to drop the atomic bomb on Japan. Different historians have viewed the decision differently, and have come to different
i conclusions. Here are several secondary sources about the decision:
Gar Alperovitz, The Decision to Use the Atomic Bomb (1995)
Herbert Feis, Japan Subdued (1961)
Gregg Herken, The Winning Weapon (1981)
Robert James, Maddox Weapons For Victory (1995)
Martin Sherwin, A World Destroyed (1975)
Look up two of these secondary sources and apply the skills you have learned for analyzing secondary sources. Then answer these historical questions:
1.	Acquiring Information What are the major opinions of historians concerning Truman’s decision?
2.	Analyzing Historical Questions Write a brief report on the kinds of evidence being used by historians analyzing the decision to drop the bomb. How might the sources used affect their interpretation?
3.	Answering Historical Questions
Based on what you have learned, why do you think President Truman dropped the atomic bomb on Japan? Do you agree with the decision?
389
chapter i2 Assessment
Directions: On a separate sheet of paper, answer the questions below. Make sure you read carefully and answer all parts of the questions.
Lesson Review
Lesson 1
0 Explaining What economic strategy did Roosevelt use to convert the U.S. economy to wartime production rapidly? 7B
0 Explaining Who were the Tuskegee Airmen and what contributions did they make to the war effort? 7G
0 Describing What was the "Double V" campaign? Which African American leader took steps to expand economic opportunities for African Americans in industry? How did President Roosevelt respond? 7G
0 Summarizing Explain how the war affected the American economy and home front. As industries mobilized for war, how did people respond? What government agencies were set up to regulate the economy and what practices were encouraged or enforced? 7G, 17A
0 Analyzing Why did the Roosevelt administration create the Office of War Information? What function did it serve? 7C
Lesson 2
0 Describing What was the Bataan Death March? Why did the march take place? 7E
0 Identifying Cause and Effect What was the Doolittle Raid and what was its impact on the war? 7E
0 Evaluating Why was the Battle of Midway a turning point in the war? 7E
0 Evaluating Who was Chester Nimitz, and what contribution did he make during World War II? 7F
Lesson 3
0 Specifying What tactic did the United States use to prevent huge shipping losses in the Atlantic? 7E
© Determining Importance What was the objective of the Tehran Conference, and what were the outcomes? 7B
© Describing Why was the awarding of the Medal of Hi to Vernon Baker especially significant? 26F
© Analyzing Why was the invasion of Normandy important? 7E
Lesson 4
© Making Connections What was the significance oft Battle of the Bulge? 7E
© Summarizing Why did the United States want to in\ the island of Okinawa? 7E
0 Evaluating Describe three major contributions by General George Patton. How did his leadership help u World War II? 7F
Answering the Essential Questions
© Categorizing Design a booth for a history conferenc titled "The Sacrifices of World War II." The booth shoi contain three charts: Economic, Military/Civilian, and Social. Use text, maps, and illustrations to show the information you would include in this booth. 7G
Critical Thinking
0 Analyzing What contributions did the Flying Tigers to the war effort? 7G
0 Analyzing Identify Executive Order 9066, and then explain the constitutional issues raised by the forced relocation and internment of Japanese Americans. E) the Supreme Court's decisions in the cases of korema and Ex Parte Endo. 7D.19B
0 Evaluating What contributions did General Dwigh Eisenhower make to the Allied victory in World War I
© Explaining Explain why the United States was des as fighting a war on multiple fronts. 7E
0 Evaluating Discuss the exceptional bravery and contributions of Navajo code talkers during the war.
Need Extra Help?
l£±“J£9;-------13611359135013611366 [ 368 1 368 1 3701367 137513781378137813811
8
0
© Analyzing Analyze the significance ofthe Holocaust and the liberation of concentration camp. How did the Allies react to the Holocaust after the war? 7D, 7E
© Explaining What obstacles faced racial and ethnic minorities wanting to participate in the U.S. military during the war? What opportunities were they eventually given and how did they respond? 7G
© Identifying Significance Explain why World War II was a turning point? 2D
Social Studies Skills
Read the two secondary sources below, and then answer the questions that follow.
Historian Gar Alperovitz argues that Truman had alternatives to the atomic bomb but chose to use the weapon to pressure Stalin, and force Japan's surrender before the Soviets could join the war.
Quite simply, it is not true that the atomic bomb was used because it was the only way to save the'hundreds of thousands' or 'millions' of lives as was subsequently claimed. The readily available options were to modify the surrender terms and/or await the shock of the Russian attack... even if one were to accept the most inflated estimates of lives saved by the atomic bomb, the fact remains that it was an act of violent destruction aimed at large concentrations of noncombatants.99
—from The Decision to Use the Atomic Bomb
Historian Herbert Feis argues that Truman dropped the bomb to avoid an invasion of Japan.
Their thoughts about its employment were governed by one reason which was deemed imperative: that by using the bomb, the agony of war might be ended more quickly. The primary and sustaining aim from the start of the great exertion to make the bomb was military, and the impelling reason for the decision to use it was military—to end the war victoriously as soon as possible. ”
—from Japan Subdued
© Using Secondary Sources to Analyze History Writea brief report explaining why Alperovitz thinks the use of the bomb was unnecessary, and why Feis disagrees.
What do both historians seem to agree is true about the decision to drop the bomb? What questions do you need to answer to be able to judge which historian has a better argument? 7D, 7E, 29A, 29C, 29D, 29G
0 Answering Historical Questions Write an essay explaining the controversy surrounding the use ofthe atomic bomb on Japan. Use historical evidence from the chapter to describe both sides ofthe argument, and then explain your point of view on the issue. Was dropping the bomb the correct decision? 7D, 29A, 29G
Explaining Continuity and Change What contributions did women make to the military effort and the wartime economy? What obstacles did they face? 7G
© Creating and Using Charts After the attack on Pearl Harbor, patriotism inspired Americans to help in whatever way they could to win the war. Create a chart that explains each ofthe following actions by Americans, and how it contributed to the war effort: enlistment, volunteerism, victory gardens, purchase of war bonds. 7G, 17A, 29B
DBQ
Analyzing Primary Sources
Use the excerpt below to answer the following questions.
PRIMARYSOURCE
“ The greatest advantage... the United States has enjoyed on the ground so far [was]... the jeep and the two-and-a-half-ton truck. These are the instruments which moved and supplied United States troops in battle, while the German Army... depended heavily on animal transport.... The United States, profiting from the mass production achievements of its automotive industry... had mobility that completely outclassed the enemy. ”
—George Marshall, quoted in Miracle of World War II
(J) Interpreting Primary Sources Based on the quote above, what technological innovations played an important role in winning the war? 7B, 29A
Need Extra Help?
	23	24	25	26	27	28	29	30
[Goto page	1 386 I 359 I 386 ]	355 | 385 | 360 | 358 | 361 |
America and World War II 391
Drawing Inferences What advantages do you think mobility give to an army in wartime? Germany was known for its high speedblitzkrieg or "lightning war" that used thousands of fast moving tanks, but was still outclassed by the American military. What does the quote imply was a weakness of the German military? 7B, 29A, 29B
© Evaluating Sources What position did General Marshall serve in the U.S. military? Why were his contributions critical to American success in World War II? Based on his role in the war, how would you evaluate his opinion above?
Analyzing Visuals
Use the image to answer the following question.
© Analyzing Examine the map of World War II in the Pacific. Why did the United States Navy adopt an "island hopping" strategy in the Pacific as part of its plan to defeat Japan? 7E
© Evaluating Based on the map, and your knowledge of World War II, what were the major military contributions of Douglas MacArthur? 7F
Extended Response Questions
(£) Evaluating Write an essay analyzing Franklin Roosev domestic and international leadership during World W; Explain the approach he and his administration took to rapidly mobilize American industry and discuss its effectiveness. Then examine Roosevelt's conferences v American allies, his objectives, and how successful he, in achieving his goals. Your essay should have an introduction, at least two paragraphs discussing Roosevelt's leadership, and a conclusion. 7B
Analyzing Write an essay explaining the challenges
facing the American military when the United States
entered the war in 1941. Describe the significance of
having to fight a war on two fronts. Then identify the
scientific and technological innovations to conventior
weapons that were needed to win a two front war ag
Japan and Germany. Your essay should have an
introduction, at least three paragraphs, and a condus
7D.7E,
Standardized Test Practice
© Which department was responsible for the content ol newsreels shown in movie theaters during World Wai
A U.S.
Office of War Information B Women's Army Auxiliary Corps C War Production Board D Office of Economic Stabilization © Which military leader made a major contribution to winning World War II by commanding the American that landed in Normandy in June 1944? 7F
F
Omar Bradley G George Patton H Charles de Gaulle J George Marshall Need Extra Help?
	31	32	33	34	35	36	37	38
IGotopage	1 361 1 361 | 371	1 371 | 356 | 355 | 366	
The Cold War Begins
netw©rks
There's More Online about the Cold War and its effects on society.
1945-1960
CHAPTER
13
the Cold War shape postwar ’ tensions affect American society?

Lesson 1
The Origins of the Cold War
Lesson 2
The Early Cold War Years
Lesson 3
The Cold War and American Society
Lesson 4
Eisenhower's Cold War Policies
9''

The Story Matters...
The destruction caused by the atomic bomb raised the stakes of military conflict. American concerns about the lack of freedom in countries controlled by the Soviet Union created a growing tension between the two nations. The United States and the Soviet Union would continue in a state of political conflict, military tension, and economic competition for almost 45 years. Conflict broke out in 1950 when Communist North Korea invaded South Korea, expanding the Cold War.
◄ Dwight D. Eisenhower, commander of the Allied forces during World War II and army chief of staff under Truman, became president in 1953.
PHOTO:
Bettmann/CORBIS JI
393
