CHAPTER 5
Lesson 1
The Imperialist Vision
Lesson 2
The Spanish-American War
Lesson 3
New American Diplomacy
The Story Matters...
International economic and military competition convinced the United States that it must become a world power, on par with Britain and Spain. By acquiring new lands before and after the Spanish-American War, the United States became more prominent, but it also took on new responsibilities. In the late 1800s, the United States increased its trade and military presence in East Asia and Latin America. By the early 1900s, it had created an American empire.
◄ Matthew Calbraith Perry, commodore of the U.S. Navy, negotiated the opening of Japan to the West with the Treaty of Kanagawain1854.
PHOTO:
The Granger Collection, New York 177
CHAPTER 5
Place andTime: United States 1872-1917
U.S. economists, politicians, and other leaders recognized that economic growth could only come through expansion into foreign markets. With that in mind, the United States embarked on a path toward imperialism that included colonization and the acquisition of new territory. One strategic acquisition was the Panama Canal. After agreeing to pay for the rights to the project and the land around it, President Roosevelt pushed for the canal's completion. William Gorgas, a U.S. Army surgeon, helped control a major obstacle facing the construction of the Panama Canal: disease.
Step Into the Place
Read the quotes and look at the information presented on the map. 12A, 29A
Analyzing Historical Documents Did Roosevelt and Gorgas agree on the challenges the construction of the Panama Canal posed?
PRIMARYSOURCE
« No single great material work which remains to be undertaken on this continent is as of such consequence to the American people as the building of a canal across the isthmus connecting North and South America.”
—Theodore Roosevelt, from a speech to Congress, 1901
PRIMARYSOURCE
M
The route of the Panama Canal lay through a low, swampy country... where... yellow fever and malaria prevailed to an alarming extent.... We appreciated that, if the Americans were subject to this disease to any considerable extent, we should have great difficulty in keeping them at Panama... and if we could afford to pay sufficiently high wages to induce them to stay, Congress, in all probability, would not sanction the continuance of the work, if we lost from yellow fever fifteen or sixteen hundred Americans every year.**
C.
Gorgas, from Sanitation in Panama, 1915 Step Into the Time
the greatest inflnpnrpnn I is
iseTi"^ J878 u;sh?"s treaty with Samoa
Hayes	Garfield Arthur
1877 1881	1881	1881 188
Making Connections
Determine which president had
Pueblo
Nuevo
Panama Bay
San Carlos
Isla Pedro Gonzalez
Isla
San Jose
*San Miguel
Isla del Rey
PACIFIC OCEAN
Gulf of Panama
• Harrison 1893 Americans S!®*®1®",
-1893 overthrow Queen 1	USS
Liliuokalani /^\ Maine explodes in
McKinley T. Roosevelt
1897-1901 1901-1909
Taft
1909-1913
1904 Senate approves treaty leasing the Panama Canal
networks
There's More Online!
BIOGRAPHY
Sanford B. Dole BIOGRAPHY Queen Liliuokalani Ef BIOGRAPHY Matthew Perry
Ef CHART/GRAPH U.S. Foreign Investments
gf VIDEO U.S. Imperialism
eT interactive self-check QUIZ

“/J ,*
LESSON 1
The Imperialist Vision

ON ‘ How are empires built?
Reading HELPDESK
Academic Vocabulary • expansion • conference Content Vocabulary
•	imperialism
•	protectorate
•	Pan-Americanism
TAKING NOTES:
Key Ideas and Details
Organizing As you read about the development ofthe United States as a world power, use the major headings of the lesson to create an outline for the lesson similar to the one below.
The Imperialist Vision
I.
Building Support for Imperialism A.
B.
C.
1

TEKS
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills 
4A explain why significant events, policies, and individuals such as the Spanish-American War, U.S. expansionism, Henry Cabot Lodge, Alfred Thayer Mahan, Theodore Roosevelt, Sanford B. Dole, and missionaries moved the United States into the position of a world power
4B evaluate American expansionism, including acquisitions such as Guam, Hawaii, the Philippines, and Puerto Rico
continued on the next page
1,1
It Matters Because
During the late 1800s, the desire to find new markets, increase trade, and build a powerful navy caused the Uni States to become more involved in international affairs.
Building Support for Imperialism
guiding question Why did the United States assert itself as a world power?
Following the Civil War, most Americans showed little interest ir expanding their nation’s territory outside the United States. Instead, they focused on reconstructing the South, settling the W and building up industry. In the 1880s, economic and military competition from Europe and a growing feeling of cultural superiority convinced many Americans that the United States should become a world power.
A
Desire for New Markets Many European nations were expanding overseas, a development called the New Imperialism. Imperialism is the economic and political domination of a strong nation over weaker ones. Europe nations expanded their power overseas for many reasons. They needed to import raw materials for manufacturing. High tariffs ii industrialized nations—intended to protect domestic industries-reduced trade, forcing companies to look for new markets overse Investment opportunities had also slowed in Western Europe, so Europeans began looking overseas for places to invest their capita
To protect their investments, European nations began exertin control over territories, making some into colonies and others ini protectorates. In a protectorate, the imperial power protected lo rulers against rebellions and invasion. In return, rulers usually ha to accept Europeans advice on how to govern their countries.
As the United States industrialized, many Americans noticed the expansion of European power overseas and took an interest i the new imperialism. Many concluded that the nation needed ne^ overseas markets to keep its economy strong.
180
A
Feeling of Superiority Certain key ideas encouraged Americans to support the nations expansion overseas. Historian John Fiske argued that English-speaking nations had superior character, ideas, and systems of government. Many Americans linked his ideas, known as Anglo-Saxonism, with the idea of Manifest Destiny. These Americans believed the nation was destined to expand overseas to spread its civilization to others.
imperialism the actions used by one nation to exercise political or economic control over a smaller or weaker nation
PRIMARYSOURCE
« The work which the English race began when it colonized North America is destined to go on until every land... that is not already the seat of an old civilization shall become English in its language, in its religion, in political habits and traditions, and to a predominant extent in the blood of its people.w
—John Fiske, from "Manifest Destiny," Harper's Magazine, 1885
protectorate a country that is technically independent but is actually under the control of another country
expansion the act or process of increasing or enlarging the extent, number, volume, or scope
Another influential advocate of Anglo-Saxonism was Josiah Strong, a popular American minister in the late 1800s. Strong linked Anglo-Saxonism to Christian missionary ideas. His ideas influenced many Americans. “The Anglo-Saxon,” Strong declared, “[is] divinely commissioned to be, in a peculiar sense, his brother’s keeper.” By linking missionary work to Anglo-Saxonism, Strong convinced many Americans to support an expansion of American power overseas.
Building a Modern Navy
As these ideas gained support, the United States became more assertive in foreign affairs. In 1888 the country risked war to prevent Germany from taking control of Samoa. The crisis ended peacefully. However, it led some Americans to believe that the United States would be shut out of foreign markets if it did not build up its navy and acquire bases overseas.
(continued from p. 180)
TEKS
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills 29H use appropriate skills to analyze and interpret social studies information such as maps, graphs, presentations, speeches, lectures, and political cartoons 31B pose and answer questions about geographic distributions and patterns shown on maps, graphs, charts, and available databases
HAWAII WEDS UNCLE SAM
In the wedding depicted in this cartoon, President McKinley is Uncle Sam's best man and Sanford B. Dole gives away the bride, who represeni Hawaii.
1	Interpreting Political Cartoom
Use your skills in determining poin of view. Do you think the artist believes the American people wan to annex Hawaii? Explain why.
2	Analyzing Political Cartoons U your historical knowledge of social issues in America in the late 1800s. How is the cartoon using the emotions of some Americans to sw. their opinion about annexation?
— Analyzing-----
Primary Sources
Mahan oil Military Bases
To provide resting places for them [warships], where they can coal and repair, would be one of the first duties of a government proposing to itself the development of the power of the nation at sea.**
—Alfred Thayer Mahan, from
The Influence of Sea Power Upon History, 1890
DBQ
IDENTIFYING CENTRAL
IDEAS
Why do you think establishing "resting places" is a key issue for developing naval power? U.S. naval officer Captain Alfred T. Mahan helped build public supp for a navy when he published The Influence of Sen Power Upon History ii 1890. Mahan pointed out that many prosperous nations had a large fleet merchant ships to trade with the world and a large navy to defend the nation’s trade. Mahan’s book helped build public support for a big navy. Two powerful senators, Henry Cabot Lodge and Albert J. Beveridge, use their position to convince Congress to support a new navy. In the execu branch, Benjamin Tracy, secretary of the navy under President Harrison John D. Long, secretary of the navy under President McKinley, and his assistant secretary Theodore Roosevelt, all supported Mahan’s ideas.
By the 1890s, several different ideas had come together. Business leaders wanted new markets overseas. Anglo-Saxonism had convinced many Americans they were destined to expand into the world, while growing European imperialism threatened U.S. security. These ideas, along with Mahan’s book, convinced Congress to authorize a large modern navy.
B READING PROGRESS CHECK
Summarizing Why did Americans'attitudes toward overseas expansion chanc
American Expansion in the Pacific
guidingquestion Why did the United States look to the Pacific for new markets?
From the earliest days of the Republic, Americans had expanded their nation by moving westward. When looking overseas for new markets, th United States naturally looked to the Pacific.
Perry Opens Japan
In 1852 President Millard Fillmore ordered Commodore Matthew C. Pei to negotiate a trade treaty with Japan. In 1853 warships under Perry’s command entered Edo Bay (now Tokyo Bay). Japan’s rulers, fearing the influence of Western ideas, had limited contact with the West. After seei t e warships, however, the Japanese realized they were not powerful
enough to resist modern weapons. In 1854, Japan signed the Treaty of Kanagawa, giving the United States trading rights at two Japanese ports.
Annexing Samoa and Hawaii
As trade with Asia grew, the United States needed ports for its ships to refuel and resupply as they crossed the Pacific. Pago Pago, in the Samoan Islands, had one of the finest harbors in the South Pacific. In 1878 the United States negotiated permission to open a base there. An 1899 agreement divided Samoa between Germany and the United States.
More important was Hawaii. Americans found that sugarcane grew well in Hawaii, and planters established sugar plantations there. In 1875 the United States signed a treaty exempting Hawaiian sugar from tariffs. This action was taken to aid Hawaii during an economic recession and prevent Hawaii from turning to Britain or France for help. When the treaty was up for renewal, the United States insisted Hawaii grant it exclusive rights to a naval base at Pearl Harbor.
In 1887, wealthy sugar planters led by Sanford Dole forced the Hawaiian king to accept a new constitution that limited the king’s authority. The planters eventually wanted to make Hawaii part of the United States. Tensions grew worse when Congress passed a new tariff in 1890. The tariff gave subsidies to American sugar producers, making Hawaiian sugar more expensive. The planters knew that if Hawaii joined the United States, they too would get the subsidies. The next year, Queen Liliuokalani ascended the Hawaiian throne and tried to restore the monarchy’s authority.
In response, the planters overthrew the queen. Backed by the American ambassador and U.S. Marines, the planters forced Liliuokalani to give up power, and asked Dole to serve as president of the new Hawaiian Republic. Dole then requested the United States annex Hawaii. President Cleveland, who opposed imperialism, tried instead to restore the queen to power, but Hawaii’s new leaders refused. Instead, they decided to wait until a new president took office. In 1898, under President McKinley, the United States annexed Hawaii and McKinley chose Dole to be Hawaii’s first governor.
H READING PROGRESS CHECK
Explaining How did the search for new overseas markets push the United States to become a world power?
LESSON 1 REVIEW
Reviewing Vocabulary
1.	Explaining How did Anglo-Saxonism help foster American imperialism? 4A
Using Your Notes
2.	listing Review the notes you completed during the lesson to list the factors that led the United States to realize an imperialist vision in the 1890s. 4A
Answering the Guiding Questions
3.	Analyzing Why did the United States assert itself as a world power? 4A
4.	Summarizing Why did the United States look to the Pacific for new markets? 4A
5.	Describing What role did Sanford Dole play in Hawaii's annexation to the United States? 4A, 4B
Writing Activity
ARGUMENT
Suppose that you are living in the United States in the 1890s. Write a letter to the president persuading him to support or oppose an imperialist policy for the United States. 4B Becoming a World Power 183
networks
There's More Online!
& biography Emilio Aguinaldo
BIOGRAPHY
William Randolph Hearst BIOGRAPHY
Joseph Pulitzer CHART/GRAPH
Spanish American War Deaths Ef IMAGE Guerilla Fighters
IMAGE
Yellow Journalism MAP
Distance Between the U.S. andthe Philippines VIDEO The Spanish-American War INTERACTIVE SELF-CHECK QUIZ Reading HELPDESK
Content Vocabulary
•	yellow journalism
•	autonomy
•	jingoism
TAKING NOTES:
Key Ideas and Details
Organizing As you read about the Spanish-American War, complete a graphic organizer like the one below by listing the circumstances that contributed to war with Spain.
TEKS
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills 2D explain the significance of the following years as turning points: 1898 (Spanish-American War), 1914-1918 (World War I), 1929 (the Great Depression begins), 1939-1945 (World War II), 1957 (Sputnik launch ignites U.S.-Soviet space race), 1968-1969 (Martin Luther King Jr. assassination and U.S. lands on the moon),
continued on the next page
LESSON 2
The Spanish-American War
It Matters Because
During the Spanish-American War, the United States defeated Spanish troops in Cuba and the Philippines. Afterward, the United States annexed the Philippines ai became an imperial power.
The Coming of War
Academic Vocabulary • intervene • volunteer
guiding question Why was the United States willing to go to war with Spain overfuba?


Cuba was one of Spain’s oldest colonies in the Americas. Its sugarcane plantations generated considerable wealth for Spain an produced nearly one-third of the world’s sugar in the mid-1800s. Until Spain abolished slavery in 1886, about one-third ot the Cut population was enslaved and forced to work for wealthy landowners on the plantations.
In 1868 Cuban rebels declared independence and launched a guerrilla war against Spanish authorities. Lacking internal suppo the rebellion collapsed a decade later. Many Cuban rebels then fl« to the United States, including their leader, Jose Marti.
By the early 1890s, the United States and Cuba had become closely linked economically. Cuba exported much ot its sugar to the United States, and Americans had invested approximately $50 million in Cuba’s sugar plantations, mines, and railroads. Th economic ties created a crisis in 1894, when the United States imposed a new tariff on sugar that devastated Cuba’s economy. With Cuba in financial distress, the Cuban rebels launched a nev rebellion in February 1895. Marti died during the fighting, buttl rebels seized control of eastern Cuba, declared independence, an formally established the Republic of Cuba in September 1895. America Supports Cuba
When the uprising began, President Cleveland declared the United St neutral. However, stories of Spanish atrocities in two major newspape the New York Journal and the New York World, swayed many America in the rebels favor. The news reports, in which writers exaggerated ot
184
made up stories to attract readers, became known as yellow journalism.
Although some stories were invented, Cubans indeed suffered horribly.
The Spanish sent nearly 200,000 troops to put down the rebellion. The rebels destroyed a considerable amount of property, some belonging to Americans, hoping to provoke American intervention in the war. To prevent villagers from helping the rebels, the Spanish herded hundreds of thousands of rural men, women, and children into “reconcentration camps,” where tens of thousands died of starvation and disease.
Calls for War
In 1897 William McKinley became president of the United States. In September 1897, he asked Spain whether the United States could help negotiate an end to the conflict, so that the United States would not have to intervene in the war. Spain removed Weyler from office and offered the Cubans autonomy, but only if Cuba remained part of the Spanish Empire. The rebels refused to negotiate.
Spain’s concessions enraged many Spanish loyalists in Cuba. In January 1898, the loyalists rioted in Havana. McKinley sent the battleship USS Maine to Havana to protect Americans living there. Then, on February 15, 1898, the Maine exploded in Havana Harbor. To this day, no one is sure why the Maine exploded. Many Americans believed the Spanish did it. “Remember the Mainel” became the rallying cry for war against Spain.
McKinley faced tremendous pressure to go to war. Within the Republican Party, jingoism—aggressive nationalism—was very strong. On April 11, 1898, McKinley asked Congress to authorize the use of force. On April 19, Congress proclaimed Cuba independent, demanded that Spain withdraw from the island, and authorized the president to use armed force. On April 24, Spain declared war on the United States.
H READING PROGRESS CHECK
Examining What events led to the war with Spain in 1898?
(continued from p. 184)
ma Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills
1991 (Cold War ends), 2001 (terrorist attacks on World Trade Center and the Pentagon), and 2008 (election of first black president, Barack Obama)
4A explain why significant events, policies, and individuals such as the Spanish-American War, U.S. expansionism, Henry Cabot Lodge, Alfred Thayer Mahan, Theodore Roosevelt, Sanford B. Dole, and missionaries moved the United States into the position of a world power
4B evaluate American expansionism, including acquisitions such as Guam, Hawaii, the Philippines, and Puerto Rico
15D describe the economic effects of international military conflicts, including the Spanish-American War and World War I, on the United States
A
War on Two Fronts guidingquestion How was the Spanish-American War different from earlier U.S. wars ?
The U.S. Navy was ready for war with Spain. The navy blockaded Cuba, and Commodore George Dewey, commander of the American naval squadron based in Hong Kong, was ordered to attack the Spanish fleet based in the Philippines, then a Spanish colony. American naval planners wanted to prevent the Spanish fleet from sailing east to attack the United States.
yellow journalism type of sensational, biased, and often false reporting for the sake of attracting readers
intervene to get involved in the affairs of another
autonomy the quality of or state of being self-governing
jingoism extreme nationalism marked by aggressive foreign policy
SKILLS PRACTICE
When trying to learn a lot of new ideas, names, and events, use the words who, what, when, and where to ask questions. As you read about the war between Spain and the United States, use words you know in the questions.
President McKinley sent the battleship Maine to Cuba to help Americans evacuate. When the ship exploded, an enraged nation blamed Spain, although the explosion may have originated within the ship. "Remember the Maine1." became the battle cry for war.
CRITICAL THINKING
Analyzing What do you think contributed to American sympathy with the Cubans? Becoming a World Power 185
volunteer person who joins the military by choice
Rough Rider and future president Theodore Roosevelt
The Battle of Manila Bay
On May 1, 1898, the American ships in Deweys squadron entered Manila Bay in the Philippines. They quickly destroyed the Spanish fleet. Dewey’s quick victory surprised McKinley. Hastily, the army assembled 20,000 troop to sail from San Francisco to the Philippines. On the way, the Americans also seized the island of Guam, another Spanish possession.
While waiting for the American troops to arrive, Dewey contacted Emilio Aguinaldo, a Filipino revolutionary leader who had staged an unsuccessful uprising against the Spanish in 1896. Now, while Aguinaldo and his rebels took control of most of the islands, American troops seized the Philippine capital of Manila.
American Forces in Cuba
The Spanish in Cuba were not prepared for war. Their soldiers were weak and sick, and their warships were old with untrained crews. If the United States could defeat the Spanish fleet, Spain would not be able to supply its troops in Cuba. Eventually, Spain would have to surrender.
The U.S. Army was not prepared for war, either. The army had recruited volunteers but lacked proper resources to train and equip them. One volunteer cavalry unit was a rough mix of cowboys, miners, and law officers known as the “Rough Riders.” Theodore Roosevelt was second in command.
Between June 22 and 24, some 17,000 U.S. troops had landed east of Santiago, Cuba. The Spanish fleet, well protected by powerful shore-based guns, occupied Santiago Harbor. Americans wanted to capture those guns to drive the Spanish fleet out of the harbor and into battle with the American fleet waiting nearby.
On July 1, American troops attacked Spanish positions near Santiago and the San Juan Heights. The Rough Riders and the all African American 9th and 10th Cavalry Regiments attacked and held Kettle Hill, then assists in the capture of San Juan Hill. In Santiago the Spanish commander orders the Spanish fleet to flee the harbor. On July 3, American warships attacked them, destroying every Spanish vessel. Later, the Spanish in Santiago surrendered, leaving American troops to occupy nearby Puerto Rico.
B READING PROGRESS CHECK
Summarizing On what two fronts was the Spanish-American War fought?
An American Empire
guiding question How did the United States develop an overseas empire?
As American and Spanish leaders met to discuss the terms for a peace treaty, Americans debated what to do about their newly acquired lands. Cuba would receive its independence as promised, and Spain had agreed to the U.S. annexation of Guam and Puerto Rico. The big question was what to do with the Philippines. The United States faced a difficult choice—remain true to its republican ideals or become an imperial power that ruled a foreign country without the consent of its people. The issue sparked an intense political debat< The Debate Over Annexation
Many people emphasized the economic and military benefits of taking the Philippines. It would provide another Pacific naval base, a stopover on the way to China, and a large market for American goods. Others believed America had a duty to help “less civilized” peoples. “Surely this Spanish >

has not been a grab for the empire,” commented one minister, “but a heroic effort [to] free the oppressed and to teach millions of ignorant, debased human beings thus freed how to live.”
Not all Americans supported annexation. An anti-imperialist movement quickly formed and many prominent Americans voiced their opposition to the United States becoming an imperial power. Andrew Carnegie argued that the cost of empire far outweighed the economic benefits. Samuel Gompers, the head of the American Federation of Labor, worried that competition from cheap Filipino labor would drive down American wages. The social worker and reformer Jane Addams and the writer Samuel Clemens both believed imperialism violated American principles and traditions. Many people argued that it was inconsistent for a democratic-republic founded on the idea of self-government to rule over others who would have no say in who was appointed to rule them.
Despite the objections of anti-imperialists, President McKinley ultimately decided to annex the islands. He later explained his reasoning as follows:
PRIMARY SOURCE
« When I next realized that the Philippines had dropped into our laps I confess I did not know what to do with them. I sought counsel from all sides—Democrats as well as Republicans—but got little help....
And one night late it came to me this way—I don't know how it was, but it came: (1) That we could not give them back to Spain—that would be cowardly and dishonorable; (2) that we could not turn them over to France and Germany—our commercial rivals in the Orient—that would be bad business and discreditable; (3) that we could not leave them to themselves—they were unfit for self-government— and they would soon have anarchy and misrule over there worse than Spain's was; and (4) that there was nothing left for us to do but to take them all, and to educate the Filipinos, and uplift and civilize and Christianize them, and by God's grace do the very best we could by them, as our fellow-men for whom Christ also died.99
—James Rusling, "Interview with President William McKinley," The Christian Advocate, January 1903
McKinley’s thinking blended the ideas of many military and business leaders with the ideas of Anglo-Saxonism. On December 10, 1898, the United States and Spain signed the Treaty of Paris, under which Cuba became independent. Also, the United States acquired Puerto Rico and Guam and paid Spain $20 million for the Philippines. After an intense debate, the Senate approved the treaty in February 1899.
A
Turning Point The year 1898 was a major turning point in American history. In just a few short months, the United States had defeated a European nation, demonstrated that its navy was one of the most powerful in the world, and had acquired its own empire. The reputation of the United States for being a nation that did not involve itself in global affairs was shattered. Increasingly the world’s other great powers had to take American perspectives and policies into account, and in the years ahead the United States would find itself drawn into issues and events thousands of miles from its own shores. After 1898, the United States had become a world power.
The Platt Amendment
Although the United States had promised to grant Cuba its independence, conditions were attached to the new Cuban constitution. The Platt Amendment, submitted by Senator Orville Platt, specified the following:
(1) Cuba could not make any treaty with another nation that would weaken its independence; (2) Cuba had to allow the United States to buy or lease
Becoming a World Power 187
naval stations in Cuba; (3) Cuba’s debts had to be kept low to prevent foreign countries from landing troops to enforce payment; and (4) the United States would have the right to intervene to protect Cuban independence and keep order. The Platt Amendment, which effectively made Cuba an American protectorate, remained in effect until its repeal in 1934.
Governing Puerto Rico
In 1900 Congress passed the Foraker Act, establishing a civil government for Puerto Rico. The law provided for an elected legislature, and a governor and executive council that were appointed by the U.S. president. Congress gradually allowed Puerto Ricans greater self-government. In 1917 it granted Puerto Ricans U.S. citizenship. Thirty years later, Puerto Ricans were allowed to elect their own governor. A debate eventually began over whether Puerto Rico should become a state, become independent, or continue as a self-governing commonwealth of the United States. The debate over Puerto Rico’s status continues today.
Rebellion in the Philippines
In 1899 Emilio Aguinaldo ordered his troops to attack the American soldiers who had been sent there. Aguinaldo wanted the Philippines to be independent. To fight the Filipino guerrillas, the U.S. military established reconcentration camps to separate Filipino guerrillas from civilians. Thousands died from disease and starvation. Many U.S. soldiers died fighting the guerrillas.
While American troops fought the guerrillas, the first U.S. civilian governor of the islands, William Howard Taft, tried to win over the
The Annexation Debate
Americans were divided over whether the
United States should give the Filipinos their independence or become an imperial power by annexing the Philippines.
«The Opposition tells us that we ought not to govern a people without their
self-government. We govern the Indians without their consent, we govern our territories without their consent, we govern our children without their consent.... Would not the people of the Philippines prefer the just, humane, civilizing government of this Republic to the savage, bloody rule of pillage and extortion from which we
only to those who are capable of
« A harbor and coaling station in the
Philippines would answer every trade
and military necessity and such a
concession could have been secured
at any time without difficulty. It is
not necessary to own people in order
to trade with them. We carry on trade X.
today with every part of the world,
and our commerce has expanded	William Jennings Bryan
more rapidly than the commerce of Presidential Candidate
any European empire.
... Imperialism finds no warrant in the Bible. The command 'Go ye into all the world and preach the gospel to every creatur has no Gatling gun attachment....”
— from Speeches of William Jennings Srt
have rescued them?”
from The Meaning of the Times
O
Making Inferences According to Albert Beveridge, wh annexation of the Philippines an honorable course of acti Q
Analyzing What are William Jennings Bryan's two mai criticisms of imperialism? 188
Filipinos by improving education, transportation, and health care. These reforms slowly reduced Filipino hostility. In March 1901, American troops captured Aguinaldo. On July 4, 1902, the United States declared the war over. Gradually the Filipinos gained more control over their government. By the mid-1930s, they elected their own congress and president. In 1946 they gained full independence from the United States.
POLITICAL CARTOONS^
Many people debated the decision to annex the Philippines, arguing over costs and benefits ofthe new empire.
President McKinley raises the American flag over the Philippines while William Jennings Bryan tries to chop it down.
1 Identifying Central Ideas Based on the cartoon, what do you think McKinley is trying to accomplish?
-35-
The Economic Effects of the War
In 1897, the year before the war, Americans had invested roughly $700 million in business ventures overseas. By 1904, they had invested over $2.5 billion. The war made Cuba safe again and American investment in sugar plantations and mining surged. Hawaii was now an American territory and companies there no longer had
to pay tariffs to ship goods to the United States, making it attractive to investors. Puerto Rico was in a similar position. American investors revived the island’s sugar industry and expanded its tobacco industry. American investments in the Philippines helped build railroads, open mines, and expanded its sugar industry as well.
All of these developments came at a cost. Together, the war with Spain and the battle against the Filipino guerrillas had cost some $400 million. Over 5,400 men had died in the war with Spain, and another 4,200 died fighting Filipino guerrillas. The war also led to a steady increase in naval spending, from $64 million in 1899 to $135 million in 1912. The spending helped stimulate parts of the economy related to shipbuilding, though it also diverted money from investment in other areas. But as a new world power with far flung bases and territories, the United States now needed a larger naval force to project its power and safeguard its interests. tl READING PROGRESS CHECK
Drawing Conclusions How do the
actions of McKinley in the cartoon represent his feelings about U.S. imperialism?
THE DEBATE OVER EMPIRE
explaining What did the United States do to expand its territorial interests?
LESSON 2 REVIEW
Reviewing Vocabulary
1.	Describing Describe the level of autonomy that Cuba obtained afterthe Spanish-American War. 4B
2.	Identifying Central Ideas Identify two results of the United States's intervening in the revolution in Cuba. 20,4A, 4B, 15D
Using Your Notes
3.	Finding the Main Idea Review the notes that you completed during the lesson to identify what all the events had in common. 4A
Answering the Guiding Questions
4.	Explaining Why was the United States willing to go to war with Spain over Cuba? 4A
5.	Contrasting How was the Spanish-American War different from earlier U.S. wars? 4B
6.	Analyzing How did the United States develop an overseas empire? 4A,4B
Writing Activity
NARRATIVE
Suppose that you are a Filipino living during the time ofthe U.S. annexation ofthe Philippine Islands. Write a journal entry in which you describe your feelings about American control ofthe islands. 4B Becoming a World Power 189

networks
There's More Online!
BIOGRAPHY
John Hay Sf BIOGRAPHY Theodore Roosevelt Ef BIOGRAPHY Pancho Villa Ef VIDEO The Building ofthe Panama Canal
Ef interactive self-check QUIZ
LESSON 3
New American Diplomacy
How an ampins built?
It Matters because
Reading HELPDESK
Academic Vocabulary
• access
• tension
The United States's influence continued to expand into foreign countries. President Theodore Roosevelt mediate disputes in Asia and Latin America and acquired the Panama Canal Zone. Presidents Taft and Wilson increase U.S. trade and influence in Latin America.
Content Vocabulary
•	sphere of influence
•	Open Door policy
•	dollar diplomacy
•	guerrilla
TAKING NOTES:
Key Ideas and Details
Organizing Complete a graphic organizer similar to the one below to list reasons the United States wanted a canal through Central America.
TEKS
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills 4A explain why significant events, policies, and individuals such as the Spanish-American War, U.S. expansionism, Henry Cabot Lodge, Alfred Thayer Mahan, Theodore Roosevelt, Sanford B. Dole, and missionaries moved the United States into the position of a world power
4B evaluate American expansionism, including acquisitions such as Guam,
Hawaii, the Philippines, and Puerto Rico
continued on the next page
American Diplomacy in Asia
guiding question Why did the United States want to eliminate spheres of influence in Chin
In 1899 the United States was a major power in Asia, with naval bases all across the Pacific. Operating from those bases, the United States Navy—by then the world’s third-largest navy—could exert American power anywhere in East Asia. The nation’s main interest in Asia, however, was not conquest but commerce. Between 1895 and 1900, U.S. exports to China quadrupled. Although China bought only about two percent of U.S. exports, the vast Chinese markets excited American business leaders, especially those in the textile, oil, and steel industries.
The Open Door Policy
In 1894 war erupted between China and Japan over Korea, which was client state dependent upon China. Western observers were astonishe( when Japan easily defeated China’s massive military. The war showed that Japan had mastered Western technology and that China was weaker than anyone had thought. In the peace treaty, China recognize Koreas independence and gave Japan territory in Manchuria.
The Russians were concerned about Japan’s rising power. They did not want Japan to acquire the territory in Manchuria because it bordered Russia. Backed by France and Germany, Russia forced Japan to return the Manchurian territory it had acquired. Then, in 1898, Russia demanded China lease the territory to Russia instead.
Leasing meant the territory would still belong to China, even though a foreign government would maintain overall control. Soon Germany, France, and Britain also demanded “leaseholds” in Chin<
190
Each leasehold became the center of a country’s sphere of influence, an area where a foreign nation controlled economic development.
U.S. politicians and businessmen worried that China would be divided among the Europeans and Americans would not be allowed to do business there. President McKinley and Secretary of State John Hay both supported what they called an Open Door policy, which would allow all countries to trade with China.
In 1899 Hay asked countries with leaseholds in China not to discriminate against other nations wanting to do business in their sphere of influence. Each nation responded by saying it accepted the Open Door policy but would not follow it unless all the others agreed. Once Hay had received assurances from all of the nations with leaseholds, he declared that the United States expected the other powers to uphold the policy. The policy helped the U.S. economy by ensuring that American companies could continue to trade with China.
The Boxer Rebellion
While foreign countries debated access to Chinas market, secret Chinese societies organized to fight foreign control and influence. One group, the Society of Righteous and Harmonious Fists, was known to Westerners as the Boxers. In 1900 this group decided to destroy both the “foreign devils” and their Chinese Christian converts, whom they believed were corrupting Chinese society.
In what came to be called the Boxer Rebellion, the Boxers and some Chinese troops attacked foreign embassies in Peking (now Beijing) and Tientsin (now Tianjin), killing more than 200 foreigners, including many Christian missionaries. After the German ambassador to China was killed, eight nations—Germany, Austria-Hungary, Britain, France, Italy, Japan, Russia, and the United States—intervened. A large multinational force rescued the foreigners and ended the rebellion.
During the crisis, Secretary of State John Hay worked with British diplomats to persuade the other powers not to partition China. In a second set of Open Door notes, Hay convinced the participating powers to accept compensation from China for damages caused by the rebellion. After some discussion, the powers agreed not to break up China into European-controlled colonies. The United States retained access to Chinas lucrative trade in tea, spices, and silk and gained a larger market for its own goods.
H READING PROGRESS CHECK
Making Inferences What was the importance of the Open Door policy to the United States?
sphere of influence
section of a country where a foreign nation enjoys special rights and powers
Open Door policy a policy that allowed each foreign nation in China to trade freely in the other nations' spheres of influence
access freedom or ability to obtain or make use of
(continued from p. 190)
TEKS
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills 12A analyze the impact of physical and human geographic factors on the settlement ofthe Great Plains, the Klondike Gold Rush, the Panama Canal, the Dust Bowl, and the levee failure in New Orleans after Hurricane Katrina
15C explain how foreign policies affected economic issues such as the Chinese Exclusion Act of 1882, the Open Door Policy, Dollar Diplomacy, and immigration quotas
31B pose and answer questions about geographic distributions and patterns shown on maps, graphs, charts, and available databases
International soldiers pose in Tientsin (now Tianjin) after rescuing their besieged delegations during the Boxer Rebellion. The American is second from the left.
CRITICALTHINKING
Drawing Conclusions Why were the Boxers and other secret Chinese societies organized? 
dollar diplomacy a policy of joining the business interests of a country with its diplomatic interests abroad
to Congress in which he stated what came to be known as the Roosevelt Corollary to the Monroe Doctrine. It stated that the United States would intervene in Latin American affairs when necessary to maintain economic and political stability in the Western Hemisphere.
The goal of the Roosevelt Corollary was to prevent European powers from using the debt problems of Latin America to justify intervening in the region. The United States first applied the Roosevelt Corollary in the Dominican Republic, which had fallen behind on its debt payments to European nations. In 1905 the United States began collecting customs tariffs in the Dominican Republic, using the Marine Corps as its agent.
Dollar Diplomacy
Roosevelt’s successor, William Howard Taft, placed less emphasis on military force and more on economic development. Taft believed that supporting Latin American industry would increase trade and profits for American businesses and lift Latin America countries out of poverty and social disorder. His policy came to be called dollar diplomacy.
To give Europeans less reason to intervene in Latin American affairs, Taft’s administration worked to replace European loans with loans from American banks. In 1911 American bankers began making loans to Nicaragua to support its shaky government. The next year, civil unrest forced Nicaragua’s president to ask for greater assistance. U.S. marines entered Nicaragua, replaced the customs collector with an American agent, and formed a committee to control the customs commissions. U.S. troops supported the government and customs until 1933.
H READING PROGRESS CHECK
Explaining Why was it important for the United States to influence Latin American nations?
Woodrow Wilson's Diplomacy in Mexico
guiding question How did "moral diplomacy" shape President Wilson's foreign policy?
“It would be the irony of fate,” said Woodrow Wilson just before he was inaugurated in 1913, “if my administration had to deal chiefly with foreign affairs.” Wilson’s experience and interest were in domestic policy. He was a university professor before entering politics and was a committed progressive. Foreign affairs, however, absorbed much of Wilson’s time and energy as president.
Wilson opposed imperialism. He believed that democracy was essential to a nation’s stability and prosperity. He wanted the United States to promote democracy to create a world free of revolution and war. He hoped the United States would lead by moral example, but his first international crisis thwarted that hope.
The Mexican Revolution
For more than 30 years, Porfirio Diaz ruled Mexico as a dictator. During Diazs reign, Mexico became much more industrialized, but foreign investors owned the new railroads and factories that were built. Most Mexican citizens remained poor and landless. In 1910 discontent erupted into revolution. Francisco Madero, a reformer who seemed to support democracy, constitutional government, and land reform, led the revolution. Madero, however, was an unskilled administrator. Worried about Madero’s plans for land reform, landowners plotted against him. In 1913 General Victoriano Huerta seized power, and Madero was murdered.
94
Huertas brutality repulsed Wilson, who refused to recognize the new government. Instead, Wilson announced a new policy. To win U.S. recognition, groups that seized power in Latin America would have to establish a government based on law, not on force. Wilson believed that, without U.S. support, Huerta soon would be overthrown. Meanwhile,
Wilson ordered the navy to intercept arms shipments to Huerta’s government. He also permitted Americans to arm Huerta’s opponents. Wilson Sends Troops Into Mexico
In April 1914, American sailors visiting the Mexican city of Tampico were arrested after entering a restricted area. After their release, their commander demanded an apology. The Mexicans refused. Wilson saw the refusal as an opportunity to overthrow Huerta. Soon after Congress authorized the use of force, Wilson learned that a German ship was unloading weapons at the Mexican port of Veracruz. Wilson immediately ordered American warships to Veracruz, where U.S. Marines forcibly seized the city.
Although the president expected the Mexican people to welcome his action, anti-American riots broke out. Wilson then accepted international mediation to settle the dispute. Venustiano Carranza, whose forces had acquired arms from the United States, became Mexico’s president.
Mexican forces opposed to Carranza conducted raids into the United States, hoping to force Wilson to intervene. In March 1916, Pancho Villa (VEE*yuh) and a group of guerrillas—armed fighters who carry out surprise attacks—burned the town of Columbus, New Mexico, killing 17 Americans. Wilson responded by sending about 5,800 troops under General John J. Pershing across the border to find and capture Villa. The expedition ended without success.
Wilson’s Mexican policy damaged U.S. foreign relations. The British ridiculed the president’s attempt to “shoot” the Mexicans into self-government. Latin Americans regarded his “moral imperialism” as no improvement over Theodore Roosevelt’s “big stick” diplomacy. In fact, Wilson followed Roosevelt’s example in the Caribbean. In 1914 he negotiated exclusive rights for naval bases and a canal with Nicaragua. In 1915 he sent marines into Haiti to put down a rebellion. In 1916 he sent troops into the Dominican Republic to set up a government he hoped would be more stable and democratic than the current regime.
H READING PROGRESS CHECK
Examining Why did President Wilson's "moral diplomacy" not accomplish its intended purpose?
BIOGRAPHY
General John J. Pershing 1860-1948
During the Spanish-American War, General John J. Pershing earned the praise of his superior officers, one of whom said that Pershing was "the coolest and bravest man I ever saw under fire." Pershing was made commander of the expedition into Mexico to capture Pancho Villa. Though the mission failed, it made Pershing a respected public figure.
CRITICAL THINKING
Predicting Consequences After the failed expedition to capture Villa, what was the next military conflict in which General Pershing commanded troops? guerrillas armed fighters who carry out surprise attacks
LESSON 3 REVIEW
Reviewing Vocabulary
1.	Explaining How did the Open Door policy help prevent any one nation from monopolizing trade with China? 15C
Using Your Notes
2.	Identifying Use your notes to identify major reasons that the United States wanted to build a canal through Central America. 4A, 4B, 12A
Answering the Guiding Questions
3.	Analyzing Why did the United States want to eliminate spheres of influence in China? 15C
4.	Evaluating Was President Roosevelt correct in his belief that a strong military presence promoted global peace? 4B
5.	Comparing and Contrasting How did "moral diplomacy"shape President Wilson's foreign policy?
Writing Activity
NARRATIVE
Suppose that you are a Mexican citizen during Wilson's presidency. Write a radio news broadcast expressing your feelings about American actions in Mexico. Becoming a World Power 195
chapter 5 Assessment
Directions: On a separate sheet of paper, answer the questions below. Make sure you read carefully and answer all parts ofthe questions.
Lesson Review
Lesson 1
0 Describing How did Josiah Strong's ideas help propel the United States to build an empire? 4A
Q
Explaining Primary Sources Why did Alfred Thayer Mahan think that a larger and more powerful navy would help American expansionism? How did his ideas help move the United States into a position of world power? 4A 0 Explaining Why did Sanford Dole and other Hawaiian sugar planters want Hawaii to join the United States? 4A, 4B, 15c
Lesson 2
0 Summarizing What were the main results of the United States victory in the Spanish-American War? 4A, 4B
0 Evaluating How did Filipinos feel about the U.S. government after the Spanish-American War? 4B
0 Explaining How did the Spanish-American War contribute to the United States becoming a world power? 4A, 4B
0 Explaining What were the economic effects of the Spanish-American military conflict in 1898? 15D
Lesson 3
0 Analyzing What were the human geographic factors that led the United States to build a canal through Panama? 12A
0 Explaining How did the Open Door Policy and Dollar Diplomacy affect the economy in the United States? 15C
0 Analyzing How did the Roosevelt Corollary and dollar diplomacy affect U.S. relations with other countries? 15C
Exploring the Essential Questions
© Determining Cause And Effect Create a cause-and-effect diagram that identifies the causes of American imperialism and the effects ofthe United States' decision to build an empire in the late 1800s and early 1900s. 4B, 15C, 15D
Critical Thinking
0 Explaining What was significance of 1898 and why might it be considered a turning point in U.S. history? 2D
© Analyzing What were the physical geographic factors that shaped the building ofthe Panama Canal? 12A
0 Evaluating How did Theodore Roosevelt's foreign policy help establish the United States as a world power?
Social Studies Skills
0 Sequencing Using Absolute and Relative Chronology
Place the following list of events in the correct chronological order and then give the date each event took place. 2C, 29B
•	Boxer Rebellion
•	Alfred Mahan publishes his book on sea power
•	Matthew Perry arrives in Japan
•	The Open Door Policy is issued
•	Spanish-American War
•	Panama Canal completed
•	Hawaiian planters overthrow Liliuokalani •The Philippine rebellion ends
•Treaty of Paris
0 Evaluating the Validity of a Source Use the library or Internet to find writings by people in support of and against the annexation ofthe Philippines. Evaluate their points of view based on their language and logic they use Then evaluate each writer's background and experience t determine if they are reliable or objective sources. Consid each person's historical context and what was shaping their thinking. Examples of people you may wish to research include Alfred Mahan, Albert Beveridge, Henry Cabot Lodge, Theodore Roosevelt, William McKinley, Jam Addams, Samuel Clemens, Andrew Carnegie, Samuel Gompers, Carl Schurz. 4A, 4B, 29E
Need Extra Help?
1	2	3	4	5	6	7	8	9	10	11	12	13	14	15	16
181 I 182 | 183 | 187 | 188 | 187 | 189 | 193[l9^n8^H8^H8^^9^H9^M87
J96
® Categorizing Create a chart listing the arguments on both sides of the debate about whether or not to annex the Philippines. 4B, 29B
BI
Analyzing Primary Sources Read the following excerpts, one from Alfred Mahan's book The Influence of Sea Power Upon History and the other from a speech by Republican Carl Schurz, a leading opponent of imperialism, and then answer the following questions.
PRIMARY SOURCE
« The protection of [naval] stations must depend either upon direct military force, as do Gibraltar and Malta, or upon a surrounding friendly population, such as the American colonists once were to England, and, it may be presumed, the Australian colonists now are. Such friendly surroundings and backing, joined to a reasonable military provision, are the best of defenses.... Colonies attached to the mother-country afford, therefore, the surest means of supporting abroad the sea power of a country. In peace, the influence ofthe government should be felt in promoting by all means a warmth of attachment and a unity of interest which will make the welfare of one the welfare of all, and the quarrel of one the quarrel of all; and in war, or rather for war, by inducing such measures of organization and defense as shall be felt by all to be a fair distribution of a burden of which each reaps the benefit.”
—Alfred Thayer Mahan, from The Influence of Sea Power Upon History, 1890
PRIMARY SOURCE
M
Many imperialists admit that our trade with the Philippines themselves will not nearly be worth its cost; but they say that we must have the Philippines as a foothold, a sort of power station, for the expansion of our trade on the Asiatic continent, especially in China. Admitting this, for argument's sake, I ask what kind of a foothold we should really need. Coaling-stations and docks for our fleet, and facilities for the establishment of commercial houses and depots. That is all. And now I ask further, whether we could not easily have had these things if we had, instead of making war upon the Filipinos, favored the independence ofthe islands. Everybody knows that we could.
We might have those things now for the mere asking, if we stopped the war and came to a friendly understanding with the Filipinos to-morrow.”
—Carl Schurz, "The Policy of Imperialism," Address to the Anti-Imperialist Conference, 1899
(J) Interpreting Speeches What policies does Schurz suggest the United States could have followed instead of annexing the Philippines and going to war with the Filipino guerrillas? 29A
© Analyzing Why does Mahan think colonies are the best way to support a nation's navy? 4A, 29A
Comparing and Contrasting Primary Sources In what ways do Schurz and Mahan agree? What is the main point on which they disagree? 29A, 29H
Analyzing Visuals
Use the political cartoon to answer the following questions.
Interpreting Political Cartoons Using your skills in detecting bias and points of view, which side ofthe debate over imperialism do you think the cartoonist supports? Explain why and also explain what he thinks the debate over imperialism is doing to the United States. 4B, 29F, 29H
0 Analyzing Political Cartoons Using your knowledge of why many American leaders wanted to expand overseas, who do you think the man in the suit beside Uncle Sam represents? 4A, 4B, 15C, 29B, 29H
Need Extra Help?
	17 18 19 20 21 22
1 Go to page	| 186 | 186 | 182 | 182 | 189 | 189 J
Becoming a World Power 197
Use the map Major Imperial Powers to answer the following questions.
© Analyzing Geographic Distributions Based on the distribution of the world's imperial powers, why would President Roosevelt have issued the Roosevelt Corollary? 4A, 15C, 31B
© Posing Questions about Geographic Distributions
What questions would you ask to be able to explain why many American business leaders supported President
Roosevelt's plan to build a canal in Panama?
4A, 12A, 15C, 31B
Examining Geographic Patterns Based on the patterns on the map, why do you think the United States developed the Open Door Policy? 15C, 31B
© Posing Questions about Geographic Patterns In order to understand why Africa was divided up by the imperial powers, what questions would you need to ask? 31B
Extended Response Questions
© Explaining Why did the United States become a world power in the late 1800s? Write an essay explaining the ideas that convinced leaders that the United States should build up its navy and expand overseas. Outline the role of significant individuals, policies, and events that moved the United States into a position of world power. 4A
© Evaluating Think about American expansionism and the nation's acquisition of Guam, Hawaii, the Philippines and Puerto Rico. Imagine you are a U.S. senator about to vote on the decision to annex the Philippines. Taking into account the nation's values and traditions, as well as its economic needs, and the world's military and political situation in the 1800s, write a speech evaluating whether American foreign policy was correct or not, and explaining how you are going to vote. 4B
© Transfer Information Write a script for an oral presentation that announces the results of the Treaty of Paris. The script should be read aloud and performed fora video presentation or other visual display. 30C
Create And Analyze Arguments And Draw Conclusions Research various points of view about the saying that Theodore Roosevelt used to describe his foreign policy: Speak softly but carry a big stick. Write a short essay to describe at least two viewpoints about the saying. Be sure to use social studies terminology correctly
such as expansionism, diplomacy, and acquisitions.
29G, 30B
Standardized Test Practice
© Which of the following contributed to the United States becoming a world power?
A the Spanish-American War B the closing ofthe Panama Canal C the annexation of Cuba by the United States D Queen Liliuokalani's rise to the throne
© Which ofthe following argued that a strong navy was critical to a nation's economic success?
F
John Fiske G
Matthew C. Perry H William Jennings Bryan J Alfred Thayer Mahan Need Extra Help?
	23	24	25	26	27	28	29	30	31	32
|Gotopage	Lt”l	[192	|19O|	1180]	180 |	[l86|			[tsT]	182 ]
198
The Progressive Movement
1890-1920
networks
There's More Online about the Progressive movement and the changes it made.
