CHAPTER 11
Place andTime: United States 1931-1941
After the experience of World War /, many Americans and Europeans did not want to be involved in such a war ever again. Many Americans believed that some European nations would always be fighting one another and there was no reason for the United States to step in. /Is another war brewed overseas during the 1930s, Americans were torn between ignoring it and using their influence to maintain peace. When war finally erupted, the nation remained supportive of its traditional allies, if reluctant to enter the fray itself. After the conflict reached U.S. soil, however, Americans devoted themselves to victory.
Step Into the Place
Read the quotes and look at the information presented on the map. £03 7A, 29a
Analyzing Historical Documents How are these two quotes similar in * their description of the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor and the outbreak of
war? How are they different?
PRIMARY SOURCE
“ We saw a lot of planes diving down and we thought that the army air force was practicing again. We didn't know what it was.... [T]wo planes came over us and they were so low that you could see the pilots in the plane. They dropped bombs on each side of us, but missed. Then we saw the big red ball, which signified they were Japanese planes. Well then we knew we were at war.**
—Will Lehner, a sailor aboard the USS Ward during the attack on Pearl Harbor, from an interview, 2004
PRIMARY SOURCE
“ Yesterday, December 7,1941 —a date which will live in infamy—the United States of America was suddenly and deliberately attacked by naval and air forces of the Empire of Japan.... No matter how long it may take us to overcome this premeditated invasion, the American people in their righteous might will win through to absolute victory.... I ask that the Congress declare that since the unprovoked and dastardly attack by Japan on Sunday, December 7,1941, a state of war has existed between the United States and the Japanese Empire. **
—President Franklin D. Roosevelt, from his speech to Congress, December 8,1941
Step Into the Time
F.
Roosevelt 1934 Nye 1933-1945 Committee h;
hearings oik '
Making Connections Choose an event from the time line and describe how the event reflects the state of the world leading up
WORLD


, Solace Allen* chew
_ Utah/ tangier,
_ _	Arizona,
Island Tennessee ^Vestal
Maryland ^West Virginia Neosho
Oklahoma
* %
Pearl Harbor
Detroit,
'dusa Rale,9h
California X Argonne
Sacramento\ K^apo
Sacramento \	,-,
Avocety Helena \/ \ New Orleans ^eiias \ X /)/,San Francisco Oglala^ *j^°™Sumner
Shaw
Cachalots

Bagley
* Pennsylvania Cassia "Downes

Castor

NeutralityAc,
^Ponsto
ions
1937 Neutrality Act limits trade with all warring nations
it; KVA.
Because Hawaii is located thousands of miles from Japan, U.S. military officials had doubted that the Japanese would attempt an attack there— leaving Pearl Harbor an open and inviting target.
1939 United States denies SS St. Louis permission to dock
1940 Roosevelt makes Destroyers-for-Bases deal with Britain


Kauai Hawaiian Islands Niihau .. \
Oahu Molokai PACIFIC Lanai Maui OCEAN Kahoolawe
.rJi
100 km
100 miles
-J
Hawa
March 1941 Congress passes Lend-Lease Act
Dec. 1941 Japan launches Destroyers-for-Bases
T

i
networks
There's More Online!
BIOGRAPHY
Adolf Hitler gf BIOGRAPHY Benito Mussolini BIOGRAPHY
HidekiTojd Sf IMAGE Chamberlain, Mussolini, and Hitler
gf IMAGE Maginot Line
ef map Germany's Expansion
gf MAP The Rise of Dictators
Ef VIDEO The Rise of Hitler
ef INTERACTIVE SELF-CHECK QUIZ
T
Reading HELPDESK
Academic Vocabulary
exploit
dominate
command
Content Vocabulary
•	fascism • appeasement
•	collective
TAKING NOTES:
Key Ideas and Details
Organizing As you read about the events in Europe and Asia after World War I, complete a graphic organizer similar to the one below, using the major headings of the lesson to create an outline.
The Origins of World War II
I.
The Rise of Dictators A. D.
C.
D.
II.


TEKS
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills 7A identify reasons for U.S. involvement in World War II, including Italian, German, and Japanese dictatorships and their aggression, especially the attack on Pearl Harbor
continued on the next page


/' :

b
LESSON 1
The Origins of World War II

’orld War II have been respond to injustice while
IT MATTERS BECAUSE
In the years following World War I, aggressive and expansionist governments took power in Europe andAsi Meanwhile, most Americans did not want to get involved another foreign war.
The Rise of Dictators
guiding question What economic and political conditions following World War I encouraged dictatorships?
The Treaty of Versailles, along with the economic depression that followed, contributed to the rise of antidemocratic governments in both Europe and Asia. These antidemocratic states would eventually break the peace agreement that ended World War I.
Mussolini and Fascism in Italy
One of Europe’s first dictatorships arose in Italy. In 1919 Benito Mussolini founded Italy’s Fascist movement. Fascism was an aggressive nationalistic movement that considered the nation mor important than the individual. Fascists believed that order in society and national greatness came through a dictator who led a strong government and built an empire.
Fascism was also strongly anticommunist. After the Russian Revolution, many Europeans feared that Communists, allied with labor unions, were trying to bring down their governments. Mussolini exploited these fears by portraying fascism as a bulwark against communism, protecting private property and the middle class. He pledged to return Italy to the glories of the Roman Empire.
Backed by the Blackshirts, a Fascist militia, Mussolini threatened to march on Rome in 1922, claiming he was defending Italy against a communist revolution. Liberal members of the Italian parliament insisted that the king declare martial law. When he refused, the cabinet resigned. Conservative advisers then persuaded the king to appoint Mussolini as the premier. Once in office, Mussolini—who took the title of II Duce, or “The Leader”—embarked on an ambitious program of bringing order to Italy.
Stalin Takes Over the Soviet Union
After the Russian Revolution, the Communist Party, led by Vladimir Lenin, created the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics (USSR) in 1922. The Communists instituted one-party rule, suppressed individual liberties, and punished opponents.
After Lenin died in 1924, Joseph Stalin came to power. By 1926, Stalin was the new Soviet dictator. He began a massive effort to industrialize his country using Five-Year Plans. Steel production increased, but industrial wages declined by 43 percent from 1928 to 1940. Family farms were combined and turned into collectives, or government-owned farms. Peasants who resisted by killing livestock or hoarding crops faced show trials or death from starvation. As many as 10 million peasants died in famines during 1932 and 1933. Stalin also sought to expand Soviet influence beyond its borders, proclaiming, “[W]orld dictatorship can be established only when the victory of socialism has been achieved in certain countries or groups of countries ... [growing into] a World Union of Soviet Socialist Republics uniting the whole of mankind....”
Stalin tolerated no opposition, targeting political enemies along with artists and intellectuals. He used concentration camps, which held nearly 2 million people by 1935. Prisoners were used as slave labor. Between 15 and 20 million people died under Stalin’s rule, which lasted until his death in 1953.
Hitler and Nazi Germany
fascism a political system headed by a dictator that calls for extreme nationalism and often racism and no tolerance of opposition
exploit to take unfair advantage of
collective a farm, especially in Communist countries, formed from many small holdings collected into a single unit for joint operation under governmental supervision
Adolf Hitler was a fervent nationalist who hated both the victorious Allies and the German government that had accepted their peace terms ending World War I. He became the leader of the National Socialist German Workers’ Party, or Nazi Party. The Nazis were one of many political parties that arose out of postwar Germany’s political and economic chaos. The party called for Germany to expand its territory and to reject the terms of the Treaty of Versailles. It also was anti-Semitic. In November 1923, the Nazis tried to seize power by marching on city hall in Munich, Germany. The plan failed, the Nazi Party was banned for a time, and Hitler was arrested.
While in prison, Hitler wrote Mein Kampf (“My Struggle”), in which he claimed that Germans, particularly blond, blue-eyed Germans, belonged to a “master race” called Aryans. He argued that the Slavic peoples of Eastern Europe belonged to an inferior race, which Germans should enslave. Hitlers racism was strongest, however, toward Jews. Hitler blamed the Jews for many of the world’s problems, especially for Germany s defeat in World War I.
After his release, Hitler changed his tactics. He focused on getting Nazis elected to the Reichstag, the lower house of the German parliament. When the Depression struck Germany, many desperate Germans began to vote for radical parties, including the Nazis and Communists. By 1932, the Nazis were the largest party in the Reichstag. The
following year, the German president appointed Hitler as chancellor.
After taking office, Hitler called for new elections. Storm troopers, as the Nazi paramilitary units were called, began intimidating voters. After the election, the Reichstag, dominated by the Nazis and other right-wing parties, voted to give Hitler dictatorial powers. In 1934 Hitler became president, which gave him control ofthe army. He then gave himself the new title of Der Fuhrer, or “The Leader.
(continued from p. 334)
TEKS
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills 7D analyze major issues of World War II, including the Holocaust; the internment of German, Italian, and Japanese Americans and Executive Order 9066; and the development of conventional and atomic weapons
12B identify and explain reasons for changes in political boundaries such as those resulting from statehood and international conflicts
dominate to be in a state or position of command or control over all others
Mussolini (left). Hitler (center), and Stalin (right) rose to power during times of political and economic instability.
CRITICALTHINKING
Making Inf erences Why would political and economic instability lead to a rise of dictatorships? Hideki Tojo became prime minister of Japan in 1941 and supported an aggressive military policy.
CRITICALTHINKING
Predicting Consequences What might be a result of Tojo's aggressive leadership? command to be in control of, to have full power
Militarists Control Japan
In Japan, as in Germany, difficult economic times helped undermine the political system. Japanese industries had to import nearly all ofthe resources they needed to produce goods. When the Depression struck, other countries raised their tariffs, making things worse. Many Japanese military officers blamed the country’s problems on corrupt politicians. They believed that Japan was destined to dominate East Asia and that straying from traditional beliefs corrupted the country.
The military leaders argued that seizing territory was the only way Japan could get the resources it needed. In September 1931, the Japanese army invaded Manchuria, a resource-rich region of northern China. In October, hoping to avoid conflict with the United States, Emperor Hirohito’s prime minister asked Minister of War Hideki Tojo to withdraw some troop; from China. Tojo refused, threatening to bring down the government. The military was in command of the country. The Japanese army swept througl China, and in 1937 invaded Nanking (now Nanjing), destroying the city am killing as many as 300,000 of its residents. The incident became known as the “Rape of Nanking.” In October 1941, Tojo took over as prime minister H READING PROGRESS CHECK
Examining How did postwar conditions contribute to the rise of dictatorships in Europe
World War II Begins
guiding question How did European nations try to prevent war?
In 1935 Hitler began to defy the Treaty of Versailles that had ended World War I. He announced that Germany would build a new air force and begin a military draft that would greatly expand its army—actions in direct violation of the treaty. Rather than enforce the treaty by going to war, European leaders tried to negotiate with Hitler.
Europe’s leaders had several reasons for believing—or wanting to believe—that a deal could be reached with Hitler to avoid war. First, they wanted to avoid a repeat of World War I. Second, some thought most of Hitler’s demands were reasonable, including his demand that all German-speaking regions be united. Third, many people assumed that the Nazis would want peace once they gained more territory.
The Austrian Anschluss
In late 1937, Hitler again called for the unification of all German-speaking people, including those in Austria and Czechoslovakia. He believed that Germany could expand its territory only by force.
In February 1938, Hitler threatened to invade German-speaking Austr unless Austrian Nazis were given important government posts. Austria’s chancellor gave in to this demand, but then tried to put the matter of unification with Germany to a democratic vote. Fearing the outcome, Hit! sent troops into Austria in March and announced the Anschluss, or unification, of Austria and Germany.
The Munich Crisis
Hitler next announced German claims to the Sudetenland, an area of Czechoslovakia with a large German-speaking population. The Czechs strong resisted Germany’s demands. France threatened to fight if Germany attacked Czechoslovakia, and the Soviet Union also promised aid. Prime Minister Nev Chamberlain pledged Britain’s support to France, its ally.
Representatives of Britain, France, Italy, and Germany met in Munich, Germany, to decide Czechoslovakia’s fate. At the Munich Conference, on September 29, 1938, Britain and France agreed to Hitler’s demands, a policy that came to be known as appeasement. In other words, they made concessions and believed that if they gave Hitler what he wanted, they could avoid war. Czechoslovakia had to give up the Sudetenland or fight Germany on its own. When Chamberlain returned home, he stated, “My good friends, for the second time in our history, a British Prime Minister has returned from Germany bringing peace with honor. I believe it is ‘peace for our time.’ Go home and get a nice quiet sleep.”
Appeasement, however, failed to preserve the fragile peace. In March 1939, Germany sent troops into Czechoslovakia and divided the country. Slovakia became independent in name, but it was actually under German control. The Czech lands became a German protectorate.
Hitler Demands Danzig
A month after the Munich Conference, Hitler demanded that the city of Danzig be returned to German control. Danzig was more than 90 percent German, and it had been part of Poland since World War I. Hitler also requested a highway and railroad across the Polish Corridor.
Hitler’s new demands convinced Britain and France that war was inevitable. On March 31, 1939, Britain announced that if Poland went to war to defend its territory, Britain and France would come to its aid. This declaration encouraged Poland to refuse Hitler’s demands. In May 1939,
Hitler ordered the German army to prepare to invade Poland. He also ordered his foreign minister to begin negotiations with the Soviet Union. If Germany was going to fight Britain and France, Hitler did not want to have to fight the Soviets too.
The Nazi-Soviet Pact
When German officials proposed a non-aggression treaty to the Soviets, Stalin agreed. He believed the best way to protect the Soviet Union was to turn the capitalist nations against each other. If the treaty worked, Germany would go to war against Britain and France.
The non-aggression pact, signed by Germany and the Soviet Union on August 23, 1939, shocked the world. Communism and Nazism were supposed to be opposed to each other. Leaders in Britain and France understood, however, that Hitler had made the deal to free himself for war against their countries and Poland. They did not know that the treaty called for the division of Poland between Germany and the Soviet Union.
The Invasion of Poland and the Fall of France
On September 1,1939, Germany invaded Poland. Two days later, Britain and France declared war on Germany. World War II had begun. The Germans used a new type of warfare called blitzkrieg, or “lightning war. Blitzkrieg used massed tanks, combined with waves of aircraft and paratroopers, to break through and encircle enemy positions. By October 5,1939, the Germans had defeated the Polish military.
Meanwhile, Western Europe remained quiet. British and French troops in | France waited for a German attack. On May 10,1940, Hitler launched a new I blitzkrieg. While German troops parachuted into the Netherlands, tanks rolled | into Belgium and Luxembourg. British and French forces raced north into I	Belgium. The Germans crossed the Ardennes Mountains of Luxembourg and
| eastern Belgium. German tanks smashed through the French lines and moved I west across northern France. The British and French were trapped in Belgium.
Neville Chamberlain (1869-1940)
After serving at top levels ofthe I British government since the end
of World Warl, Neville [ Chamberlain became prime ; minister in 1937. Chamberlain's \ term was dominated by growing \ tension with Nazi Germany. He \ signed the Munich Agreement f with Hitler in 1938 as part ofan ; appeasement policy. Wildly \ popular as the man who avoided
another war, Chamberlain quickly I fell from favor when Hitler invaded ? Poland a year later. Chamberlain \ resigned, and died of cancer just I six months later.
_
► CRITICALTHINKING j Drawing Conclusions Why did
\ opinions of Chamberlain change so j quickly after Hitler invaded Poland?
appeasement giving in to unjust demands in order to avoid all-out conflict
A
World in Flames 337 
Britain's Neville Chamberlain (third from left), Mussolini (center), and Hitler (third from right) agreed to prevent war at the Munich Conference in 1938. To appease Hitler, representatives at the conference agreed that Czechoslovakia would give up the Sudetenland to Germany. Less than a year later, Germany had occupied all of Czechoslovakia, invaded Poland, and was at war with Britain and France.
CRITICAL THINKING
Drawing Conclusions Why do you think that the policy of appeasement failed?
The Miracle at Dunkirk
German troops drove Allied forces toward the English Channel. The port of Dunkirk became the Allies’ only way out. As German forces moved in on Dunkirk, Hitler ordered them to stop. Historians think that Hitler was nervous about risking his tank forces. Whatever his reasons, Hitler’s orders provided a three-day delay that allowed Allied forces to evacuate. When the evacuation ended on June 4, an estimated 338,000 British and French troops had been saved during the “Miracle at Dunkirk.”
Less than three weeks later, on June 22, 1940, Franc surrendered. To govern the rest of France, Germany set up a puppet government at the town of Vichy and mad<
Marshal Philippe Petain the leader but gave him no power. French general Charles de Gaulle led the Free French resistance forces from the French colony of Algiers. He worked with Allied leaders and refused to recognize the defeat of France.
Britain Remains Defiant
Hitler expected Britain to negotiate peace after France surrendered. Hew< mistaken. On June 4, 1940, British prime minister Winston Churchill delivered a defiant speech, vowing that Britain would never surrender:
PRIMARY SOURCE
«Even though large tracts of Europe and many old and famous States have fallen or may fall into th< grip of the Gestapo and all the odious apparatus of Nazi rule, we shall not flag or fail, we shall goont the end.... [W]e shall defend our island, whatever the cost may be... we shall never surrender....
-Winston Churchill, from his speech to Parliament, June 4,
That same month, Hitler ordered the German air force, the Luftwaffe, to begin attacking British ships in the English Channel. Then, in August and September, the Luftwaffe battled the British Royal Air Force in what became known as the Battle of Britain. After London was bombed accidentally, Britai retaliated by bombing Berlin. The Luftwaffe then began targeting its attacks c London and other cities. Britain’s use of radar gave it the advantage. After ma losses on both sides, Hitler canceled the planned invasion of Britain. Churchi praised the sacrifices of the pilots who saved Britain, saying, “Never in the fie of human conflict was so much owed by so many to so few.”
H READING PROGRESS CHECK
Evaluating How was Britain able to prevent Germany from invading?
LESSON 1 REVIEW
Reviewing Vocabulary
1.	Explaining How did fascism put Europe on the path to war? 7A
2.	Stating How was the Soviet collectivization of agriculture an example of a dictatorial government?
Using Your Notes
3.	Summarizing Use your notes from the lesson to write a
paragraph explaining how dictators came to power during this era 7A
Answering the Guiding Questions
4.	Evaluating What economic and political conditions follov World War I encouraged dictatorships? 7A
5.	Synthesizing How did European nations try to prevent w<
Writing Activity
INFORMATIVE/EXPLANATORY
Write a short essay explai why the Nazi-Soviet Non-Aggression Pact was such a surpri the world. 338
it Matters because
Academic Vocabulary
•	revise • underestimate
•	purchase
Although Americans wanted to avoid fighting in another foreign war, they sent aid when their allies were threatened. The attack on Pearl Harbor convinced the United States to declare war.
American Neutrality
Content Vocabulary
•	internationalism
•	strategic materials
TAKING NOTES:
Key Ideas and Details
Organizing As you read about U.S. efforts to stay neutral, complete a graphic organizer similar to the one below by identifying events that shifted American involvement in the war.
guiding questions Why did many Americans support isolationism? Why did President Roosevelt support internationalism?
The rise of dictatorships and militarism in Europe discouraged many Americans. The sacrifices they had made during World War I seemed pointless. In addition, during the Depression, most European nations announced they would no longer repay their war debts to the United States. In response, many Americans once again began supporting isolationism and trying to avoid involvement in international conflicts.
The Nye Committee
Meanwhile, accusations emerged that arms manufacturers had tricked the United States into entering World War I. In 1934 Senator Gerald P. Nye held hearings to investigate these allegations. The Nye Committee report documented the huge profits that arms factories had made during the war and created the impression that these businesses influenced the decision to go to war. Even more Americans turned toward isolationism.
ffjg Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills
7A identify reasons for U.S. involvement in World War II, including Italian, German, and Japanese dictatorships and their aggression, especially the attack on Pearl Harbor
continued on the next page
Legislating Neutrality
In response to growing Italian and German aggression in Europe, Congress passed the Neutrality Act of 1935. This legislation-reflecting a response to the Nye report—made it illegal for Americans to sell arms to any country at war.
In October 1935, as part of his dream of building a new Roman empire, Mussolini ordered the Italian military to invade Ethiopia, then known as Abyssinia. The war was short, the Abyssinian forces were no
A
World in Flames 339 POLITICAL CARTOONS
By 1940, many Americans joined Roosevelt in wanting to help Britain and France in their struggle against Hitler. Isolationists, however, still wished to keep the country from directly entering the conflict.
This political cartoon shows Uncle Sam extending a helping hand to Britain but refusing to sell arms to Britain and France.
1 Making Inferences According to the cartoon, why should the United States refuse to sell arms overseas?
Analyzing Primary Sources
What does this cartoon try to persuade the viewer to believe?
HELPING HANDS—BUT NOT ARMS
match for the Italian troops, and the emperor, Haile Selassie was forced into exiL
Knowing that the American people and Congress would not suppor action to stop Italy, Rooseve supported the passage of a new law, the Neutrality Act 1936, which extended theb on arms sales imposed by tl Neutrality Act of 1935, and also banned loans to nation at war. The 1936 act was fai more likely to hurt Italy tha Abyssinia, which would noi have been able to borrow much money anyway.
In 1936 another confli began, this time in Europe when the Spanish Civil W
(continued from p. 339)
TEKS
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills 7B evaluate the domestic and international leadership of Franklin D. Roosevelt and Harry Truman during World War II, including the U.S. relationship with its allies and domestic industry’s rapid mobilization for the war effort
erupted. On one side were the rebel Nationalists led by General Franco an supported by Germany and Italy. On the other side were the Republicans, supported both by the Soviet Union, and by thousands of volunteers from Europe and the United States who went to Spain to fight against Franco.
The Spanish Civil War was widely portrayed as the first clash between the forces of fascism and the forces of western democracy and it greatly contributed to growing tensions in Europe and to the fear that another world war was coming. Franco’s forces eventually won the civil war, and
SKILLS PRACTICE
Work with a partner. Point to a picture in this lesson about the United States entering World War II. Retell in your own words the part of the text that goes with the picture.
Franco became the leader of Spain until his death in 1975.
Soon after the Spanish Civil War began, Hitler and Mussolini pledged to
cooperate on several international issues, and Japan aligned itself with Germa and Italy. Together, the three nations became known as the Axis Powers. As European tensions worsened, Congress passed the Neutrality Act of 1937, continuing the ban on selling arms to warring nations and also requiring thei to buy all nonmilitary supplies from the United States on a “cash-and-carry” basis. Countries had to send their own ships to pick up goods and had to pay cash. Loans were not allowed. Isolationists knew that attacks on American si had helped bring the country into World War I. They wanted to prevent such attacks that could bring the nation into another European war.
internationalism
a national policy of actively trading with foreign countries to foster peace and prosperity
Roosevelt's Internationalism
Despite the government’s stand on neutrality, President Roosevelt supported internationalism, the idea that trade between nations creates prosperity and helps prevent war. He warned that the neutrality acts might drag us into war instead of keeping us out,” but he did not veto th bills. When Japan invaded China in July 1937 without declaring war, Roosevelt claimed the Neutrality Act of 1937 did not apply. He authorize! the sale of weapons to China, warning that the nation should not let an “epidemic of lawlessness” infect the world:
340
PRIMARY SOURCE
«There is no escape through mere isolation or neutrality.... When an epidemic of physical disease starts to spread, the community.. .joins in a quarantine of the patients in order to protect the health of the community against the spread of the disease.... War is a contagion, whether it be declared or undeclared?*
—from The Public Papers and Addresses of Franklin D. Roosevelt
B READING PROGRESS CHECK
Explaining What steps did the supporters of United States isolationism take to ensure that the country remained neutral in an international conflict?
Neutrality Tested
guiding question Howdid President Roosevelt assist Britain while maintaining U.S. neutrality?
Roosevelt wanted to help Britain and France in their struggle and asked Congress to revise the neutrality laws to allow the sale of weapons to warring nations. Congress passed the Neutrality Act of 1939 permitting the sale of weapons, but only on a “cash-and-carry” basis.
In the spring of 1940, the United States faced the first test of its neutrality. Britain asked Roosevelt for old American destroyers to replenish its fleet, and the president used a loophole in the cash-only requirement for purchases. He sent 50 ships to Britain in exchange for Americas use of British bases in the Atlantic. Because the deal did not involve an actual sale, the Neutrality Act did not apply.
Widespread acceptance of the Destroyers-for-Bases deal indicated a change in public opinion. By July 1940, most Americans favored offering limited aid to the Allies, but debate continued over the scope of that aid.
The Fight for Freedom Committee wanted the repeal of neutrality laws and stronger actions against Germany. On the other side, the America First Committee opposed any intervention to help the Allies.
After winning reelection in 1940, Roosevelt expanded the nation’s role in the war. Speaking to Congress, he listed the Four Freedoms for which both the United States and Britain stood: freedom of speech, freedom of worship, freedom from want, and freedom from fear.
The Lend-Lease Act
By December 1940, Great Britain had run out of funds to fight the war. Roosevelt proposed the Lend-Lease Act, which allowed the United States to lend or lease arms to any country considered “vital to the defense of the United States.” Britain could receive weapons, then return them or pay rent for them after the war. Congress passed the Lend-Lease Act by a wide margin. Lend-lease aid eventually went to the Soviet Union as well, when in June 1941, Hitler invaded the Soviet Union. Roosevelt followed Britain’s lead in supporting any state fighting the Nazis.
A
Hemispheric Defense Zone The problem of getting American arms and supplies to Britain remained. German submarines in the Atlantic sank hundreds of thousands of tons of cargo each month. The British Navy lacked the ships to stop them.
| Because the United States was still officially neutral, Roosevelt could not | order the navy to protect British cargo ships. Instead, he developed the idea s	of a hemispheric defense zone, declaring that the entire western half of the
I
Atlantic was part of the Western Hemisphere and therefore neutral. He then BIOGRAPHY
Winston Churchill (1874-1965)
British leader Winston Churchill first won election to Parliament in 1900, rising to become head of the British Navy in 1911. In the years leading up to World War II, he spoke out repeatedly against Hitler's aggression and after becoming prime minister committed the nation to intense efforts to defeat Germany. Churchill became known for his public speaking skills and for his tenacious patriotism during the war. His Conservative Party lost power after the war, but Churchill again served as Britain's prime minister from 1951 until his retirement in 1955.
CRITICAL THINKING
Drawing Conclusions Why might Roosevelt have particularly wanted to help Churchill? revise to make changes to an original work
purchase something obtained especially for a price in money or its equivalent
A
World in Flames 341 _____________________
ordered the U.S. Navy to patrol th< western Atlantic and reveal the location of German submarines to the British.
Despite Roosevelt's support for the British and French, many Americans believed that fighting another war overseas was against the nation's interests.
CRITICAL THINKING
Predicting Consequences How would you expect isolationists' feelings to change if the United States suffered a direct attack?
The Atlantic Charter
In August 1941, Roosevelt and Churchill met and developed the Atlantic Charter, which committei both nations to a postwar world oi democracy, nonaggression, free trade, economic advancement, am freedom of the seas. Churchill late said that FDR “made it dear that 1 would look for an ‘incident’ which would justify him in opening hostilities” with Germany.
In early September, a German submarine, or U-boat, fired on an American destroyer that had been radioing the U-boat s position to the British. Roosevelt promptly responded by ordering American ships to follow a “shoot-on-sight” policy toward German submarines. The Germans escalated hostilities the following month, targeting two American destroyers. One of them, the Reuben James, sank after being torpedoed, killing over 100 sailors. As the end of 1941 drew near, Germany and the United States continued a tense standoff.
H REAPING PROGRESS CHECK
Summarizing What indications were there that public opinion was shifting awa; from American isolationism?
strategic materials
items needed for fighting a war
Japan Attacks Pearl Harbor
guidingquestion Howdid the United States try to slow Japan's advances in the Pacific?
Despite the growing tensions in Europe, it was the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor that finally brought the United States into World War II. Ironically Roosevelts efforts to help Britain fight Germany resulted in Japan’s decision to attack the United States.
America Embargoes Japan
As German submarines sank British ships in the Atlantic, the British begai moving warships from Southeast Asia, leaving India and other colonial possessions vulnerable to Japanese attack. To hinder Japanese aggression, Roosevelt began applying economic pressure. Japan depended on the Unit States for many key materials, including scrap iron, steel, and especially oi In July 1940, Congress gave the president the power to restrict the sale of strategic materials—items important for fighting a war. Roosevelt then blocked the sale of airplane fuel and scrap iron to Japan. Furious, the Japanese signed an alliance with Germany and Italy, becoming a member ( the Axis.
In 1941 Roosevelt began sending lend-lease aid to China, hoping to enable the Chinese to tie down the Japanese and prevent them from attacking elsewhere. The strategy failed. By July 1941, Japan had sent military forces into southern Indochina, directly threatening the British Empire. In response, Roosevelt froze all Japanese assets in the United States, reduced the oil shipments to Japan, and sent General Douglas MacArthur to the Philippines to build up American defenses there.
342
With its war against China in jeopardy because of a lack of resources, the Japanese military planned to attack the resource-rich British and Dutch colonies in Southeast Asia. They also decided to seize the Philippines and to attack the American fleet at Pearl Harbor. Negotiations with the Americans continued, but neither side would back down. In late November 1941, six Japanese aircraft carriers, two battleships, and several other warships set out for Hawaii.
Surprise Attack
The Japanese government appeared to be continuing negotiations with the United States in good faith. American intelligence, however, had decoded Japanese messages that made it clear that Japan was preparing to go to war against the United States. On November 27, American commanders at the Pearl Harbor naval base received a war warning from Washington D.C., but it did not mention Hawaii as a possible target. Because of its great distance from Japan, officials doubted that Japan would attack Hawaii.
The U.S. military’s inability to interpret the intelligence correctly left Pearl Harbor an open target. Japan’s surprise attack on December 7, 1941, was devastating. Eight battleships, three cruisers, three destroyers, and four other vessels were sunk or damaged. The attack destroyed over 180 aircraft and killed 2,403 Americans. Another 1,178 were injured.
That night, a gray-faced Roosevelt met with his cabinet, telling them the country faced the most serious crisis since the Civil War. The next day, he asked Congress to declare war: The Senate voted 82 to 0 and the House 388 to 1 to declare war on Japan.
Because American officials did not expect it, the attack on Pearl Harbor was particularly devastating.
CRITICAL THINKING
Determining Cause and Effect What was the immediate result of the attack on Pearl Harbor? Germany Declares War
Hitler had hoped that Japan would attack the United States so that the majority of U.S. forces would be sent to the Pacific front. He expected the United States to enter the European war as incidents between German submarines and the United States mounted in the Atlantic.
Hitler underestimated the strategy of the United States, which was to | view Germany as the larger threat but fight the Japanese with the U.S.
I
Navy. By helping Japan, he hoped for Japanese support against the Soviet | Union after they had defeated the Americans. On December 11, Germany ! and Italy both declared war on the United States. o<5
I D READING PROGRESS CHECK
6----------------------------
I
Sequencing What sequence of events led the United States to a declaration of war? underestimate to estimate lower than the real amount or number
LESSON 2 REVIEW
Reviewing Vocabulary
1.	Contrasting How does internationalism differ from isolationism? 7A
2.	Explaining How did restricting the sale of strategic materials hinder Japan's aggression in the Pacific? 7A, 7B
Using Your Notes
5. Determining Cause and Effect Use the notes you completed during the lesson to write a paragraph identifying the events that moved the United States from neutrality to war. 7A
Answering the Guiding Questions
4.	Evaluating Why did many Americans support isolationism? Why did President Roosevelt support internationalism? 7B
5.	Synthesizing How did President Roosevelt assist Britain while maintaining U.S. neutrality? 7B
6.	Explaining How did the United States try to slow Japan's advances in the Pacific? 7A, 7B
Writing Activity
INFORMATIVE/EXPLANATORY
Write a short essay in which you discuss why the United States had taken action against the Japanese before the attack. 7A.7B A
World in Flames 343 EWorld War II have been prevented? to Injustice while others try to
IT MATTERS BECAUSE
Academic Vocabulary
prohibit • virtually
Nazis first acted upon their racist ideology when they imposed restrictions on Jews and stripped them of basic rights. Eventually, Nazi Germany created concentration camps and systematically attempted to kill all European Jews.
• assume
Content Vocabulary
Nazi Persecution of the Jews
•	concentration camp
•	extermination camp
guidingquestion Why did many Jews remain in Nazi Germany and within Axis-controlled areas of Europe?
TAKING NOTES:
Key Ideas and Details
Organizing As you read about the Holocaust, complete a graphic organizer similar to the one below, by listing examples of Nazi persecution of European Jews.
		
Examples of Persecution		
		
		
		
		


TEKS
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills 7D analyze major issues of World War II, including the Holocaust; the internment of German, Italian, and Japanese Americans and Executive Order 9066; and the development of conventional and atomic weapons

During the Holocaust, the Nazis killed nearly 6 million European Jews. The Nazis also killed millions of people from other groups they considered inferior. The Hebrew term for the Holocaust is Shoah, meaning “catastrophe,” but it is often used specifically to refer to the Nazi campaign to exterminate the Jews during World War II.
The Nuremberg Laws
Although the Nazis persecuted anyone who dared oppose them, as well as the disabled, Gypsies (now known as Roma), homosexuals, and Slavic peoples, they reserved their strongest hatred for the Jews. This loathing went far beyond the European anti-Semitism that was common at the time. In the Middle Ages, Jews had been subjected to discrimination and sometimes to mob violence and expulsions. But in nineteenth- and twentieth-century Western and Central Europe, both the frequency and intensity of anti-Jewish government policies diminished.
After the Nazis took power, however, they quickly moved to deprive German Jews of many established rights. In September 1935, the Nuremberg Laws took citizenship away from Jewish Germans and banned marriage between Jews and other Germans. Two months later, another decree barred Jews from holding public office or voting. Another law compelled Jews
344
with German-sounding names to adopt “Jewish” names. Soon the passports of Jews were marked with a red J to identify them as Jewish.
By the summer of 1936, at least half of Germany’s Jews were jobless, having lost the right to work as civil servants, journalists, farmers, and actors. In 1938 the Nazis also banned Jews from practicing law and medicine and from operating businesses. With no source of income, life for Jews became very difficult.
Despite worsening conditions, many Jews chose to remain in Germany during the early years of Nazi rule. Well integrated into German society before this time, they were reluctant to leave and give up the lives they had built there. Many also thought that conditions would surely improve after a time. In fact, conditions soon became worse.
Kristallnacht
On November 7, 1938, a young Jewish refugee named Herschel Grynszpan shot and killed a German diplomat in Paris. Grynszpan’s parents and more than 14,000 other Polish Jews had been deported from Germany to Poland, and the distraught young man was seeking revenge for this act and for the persecution of the Jews in general.
Using this as a pretext, Hitler ordered his minister of propaganda, Joseph Goebbels, to stage attacks against the Jews that would seem like a spontaneous popular reaction to news of the murder. On the night of November 9, this plan played out in a spree of destruction. In Vienna, a Jewish child named Frederic Morton watched in terror that night as Nazi storm troopers broke into his family’s apartment:
On Kristallnacht, November 9,1938, Nazi storm troopers destroyed Jewish property, such as this burned-out synagogue, and terrorized Jewish families across the Third Reich.
► CRITICALTHINKING
PRIMARYSOURCE
6
o
“They yanked out every drawer in every one of our chests and cupboards, and tossed each in the air. They let the cutlery jangle across the floor, the clothes scatter, and stepped over the mess to fling the next drawer. Their exuberance was amazing.... 'We might be back,'the leader said. On the way out he threw our mother-of-pearl ashtray over his shoulder, like confetti. We did not speak or move or breathe until we heard their boots against the pavement.**
—quoted in Facing History and Ourselves
The anti-Jewish violence that erupted throughout Germany and Austria that night came to be called Kristallnacht, or “night of broken glass,” because broken glass littered the streets afterward. By the following morning, more than 90 Jews were dead, hundreds were badly injured, and thousands more were terrorized. The Nazis had forbidden police to interfere while roving bands of thugs destroyed 7,500 Jewish businesses and hundreds of synagogues.
The lawlessness of Kristallnacht continued to persist. Following the initial night of violence, the Gestapo, the government’s secret police, arrested about 30,000 Jewish men. The state also confiscated insurance payments owed to Jewish owners of ruined businesses.
Making Generalizations How do you
think publication ofthe photograph of the synagogue would have affected world opinion toward the Nazis?
After weeks of fierce resistance, Jews in the Warsaw ghetto in Poland are rounded up for deportation to concentration camps in May 1943.
CRITICAL THINKING
Predicting Consequences What details in the photograph suggest what might happen when these people reach the concentration camps? prohibit to make illegal by an authority
assume to take for granted or as true
Jewish Refugees Try to Flee
Kristallnacht and its aftermath marked a significant escalation of Nazi persecutioi against the Jews. Many Jews, including Frederic Morton’s family, decided that was time to leave and fled to the United States. Between 1933, when Hitler took power, and the start of World War II in 1939, some 250,000 Jews escaped Nazi-controlled Germany. These emigrants included prominent scientists, such as Albert Einstein, and business owners lik Otto Frank, who resettled his family in Amsterdam in 1933. Ottos daughter Anr kept a diary of her family’s life in hiding after the Nazis overran the Netherland; The “secret annex,” as she called their hiding place, has become a museum.
Limits on Jewish Immigration By 1938, one U.S. consulate in Germai had a backlog of more than 100,000 visa applications from Jews trying to leave for the United States. Following the Nazi Anschluss, some 3,000 Austrian Jews applied for U.S. visas each day. Most never received visas 1 the United States or to the other countries where they applied. As a result, millions of Jews remained trapped in Nazi-dominated Europe.
Several factors limited Jewish immigration to the United States. Na2 orders prohibited Jews from taking more than about four dollars outoi Germany. U.S. immigration law, however, forbade granting a visa to anyone “likely to become a public charge.” Customs officials tended to assume that this description applied to Jews, because Germany had fore them to leave behind any wealth. High unemployment rates in the 1930; also made immigration unpopular. Few Americans wanted to raise immigration quotas, even to accommodate European refugees. Others d not want to admit Jews because they held anti-Semitic attitudes. The existing immigration policy allowed only 150,000 immigrants annually, with a fixed quota from each country. The law permitted no exceptions] refugees or victims of persecution.
International Response At an international conference on refugees in 1938, several European countries, the United States, and Latin America stated their regret that they could not take in more of Germany’s Jews without raising their immigration quotas. Meanwhile, Nazi propaganda chief Joseph Goebbels announced, “[I]f there is any country that believes i has not enough Jews, I shall gladly turn over to it all our Jews.” Hitler also declared himself ready to put all these criminals at the disposal of these countries ... even on luxury ships.”
As war loomed in 1939, many ships departed from Germany cramm< with Jews desperate to escape. Some of their visas, however, had been forged or sold illegally, and Mexico, Paraguay, Argentina, and Costa Rica denied access to Jews with such documents. So, too, did the United State;
The St Louis Affair On May 27, 1939, the SS St. Louis entered the harb< in Havana, Cuba, with 930 Jewish refugees on board. Most of these passengers hoped to go to the United States eventually, but they had certi icates improperly issued by Cuba’s director of immigration giving
em permission to land in Cuba. When the ships arrived in Havana, the
346
Cuban government refused to let the refugees come ashore. For several days, the ship’s captain steered his ship in circles off the coast of Florida, awaiting official permission to dock at a U.S. port. Denied permission, the ship turned back toward Europe, disembarking in France, Holland, Belgium, and Great Britain. Within two years, the first three of these countries fell under Nazi domination. Many of the refugees brought to these countries perished in the Nazis’ “final solution.”
Q RFADING PROGRESS CHECK
Explaining What factors made it difficult for Jewish people to leave Europe?
The Final Solution
. n d i n g q u e s t i o n How did the Nazis try to exterminate Europe's Jewish population?
On January 20, 1942, Nazi leaders met at the Wannsee Conference to coordinate the “final solution of the Jewish question.” Previous “solutions” had included rounding up Jews, Gypsies, Slavs, and others from conquered areas, shooting them, and piling them into mass graves. Another method forced Jews and other “undesirables” into trucks and then piped in exhaust fumes to kill them. These methods, however, had proven too slow and inefficient for the Nazis.
At Wannsee, the Nazis made plans to round up Jews from the vast areas of Nazi-controlled Europe. Jews were taken to detention centers known as concentration camps. There, healthy individuals would work as slave laborers until they dropped dead of exhaustion, disease, or malnutrition. Most others, including the elderly, young children, and the
i infirm (among them laborers who could no longer work) would be sent to extermination camps, attached to many of the concentration camps, to be
? executed in massive gas chambers.
concentration camp
a camp where persons are detained or confined
extermination camp
a camp where men, women, and children were sent to be executed
Concentration Camps
The Nazis had established their first concentration camps in 1933 to jail political opponents. After the war began, the Nazis built concentration camps throughout Europe.
Men, women, and children are packed onto cattle cars for transport to extermination camps.
CRITICALTHINKING
Making Generalizations What does the fact that Jews were transported on cattle cars indicate about Nazi attitudes toward them? [MM

Nazi concentration camps and extermination camps extended across several countries.
THE WORLD IN SPATIAL TERMS
Where were most ofthe extermination camps located?
PLACES AND REGIONS
Which three nations had the highest number of Jewish losses? As one of the largest concentration camps, Buchenwald had more tha 200,000 prisoners working 12-hour shifts as slave laborers in nearby factories. Although Buchenwald had no gas chambers, hundreds of prisoners died there every month from exhaustion and horrible living conditions. As a U.S. Army chaplain wrote in his diary in 1945:
PRIMARYSOURCE
“ One thousand Weimar citizens toured the Buchenwald camp in groups of 100. They saw blackens skeletons and skulls in the ovens ofthe crematorium. In the yard outside, they saw a heap of white human ashes and bones... .Those who were dead were stripped of their clothing and lay naked, m< stacked like cordwood waiting to be burned in the crematory. At one time, 5,000 had been stacked ( the vacant lot next to the crematory.
—from the diary of Captain Luther D. Fletcher, qu World War II: From the Battle Front to the Hon
Leon Bass, a young American soldier, saw Buchenwald at the end of the war. A room built to hold 50 people had housed more than 150, with bunk beds built almost to the ceiling. Bass recalled:
PRIMARYSOURCE
I looked at a bottom bunk and there I saw one man. He was too weak to get up; he could just b3i turn his head. He was skin and bones. He looked like a skeleton; and his eyes were deep set. He didr utter a sound; he just looked at me with those eyes, and they still haunt me today.
—quoted in Facing History ond 0
Extermination Camps
In late 1941, the Nazis built extermination facilities at the Chelmno and Auschwitz camps in Poland. After the Wannsee Conference, extermination facilities were built at four other camps in Poland. At these camps, including the infamous Treblinka, Jews were the Nazis’ main victims. Auschwitz alone housed about 100,000 people in 300 prison barracks. Its gas chambers, built to kill 2,000 people at a time, could gas 12,000 people in a day. Of the estimated 1,600,000 people who died at Auschwitz, about 1,300,000 were Jews. Most of the others were Poles, Soviet prisoners of war, or Gypsies.
Upon arrival at Auschwitz, healthy prisoners were selected for
slave labor. Elderly or disabled people, the sick, and mothers and children went immediately to the gas chambers, after which their bodies were burned in giant crematoriums.
In only a few years, Jewish culture, which had existed in Europe for more than 1,000 years, had been virtually obliterated by the Nazis in the lands they conquered. Despite exhaustive debate, there is still great controversy about why and how an event so horrifying as the Holocaust could have occurred. No consensus has been reached, but most historians point to a number of factors: the German people’s sense of injury after World War I; severe economic problems; Hitler’s control over the German nation; the lack of a strong tradition of representative government in Germany; German fear of Hitler’s secret police; and a long history of anti-Jewish prejudice and discrimination in Europe.
READING PROGRESS CHECK
Explaining What was the purpose and outcome of the Wannsee Conference?
American soldiers force German civilians to view bodies after the liberation of the Buchenwald concentration camp.
CRITICAL THINKING
Drawing Conclusions Why did American soldiers force German civilians to view the atrocities at the concentration camp?
virtually almost entirely; nearly
LESSON 3 REVIEW
Reviewing Vocabulary
1.	Defining What was the purpose of the concentration camps?
2.	Identifying How was the Buchenwald concentration camp different from Treblinka and Auschwitz? 7D
Using Your Notes
3.	Making Connections Review the notes you completed during the lesson, and then identify an anti-Jewish policy or action that should have warned the world that the Nazis needed to be stopped immediately. 7D
Answering the Guiding Questions
4.	Evaluating Why did many Jews remain in Nazi Germany and within Axis-controlled areas of Europe? 7D
5.	Explaining How did the Nazis try to exterminate Europe's Jewish population? 7D
Writing Activity
ARGUMENT
Imagine that you are living in the United States during the 1930s. You believe that more Jewish immigrants should be allowed to come into the country. Write a letter to your representative or senator in Congress to express your point of view. A
World in Flames 349 ■ rpr p
J I
■. 1 '--H ~ 

r

'TEKS 7D, 7E, 29A, 29E, 29H
The Holocaust As the Allies
liberated areas from German control in the spring of 1945, they discovered horrifying scenes in Nazi concentration camps. The Nazi regime had systematically murdered six million Jews and killed another six million Poles, Slavs, Gypsies, homosexuals, communists, and mentally disabled persons. Photographs of the newly liberated camps shocked the American public, although the Roosevelt administration and the State Department had evidence of the death camps as early as 1942.
VOCABULARY
horde
a large disorganized group or crowd
facilitate
to make easier
prohibited
to forbid by authority
malignant
planned evil, vicious
vengeance
revenge, getting even
vindicate
prove true or correct
NAZI DECREE,
1941 I.	(1) Jews over six years of age are prohibited from appearing in public without wearing a Jewish star.
(2) The Jewish star is a yellow piece of cloth with a black border, in the form of a six-pointed star the size of a palm ofthe hand. The inscription reads ‘JEW’ in black letters. It shall be worn visibly, sewn on the left chest side of the garment.
II.
Jews are forbidden: EYEWITNESS ACCOUNT
“[There] were two barracks: the men stood on one side, the women on the other. They were addressed in a very polite and friendly way: ‘You have been on a journey. You are dirty. You will take a bath. Get undressed quickly.’ Towel and soap were handed out, an then suddenly the brutes woke up and showe their true faces: this horde of people, these men and women were driven outside with hai blows and forced both summer and winters tc go the few hundred metres to the ‘Shower Room.’ Above the entry door was the word ‘Shower’. One could even see shower heads on the ceiling which were cemented in but never had water flowing through them.
These poor innocents were crammed together, pressed against each other. Then panic broke out, for at last they realized the fate in store for them. But blows with rifle but and revolver shots soon restored order and finally they all entered the death chamber. Tt doors were shut and, ten minutes later, the temperature was high enough to facilitate th condensation ofthe hydrogen cyanide forth condemned were gassed with hydrogen cyanide. This was the so-called ‘Zyklon B’.. which was used by the German barbarians.. One could hear fearful screams, but a few moments later there was complete silence.”
—Andre Lettich, Jewish prisoner assigned remove bodies from the gas chambers
Birkenau from Nazism 1919-1945, Volume Foreign Policy, War and Rat
Extermination—A Document Read
(a)	to leave their area of residence without written permission ofthe local police, carried on their person.
(b)	to wear medals, decorations or other insignia.”
—Nazi decree issued September 1,1941 from Nazism 1919-1945, Volume 3: Foreign Policy, War and Racial Extermination—A Document Reader.
350
AMERICAN SOLDIER’S DIARY,
1945 “One thousand Weimar citizens toured the Buchenwald camp in groups of 100. They saw blackened skeletons and skulls in the ovens of the crematorium. In the yards outside, they saw a heap of white human ashes and bones ...
Often ... the SS wished to make an example of someone in killing him. They hung him on the lot adjacent to the crematory, and all the three sections ofthe camp witnessed the sight—some 30,000 prisoners ...”
—diary of Captain Luther D. Fletcher, from World War II: From the Battle Front to the
Home Front
PROSECUTION STATEMENT
The wrongs which we seek to condemn and punish have been so calculated, so malignant, and so devastating, that civilization cannot tolerate their being ignored, because it cannot survive their being repeated. That four great nations, flushed with victory and stung with injury stay the hand of vengeance and voluntarily submit their captive enemies to the judgment of the law is one ofthe most significant tributes that Power has ever paid to Reason.
This Tribunal, while it is novel and experimental, is not the product of abstract speculations nor is it created to vindicate legalistic theories. This inquest represents the practical effort of four ofthe most mighty of nations, with the support of 17 more, to utilize
Analyzing Historical Documents
1.	Evaluating Text Evidence In The Extermination Camps, Andre Lettich describes the Germans as “barbarians.” What evidence does he provide in his account to support this accusation? Why does the language of Lettich’s account help to validate the source?
2.	Finding the Main Idea What do all these primary sources have in common?
3.	Acquiring Information What restrictions did the Nazis impose on Jews in 1941?
4.	Corroborating How does the photo of Buchenwald corroborate the American soldier’s diary?
international law to meet the greatest menace of our times-aggressive war.
... What makes this inquest significant is that these prisoners represent sinister influences that will lurk in the world long after their bodies have returned to dust. We will show them to be living symbols of racial hatreds, of terrorism and violence, and ofthe arrogance and cruelty of power.... Civilization can afford no compromise with the social forces which would gain renewed strength if we deal ambiguously or indecisively with the men in whom those forces now precariously survive.
H.
Jackson, Chief of Counsel for the United States, Opening Statement before the International Military Tribunal, Nuremberg,
Germany, November 21,1945
▲ These survivors of Buchenwald concentration camp, liberated in 1945, show the horrifying conditions under which they lived.
5.	Analyzing Historical Questions Study the photo, read the excerpt from the American soldier’s diary, and the excerpt from Robert Jackson’s opening statement. What impact did the liberation ofthe concentration camps have on soldiers and the world? How did the Allies respond to the discovery ofthe camps?
6.	Answering Historical Questions Why does Jackson say the war crimes trials were necessary?
7.	Evaluating Sources Given that Robert Jackson was chief counsel ofthe United States at Nuremberg, how would you evaluate him as a source of information?
351
V
chapter ii Assessment
I
7%|
Directions: On a separate sheet of paper, answer the questions below. Make sure you read carefully and
answer all parts of each question.
Lesson Review
Lesson 1
0 Describing Describe the characteristics of Mussolini's Fascist movement. 7A
0 Summarizing Describe the goal of Stalin's Five Year Plans. What was the impact of these plans on the Soviet people?
0 Identifying What were Hitler's core beliefs? 7A
0 Comparing What did Hitler, Mussolini, and Stalin have in common? 7A
0 Identifying Explain how the borders of Europe changed as a result of the Anschluss and the Munich Conference? Why was the policy that British and French leaders adopted at Munich known as appeasement? 12B
0 Explaining What famous battle saved Britain from being invaded by Germany and why was it critical in preventing an invasion? Who fought this battle and what new technology enabled the British to win the battle even though they were outnumbered? 7D
Lesson 2
0 Identifying Central Issues By the mid-1930s, why did many Americans have bitter feelings about World War I?
0 Summarizing How did the Neutrality Act of 1935 distance the United States from conflicts around the world?
0 Summarizing When Japan invaded China in 1937, what justification did Roosevelt use to authorize the sale of arms to the Chinese even though the Neutrality Act of 1937
made it illegal to sell arms to countries fighting a war?
7A, 7B
Lesson 3
0 Identifying WhatistheShoah? 7D
0 Evaluating Why were Jews, Gypsies, and Slavs persecuted by the Nazis? 7D
Need Extra Help?
G
Summarizing What were the Nuremberg Laws? Describe how they systematically stripped Jews living in Germany of their civil rights and segregated them withir German society. 7D G
Identifying Significance What was the Wannsee Conference and what happened as a result of decisions taken at that conference? 7D G
Explaining Why did the United States not waive its immigration quotas to let more Jewish refugees into the country? 7D Exploring the Essential Questions
G
Conducting an Historical Inquiry Could World War II have been prevented? Write a brief essay that reviews tl historical evidence presented in the chapter about the causes of World War II. Use that evidence to explain whether or not you think World War II could have been prevented. 7A, 29D G
Making an Oral Presentation Use the library or onlir sources, as well as the information in the textbook, to prepare a speech on the Holocaust. If possible use presentation software to create a slideshow presentatic with images and quotes to accompany your speech. Be sure to trace the ideas of anti-Semitism and events in Germany that led to the Holocaust and discuss why it w able to happen. Explain why it is important to learn abt the Holocaust and not forget that it happened. 7D, 30 Critical Thinking
G
Analyzing When Germany invaded France in World W. the fighting quickly bogged down into trench warfare. What developments and changes in conventional weapi enabled Germany to quickly break through French lines force France to surrender? Identify the type of warfare tl Germany introduced and explain why it allowed the German military to conquer so much of Europe in such a short time. 7D 9	10	11	12	13	14	15	16
lG°t0^9e-----Lit4.1 335 1	1 335 | 336 1 338 | 339 | 339 | 340 "
352
$ Comparing How was Japan's leadership in the late 1930s similar to the Hitler and Mussolini dictatorships in Europe’
_	7A
(J) Making Connections Describe the sequence of events
that leads from Hitler's demand that Poland give the city of Danzig back to Germany to Hitler's decision to enter into a non-aggression pact with the Soviet Union.
© Analyzing Cause and Effect How did Hitler's order to stop German troops at Dunkirk impact Britain and France both immediately and in the following weeks?
0 Evaluating What methods did Roosevelt use to aid Britain in its struggle with Nazi Germany, while still technically keeping the United States neutral? What do you think was the effect of Roosevelt leading the United States into a policy of supporting Britain? 7B
© Drawing Inferences When the United States entered World War II, its domestic industries were already manufacturing a lot of military equipment and they were ready to rapidly mobilize for the war effort. How do you think Roosevelt's international leadership contributed to the ability ofthe nation's economy to respond so quickly once the United States entered the war? 7B
Theorizing How did the rise of Benito Mussolini's dictatorship and its subsequent aggression against Ethiopia contribute to the United States becoming involved in World War II? 7A
Understanding Relationships Among Events Why did
the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor cause Germany to declare war on the United States? 7A
Social Studies Skills
Sequencing using Absolute and Relative Chronology
Create a timeline showing the sequence of events that began with Japan's decision to build an empire in Asia and ended with Japan's decision to attack Pearl Harbor, triggering American entry into World War II. Include dates for events on the timeline as well as captions for each event that explains its significance to the coming of the war. 2C,7A
© Compare and Contrast What were the similarities and differences between the Japanese and German drives to build an empire?
Analyzing Primary Sources
Use the quotation to answer the following questions.
In May 1941 President Roosevelt declared a national emergency because of concerns that the war in Europe was likely to spill over into the western hemisphere. Read the excerpt below from his speech proclaiming the emergency:
PRIMARYSOURCE
6 4 The first and fundamental fact is that what started as a European war has developed, as the Nazis always intended it should develop, into a world war for world domination.... It is unmistakably apparent to all of us that, unless the advance of Hitlerism is forcibly checked now, the Western Hemisphere will be within range ofthe Nazi weapons of destruction... .To the people ofthe Americas, a triumphant Hitler would say, as he said after the seizure of Austria, and as he said after Munich, and as he said afterthe seizure of Czechoslovakia:"! am now completely satisfied. This is the last territorial readjustment I will seek." And he would of course add: "All we want is peace, friendship, and profitable trade relations with you in the New World."... Nobody can foretell tonight just when the acts of the dictators will ripen into attack on this hemisphere and us. But we know enough by now to realize that it would be suicide to wait until they are in our front yard. 59
—Radio Address, May 27,1941
© Interpreting Speeches What parts of the speech demonstrate how German aggression contributed to the United States entry into the war? 7A, 7B, 29A, 29G, 29H
© Finding the Main Idea In justifying the declaration of emergency, what does Roosevelt say to counter the arguments of Americans who supported neutrality and isolationism? 7A, 7B, 29A, 29B
Need Extra Help?
	18	19	20	21	22	23	24	25	26	27	28
, Go to page	| 336 |		fnaj	|341	j 340	340	[342]	[33?	1 331 j 331 j 331 |
A
World in Flames 353 Analyzing Visuals
Use the image below to answer the following questions.
On May 22,1941, cartoonist Theodor Geisel (later to be known as Dr. Seuss) published this political cartoon criticizing U.S. isolationism in the face ofthe Nazi threat.
© Analyzing Visuals What do the trees and each of the two birds represent?
© Identifying Central Ideas Using what you know about
U.S. isolationism and Roosevelt's internationalism, analyze
Geisel's message. How does the cartoon support his claim?
7B, 29G, 29H
© Making Inferences If a reader saw this cartoon in 1941 and agreed with its message, what policies might that person have supported? 7A, 7B
Extended-Response Questions
© Understanding Relationships Among Events Write a essay identifying Hitler's ideas and describing the actions that he and the German government took that contributf to the United States becoming involved in World War II. Your essay should have an introduction, at least three paragraphs, and a conclusion. 7A
Standardized Test Practice
© What was internationalism? 7B
A.
The idea that free trade creates prosperity and preserves peace. B.
The idea that Hitler could be appeased by giving in some of his demands. C.
The idea that national governments should be abolished and replaced by an international government. D.
The idea that the United States should remain neu in international conflicts. © What happened on December?, 1941? 7A
F.
Germany invaded the Soviet Union G.
The Wannsee Conference decided on the Final Solution H.
Japanese forces bombed Pearl Harbor J.
British pilots defeated the Germans in the Battle c Britain Need Extra Help?
	29	30	31	32	33	34
| Go to page	1 ”1 1 331 | 331 | 331 | 340 | 342 ,
354
networks
There's More Online about World War II at home and abroad.
12
CHAPTER
Lesson 1
Wartime America
Lesson 2
The War in the Pacific
Lesson 3
The War in Europe
Lesson 4
The War Ends
The Story Matters...
During World War II, millions of Americans enlisted in the armed forces, risking their lives in the struggle. On the home front, Americans also helped the war effort by giving up goods needed by the military and by buying war bonds. Read the chapter to learn how Americans sacrificed during World War II in the hopes of achieving a better future.
■s®
◄ "Rosie the Riveter" is a fictional character that came to symbolize women in the workforce during World War II. Images such as this one encouraged women to participate in the war effort.
PHOTO:
The Granger Collection, New York 355
