CHAPTER 4
Place and Time: Colonial America 1587 to 1770
Although several European nations had claims in North America, it was the British who eventually dominated the continent. England's early attempts at colonizing ended in failure, but by 1750, British colonies stretched for hundreds of miles along the Atlantic Coast.
Step Into the Place
r
7%
Led by John Winthrop, the Puritans journeyed to Massachusetts to seek religious freedom for themselves.

MAP FOCUS
Several European powers claimed parts of North America in the mid-1700s. PLACE
Which European power claimed the largest territory in North America? HUMAN-ENVIRONMENT INTERACTION
Where were the earliest cities in the British colonies located? CRITICAL THINKING
Predicting What effect do you think these nations'land claims in North America might have on relations between them? 29B Nathaniel Bacon wanted to drive out Native Americans living on treaty-protected land. Bacon's Rebellion challenged the colonial government of Virginia.
Y
PACIFIC
OCEAN
British I re11c h Spam U nset t led or Unc burned
Step Into the Time
TIMELINE
Look at the time line. The Spanish Armada was a fleet of warships Spain sent to attack England. How might this 1612 Tobacco planted in Virginia
1607 English establish first	U20 Pilgrims land
permanent settlement at	at Plymouth Rock
Jamestown
<——
networks eT MAP Explore the interactive version of
There's More Online! this map on NETWORKS.
Ef TIMELINE Explore the interactive version ofthis time line on NETWORKS.

networks
There's More Online!
Sf BIOGRAPHIES
•	Pocahontas
•	John White
eT GAME Fill in the Blank
gf GRAPHIC ORGANIZER
Hardships for Jamestown's Settlers
sf SELF-CHECK QUIZ gf VIDEO
4	’	--
Lesson 1
Roanoke and Jamestown
IAL QUESTION
Howdoesgeographyinfluencethewaypeoplelive? IT MATTERS BECAUSE
lamectnwn was the first successful English colony in North America.
TEKS
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills___________ 1A Identify the major eras and events in U.S. history through 1877, including colonization, revolution, drafting of the Declaration of Independence, creation and ratification of the Constitution, religious revivals such as the Second Great Awakening, early republic, the Age of Jackson, westward expansion, reform movements, sectionalism, Civil War, and Reconstruction, and describe their causes and effects.
1C Explain the significance of the following dates: 1607, founding of Jamestown; 1620, arrival of the Pilgrims and signing of the Mayflower Compact; 1776, adoption of the Declaration of Independence; 1787, writing of the U.S. Constitution; 1803, Louisiana Purchase; and 1861-1865, Civil War.
2A Identify reasons for European exploration and colonization of North America.
2B Compare political, economic, religious, and social reasons for the establishment of the 13 English colonies.
3B Analyze the importance of the Mayflower Compact, the Fundamental Orders of Connecticut, and the Virginia House of Burgesses to the growth of representative government.
11A Analyze how physical characteristics of the environment influenced population distribution, settlement patterns, and economic activities in the United States during the 17th, 18th, and 19th centuries.
11C Describe how different immigrant groups interacted with the environment in the United States during the 17th, 18th, and 19th centuries.
The Mystery of Roanoke
GUIDING question What problems did the Roanoke settlers encounter?
The success of Spain’s colonies in the Americas did not go unnoticed. The great powers of Europe were all interested in the rich opportunities available on the other side of the Atlantic. England was no exception. In the late 1500s, English pirates such as Sir Francis Drake had success stealing Spanish treasure on its way from the Americas to Europe. The era of English colonization of the Americas began during this period and would continue until the 1700s. By 1584, however, none of these efforts had been successful.
That year, England’s Queen Elizabeth gave Sir Walter Raleigh the right to claim land in North America. Raleigh took up this effort with great energy. He sent scouts across the ocean to find a good place for a colony. The scouts mack an enthusiastic report of a place called Roanoke Island. This island lies off the coast of what is now North Carolina. At the time, Raleigh called this area Virginia.
Raleigh sent settlers to Roanoke Island twice. The first group arrived in 1585. While they were there, artist John White explored the area and drew pictures of what he saw. In a book illustrated by White, another colonist described the Native American towns:
Reading HELPDESK
Taking Notes: Listing___________
As you read, use a diagram like this one to list hardships the people of Jamestown faced.
Content Vocabulary
•	charter	. headright
•	joint-stock company • burgess
a
Colonial America
i
PRIMARY SOURCE
11	Their townes are but small, & neere the sea coast but few, some containing but 10 or
12	houses: some 20, the greatest that we [have] seene [have] bene but of 30 houses: if they be walled it is only done with barks of trees made fast to stakes. »
A
Briefe and True Report of the New Found Land of Virginia, 1588 The 1585 expedition produced some valuable information about the people and places of Virginia. Their colony, however, did not survive. After suffering through a difficult winter, the colonists gave up and returned to England.
Then, in 1587 Raleigh sent 91 men, 17 women, and 9 children to Roanoke. John White led this group. Shortly after arriving on the island, White’s daughter, who was part of the expedition, gave birth. Virginia Dare was the first English child born in North America.
Nine days after his granddaughter’s birth, White returned to England for supplies. Although he had hoped to be back within a few months, White was delayed. His country was at war with Spain. This war featured England’s great naval battle with the Spanish Armada. The fighting between England and Spain made it impossible for White to sail back to Roanoke for nearly three years.
When he returned to Roanoke, White found his colony deserted. The only clue he found was a tree with the word Croatoan carved on it. White thought perhaps the colonists had gone to Croatoan Island, about 50 miles (80 km) to the south.
Bad weather kept White from investigating. The Roanoke colonists were never seen again.
H READING PROGRESS CHECK
Explaining Why did the English decide to settle in Roanoke?
Success at Jamestown
guiding question Why did the Jamestown settlement succeed?
For a time, the failure at Roanoke discouraged the English from settling in North America. The idea emerged again in 1606.
By then, England had a new king, James I. He wanted to renew England’s quest for a colony in North America. Several merchants pressed him for a charter—a document that granted the right to form a colony.
-Tkin^inq Life a —
HISTORIAN
Analyzing Primary Sources
John White drew pictures of the plants, animals, and people of the region in order to help educate Europeans about North America.

charter a document granting the recipient the right to settle a colony
Academic Vocabulary
investigate to try to discover facts and other information about something
CRITICAL THINKING
Analyzing Visuals Do you think John White's sketches are a primary source? Why or why not?

Lesson 1 111
SKILLS PRACTICE_________________
When you hear a new academic vocabulary word, be sure to use it. Include the word in sentences you write and in discussions with your classmates.
The Virginia Company
The Virginia Company was a joint-stock company in which investors bought shares, or part ownership. Investors bought shares hoping the company would make money and that they would share in the profits. The plan was for the company’s settlers to find gold and establish trade in fish and furs.
James I granted a charter to the Virginia Company of London, In December 1606, the company sent 144 settlers in three ships to build a new colony in North America. In April 1607, the ships entered Chesapeake Bay. They sailed up a river Bowing into the bay. The colonists named the river the James and their new settlement Jamestown to honor their king.
Jamestown Survives
The colonists did not find gold or riches in Virginia. Instead thev faced severe hardships, including disease and hunger. The colony survived its first two years in part because of 27-year-old Captain John Smith. Smith forced the settlers to work. He also built ties with—and got food from—the local Powhatan people and their chief, who was also named Powhatan.
In late 1609, Smith was injured and had to return to England. The colony struggled. The Powhatan stopped providing food. The winter of 1609-1610 was called “the starving time.”
joint-stock company a
company in which investors buy stock in return for a share of its future profits
Soon after landing, the Jamestown colonists began building a fort for protection. The surrounding forest provided the materials they needed for this project.
headright a 50-acre grant of land given to colonial settlers who paid their own way burgess an elected representative to an assembly
Academic Voca b u la ry
expand to increase in size or number
112 Colonial America
Library of Congress Prints & Photographs Division, [LC-DIG-det-4a26409]
Somehow Jamestown survived this terrible time. More colonists arrived to replace those who had died. The colonists also found a way to make money for the investors. Using seeds from the West Indies, they began growing a type of tobacco. Soon planters all along the James River were raising this valuable crop.
More Settlers Come to Virginia The colony of Virginia began to expand. Relations with the Powhatan improved after a colonist, John Rolfe, married the chief’s daughter, Pocahontas. The Virginia Company sent women to Jamestown. As a result, marriage and children became a part of life in the colony. The Virginia Company also began giving a headright (HEHD«RYT), or land grant, of 50 acres to settlers who paid their own way to the colony. The headright system helped the colony succeed. The chance to own land lured many settlers to Virginia and gave them a reason to work hard.
The Virginia Company also gave the colonists the right to take part in their own government. In 1619, land-owning male colonists cast ballots for burgesses (BUHR«juhs»uhz), or representatives. The burgesses helped make laws for the colony. The House of Burgesses was the first legislature in North America elected by the people.
The Virginia Colony was growing in size, but it was not making any money for the shareholders of the Virginia Company. In fact, the company faced financial troubles. In 1624 King James took away the company’s charter. Virginia became a royal colony, meaning it was directly under the control of the government in England.
READING PROGRESS CHECK

OHk *
L



Pocahontas, shown here in English-style clothes for a visit to England, served as a link between the colonists and the Native Americans of Virginia.
Analyzing Why was the House of Burgesses important?
Include this lesson's information in your Foldable®.
1539
1607
Southern
Colonies
LESSON 1 REVIEW
Review Vocabulary
1.	Examine the meaning of charter and joint-stock company by using each term in a sentence. 3oa;3ob
2.	Write a sentence about the early years of the Virginia colony, using the following terms: 3oa,-3ob a. headright b. burgess
Answer the Guiding Questions
3.	Drawing Inferences Why did Sir Walter Raleigh send settlers to establish a colony on Roanoke Island? 2A
4.	Describing What did the Virginia Company hope to accomplish by establishing a colony in North America? ia
PERSUASIVE WRITING
Using primary and secondary source images and descriptions in this lesson, write an advertisement for a newspaper in England that encourages people to come to America in the 1600s. 29A;30D
Lesson 1 113
networks
There's More Online!
Ef graphic ORGANIZER
Cooperation and Conflict
between Colonists and Native Americans
MAP
The New England Lesson 2
The New England Colonies
Colonies .
Ef self-check quiz Ef SLIDESHOW Plymouth Colony
sf PRIMARY SOURCE
Anne Hutchinson
sf VIDEO
TEKS
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills 1A Identify the major eras and events in U.S. history through 1877, including colonization, revolution, drafting of the Declaration of Independence, creation and ratification of the Constitution, religious revivals such as the Second Great Awakening, early republic, the Age of Jackson, westward expansion, reform movements, sectionalism, Civil War, and Reconstruction, and describe their causes and effects.
1C Explain the significance of the following dates: 1607, founding of Jamestown; 1620, arrival of the Pilgrims and signing of the Mayflower Compact; 1776, adoption of the Declaration of Independence; 1787, writing of the U.S. Constitution; 1803, Louisiana Purchase; and 1861-1865, Civil War.
2A Identify reasons for European exploration and colonization of North America.
2B Compare political, economic, religious, and social reasons for the establishment of the 13 English colonies.
3A Explain the reasons for the growth of representative government and institutions during the colonial period.
3B Analyze the importance of the Mayflower Compact, the Fundamental Orders of Connecticut, and the Virginia House of Burgesses to the growth of representative government.
3C Describe how religion and virtue contributed to the growth of representative government in the American colonies.
10A Locate places and regions of importance in the United States during the 17th, 18th, and 19th centuries.
ITIAL QUESTION
How do new ideas change the way people Ihtt? IT MATTERS BECAUSE
Seeking freedom to pursue their own religion, English settlers started colonies in New England. Many people still come to the
Americas in search of religious freedom.
Seeking Religious Freedom
guiding question Why did the Puritans settle in North America!
The Jamestown settlers had come to America in search ot wealth. The next wave of English colonists arrived in search of religious freedom.
England had been a Protestant country since 1534 when King Henry VIII broke away from the Roman Catholic Church and formed the Anglican Church. Not everyone in England was happy with the new church. Many people dissented (dih»SEHNT»uhd), disagreeing with Anglican beliefs or practices. Some English people remained Catholic. Others were Protestants who wanted to reform the Anglican Church. The Protestants who wished to reform the Anglican Church were called Puritans. Some Puritans sought to set up their own churches and were known as Separatists.
The Separatists were persecuted (PUHR»sih«kyoot«uhd)— mistreated because of their beliefs—in England. Some fled to the Netherlands. There they found freedom to practice their religion but had difficulty finding work. They also worried that their children were losing their religious values and English way of life. To preserve their religious faith and English culture, some Separatists decided to move to America.
Reading HELPDESK
......................
Taking Notes: Describing_________________
Use a diagram like this one to describe examples of cooperation and conflict between Native Americans and English colonists.
114 Colonial America
Content Vocabulary
•	dissent
•	persecute
•	tolerance
The Pilgrims Settle Plymouth
In 1620 a group of Separatists were able to get land grants from the Virginia Company. They received permission to settle in Virginia and to practice their religion freely. These Separatists became known as the Pilgrims. (A pilgrim is someone who undertakes a religious journey.) The Pilgrims boarded a ship called the Mayflower and set out for America to begin their new lives.
The Mayflower drifted off course on its journey across the Atlantic. The first land the Pilgrims sighted was Cape Cod, well north of their target. It was November, and winter was fast approaching. The colonists decided to drop anchor in Cape Cod Bay. They went ashore on a cold, bleak day in December at a place they called Plymouth. View the location of Plymouth on the map of the New England Colonies. New England was one of the first regions settled by those who set sail from England.
10B Compare places and regions of the United States in terms of physical and human characteristics.
11A Analyze how physical characteristics of the environment influenced population distribution, settlement patterns, and economic activities in the United States during the 17th, 18th, and 19th centuries.
23A Identify selected racial, ethnic, and religious groups that settled in the United States and explain their reasons for immigration.
23C Identify ways conflicts between people from various racial, ethnic, and religious groups were resolved.
25A Trace the development of religious freedom in the United States.
25B Describe religious motivation for immigration and influence on social movements, including the impact of the first and second Great Awakenings.
dissent to disagree with or oppose an opinion persecute to mistreat a person or group on the basis of their beliefs
Build Vocabulary: Word Origins
The term pilgrim refers to someone who travels to a shrine or sacred place. It can also mean simply "a traveler."
Lesson 2 115
The Mayflower Compact
Plymouth was outside the territory of the Virginia Company and its laws. While they were still on board ship, the Pilgrims signed
; a document later called the Mayflower Compact. This document set up an organized, orderly government. Each signer promised to obey the laws passed “for the general good of the colony.” The Mayflower Compact was a key step in the development of representative, democratic government in America.
Native American Help
During their first winter in America, almost half the Pilgrims died. Illness, hunger, and cold took a terrible toll. In the spring, however, two Native Americans—Squanto and Samoset—befriended the
i colonists. They taught the Pilgrims to grow corn, beans, and | pumpkins and showed the colonists where to hunt and fish.
1 Without their help, the Pilgrims might not have survived.
I I
Squanto and Samoset also helped the Pilgrims make peace with the Wampanoag people who lived in the area. For a time, the two groups lived together in harmony. In the fall of 1621, the Pilgrims included their new Wampanoag friends in a feast of thanksgiving. D READING PROGRESS CHECK
I
Analyzing What was the significance of the Mayflower Compact? Connections to
TODAY

\ rlimoth Plantation
Plimoth Plantation, shown here, is an outdoor museum and a popular tourist site. Located in present-day Plymouth, Massachusetts, it uses actors to portray life as it was in 1627.
Reading Strategy: Sequencing
New Colonies
guidingquestion IV/wt role did religion play in the founding of the various colonial
In 1629 a group of Puritans formed the Massachusetts Bay Company. They received a royal charter to establish a colony north of Plymouth. The company chose John Winthrop to be the colony’s governor.
In 1630 Winthrop led about 900 men, women, and children to Massachusetts Bay. Most of them settled in a place they called Boston.
More settlers followed. During the 1630s, more than 15,000 Puritans journeyed to Massachusetts to escape religious persecution and economic hard times in England. This movement of people became known as the Great Migration.
At first Winthrop and his assistants made the colony’s laws.
In 1634 settlers demanded a larger role in the government. Adult male church members were allowed to vote for the governor and for representatives to the government. Later, property ownership became a requirement for voting.
The Puritans came to America to put their religious beliefs into practice. At the same time, they themselves had little tolerance for
Sequencing means arranging events in the order in which they occur. Create a time line for the years 1620 to 1700, then place the events discussed in this lesson in their proper place along this line.
tolerance the ability to accept or put up with different views or behaviors
116 Colonial America
. ggl*y * ®rf* «?* «& |f -	"•ct j, /** ■>'
- 1 \
. y 5 *

t ... J
■
I

I

100mil§sj
'<
V\H
Portsmouth
Salem
uth
ATLANTIC
OCEAN
42uN
Newport
KRhode 72°w Island
68°W
Products
Cattle
Fish
t Furs Grain
g Iron Lumber
@ Rum Ships
T«as Whales
GEOGRAPHY CONNECTION
English settlers formed the New England colonies.
MOVEMENT
What colonies were founded after the settling of Massachusetts? CRITICAL THINKING
Identifying In what part of New England was farming a significant industry?
different beliefs. They criticized or persecuted people who did not agree with their views. They strictly enforced their own religious rules. This lack of tolerance led people to form new colonies.
Connecticut and Rhode Island
To the west of Boston is land we now call the Connecticut River Valley. This rich land is better for farming than the stony soil around Boston. In the 1630s colonists began to settle this area.
A leader of this movement was Massachusetts minister Thomas Hooker. He did not like how Winthrop and other Puritan leaders ran the colony. In 1636 Hooker led his congregation to the Connecticut River Valley. There he founded the town of Hartford. Other nearby towns were soon established. Three years later these towns formed the colony of Connecticut. In 1639 they adopted a plan of government called the Fundamental Orders of Connecticut. This was the first written constitution in America. The document described the organization of representative government in detail. Like the Mayflower Compact, it reflected a belief in democratic principles. The Connecticut colonists, like the Pilgrims, believed that the people had the right to make decisions in matters of government as well as matters of religion.

SKILLS PRACTICE
Before you read challenging text, examine the illustrations, visuals, captions, headings, and key terms. What can you learn from them about the topic?

Academic Vocabulary
enforce to apply a rule or law policy a statement of ideals or plan of action
Lesson 2 117
Anne Hutchinson held meetings in her home to discuss and give her views on religious teachings. Puritan leaders charged her with "dishonoring" the Massachusetts Bay Colony. They banished Hutchinson in 1637.
Include this lesson's information in your Foldable®.
	New
1585	England
	Colonies
1589	Middle
	Colonies
	Southern
1607	Colonies
A minister named Roger Williams founded the colony of Rhode Island. Williams felt that government should not force people to worship in a certain way. He also believed it was wrong for settlers to take land away from the Native Americans. Forced by Massachusetts leaders to leave the colony, Williams found
refuge with the Narragansett, a Native American people.
They later sold him land, where Williams founded the town of Providence. With its policy of religious toleration, Rhode Island became a safe place for dissenters. It was the first place in America where people of all faiths could worship freely.
Others followed Williams’s example. In 1638 John Wheelwright led a group of dissenters from Massachusetts to found the town of Exeter in New Hampshire. New Hampshire became an independent colony in 1679.
Conflict With Native Americans
As settlers spread across New England, they met the Native Americans who lived there—Wampanoag, Narragansett, and other groups. Native Americans traded furs for settlers’ goods, but conflicts arose. Usually settlers moved onto Native American lands without permission or payment. Throughout the colonial period, settlers and Native Americans competed fiercely for land.
In 1675 Wampanoag leader Metacomet waged war against the New England colonies. Known to settlers as King Philip, Metacomet enlisted the help of other Native American groups. King Philip’s War raged for 14 months. In the end, the colonists defeated Metacomet. The war destroyed the power of the Native Americans in New England. Colonial settlement expanded.
P READING PROGRESS CHECK
Identifying Which colony was the first to let people of all faiths worship freely?
1
networks
There's More Online1.
Ef GAME Vocabulary eFlashcards
Ef GRAPHIC ORGANIZER
Dividing Colonies
MAP
The Middle Colonies sf PRIMARY SOURCE
New Amsterdam
Ef SELF-CHECK QUIZ Ef VIDEO
IT a ,
Lesson 3
The Middle Colonies
Til
I
LESSON 2 REVIEW
Review Vocabulary
1.	Examine the words below. Then write a paragraph explaining what the words have in common. 3oa a. dissent b. persecute c. tolerance
Answer the Guiding Questions
2.	Describing Why did the Separatists and Puritans leave England and settle in North America?
1A,2A, 2B,23A,25A,25B
3.	Comparing How did religion play a role in the founding of the colonies of Connecticut, Rhode Island, and New Hampshire? 2b
4.	Analyzing Maps View the map of the New England Colonies. In what present-day state is Plymouth located! What body of water borders New England to its east?
10A;25A
DESCRIPTIVE WRITING
Write a paragraph describing the importance of the search for religious freedom in the settling of America. Describe the founding of at least two colonies, ia TEKS
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills 1A Identify the major eras and events in U.S. history through 1877, including colonization, revolution, drafting of the Declaration of Independence, creation and ratification of the Constitution, religious revivals such as the Second Great Awakening, early republic, the Age of Jackson, westward expansion, reform movements, sectionalism, Civil War, and Reconstruction, and describe their causes and effects.
2A Identify reasons for European exploration and colonization of North America.
2B Compare political, economic, religious, and social reasons for the establishment of the 13 English colonies.
3A Explain the reasons for the growth of representative government and institutions during the colonial period.
10A Locate places and regions of importance in the United States during the 17th, 18th, and 19th centuries.
11A Analyze how physical characteristics of the environment influenced population distribution, settlement patterns, and economic activities in the United States during the 17th, 18th, and 19th centuries.
11C Describe how different immigrant groups interacted with the environment in the United States during the 17th, 18th, and 19th centuries. 23A Identify selected racial, ethnic, and religious groups that settled in the United States and explain their reasons for immigration.
25B Describe religious motivation for immigration and influence on social movements, including the impact of the first and second Great Awakenings.
Reading HELPDESK

Taking Notes: Identifying

NTIAL QUESTION
How does geography influence the way people live? It Matters Because
The Middle Colonies drew a diverse population to North America.
New York and New Jersey
GUIDING QUESTION
Why did the Middle Colonies grow? By 1660, England had two groups of colonies in North America. In the north were the New England colonies. In the south were Virginia and also the colony of Maryland, which was settled in 1634. Between these two groups of colonies were lands under Dutch control. This area was called New Netherland.
The main settlement of New Netherland was New Amsterdam on Manhattan Island. This location combined a good seaport with access to the Hudson River. The river served as a major transportation link to a rich land of farms, forests, and furs. As a result, New Amsterdam became a center of shipping to and from the Americas.
The Dutch West India Company controlled New Netherland. It wanted to increase the colony’s population. To do this, the company offered large grants of land to anyone who could bring at least 50 settlers to work the land. The landowners who received these grants were called patroons (puh»TROONS). The patroons ruled like kings. They had their own courts and laws. Settlers owed the patroons labor and a share of their crops.
As you read, use a diagram like this one to illustrate how the New York and Pennsylvania colonies split to form the four middle colonies under British rule.
Content Vocabulary
•	patroon
•	pacifist
Colonial America
Lesson 3 119
4
1
New Amsterdam, which later became New York City, was a prosperous and diverse city. Its population was around 8 thousand in 1664. Today, the city is home to 8 million people. The population is still diverse. Some 3 million New York City residents were born in another country.
CRITICAL THINKING
Speculating Why do you think New York City draws such a diverse population? Reading HELPDESK
............
patroon a landowner in the Dutch colonies who ruled over large areas of land
New Netherland Becomes New York
New Netherland’s success did not go unnoticed. The English wanted to gain control of the valuable Dutch colony. England insisted it had a right to the land, based on John Cabot’s explorations in the late 1400s. In 1664 the English sent a fleet to attack New Amsterdam. Peter Stuyvesant, governor of the colony, surrendered it to the English forces without a fight.
England’s King Charles II gave the colony to his brother, the Duke of York, who renamed it New York. New York was a proprietary colony. This was a colony in which an owner, or proprietor, owned all the land and controlled the government. Not until 1691 did the English government allow citizens of New York to elect their legislature.
New York continued to prosper under English control. It had a diverse population made up of Dutch, German, Swedish, and Native American people. Also among the population were people of the Jewish religion. They were the first Jews to settle in North America.
In 1664 New York had about 8,000 residents, including at least 300 enslaved Africans. By 1683 the population had swelled to about 12,000 people. New Amsterdam, which had been renamed New York City, was one of the fastest-growing places in the colonies. Because of its large natural harbor, the city had become a major seaport. View the location of New York City on the map of the Middle Colonies. Founding New Jersey
The Duke of York decided to divide his colony. He gave the land between the Hudson and Delaware Rivers to Lord John Berkeley and Sir George Carteret. The two proprietors named their colony New Jersey, after the English Channel island of Jersey where Carteret was born. To attract settlers, the proprietors offered large tracts of land and also promised freedom of religion, trial by jury, and a representative assembly.
Like New York, New Jersey had a diverse population. There were people of many different racial, religious, and national backgrounds that is, many different ethnic groups. New Jersey had no natural harbors, so it did not develop a major port or city like New York. New Jersey’s proprietors made little profit. Both eventually sold their shares in the colony. By 1702, New Jersey had become a royal colony. However, the colonists continued to make local laws. H READING PROGRESS CHECK
Explaining Why did no major city develop in New Jersey?
Academic Vocabulary
ethnic of or relating to national, tribal, racial,
religious, language, or cultural background
120 Colonial America
Pennsylvania and Delaware
GUIDING QUESTION
How did Pennsylvania differ from the other English colonies? The Quakers, a Protestant group that had been persecuted in England, founded the colony of Pennsylvania. In 1680 William Penn, a wealthy English Quaker, received the land in payment for a debt King Charles II owed Penn’s father. Pennsylvania, or “Penn’s Woods,” stretched inland from the Delaware River. The new colony was nearly as large as England.
William Penn saw Pennsylvania as a “holy experiment,” a chance to put his Quaker ideals into practice. The Quakers, or Society of Friends, believed that everyone was equal. People could follow their own “inner light” rather than the teachings of a religious leader. Quakers were also pacifists (PA«suh»fihsts), or people who refuse to use force or fight in wars.
Penn was an active proprietor. In 1682 he sailed to America to supervise the building of Philadelphia, a name that means “city of brotherly love.” Penn designed the city himself. He also wrote Pennsylvania’s first constitution. Penn believed that the land belonged to the Native Americans and that settlers should pay for it. He negotiated several treaties with local Native Americans.
GEOGRAPHY CONNECTION
New York, New Jersey, Pennsylvania, and Delaware made up the \ Middle Colonies.
PLACE
What geographic features helped make Philadelphia and New York centers of trade? CRITICAL THINKING
Drawing Conclusions How did the Middle Colonies get that name? pacifist a person who is opposed to the use of violence
Academic Vocabulary________
function to be in action; to operate
SKILLS PRACTICE

Raise your hand for help when somebody says a word you do not know. Then use the word often when you speak.
Lesson 3 121
networks
There's More Online!
Sf CHARTS
* Founding of the
Thirteen Colonies
»Indentured Servants and
Enslaved Africans Sf GAME identification Garr Ef MAP The Southern Colon Ef primary source
Bacon's Declaration in the
Name of the People
sf SELF-CHECK QUIZ Sf VIDEO
,z
' y
I-
Include this lesson's information in your Foldable®.
1585
1589
1607
New
England
Colonies
Middle
Colonies
Southern
Colonies
Penn advertised his colony throughout Europe. By 1683, more than 3,000 English, Welsh, Irish, Dutch, and German settlers had arrived. In 1701, in the Charter of Privileges, Penn granted colonists the right to elect representatives to the legislature. Philadelphia quickly became America’s most prosperous city and its most popular port.
People from Sweden had settled land in southern Pennsylvania before the Dutch and then the English took over the area. Penn allowed these southern counties to form their own legislature. The counties then functioned, or worked, as a separate colony known as Delaware. However, Delaware remained under the authority of Pennsylvania’s governor.
Q READING PROGRESS CHECK
Inferring What was William Penn's main purpose in founding the colony of Pennsylvania?
LESSON 3 REVIEW
II
Review Vocabulary
1.	Explain the significance of the following words, joa a. patroon b. pacifist
Answer the Guiding Questions
2.	Analyzing Why did New Amsterdam become the main settlement of New Netherland? ha
122 Colonial America
3.	Describing William Penn viewed his colony as a "holy experiment." What did he mean? isb
4.	Analyzing Maps View the map of the Middle Colonies. Describe the location of New York City in relation to Philadelphia. What were the four Middle Colonies? m*
EXPOSITORY WRITING
Think about what you read about New Amsterdam. Why did the English want to gain control of New Amsterdam? ia; joa TEKS
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills 1A Identify the major eras and events in U.S. history through 1877, including colonization, revolution, drafting of the Declaration of Independence, creation and ratification of the Constitution, religious revivals such as the Second Great Awakening, early republic, the Age of Jackson, westward expansion, reform movements, sectionalism, Civil War, and Reconstruction, and describe their causes and effects.
1C Explain the significance of the following dates: 1607, founding of Jamestown; 1620, arrival of the Pilgrims and signing of the Mayflower Compact; 1776, adoption of the Declaration of Independence; 1787, writing of the U.S. Constitution; 1803, Louisiana Purchase; and 1861-1865, Civil War.
2A Identify reasons for European exploration and colonization of North America.
2B Compare political, economic, religious, and social reasons for the establishment of the 13 English colonies.
10A Locate places and regions of importance in the United States during the 17th, 18th, and 19th centuries.
10B Compare places and regions of the United States in terms of physical and human characteristics.
11A Analyze how physical characteristics of the environment influenced population distribution, settlement patterns, and economic activities in the United States during the 17th, 18th, and 19th centuries.
12B Explain reasons for the development of the plantation system, the transatlantic slave trade, and the spread of slavery.
Reading HELPDESK



Lesson 4
The Southern Colonies
TIAL QUESTION
How does geography influence the way people live? it Matters because
A warm climate, a long growing season, and rich soil spurred the growth of large-scale agriculture in the Southern Colonies.
Virginia and Maryland
guiding question What problems did Maryland and Virginia face?
The settlement of Jamestown in 1607 marked the beginning of English colonization in North America—and of the Virginia Colony. After its difficult beginnings, Virginia began to grow. The demand for workers was high. It took a great deal of labor to plant, tend, and harvest the tobacco crop on which the colony depended.
White landowners helped meet this need through the use of enslaved Africans. The first group of 20 Africans arrived in 1619 aboard a Dutch trading ship. In the years to follow, many more shiploads of this human cargo would arrive in North America.
The story of Virginia’s first Africans shows that not all people came to work in the colonies of their own free will. England also shipped criminals and prisoners of war to the colonies. They could earn their release by working for a period of time—usually seven years.
Many people also came to the colonies as indentured servants (ihn*DEHN»shuhrd SIRxvuhnts), agreeing to work without pay for a certain length of time to pay for their passage to America. Some came for adventure. Others came for a new start in life. Still others followed family members or friends.
Taking Notes: Determining Cause and Effect
Use a diagram like this one to list the causes and effects of Bacon's Rebellion.
Content Vocabulary
•	indentured servant
•	constitution
•	debtor
Lesson 4 123
r.
ENSLAVED PEOPLE IN THE COLONIES
1650-1710 Most enslaved Africans lived in the Southern Colonies, where they were forced to work on plantations.
Northern Colonies had fewer enslaved people but also profited from the international slave trade.
IDENTIFYING
In about what year did the South begin relying on slavery in a much larger way than the North? ; CRITICAL THINKING
Comparing and Contrasting Describe how the number of i enslaved people in the South compared to those in the North i during the time period shown in	i
this graph.	I
............. ....~..... i
Maryland arose from the dream of Sir George Calvert, Lord Baltimore. Calvert wanted a safe place for his fellow Catholics who faced persecution in England. England’s king, Charles 1, gave Calvert a proprietary colony north of Virginia. Soon after receiving this grant, Calvert died. His son, Cecilius, inherited the colony and named it Maryland. Cecilius sent two of his brothers to start the colony. They reached America in 1634.
Cecilius gave large estates to English aristocrats. He also granted smaller pieces of land to other settlers. As the number of plantations grew, so did the need for workers. The colony imported indentured servants and enslaved Africans.
For years the Calvert and Penn families argued over the boundary between Maryland and Pennsylvania. In the 1760s, they hired two men named Charles Mason and Jeremiah Dixon to map the boundary between the colonies. This boundary line became
20A Explain the role of significant individuals such as Thomas Hooker, Charles de Montesquieu, John Locke, William Blackstone, and William Penn in the development of self-government in colonial America.
23A Identify selected racial, ethnic, and religious groups that settled in the United States and explain their reasons for immigration.
23C Identify ways conflicts between people from various racial, ethnic, and religious groups were resolved.
25A Trace the development of religious freedom in the United States.
Reading HELPDESK
known as the Mason-Dixon Line. View the map of Maryland and the other colonies that make up the Southern Colonies.
Conflict arose from differences in religion. The Calverts welcomed Protestants as well as Catholics. Protestant settlers outnumbered Catholics. To protect Catholics, the colony established the Act of Toleration in 1649. The act ensured both Protestants and Catholics the right to worship freely.
Tensions, however, continued. In 1692 Maryland was made a royal colony, and the Anglican Church became the official church. As a result, Catholics faced the same restrictions they had encountered in England.

indentured servant a laborer who agrees to work without pay for a certain period of time in exchange for passage to America
Academic Vocabulary_______
estate a large area of land that has one owner dominate to control
14 Colonial America
Virginia also experienced conflict. As the colony grew, settlers moved west—and onto Native American lands. In the 1640s, Virginia governor William Berkeley made a pledge to Native Americans. In exchange for a large piece of land, he agreed to keep settlers from pushing farther into their territory. Berkeley’s goal was to prevent the outbreak of a war with the Native Americans.
Nathaniel Bacon was a young planter in western Virginia.
He opposed the colonial government because it was dominated by easterners. Many westerners also resented Berkeley’s pledge to stay out of Native American territory. Some settled in the forbidden areas. They then blamed the government for not clearing the colony of Native Americans.
In 1676 Bacon led attacks on Native American villages. His army also marched to Jamestown to drive out Berkeley, and they burned the town to the ground. Bacon seemed on the verge of taking over the colony when he suddenly became ill and died. With his death, the rebellion faded. England recalled Berkeley and sent troops to restore order. Bacon’s Rebellion showed that government could not ignore the demands of its people.
D PROGRESS CHECK
Analyzing Why did Nathaniel Bacon oppose the colonial government?
The Thirteen Colonies were founded over a span of 125 years.
Q PLACE
How did Georgia serve as protection for the English colonies? Sequencing What colony was the first to be settled? Which was the last?
FOUNDING OF THE THIRTEEN COLONIES
COLONY (YEAR FIRST SETTLED) REASONS FOUNDED SETTLED BY MAJOR RELIGIONS
Virginia (1607)	Expand trade	English	Anglican
Maryland (1634)	Religious freedom; to sell land	English, French	Roman Catholic, Others
North Carolina (1653)	Profit from trade and selling land; religious freedom	English	Anglican
South Carolina (1670)	Profit from trade and selling land; religious freedom	English, French	Anglican, French Protestant
Georgia (1733)	Home for England’s poor; protection against Spanish Florida	English, German	Anglican, Moravian
Massachusetts (1620)	Religious freedom	Pilgrims, Puritans	Separatist, Congregationalist
New Hampshire (1623)	Religious and economic freedom	Puritans	Congregationalist
Connecticut (1633)	Religious and political freedom	Puritans	Congregationalist
Rhode Island (1636)	Religious freedom	English	Congregationalist
New Jersey (1638)	Profit from selling land; religious freedom	Swedish, Dutch	Lutheran, Dutch Reformed
Delaware (1638)	Expand trade	Swedish, Dutch	Lutheran, Dutch Reformed
New York (1664)	Expand trade	Dutch, English	Dutch Reformed
Pennsylvania (1682)	Religious freedom; escape conflict in Europe	English, German	Quaker, Lutheran
Lesson 4 125
SKILLS PRACTICE_________________
Write a sentence for each vocabulary word in a text selection. Leave a blank space where the word should be.
Switch papers with a partner and complete one another's sentences with a vocabulary word.
r u
GEOGRAPHY CONNECTION
The Southern Colonies were Maryland, Virginia, North and South Carolina, and Georgia.
LOCATION
Which was the southernmost colony? CRITICAL THINKING
Analyzing Visuals How does the map show the importance of tobacco in the Southern Colonies? The Carolinas and Georgia
guidingquestion What factors contributed to the growth of the Carolinas?
In 1663 King Charles II created a proprietary colony south of Virginia called Carolina—Latin for “Charles’s land.” The king gave the colony to eight nobles. The proprietors set up estates and sold or rented land to settlers brought from England.
John Locke, an English philosopher, wrote a constitution (kahn«stuh»TOO«shuhn), a plan that outlined the jobs and powers of the colony’s government. The constitution covered topics such as land divisions and social rank. Locke stated, “Every man has a property in his own person.... The labour of his body, and the work of his hands ... are properly his.”
Two Carolinas
Carolina split into northern and southern Carolina. Farmers from inland Virginia settled northern Carolina. They grew tobacco and sold timber and tar. Northern Carolina lacked a good harbor, so farmers used Virginia’s ports.
Settlers in southern Carolina took advantage of fertile land and the harbor at Charles Town (later Charleston). Settlements there spread, and trade in deerskin, lumber, and beef thrived.
constitution a list of fundamental laws to support a government debtor a person or country that owes money
Colonial America
Visual Vocabulary		
indigo The indigofera plant, often called just indigo, was used to make indigo dye.	T	
Two crops came to dominate Carolina agriculture. In the 1680s, planters discovered that rice grew well in the wet coastal lowlands. Growing rice required much labor, so the demand for enslaved labor rose. Another important crop was indigo. A young Englishwoman named Eliza Lucas developed this crop in the 1740s. Indigo, a blue flowering plant, was used to dye cloth.
By the early 1700s, Carolina’s settlers were growing tired of proprietor rule. In 1719 settlers in southern Carolina took control from the proprietors. In 1729 Carolina became two royal colonies—North Carolina and South Carolina.
Georgia
Georgia, founded in 1733, was the last British colony set up in America. James Oglethorpe received a charter from George II for a colony where debtors and poor people could make a fresh start.
In Britain, debtors (DEH»tuhrs)—those who had debts—could be imprisoned if they were unable to pay what they owed.
The British also hoped Georgia would block any Spanish attack on the colonies from Florida. Oglethorpe and his settlers built forts and the town of Savannah to discourage such attacks.
Georgia did not develop as Oglethorpe planned. Hundreds of poor people came from Britain, but few debtors settled there. Religious refugees from Central Europe and a small group of Jews also arrived. Many settlers complained about Oglethorpe’s rules, especially the limits on landholding and the bans on slave labor and rum. A frustrated Oglethorpe finally agreed to their demands. Disappointed with the colony’s slow growth, he gave up and turned Georgia over to the king in 1751.
By that time, the British had been in eastern North America for almost 150 years. They had lined the Atlantic coast with colonies.
HPROGRESS CHECK
Explaining Why was Georgia founded?
Foldables
Study Organizer
Include this lesson's information in your Foldable®.
1535	New England Colonies
1539	Middle Colonies
	——-
1607	Southern Colonies
LESSON 4 REVIEW
Review Vocabulary
1.	Examine the terms below. Write a sentence explaining what the terms have in common, joa; a. indentured servant b. debtor
2.	Use the word constitution in a sentence. 3oa,-
Answer the Guiding Questions
3.	Identifying What act resolved conflict between Protestants and Catholics in Maryland? What did the act ensure? 23c
4.	Analyzing Why did demand for enslaved workers increase in the Carolinas? ub
5.	Analyzing Maps View the map ofthe Southern Colonies. Which five colonies made up the region? Between which two colonies did the Savannah River serve as the border? ioa
EXPOSITORY WRITING
View the graph on the number of enslaved people in the colonies. Write a paragraph to describe how the number of enslaved people in the South compared to those in the North during the time period shown in the graph. 29C;30D
Lesson 4 127
Activities

Directions: Write your answers using standard grammar, spelling, sentence structure, and punctuation.
O
Use your to explore the Essential Questions. descriptive writing Take on the role of William Penn. Write an advertisement to attract settlers to the new colony of Pennsylvania. Include details about Pennsylvania that people would find attractive. 290300
® Social Studies Skills
ANALYZING primary SOURCES Working with a small group, read the Mayflower Compact and identify the passages that establish the principles of a self-governing group of people. Then, write a paragraph that explains how these principles of self-government influenced the development of representative government in America, jb
o Thinking Like a Historian
CREATING GRAPHS
Create a bar graph using the population statistics for the Southern Colonies in 1650,1700, and 1750. Write three quiz questions and answers based on your graph. Exchange quizzes with a partner and answer the quiz questions. 291; 29J; joc O
Visual Literacy ANALYZING VISUALS
This painting by Edward Hicks shows William Penn meeting with Native Americans in the colony of Pennsylvania. What details in the painting help you know that it reflects life in Colonial America? 2«b Southern Colonies	
Year	Population
1650	27,100
1700	104,500
1750	514,200
Source: Historical Statistics of the United States: Colonial Times to 1970
ill

William Penn's Treaty with the Indians, by Edward Hicks, 1830-
1840
128 Colonial America
Assessment
Directions: Write your answers using standard grammar, spelling, sentence structure, and punctuation.
CHECKING FOR UNDERSTANDING
© How did the search for wealth and the pursuit of religious freedom shape the founding of Jamestown and the growth of Virginia? Write your response in a paragraph.
REVIEW THE GUIDING QUESTIONS
© Identifying What three regions made up the British colonies in North America in the seventeenth century?
10A
© Explaining Explain the significance of these dates.
a. 1607 b. 1620 c. 1639
© Drawing Inferences Imagine you are traveling through the thirteen colonies and in one region you notice the following things: Dutch is spoken in some areas. Many Germans have settled there. Peace-loving people called Quakers founded one of the colonies. In which region are you? 29B
© Interpreting Maps Look at the map of the British colonies on the following page. Where are most colonial cities? List three cities on the map that are major cities today. ioa;29c
© Describing What natural resources helped New Netherland prosper? Why did the Hudson River play an important part in the Dutch economy? nc
© Identifying Cause and Effect Whtt religious groups settled in Plymouth and Massachusetts Bay? Why did they come to North America? 2ja; 2sb; 29b
© Describing What role did Thomas Hooker play in the development of self-government in the British colonies?
© Identifying How was the conflict between the settlers and the Native Americans of New England resolved? 23c
© Making Connections How did the characteristics of the physical geography in the Carolinas influence settlement? ha
CRITICAL THINKING
© Explaining What role did religious freedom play in the founding of Rhode Island? 23A
© Speculating Why did cooperation turn to conflict between settlers and Native Americans in Virginia? How did William Berkeley try to promote peace? What are some other ways the conflict might have been resolved?
© Making Connections Where was the Dutch settlement of New Amsterdam located? Describe the physical geography of the settlement. Explain how these characteristics influenced settlement, population distribution, and economic activities. 1 a; ioa; ha
© Analyzing How were the Mayflower Compact, the Virginia House of Burgesses, and the Fundamental Orders of Connecticut important steps in the growth of representative government in the British colonies?
3B
© Analyzing What physical characteristics of the Carolinas helped rice become a dominant crop? Why did the demand for enslaved labor increase in the Carolinas?
11A;12B
© Identifying Problems Why did George 11 grant a charter to establish a new colony in Georgia? How did George Oglethorpe encourage new settlers to go there from England? What happened to his plan? 2A
© Identifying Cause and Effect How did religion contribute to the growth of representative government in the American colonies? 3c
© AnalyzingWhat physical characteristics of the environment caused settlements to grow in the Connecticut River Valley? In southern Carolina? ha
© Analyzing What physical characteristics helped New York City grow rapidly in the late 1600s? ha
© Identifying The colony of New York had a diverse population. What ethnic groups settled in New York?
23A
© Identifying What ethnic groups settled in the colony of Georgia? 23A
Need Extra Help?
IfYou've Missed Question	O	O	O	©	O	O	O	0	0	©	©	©	©	©	©
Review Lesson	1,4	1,2,3,4	1,2	3		3	2	2	2	4	2	1,4	3	1,2	4
129
sf'TL84 Assessment (continued) JjP
FB7T51 SHORT RESPONSE
William Bradford was governor of the Plymouth Colony in 1621.
Life in the American Colonies
networks
There's More Online about life in the American colonies.
PRIMARY SOURCE
1607-1770
"]I]n two or three months' time half of their company died, especially in . . . the depth of winter, and wanting houses and other comforts; being infected with the scurvy and other diseases.... there died sometimes two or three of a day . . . of 100 and odd persons, scarce 50 remained. And of these . . . there ivas but six or seven sound persons who to their great commendation [took care of the sick people] ... and ... willingly and cheerfully . .. showing herein their true love unto their friends."
—from Of Plymouth Plantation, by William Bradford, c. 1650
& Hypothesizing Why do you think Bradford recorded this information about the Pilgrims?
29A
& Speculating Do you think this scene is typical of the hardships the early colonists faced? Why or why not?
EXTENDED RESPONSE
© Expository Writinglhe thirteen colonies of British North America were founded for many reasons. Write an essay comparing the political, economic, religious, and social reasons they were founded. 2B;29B
ESSENTIAL QUESTIONS
• How does geography influence the way people live? •How do new ideas change the way people live? • Why does conflict develop? CHAPTER J
Lesson 1
Colonial Economy
Lesson 2
Colonial Government
Lesson 3
Culture and Society
Lesson 4
Rivalry in North America
STANDARDIZED TEST PRACTICE
ANALYZING DOCUMENTS
G
InterpretingMapslhe map at the right shows the settlement of the British colonies. Which colony was the most heavily settled before 1660? 29c; 29J A.
Virginia C. Massachusetts B.
North Carolina D. New Hampshire © Movement Which of the following best describes what happened to English settlement over time? 29c
F.
It spread to the north. H. It spread to the east. G.
It spread to the south. I. It spread to the west. 
New
York
^Pennsylvania] Philddeiphij
^Mass.
^.Jvidence
Conn.^
Hi Before 1660 CZ] 1660-1700 I I 1700-1760 • Town or city
Virginia
Jamesto^
Nortft Carolina
Soutiv Carolina
Georgia V Jjl^CharlesTown Savannah/ 80°W
ATLANTIC
OCEAN
The Story
Matters...
At first glance, the painting is simple—just a woman and her small baby. Look deeper, however, and you can see more.
The portrait dates from the 1670s, just 50 years after the Pilgrims first arrived in New England. It shows Elizabeth Freake, wife of a Boston merchant and lawyer John Freake, with baby Mary. Notice the fine fabrics mother and child are wearing.
For many colonial Americans such as the Freakes, life is no longer a struggle for survival. In fact, it is increasingly prosperous and comfortable.
200 miles
0	200 km
- Lambert Azimuthal Equal-Area projection
Goto the Foldables® library in the back ofyour book to make a Foldable® that will help you take notes while reading this chapter.
© Burstein Collection/CORBIS
!0 Colonial America
131
Colonial America was rich in natural resources, such as lumber, fish, and furs.
In many ofthe colonies, the land was well-suited to agriculture, producing crops like wheat, corn, tobacco, rice, and indigo.
In some colonies, industries developed to process and transport the wealth ofthe new land.
Step Into the Place
MAP FOCUS
The Colonial Economy map shows the different regions of the thirteen colonies along with their major industries. PLACE
Where was shipbuilding a major industry? ioa
REGIONS
What crops were common to both the Middle Colonies and the Southern Colonies? ioa 3	w . 1 ,
Drawing Conclusions Why do you think the New England Colonies developed industries that were not based in agriculture? 29B
Step Into the rime
TIMELINE
Which events on the time line hint at conflict in colonial North America? The kitchen was the heart ofthe American home in colonial times. Maintaining the fire was an important task. The fire was used to cook the food, provide warmth, and boil the water for washing the clothes.

Perhaps no other person represented the rise ofthe American colonies better than Benjamin Franklin. A successful businessperson, a scientific genius, anda skilled political leader—Franklin showed many ofthe best traits ofthe growing colonial society.
ATLANTIC
OCEAN
SOUTHERN
COLONIES
200 miles
0	200 km
Lambert Azimuthal Equal-Area projection
Gulf of Mexico	*85°w
80°W
I | Wheat and corn Tobacco
I | Rice and indigo |< I Fishing and whaling 'W Cattle
J
Furtrapping % Ironworks Lumber Of Rum distillery jfe Shipbuilding
70‘5W
c.1570 Iroquois Confederacy forms 1619 The first Africans arrive in Virginia
1651 First Navigation Act regulates colonial trade
1676 Bacon's Rebellion takes place in Virginia
c. 1740 Great Awakening peaks
1754 French and Indian War begins
1763 King George issues Proclamation of 1763
WORLD EVENTS

networks
There's More Online!
Ef CHART
The African Slave Trade
Ef graphic novel
The Middle Passage
Ef graphic organizer
The Triangular Trade Ef ■MAP' The Triangular Trade
SELF-CHECK QUIZ
Ef VIDEO Lesson 1
Colonial Economy
NORTH
AMERICA
iENTIAL QUESTION How does geography influence the way people live?

TEKS
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills 7C Analyze the impact of slavery on different sections of the United States.
10B Compare places and regions of the United States in terms of physical and human characteristics.
11A Analyze how physical characteristics of the environment influenced population distribution, settlement patterns, and economic activities in the United States during the 17th, 18th, and 19th centuries.
11C Describe how different immigrant groups interacted with the environment in the United States during the 17th, 18th, and 19th centuries.
12B Explain reasons for the development of the plantation system, the transatlantic slave trade, and the spread of slavery.
14B Describe the characteristics and the benefits of the U.S. free enterprise system during the 18th and 19th centuries.
23A Identify selected racial, ethnic, and religious groups that settled in the United States and explain their reasons for immigration.
23D Analyze the contributions of people of various racial, ethnic, and religious groups to our national identity.
J
II
Reading HELPDESK
IT MATTERS BECAUSE
The unique resources and conditions that existed in each colony helped shape colonial economies and ways of living.
Making a Living in the Colonies
GUIDINGQUESTION
Howdidthe economic activity of the three regions reflect their geography? Life in colonial America was based largely on agriculture. Most colonists farmed or made their livings from related activities such as milling flour. Geography played an important role in the colonies’ economic development. Colonists learned to adapt to the climate and terrain of the region where they lived. Commercial New England
In New England, long winters and thin, rocky soil made large-scale farming difficult. Most farmers here practiced subsistence farming (suhb»SIS*tuhns)—producing enough to meet the needs of their families, with little left over to sell or trade. New England farmers often depended on their children for labor. Everyone in the family worked—spinning yarn, milking cows, fencing fields, and sowing and harvesting crops. Women made cloth, garments, candles, and soaps for their families.
Throughout New England were many small businesses. Nearly every town had a mill for grinding grain or sawing lumber. People used waterpower from streams to run the mills-Large towns attracted skilled craftspeople. Among them were blacksmiths, shoemakers, furniture makers, and gunsmiths.

Taking Notes: Describing___________
As you read, use a diagram like this one to describe the triangular trade routes.
ZL-k
Content Vocabulary
134	Life in the American Colonies
•	subsistence farming
•	cash crop
•	diversity
•	triangular trade
•	slave code
Society/Bridc
Shipbuilding was an important New England industry. The lumber for building ships came from the region’s forests. Workers floated the lumber down rivers to shipyards in coastal towns.
The Northern coastal cities served as centers of the colonial shipping trade, linking the Northern Colonies with the Southern Colonies—and America with other parts of the world.
Fishing was also important. Nearby lay the Grand Banks, a shallow area in the Atlantic Ocean that teemed with cod, mackerel, halibut, and herring. Some New Englanders ventured far out to sea to hunt whales for oil and whalebone.
The Middle Colonies
Most people in the Middle Colonies were farmers. This region enjoyed more fertile soil and a slightly milder climate than New England. Farmers here plowed and planted larger areas of land and produced bigger harvests than did New Englanders. In New York and Pennsylvania, farmers grew large quantities of wheat and other cash crops—crops that could be sold easily in markets in the colonies and overseas.
Farmers sent wheat and livestock for shipment to New York City and Philadelphia, which became busy ports. By the 1760s, Philadelphia,
New York City, and Boston were the largest cities in the American colonies.
Like the New England Colonies, the Middle Colonies also had industries. Some were home-based crafts, such as carpentry and flour milling. Others were larger businesses— lumber mills, mines, ironworks, small-scale manufacturing, and so on.
The Middle Colonies attracted many Scots-Irish, German, Dutch, and Swedish settlers in the 1600s. Using agricultural methods developed in Europe, these immigrants became successful farmers. They gave the Middle Colonies a cultural diversity (duh«VUHR«suh»tee), or variety, not found in New England.
Life in the Southern Colonies
The Southern Colonies had rich soil and a warm climate well suited to certain kinds of farming. Southern farmers could plant large areas and produce harvests of cash crops, such as tobacco or rice. Most settlers in the Southern Colonies made their living from farming.
New York City, shown here in the late 1750s, was a bustling center of trade and population in the American colonies.
CRITICAL THINKING
Analyzing What geographic features helped New York thrive as a seaport?

subsistence farming producing just enough to meet immediate needs cash crop a crop that can be sold easily in markets
diversity variety, such as of ethnic or national groups
Lesson 1 135
Little commerce or industry developed there. For the most part, London merchants rather than local merchants from the colonies managed Southern trade.
Most large plantations were located in the Tidewater, a region of flat, low-lying plains along the seacoast. Planters built their plantations on rivers so they could ship their crops to market by boat. A plantation was like a small village. It had fields stretching out around a cluster of buildings, including cabins, barns, and stables, as well as carpenter and blacksmith shops, storerooms, and kitchens. A large plantation might have its own chapel and school. Small plantations often had fewer than 50 enslaved workers. Large ones typically had 200 or more.
Between the Tidewater and the Appalachian Mountains lay a region of hills and forests known as the backcountry. Its settlers included hardy newcomers to the colonies. They grew corn and tobacco on small family farms. Some had one or two enslaved Africans to help with the work. Backcountry farmers greatly outnumbered large plantation owners. Still, the plantation owners were wealthier and more powerful. They controlled the economic and political life of the region.
Tobacco and Rice
Reading HELPDESK
Tobacco was the principal cash crop in Maryland and Virginia. Growing tobacco and preparing it for sale required a lot of labor. At first, planters used indentured servants to work in the fields. These servants worked for a specified period of time and then were freed. When indentured servants became scarce and expensive, Southern planters began using enslaved Africans instead.
Slaveholders with large farms grew wealthy by growing tobacco. They sold most of it in Europe. Sometimes, though, there was too much tobacco on the market—more than buyers wanted. To sell the extra tobacco, planters had to lower their prices. Asa result, their profits fell. Some planters switched to other crops, such as corn and wheat.
The geography of South Carolina and Georgia helped make rice the main cash crop there. In low-lying areas along the coast, planters built dams to create rice fields called paddies. Planters flooded the fields when the rice was young and drained them when the rice was ready to harvest.
Work in the rice paddies was hard. It involved standing knee-deep in the mud with no protection from the blazing sun orbiting insects. To do this work, rice growers relied on enslaved workers.
Academic Vocabulary
principal most important rely to depend upon
Build Vocabulary: Related Word*
If the word principal means "most important,"
what can you say about the principal of your school?
SKILLS PRACTICE
Before you read a text selection, make a graphic organizer with three columns. In the first column, record what you know about a topic. In the second, write what you would like to learn. Use the third column to record what you learn as you read.
13,
ifc in the American Colonies
i
AFRICAN SLAVE TRADE
AFRICAN SLAVE TRADE
Destination Percentage Caribbean	50%
Brazil	33%
Central, South America	12%
North America	5%
Source: The Trans-Atlantic Slave Trade Database
Millions of Africans were victims of the slave trade. Antislavery groups used this diagram of the slave ship to show the cruelty of the slave trade. First published in 1789, this powerful image was reprinted many times in the years that followed.
Millions of Africans were victims of the slave trade.
MAKING CONNECTIONS
Based on what you have learned about slavery, what kind of agriculture do you suppose was practiced in the Caribbean?
CRITICAL THINKING
Drawing Conclusions What do you think was the impact of the slave trade on African cultures?
Rice proved to be an even more profitable crop than tobacco. Prices rose steadily as rice became popular in Europe. By the 1750s, South Carolina and Georgia had the fastest-growing economies in the colonies.
O READING PROGRESS CHECK
Summarizing Why did plantation agriculture develop in the Southern Colonies?
The Growth of Slavery
guidingquestion Why were enslaved Africans brought to the colonies?
By the time Europeans were sailing to the Americas, slavery was widely practiced in West Africa. Many West African kingdoms enslaved those they defeated in war. Slave traders from Arab lands bought some of these enslaved people. Others were forced to work in gold mines or in farm fields.
The European colonization of the Americas created new demands for enslaved workers. Colonists needed workers for their plantations. West African slave traders met this need, selling
I captives they gained through wars and raids. The transatlantic j slave trade brought millions of Africans to the Americas. Slavery | and the slave trade became major parts of the colonial economy.
I
For enslaved Africans, the voyage to America usually began 1 with a march to a European fort on the West African coast. 4 There, they were sold to Europeans who loaded them on ships.
Lesson 1 137
7

TRIANGULAR TRADE
1,000 km
On this map, you can see how the trade routes between the colonies, Great Britain, and Africa formed triangles. The triangular trade supported the economies of all three regions—though at a terrible human cost. The map shows which goods and products came from which locations.
LOCATION
From where did the American colonies receive molasses? CRITICAL THINKING
Analyzing What was the main role of Great Britain in the triangular trade?
Reading HELPDESK
The Middle Passage
The trip across the ocean was called the “Middle Passage.” This name came from the fact that it was often the middle leg of the three-part route known as the triangular trade. People called this route “triangular” because, as the ships traveled between their destinations, their paths formed the three sides of a triangle.
The Middle Passage was a terrible ordeal. Chained together for more than a month, prisoners could hardly sit or lie down in the crowded ship decks. They received little food or water. Africans who died or became sick were thrown overboard. Those who refused to eat were whipped.
Those who survived the journey faced another terror when they reached American ports—the slave market. There they were physically examined and put up for sale as laborers to plantation owners. Life Under Slavery
Some enslaved Africans on plantations did housework, but most worked in the fields. Many enslaved people suffered great cruelty. Owners of large plantations hired overseers, or bosses, to keep the enslaved Africans working hard.
triangular trade a trade route between three destinations, such as Britain, West Africa, and the West Indies
slave code rules focusing on the behavior and punishment of enslaved people
life in the American Colonies

JU
Many colonies had slave codes, rules governing the behavior and punishment of enslaved people. Some did not allow enslaved workers to leave the plantation without the slaveholders written permission. Some made it illegal to teach enslaved people to read or write. Enslaved people were seldom allowed to move about freely or gather in large groups.
Punishments ranged from whipping for even minor misdeeds to hanging or burning to death for more serious crimes. Enslaved persons who ran away were punished severely when caught.
Although enslaved Africans had strong family ties, their families were often torn apart when a slaveholder sold a spouse, parent, or child. Many of the enslaved found strength in their African roots. They developed a culture that drew on the languages, customs, and religions of their African homelands.
Some enslaved Africans learned trades, such as carpentry, blacksmithing, or weaving. Skilled workers could sometimes set up shops, sharing their profits with the slaveholders. Those lucky enough to be able to buy their freedom joined the small population of free African Americans.
Critics of Slavery
Not all colonists believed in slavery. Many Puritans, for example, refused to hold people in slavery. In Pennsylvania, Quakers and Mennonites condemned slavery. Eventually, the debate over slavery would spark a bloody war between North and South.
H READING PROGRESS CHECK
Describing What role did Africans play in the economy of the Southern Colonies?
i
■ *
/




On large plantations, the owner or a hired overseer looked on while enslaved workers worked in the fields from sunrise to sunset.
Foldables
[Study Organizer j
Include this lesson's information in your Foldable®
	-—	
	% ->l	X
ssf		X
	&	
LESSON 1 REVIEW
Review Vocabulary
1.	Define the following terms by using them in a sentence about colonial farming. 3oa; job
a. subsistence farming b. cash crop
2.	Explain the significance ofthe following terms by using each in a sentence. 3oa;3ob
a. triangular trade b. diversity c. slave code
Answer the Guiding Questions
3.	Contrasting How did the soil and climate in New England differ from the soil and climate in the Middle Colonies? How did this affect agriculture in those regions? iob;iia;29b
4.	Identifying Cause and Effect Why did the transatlantic slave trade develop? ub;2»b
EXPOSITORY WRITING
Choice is one of the characteristics ofthe U.S. free enterprise system. How did the economic decisions of farmers and manufacturers ofthe Middle Colonies exhibit choice? Explain why the freedom to make economic choices is a benefit ofthe free enterprise system, mb Lesson 1 139
AMERICA'S LITERATURE
The Interesting Narrative of the Life of Olaudah Equiano
byOlaudah Equiano
Most of what we know about Equiano comes from his
autobiography. According to his writings, Olaudah Equiano was born in Nigeria. At age 11, he was kidnapped, separated from his family, and sold into slavery.
In this excerpt, Equiano tells about his life in Nigeria and the day he was kidnapped.
AftY SOURCE
When we went to rest the following night, they offered us some victuals, but we refused it; and the only comfort we had was in being in one another’s arms all that night, and bathing each other with our tears. 99
-The Interesting Narrative of the Life of Olaudah Equiano; or, Gustavus Vassa, the African. Written by Himself.
Enslaved Africans were transported across the ocean and sold in the Americas.
PRIMARY SOURCE
Chicago History Museum/The
M
Generally, when the grown people in the neighbourhood were gone far in the fields to labour, the children assembled together in some of the neighbours' premises to play; and commonly some of us used to get up a tree to look out for any assailant, or kidnapper, that might come upon us, for they sometimes took those opportunities of our parents' absence to attack and carry off as many as they could seize.... One day, when all our people were gone out to their works as usual, and only I and my dear sister were left to mind the house, two men and a woman got over our walls, and in a moment seized us both, and, without giving us time to cry out, or make resistance, they stopped our mouths, and ran off with us into the nearest wood. Here they tied our hands, and continued to carry us as far as they could, till night came on, when we reached a small house, where the robbers halted for refreshment, and spent the night. We were then unbound, but were unable to take any food; and, being quite overpowered by fatigue and grief, our only relief was some sleep, which allayed our misfortune for a short time. The next morning we left the house, and continued travelling all the day. For a long time we had kept [to] the woods, but at last we came into a road which I believed I knew. I had now some hopes of being delivered; for we had advanced but a little way before I discovered some people at a distance, on which I began to cry out for their assistance; but my cries had no other effect than to make them tie me faster and stop my mouth, and then they put me into a large sack. They also stopped my sister's mouth, and tied her hands; and in this manner we proceeded till we were out of sight of these people. When we went to rest the following night, they offered us some victuals, but we refused it; and the only comfort we had was in being in one another's arms all that night, and bathing each other with our tears. But alas! we were soon deprived of even the small comfort of weeping together. The next day proved a day of greater sorrow than I had yet experienced, for my sister and I were then separated while we lay clasped in each other's arms. It was in vain that we besought them not to part us; she was torn from me and immediately carried away, while I was left in a state of distraction not to be described. I cried and grieved continually, and for several days I did not eat anything but what they forced into my mouth. 99
Literary Element
Point of View is the vantage point from which a story is told. This passage is told from the first-person point of view. In it, you learn the narrator's thoughts and feelings. As you read, think about how the story's point of view affects your reading experience.
Vocabulary
allay
to reduce in strength
victual
food
Kidnappers chained their captives together in pairs—right leg to left leg.
Analyzing Literature DBQ
Q
Drawing Conclusions Why is a first-person narrative of an enslaved person valuable? 29B;29D
0 Speculating What kind of person did the kidnappers target? Why do you think that might be?
0 Predicting What do you think will happen to Equiano and his sister? 29b
Lesson 1 141
* .V'^sfd|
i
j
networks
There's More Online! S( DIAGRAM
Mercantilism

Ef GAME Crossword Puzzle	( !<
Ef GRAPHIC ORGANIZER	.	>5
Principles of Government	> LGSSOil £
SELF-CHECK QUIZ
£ | 0 VIDEO	*vivi
FflI	Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills
2A Identify reasons for European exploration and colonization of North America.
A
Explain the reasons for the growth of representative government and institutions during the colonial period. 4A Analyze causes of the American Revolution, including the Proclamation of 1763, the Intolerable Acts, the Stamp Act, mercantilism, lack of representation in Parliament, and British economic policies following the French and Indian War.
15A Identify the influence of ideas from historic documents, including the Magna Carta, the English Bill of Rights, the Mayflower Compact, the Federalist Papers, and selected Anti-Federalist writings, on the U.S. system of government.
Reading HELPDESK

Taking Notes: Explaining
As you read, use a diagram like this one to explain protected rights and representative government.
Life in the American Colonies
1 ' ‘
1
Ca/^I
Ji/ / a.

Colonial Government
IAL QUESTION
How do new ideas change the way people live? It Matters because
Using ideas from England and their own experiences, American colonists began developing their beliefs about the proper form and role of government.
English Principles of Government
GUIDINGQUESTION
Why are protected rights and representative government important principles? When English colonists came to North America, they brought with them English ideas about government. These ideas had been developing in England over hundreds of years. By the 1600s, the English people had won political liberties, such as trial by jury, that were largely unknown elsewhere.
At the heart of the English system were two principles of government—protected rights and representative legislatures. These two principles greatly influenced the development of the United States and are important parts of the U.S. Constitution. Protected Rights
The colonists believed that government must respect civil liberties, or rights. In fact, the protection of people’s rights was a central idea in the English system of government. It first appeared in the Magna Carta, or Great Charter, which King John signed on June 15, 1215. This document gave English people protection against unjust treatment or punishment. For the English, even kings and queens were bound by the law.
Protected
Rights

Representative
Government
Content Vocabulary
•	representative government • import
•	mercantilism
•	export
Representative Government
The English had a tradition of representative government, in which people elect delegates to make laws and conduct government. The English Parliament was a representative assembly. It had the power to legislate, or make laws.
Parliament had two chambers, or houses: the House of Lords and the House of Commons. Only the eldest sons of England’s aristocracy—the upper, ruling class—could sit in the House of Lords. The House of Commons included commoners—mostly merchants or property owners elected by other property owners. American legislatures grew, in part, from this English model.
In the mid-1600s, Parliament and King James II began a struggle for power. In 1688, Parliament removed King James II from power and crowned William and Mary to rule. William and Mary promised to govern England according to the “statutes [laws] in Parliament agreed upon, and the laws and customs of the same.” The English called this peaceful transfer of power the Glorious Revolution. It brought a major change in the idea of government in England. From that time forward, no ruler would have more power than the legislature.
The English Bill of Rights
To set clear limits on a ruler’s powers, Parliament drew up the English Bill of Rights in 1689. The Bill of Rights stated that the ruler could not suspend Parliament’s laws, impose taxes, or raise an army without Parliament’s consent.
Members of Parliament had to be freely elected. Citizens of England had the	J i' Kf
right to a fair trial by jury in court
cases. The Bill of Rights also banned cruel and unusual	(
punishments.
Government in America
Each of the thirteen colonies
began as either a charter or a
proprietary colony. Charter
colonies were based on a
charter, a grant of rights by
the English monarch to a
company. Massachusetts was
a charter colony.

Established in 1619, the Virginia House of Burgesses was the first legislature in the English colonies. It became a foundation for the principle of self-government in colonial America and, later, the United States.
'■1\

SkrWW*1
representative government
a system by which people elect delegates to make laws and conduct government
Academic Vocabulary
suspend to set aside or temporarily stop operation of something impose to force on others
Lesson 2 143
r
In New England, town meetings were held in meeting houses like this one in Pelham, Massachusetts. Built in 1743, Pelham's Old Meeting House is the oldest town hall in continuous use in the nation.
Proprietary colonies were the property of an owner or group of owners. These proprietors ruled more or less as they wished. For example, they named their own governors and many other colonial officials. Pennsylvania was a proprietary colony.
Some colonies later became royal colonies, under direct English control. Virginia became the first royal colony in 1624. In a royal colony, Parliament appointed a governor and council, known as the upper house. The colonists selected an assembly, or lower house. The governor and
council usually did as the English king and Parliament told them. This often led to conflicts with the assembly. For example, colonists got angry when officials enforced tax or trade laws.
Not all colonists had a voice in government. In general, only white men who owned property could vote. Most women, indentured servants, landless poor, and African Americans could not vote. Still, compared to Europe, the share of the colonial population taking part in government was large. This training proved valuable when the colonies became independent.
Local Government in the Colonies
Over time, townspeople began discussing local issues at town meetings. These developed into local governments, with landowners holding the right to vote and pass laws. Because colonists in many areas took part in local government, they developed a strong belief in their right to govern themselves. Town meetings helped set the stage for the American Revolution. Q READING PROGRESS CHECK

SKILLS PRACTICE
As you read your text, notice how key vocabulary words are used in sentences. Look for pictures and captions that include these words.
Reading HELPDESK
Understanding Supporting Details In what part of the government were colonists represented in a royal colony?
English Economic Policies
GUIDINGQUESTION
How did the colonists react to England's economic policies’ Beginning in the 1600s, many European nations followed a theory known as mercantilism (MUHR.kuhn.tuh.lih.zuhm). Mercantilism holds that a country builds wealth and power by
uilding its supplies of gold and silver. To achieve this goal, a country must export, or sell to other countries, more than it
mercantilism an economic theory whose goal is building a	export to sell abroad
X“«a,a,^Zb,ina“'n’eXP",SandiaUm“lifin9	t0 ^r'ng in from foreign markets
Life in the American Colonies
imports, or buys from other countries. A country must also seek colonies, which could supply raw materials and serve as a market for exports.
The English followed a mercantilist policy. They looked to the American colonies for raw materials, such as tobacco, rice, indigo, wheat, lumber, fur, leather, fish, and whale products. They also wanted the colonists to buy English manufactured goods, such as tools, clothing, and furniture.
To control this trade, England began passing a series of laws called Navigation Acts in the 1650s. These laws forced colonists to sell their raw materials to England even if they could get a better price elsewhere. Goods bought by the colonies from other countries in Europe had to go to England first and be taxed. All trade goods had to be carried on ships built in England or the colonies. The crews on the ships had to be English as well.
Foldables
I
Study Organizer Include this lesson's information in your Foldable®
			
			
			
V %			
Many items in a colonial kitchen were tinware imported from England. Because of its silvery color, tinware was often called "poor man's silver." Although it was thought to be inferior to china or silver, tinware goods were less breakable than china and easier to clean than silverware.
Colonial Resistance
The colonists at first accepted the Navigation Acts because the laws guaranteed them a place to sell their raw materials.
Later, the colonists came to resent English restrictions With their population growing, colonists wanted to manufacture their own goods rather than import them from England. They also wanted to sell their products to buyers other than England. Colonial merchants began smuggling, or shipping goods without government permission or payment of taxes. Controls on trade would later cause conflict between the American colonies and England.
H READING PROGRESS CHECK
Making Generalizations What was the purpose of the Navigation Acts?
LESSON 2 REVIEW
Review Vocabulary
1.	Use the words import, export, and mercantilism in a paragraph about the colonies. 3oa;3od
2.	Write a sentence about the political ideas of the English colonists, using the term representative government. 3#a; 3ob
Answer the Guiding Questions
3.	Analyzing Where did the colonists get their ideas and attitudes about government? ha
4.	Explaining How did the colonists react to Britain's economic policies?
PERSUASIVE WRITING
Write a speech from the perspective of a merchant in the colonies, explaining how Britain's mercantilist policies affect your business. 4A;29D;30D
Lesson 2 145
networks
There's More Online! sf GAME Column Game
sf GRAPHIC ORGANIZER
The First Great Awakening and the Enlightenment
sf PRIMARYSOURCE
Freedom ofthe Press
sf SELF-CHECK QUIZ Sf SLIDESHOW Colonial Children Sf VIDEO

1
HHE afccfc (o qd u& ! ba oeM t the name of the jf athctl
sUe father tohichactl luen^aHotoeObetbif J<hpMn$Oonie cowl torn bee Done to earth ao f heauem^iueWth«ioapoa bjcaOnb foigiue w our I &&&$ &ce fojgttte than t w aaarnft hrfnnft frafthd
Lesson 3

TEKS
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills 3A Explain the reasons for the growth of representative government and institutions during the colonial period.
3C Describe how religion and virtue contributed to the growth of representative government in the American colonies.
19C Explain the importance of personal responsibilities, including accepting responsibility for one's behavior and supporting one's family.
23A Identify selected racial, ethnic, and religious groups that settled in the United States and explain their reasons for immigration.
23D Analyze the contributions of people of various racial, ethnic, and religious groups to our national identity.
23E Identify the political, social, and economic contributions of women to American society.
25A Trace the development of religious freedom in the United States.
25B Describe religious motivation for immigration and influence on social movements, including the impact ofthe first and second Great Awakenings.

Reading HELPDESK
«
Culture and Society
|	the
New-York Weekly

I 1	fl’r«dn»	^'1
I I
a/ Mr. S~,i, >ai M I	ro ike
| I hint, ltuOiu>«>s*»W, ux. tfM
A
New American Spirit Many Americans were born in other countries. They brought with them different languages and ways of thinking. Yet in the colonies, immigrants became something new and different—they became Americans. In 1782 French writer J. Hector St. John De Crevecoeur (krev«KUHR) described this new type of person:
L QUESTION
Howdonewideas dump* rte way people live? IT MATTERS BECAUSE
An American culture, influenced by religion and education, began to develop in the colonies.
Life in the Colonies
guidingquestion What was life like for people living in the thirteen colonies?
The number of people living in the thirteen colonies rose from about 250,000 in 1700 to approximately 2.5 million hv the mid-1770s. The population of persons of African descent increased at an even faster rate—from about 28,000 to more than 500,000.
Immigration (im»ih»GRAY»shuhn)—the permanent moving of people into one country from other countries—was important to this growth. Between 1607 and 1775, an estimated 690,000 Europeans came to the colonies. Also during this time, traders brought in 278,000 enslaved Africans to the colonies.
There was another reason for the growing population. Colonial women tended to marry early and have large families. In addition, the colonies—especially New England—turned out to be a very healthy place to live compared to other parts of the world.
Still, compared to today, life was fragile. For example, women often died in childbirth. Outbreaks of serious diseases such as smallpox were common. Many people died in epidemics (eh.puh.DEH.mihks), outbreaks that affect large numbers of people. In 1721, for example, a smallpox epidemic in the city of Boston killed about 850 people, or 15 percent ofthe city’s population.
Taking Notes: Identifying Cause and Effect
As you read, use a diagram like this one to explain how the First Great Awakening and the Enlightenment affected the colonists.
146 Life in the American Colonies
First Great Awakening

The |_K Enlightenment I—|/X
Content Vocabulary _____
•immigration • civic virtue
•	epidemic
•	apprentice
PRIMARYSOURCE
« He is an American, who, leaving behind him all his ancient prejudices and manners, receives new ones from the new mode of life he has embraced, the new government he obeys, and the new rank he holds....
Here individuals of all races are melted into a new race of man, whose labors and posterity will one day cause great changes in the world.»
—from Letters from an American Farmer
A spirit of independence developed early in the history of the American people. Far from the rules and limits of their home countries, settlers began to develop their own ways of doing things. Throughout the colonies, people adapted their traditions to the new conditions of life.
Religion, education, and the arts contributed to a new American culture. The family, however, formed the basic foundation of colonial society—for those who were not enslaved, at least.
Family Roles
Men were the formal heads of the households. They managed the farm or business and represented the family in the community. On the farm, men worked in the fields and built barns, houses, and fences. Sons might work as indentured servants for local farmers or become apprentices. An apprentice (uh«PREHN«tuhs) agrees to work with a skilled craftsperson as a way of learning a trade.
Women ran their households and cared for children. Many l worked in the fields with their husbands. Married women had 1 few rights. Unmarried women might work as maids or cooks.
immigration the permanent movement of people into one country from other nations epidemic an illness that affects large numbers of people
apprentice a young person who learns a trade from a skilled craftsperson
In 1721 Boston clergyman Cotton Mather suggested a daring answer to smallpox—inoculation, or injecting smallpox virus into healthy people. Often, inoculation causes only mild disease and leaves the body protected from illness in the future.
In 1796, Edward Jenner, shown inoculating a child, developed a safer smallpox vaccine.
Academic Vocabulary
adapt to change in response to a new set of conditions
Lesson 3 147
II
Connections to
TODAY
Colleges and Universities
Several colleges and universities founded in colonial times are still educating students today. For example, Harvard University in Massachusetts got its start in 1636 as a school for training ministers. Next came Virginia’s College of William and Mary, founded in 1693. Yale University in Connecticut started as a school in 1701. The University of Pennsylvania in Philadelphia began as a charity school in 1740.

Widows and older women who had never married might work as teachers, nurses, or seamstresses. They could run businesses and own property, but they could not vote.
Even children as young as four or five often had jobs. When they played, they enjoyed simple games, such as hopscotch or leap frog. Their toys were usually made from common objects.
Q READING PROGRESS CHECK
A hornbook, made of a wooden paddle with lessons tacked onto it, helped young students learn to read.
Reading HELPDESK
Describing Describe two common health risks faced by colonists in America.
American Beliefs
guidingquestion What values and beliefs were important to the American colonists?
The American spirit and the family served as foundations for life in the colonies. In addition, Americans shared a commitment to education, strong religious beliefs, and openness to new ideas.
Colonial Education
Most colonists valued education. Parents often taught their children to read and write at home. In New England and Pennsylvania, in particular, people set up schools to make sure everyone could read and study the Bible. In 1647 the Massachusetts Puritans passed a public education law requiring communities with 50 or more families to have a public school.
The result was a high level of literacy in New England. By 1750, about 85 percent of the men and about half of the women were able to read. Many learned from The New England Primer.
Most schools in the Middle Colonies were private. Widows or unmarried women ran many of those schools. Quakers
and other religious groups ran others. In towns and cities, craftspeople often set up night schools for their apprentices. The earliest colleges were founded to train ministers.
The First Great Awakening
Religion had a strong influence in colonial life. In the 1730s and 1740s, a religious revival called the First Great Awakening swept through the colonies. In New England and the Middle Colonies, ministers called for “a new birth,” a return to the strong faith of earlier days. One such minister was Jonathan Edwards of
Reading in the Content Area: Percentages
”zs	XT* r"7"™as a	“<
would be 120. Percentages akrwforea^ytomp^dsonofd^fferenuumbe^.^'^0'1^
Life in the American Colonies
G.
Mayer/CORBIS Massachusetts, who gave powerful sermons. George Whitefield, an English preacher who arrived in the colonies in 1738, inspired worshipers in churches and open fields from Georgia to New England.
The Great Awakening inspired greater religious freedom. It led to the formation of many new types of churches. The new churches placed an emphasis on having personal faith rather than on church rituals. More colonists began choosing their own faiths, and the strength of established official churches declined. As a Baptist preacher noted, “The common people now claim as good a right to judge and act in matters of religion as civil rulers or the learned clergy.” This independence of thought encouraged the belief that colonists had the ability and the right to make their own decisions in government matters as well.
The Great Awakening also united colonists from north to south in a common experience. The colonists overcame regional barriers, which helped pave the way for the rapid spread of revolutionary ideas and excitement during the
struggle for independence.
The Enlightenment
By the middle of the 1700s, many educated colonists were also influenced by the Enlightenment. This movement, which began in Europe, spread the idea that knowledge, reason, and science could improve society.
In the colonies, the Enlightenment increased interest in science. People observed nature, staged experiments, and published their findings, much as Benjamin Franklin did.
The Enlightenment also promoted freedom of thought and expression, a belief in equality, and the idea of popular government.
Ideas of Freedom
Freedom of the press became an important issue in colonial America. Newspapers in colonial cities, such as Boston and Philadelphia, carried political news and often faced government censorship. Censorship is the banning of printed materials because they contain unpopular or offensive ideas.
Ministers such as George Whitefield (shown below) and Jonathan Edwards swayed crowds with their vivid, emotional style of preaching.
SKILLS PRACTICE
Academic Vocabulary
emphasis a special stress or indication of importance
Keep a list of connecting words. Look at it when you are speaking and want to put connected ideas into one sentence.
Lesson 3 149
CHAPTER?
Place and Time: Revolutionary America 1776to178J
After a period of growing tension, the American colonies rebelled against the British. Soon, Patriot soldiers were fighting against British redcoats up and down the East Coast as well as in the 1/1/esf. The map on the next page shows many of the major battles of the Revolutionary War.
1776 Nathan Hale (standing, left) wasan officer of the Continental Army, but his greatest contribution was as a spy-and as a symbol of the Patriotspiritc freedom. Captured by the British during a mission and sentenced to die, Hale is said to have declared, "I only regret that I have but one life to lose for my country.

Step Into the Place
MAP FOCUS
This map shows some of the major battles fought during the American Revolution. PLACE
Which two battles were fought in New Jersey? 29C LOCATION
Which was the southernmost battle? 29C 3	;..
Identifying Where did most of the battles in the Revolutionary War take place?
networks sf MAP Explore the interactive version of
There s More Online!	this map on
NETWORKS.
TIME LINE
Explore the interactive version of this time line on NETWORKS. I 1 Original 13 Colonies | $ Major battle
7O"W

1780 British forces capture Charles Town, South Carolina
1781 British surrender at Yorktown
1782 Spain completes conquest of Florida
1783 Treaty of Paris is signed

networks
There's More Online!
Ef BIOGRAPHY Peter Salem j Ef CHART The Fighting Fortes
GRAPHIC ORGANIZER
'» Early Battles
i	eT	MAP The Revolutionary War,
;	1776-1777
ST PRIMARY SOURCE
The Battle I	of Trenton
Sf	SELF-CHECK QUIZ
Ef SLIDESHOW Women of the Revolution
Ef video

The War for Independence
TIAL QUESTION
Whydoesconflictdewlop? 9
TEIB
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills 4B Explain the roles played by significant individuals during the American Revolution, including Abigail Adams, John Adams, Wentworth Cheswell, Samuel Adams, Mercy Otis Warren, James Armistead, Benjamin Franklin, Bernardo de Galvez, Crispus Attucks, King George III, Haym Salomon, Patrick Henry, Thomas Jefferson, the Marquis de Lafayette, Thomas Paine, and George Washington.
4C Explain the issues surrounding important events of the American Revolution, including declaring independence; writing the Articles of Confederation; fighting the battles of Lexington, Concord, Saratoga, and Yorktown; enduring the winter at Valley Forge; and signing the Treaty of Paris of 1783.
17A Analyze the arguments of the Federalists and Anti-Federalists, including those of Alexander Hamilton, Patrick Henry, James Madison, and George Mason.
23D Analyze the contributions of people of various racial, ethnic, and religious groups to our national identity.
23E Identify the political, social, and economic contributions of women to American society.
29D Identify points of view from the historical context surrounding an event and the frame of reference which influenced the participants.
Reading HELPDESK
IT MATTERS BECAUSE
The Patriots used skill, cunning, and determination to survive early defeats and win a key victory at Saratoga.
The Two Armies Face Off
guidingquestion Who were the opposing sides in the American Revolution?
In April 1776, colonial leader John Adams predicted, “Weshall have a long ... and bloody war to go through.” Few people agreed with him. Each side thought they would win the war quickly. The British planned to crush the colonists by force. Most Patriots—Americans who supported independence-believed the British would give up after losing one or two major battles.
British Advantages
As the war began, the British seemed to have a big advantage. They had the strongest navy in the world. The British also had a well-trained army. They were supported by the wealth of their empire. Great Britain also had more people. More than 8 million people lived in Britain. There were only 2.5 million Americans.
The Patriots did not seem to be a match for the British. They had no regular army and a weak navy. American soldiers also lacked experience and weapons for fighting. Much of the Patriot military force was in the form of militia groups. These
volunteer soldiers fought only for short periods of time and then returned home.
£§
In addition, not all Americans supported the struggle for independence. Some Americans remained loyal to Britain.
Others, such as the Quakers, were neutral. They would not take part in the war because they opposed all armed conflict.
Loyalists in the Colonies
At least one in five Americans was thought to be a “Loyalist” or “Tory.” The number may have been as high as one in three. These Americans remained loyal to Britain and opposed independence. Some Americans changed sides during the war. Loyalist support also varied from region to region. In general, support for Britain was strongest in the Carolinas and Georgia and weakest in New England.
Loyalists had reasons to support Britain. Some depended on the British for their jobs. Some feared the Revolution would throw America into chaos. Others simply could not understand why the colonies wanted independence. For them, Patriot complaints seemed minor and not worth fighting over.
The British actively sought the support of African Americans. Virginia’s royal governor, Lord Dunmore, promised freedom to those African Americans who joined the British cause. Many men answered his call. Eventually, some of them ended up free in Canada. Others settled in the British colony of Sierra Leone in Africa.
Loyalty to Britain divided friends and family. For example, William Franklin, son of Patriot Benjamin Franklin, was a Loyalist who had served as a royal governor of New Jersey. This disagreement caused lasting damage to their relationship. As one Connecticut man observed: “Neighbor [was] ... against
neighbor, father against son and son against
father, and he that would not thrust his own
blade through his brother’s heart was called
an infamous villain.”
Advantages of the Patriots
The Patriots did hold some advantages. They
were fighting on their own ground. The
British, on the other hand, had to fight from
thousands of miles across the Atlantic Ocean.
It took time and money to ship soldiers
and supplies.
-Thinkinq Like a —
HISTORIAN
Drawing Inferences and Conclusions
Made in the 1750s, the Liberty Bell hung in the Pennsylvania State House (now Independence Hall).
Legend has it that on July 8,1776, the bell’s ringing announced the first public reading of the Declaration of Independence. The Liberty Bell also rang every Fourth of July and for many public events until a crack appeared in about 1846. Today, the Liberty Bell stands as a symbol of freedom. Why do you think such symbols are important to the people of a country?
The Continental Army was made up mostly of inexperienced soldiers.


Taking Notes: Categorizing
Use a diagram like this one to list the
Patriot defeats and victories during the early years of the American Revolution. 194 The American Revolution
Content Vocabulary
•	mercenary
•	recruit
Build Vocabulary: Word Parts
The suffix -ist means "one who is." Adding this suffix to an adjective creates a noun. Adding -ist to the word loyal makes the word loyalist—one who is loyal. During the Revolution,
X,
Lesson 1 195
During the Revolutionary War, women could not officially join the army. A few managed to fight in disguise. Many more served as cooks, nurses, or even spies.
Today, about 400,000 women serve in the American armed forces, reserves, and National Guard.
V- CRITICAL THINKING
Comparing How have attitudes about women in the military changed since the 1770s?
Reading HELPDESK
The Patriot soldier also had greater motivation, or sense of purpose. The British relied on mercenaries (MUHR.suh. nehr.eez), or hired soldiers, to fight for them. The Americans called these mercenaries “Hessians” (HEH.shuhnz) after the region in Germany from which most of them came. The Patriots fought for the freedom of their own land. This gave them a greater stake in the war’s outcome than soldiers who fought for money. The Americans also lured the Hessians away with promises of land.
The Patriots’ greatest advantage was probably their leader, George Washington. Few could match him for courage and determination. The war might have taken a different turn without Washington.
The Continental Army
After the Declaration of Independence, the Continental Congress served as the national government. However, the Congress lacked the power to raise money through taxes. Delegates led by James Madison of Virginia called for a stronger national government to bind the colonies together. They believed that winning independence was possible only under a strong national government.
Not every American agreed. They placed great value on liberty and personal freedom. After rejecting the rule of the British Parliament, they were unwilling to transfer power to their own Continental Congress. As a result, the American Revolution was in some ways 13 separate wars, with each state fighting for its own interests. This made it hard for the Congress to get soldiers and raise money.
Local militia made up a key part of the Patriot forces. These troops were limited. Many were farmers who needed to provide for their families and did not want to leave their fields unattended. The Patriots also needed well-trained soldiers who could fight the British throughout the colonies. To meet this need, the Congress established the Continental Army, which depended on the states to recruit (ree.KROOT) soldiers.
At first, soldiers signed up for just one year, but General Washington asked for longer terms. “If we ever hope for success, he said, we must have men enlisted for the whole term of the war. Eventually, the Continental Congress invited soldiers to sign up for three years or until the war ended. Most soldiers, however, still signed up for only one year.

Academic Vocabulary
mercenary a hired soldier recruit to enlist in the military
transfer to move previous earlier
The American Revolution


The Revolutionary War 1776-1777
-V
QUEBEC

^Montreal
ss.
, 4/

like r. -V-; , Champlairfr '-X' . 'FtStanwix, r 1 1777	vmmu
Oriskany, 7J
..’T.A -r ’»	; j
> /... . . ....
*1
IL,/'...? a,.......'
R.l.
v York City iceton
hia
W*
100 miles
ATLANTIC OCEAN
A—
0	100 km
Albers Equal-Area projection
’ 75°W
40°N
$ American victory $ British victory
$ British capture New York City, 1776
& Americans attack Trenton n and Princeton, 1776-1777
K
Howe captures Philadelphia, 1777 Burgoyne surrenders at Saratoga, 1777 70°W


lllil

The Continental Army also had a hard time finding officers— qualified military commanders. Some were young men who were recruited from the ranks. The best officers had experience from previous, or earlier, wars.
Men did all the fighting—with a few exceptions. For example, Margaret Corbin of Pennsylvania went with her husband when he joined the Continental Army. After he died in battle, she took his place. Mary Ludwig Hays McCauley joined her husband in battle as well. The soldiers called her “Moll of the Pitcher,” or “Molly Pitcher,” because she carried water pitchers to the soldiers. Legend has it she also took part in combat. On February 21, 1822, Pennsylvania recognized Molly Pitcher’s service by granting her an annual payment of $40. Deborah Sampson of Massachusetts took a different route to the battlefield. She joined up as a soldier by disguising herself as a man.
H READING PROGRESS CHECK
Summarizing What disadvantages did the Patriots face in fighting the British?
GEOGRAPHY CONNECTION
Early in the Revolutionary War, the British and the Patriots each won some battles.
LOCATION
In what area were most battles on this map fought? CRITICAL THINKING
Sequencing According to this map, which British victory occurred just before the Battle of Saratoga?
Lesson 1 197
r
Early Campaigns
guidingquestion What were significant battles in the early years of the American Revolution?
Relatively few soldiers fought in the war s early battles. At Bunker Hill, for example, about 2,200 British soldiers fought 1,200 Americans. The British had not yet won a clear victory. They realized they were going to need more troops.
During the summer of 1776, Britain sent 32,000 troops across the Atlantic to New York. The British commander, General William Howe, hoped the sheer size of his army would convince the Patriots to give up. He was soon disappointed.
CRITICAL THINKING
Using Math Skills What is the approximate ratio of British army forces to the Continental Army and colonial militias?
Reading HELPDESK
THE FIGHTING FORCES
1777 British regular army
Continental Army and colonial militias
Patriot Defeat on Long Island
Only 20,000 soldiers made up the Patriot force under George Washington. Yet the Americans were determined to fight. The two sides clashed in the Battle of Long Island in late August 1776. The British badly defeated the outnumbered Continental Army.
One Patriot, Nathan Hale, showed his bravery at Long Island. Hale disguised himself as a Dutch schoolteacher and went to spy on British troops. The British caught Hale and hanged him as punishment. According to legend, Hale went to his death
saying, “I only regret that I have but one life to lose for my country.”
The Patriots fought hard on Long Island but could not overcome the larger and better-equipped British army.
A
British officer wrote that many Patriot soldiers killed on Long Island had not been wearing shoes, socks, or jackets. “They are also in great want of blankets,” he said, predicting that the rebels would suffer during the winter. After the defeat, Washington retreated from New York, which became a Loyalist stronghold. The British chased the Continental Army across New jersey into Pennsylvania. Satisfied that Washington was beaten, the British let him go.
A
Low Point for the Patriots Washington and his forces had managed to escape the British. As winter approached, however, the Patriots’ cause was near collapse The Continental Army had fewer than 5,000 soldiers. Many had completed their terms. Others had run away.



Reading in the Content Area: Circle Graphs____________________________
Circle, or pie, graphs show how a whole is divided into parts. In the case ofthe graph above, the "whole" is fighting forces in the Revolutionary War. Often, circle graphs visually show how the whole is divided. They often have numbers and labels, as well. 198 The American Revolution
Enslaved African American Peter Salem appears in the far right of this painting ofthe Battle of Bunker Hill.
i
i
Washington begged the Continental Congress for more troops. He suggested allowing free African Americans to enlist, but many Americans opposed this idea. Early in the war, the Southern Colonies had persuaded the Congress not to take this step. Many white people in the South worried about giving guns and training to African Americans. They feared the possibility of revolt among the enslaved population.

African Americans in Battle
The growing need for soldiers led some states to ignore the ban on African Americans. Rhode Island raised an all-African American regiment in 1778. By the war’s end, every state except South Carolina enlisted African Americans to fight.
Historians believe that as many as 5,000 African Americans joined the Patriots. One example was Peter Salem, an enslaved African American from Massachusetts. Salem fought at Concord and at the Battle of Bunker Hill and served the Patriot cause throughout the war. In return for his service, Salem won his freedom. Another Massachusetts Patriot, Wentworth Cheswell, was a free African American. Like Paul Revere, Cheswell made a midnight ride on horseback to warn local residents that British soldiers were coming. He later fought heroically in the Battle of Saratoga.
African Americans had many reasons to fight. Some fought 5 because they believed in the Patriot cause of freedom and liberty, j Others may have joined up for the chance to earn money. Some I were enslaved Africans who had run away or who, like Salem, were « allowed by their slaveholders to enlist.
Lesson 1 199
I
r
* ,
Washington's forces made a daring crossing of the icy Delaware River, surprising the enemy at Trenton and delivering a key Patriot victory.
The Battles of Trenton and Princeton
While the Patriots were struggling through the winter, the main British force was settled in New York. The British also left some troops in Princeton and Trenton, New Jersey. Washington saw a chance to catch the British by surprise.
Washington was camped in Pennsylvania, across the Delaware River from the British camp in New Jersey. On Christmas night 1776, Washington led 2,400 troops across the icy river to surprise the enemy at Trenton the next day. Washington then escaped and marched to Princeton; his army scattered the British force there.
a READING PROGRESS CHECK
Explaining Why was the winter of 1776-1777 significant?
British Strategy
guiding question Was the British plan for victory successful?
Reading HELPDESK
In early 1777, the British began a three-pronged battle plan. Their goal was to seize Albany, New York, and gain control ot te Hudson River. If they controlled the Hudson, they would cuto New England from the Middle Colonies.
Build Vocabulary: Multiple Meaning Words	SKILLS PRACTICE
Some words have more than one meaning. Late most commonly means "not on time." It can also mean "recent/
Work with a partner. Have your partner ask you to do things and practice doing what your partner asks. Take turns.
200 The American Revolution
First, General John Burgoyne would lead troops south from Canada. At the same time, Lieutenant Colonel Barry St. Leger would move east from Lake Ontario. A third group, under General Howe, would move north up the Hudson. The three British forces would then attack Patriot troops at Albany.
The British Capture Philadelphia
Before the attack on Albany, Howe sought to capture
Philadelphia—the home of the Continental Congress. Howe won battles in September 1777 at Brandywine and Paoli, near Philadelphia. Then Howe’s troops captured Philadelphia, forcing the Continental Congress to flee. By now, winter was coming. Howe decided to stay in Philadelphia instead of going to Albany. The Battle of Saratoga
Meanwhile, the British plan for taking Albany was in trouble. In August, American soldiers led by Benedict Arnold stopped St. Leger at Fort Stanwix, New York.
General Burgoyne’s army had not reached Albany either. In July he captured Fort Ticonderoga, but he needed supplies. He sent a force to the American supply base at Bennington, Vermont. A local militia group, the Green Mountain Boys, defeated them. Burgoyne retreated to Saratoga, New York.
Here Burgoyne found himself in serious trouble—and alone. Patriots had stopped St. Leger at Fort Stanwix. Howe was still in Philadelphia. Now American troops under General Horatio Gates blocked and surrounded Burgoyne’s army. Burgoyne made a desperate attack on October 7. The Patriots held firm.
On October 17, 1777, General Burgoyne surrendered. The British plan had failed. The Continental Army had won an enormous victory that changed the course of the war.
H READING PROGRESS CHECK
Analyzing Why did Howe's Philadelphia victory lead to defeat at Saratoga?
Include this lesson's information in your Foldable®.
c .The American Revolution
o Beginning (1776-1777)	,
0 Middle (1778-1779)_________
o Ending (1780-1783)
LESSON 1 REVIEW -
Review Vocabulary
1.	Use each of the following words in a sentence that
demonstrates its meaning. 3oa; 3ob	4,
a. mercenary b. recruit
Answer the Guiding Questions
2.	Contrasting How did the two sides in the American Revolution differ? 29B
Summarizing How did the Continental Army fare in the early battles of the war? 29b
Explaining What key factors led to the American victory at Saratoga?«
NARRATIVE WRITING
As a Patriot, write a letter to the editor of your local newspaper. Point out the Patriot strengths and why you think the Patriots will win the war for independence. 290300 Lesson 1 201
1TEKS Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills
4B Explain the roles played by significant individuals during the American Revolution, including Abigail Adams, John Adams, Wentworth CheswelI, Samuel Adams, Mercy Otis Warren, James Armistead, Benjamin Franklin, Bernardo de Galvez, Crispus Attucks, King George III, Haym Salomon, Patrick Henry, Thomas Jefferson, the Marquis de Lafayette, Thomas Paine, and George Washington.
4C Explain the issues surrounding important events of the American Revolution, including declaring independence; writing the Articles of Confederation; fighting the battles of Lexington, Concord, Saratoga, and Yorktown; enduring the winter at Valley Forge; and signing the Treaty of Paris of 1783.
7C Analyze the impact of slavery on different sections of the United States.
23D Analyze the contributions of people of various racial, ethnic, and religious groups to our national identity.
23E Identify the political, social, and economic contributions of women to American society.
IT MATTERS BECAUSE
The ideals of liberty and freedom helped attract key support and helped the colonists overcome difficult challenges.
Gaining Allies
guiding question How did America gain allies?
By late 1777, Benjamin Franklin had been in France lor a year. He was trying to get the French to support the Americans’ fight for independence. With his skill and charm, Franklin gained many friends for the United States. The French had secretly given the Americans money, but they had not entered the war.
The Continental Congress sent Jonathan Austin of Boston to France to deliver the news of the American victory at Saratoga. As soon as Austin arrived, Franklin asked if the British had taken Philadelphia. Austin answered, “Yes sir. . . . But sir, I have greater news than that. General Burgoyne and his whole army are prisoners of war!”
Franklin surely understood the importance of this news. The victory at Saratoga was a turning point in the American Revolution. France and other nations now realized that the Americans might actually win their war against Great Britain. France decided to help the Americans. In February 1778, France declared war on Britain and sent money, equipment, and troops to aid the American Patriots.
II
Reading HELPDESK
Taking Notes; Identifying
Use a diagram like the one here to determine what aid the Patriots received during the American Revolution.
202 The American Revolution
Sources of Aid to the Patriots
E=3
z
Content Vocabulary • inflation
Academic VocabujjS.
aid to help
desert to leave without permission

\

Like France, Spain also decided to help the Americans. Spain did not form an alliance with the United States, but it did declare war on Great Britain in 1779. Spanish forces fought the British in present-day Louisiana, Mississippi, Alabama, and Florida. This fighting kept many British troops out of action against the Americans.
Winter at Valley Forge
In 1778 news traveled slowly across the Atlantic. People in the United States did not learn of the French-American alliance until the spring. Meanwhile, British general Howe and his forces spent the winter in comfort in Philadelphia. Washington set up camp at Valley Forge, about 20 miles (32 km) to the west. There, Washington and his troops suffered through a terrible winter. They lacked decent food, clothing, shelter, and medicine. Washington’s greatest challenge at Valley Forge was keeping the Continental Army together.
Snowstorms and damaged roads slowed delivery of supplies. The Continental Army built huts and gathered supplies from the countryside. Several volunteers—including Washington’s wife, Martha—made clothes for the troops and cared for the sick.
| Washington declared that no army had ever put up with “such I uncommon hardships” with such spirit. “Naked and starving as I they are,” he wrote, “we cannot enough admire the incomparable i patience and fidelity [faithfulness] of the soldiery.”
Benjamin Franklin served as America’s first ambassador to France. French nobles and thinkers greatly admired the American. Much like a singer or actor today, Franklin became a star in America and Europe. Fashionable women even wore a hairstyle meant to look like a fur cap Franklin wore. How might Franklin’s popularity have helped the Patriot cause?
Martha Washington, shown here on the arm of George Washington, helped lift the spirits of the army during the bitter winter at Valley Forge.
c

SKILLS PRACTICE______________
Use a concept map to help you understand new vocabulary. Write a vocabulary word in the center circle, and write details and ideas about the word in the surrounding circles.
Reading HELPDESK

Academic Vocabulary____________
desert to leave without permission or intent to come back
204 The American Revolution
Washington and the Continental Army lived through a terrible winter at Valley Forge.
CRITICAL THINKING
Identifying Cause and Effect
How did the difficult winter at Valley Forge affect the Continental Army?
Joseph Martin, a young soldier from Connecticut, spent the winter at Valley Forge. “We had hard duty to perform,” he wrote years later, “and little or no strength to perform it with.” Most ofthe men lacked blankets, shoes, and shirts. Martin made a pair of rough shoes for himself out of a scrap of cowhide, which hurt his feet.
PRIMARY SOURCE
M [T]he only alternative I had, was to endure this inconvenience or to go barefoot, as hundreds of my companions had to, till they might be tracked by their blood upon the rough frozen ground. 99
—Joseph Martin, in A Narrative of a Revolutionary Soldi^
ivitiuy soiaiers oecame sick and died. Other men deserted (duh«ZERT»ed), or left without permission. Some officers quit. The Continental Army seemed to be falling apart.
Yet the Continental Army did survive the winter. Spring came, and conditions gradually improved. New soldiers joined the ranks. The army grows stronger every day,” one officer
wrote. There is a spirit of discipline among the troops that is better than numbers.”
Then, in April 1778, Washington told his troops of Frances help. Everyone’s spirits rose at the thought. The Continental Army celebrated with a religious service and a parade.
.
Build Vocabulary: Related Words_________________________
Some words sound the same despite different spellings and
meanings. Still, aid and aide have related meanings. The word aide
is a noun meaning "helper." The Academic Vocabulary aid is a verb meaning "to help."
Foreigners Help on the Battlefield
The Patriot cause had supporters around the world. A number of individuals from other nations gave their talents to the cause.
One leader at Valley Forge was the Marquis de Lafayette (lah*fee»EHT) of France. He had come to the United States as a 19-year-old volunteer in June 1777. Lafayette was excited about the ideas expressed in the Declaration of Independence, and he wanted to join the battle for freedom. He believed that the American cause represented the future of humankind.
When he reached the United States, Lafayette offered his services to General Washington. He agreed to serve without pay and became a trusted aide to Washington.
Other Europeans volunteered to work for the Patriot cause. Two Polish men—Thaddeus Kosciuszko (kawsh«CHUSH«KOH) and Casimir Pulaski (poo*LAHS»kee)—supported American efforts. Kosciuszko helped build important defenses for the Americans. Pulaski won promotion to the rank of general. He died in 1779, fighting for the Continental Army.
Friedrich von Steuben (vahn STOO«buhn) also came to help Washington. Von Steuben had been an officer in the Prussian army. He helped to train the Patriot troops at Valley Forge and shape the ragged Continental Army into a more effective fighting force.
In 1778 Spaniard Juan de Miralles (mee*RAH*yays) arrived in Philadelphia. He had persuaded Spain, Cuba, and Mexico to send money to the United States. Miralles became friends with many Patriot leaders and lent money to the cause.
Europeans who had recently moved to the United States also joined the Patriot cause. For example, almost two-thirds of the soldiers in Pennsylvania regiments were foreign-born.
Even with the help of foreign nations and individuals, the Patriots faced a huge challenge. The Continental Army still needed large amounts of money to fight the war and defeat the British.
OPROGRESS CHECK
Explaining How did Lafayette help the Patriot cause?
Thaddeus Kosciuszko of Poland was a big contributor to the Patriot cause.
Baron von Steuben trained American recruits at Valley Forge, 1778.


X

/'
z
,.X'



Life on the Home Front
guidingquestion What was life like on the home front during the American Revolution?
The war changed the lives of all Americans, even those who stayed at home. For example, wives of soldiers had to take care of families by themselves. They had to run a farm or a business without a husband’s help. Children had to make do without a father present.

»//>r(Sr?
eifa
T* <6*m/JT.rt <yv r /«/»	■

During the war, Congress and the states printed paper money. Over time, people came to question the value of this paper money, and the amounts required to make purchases rose.
CRITICAL THINKING
Identifying Cause and Effect What happened when people began to question the value of the paper money?
Problems in the Economy
Raising funds to pay for the war was a great challenge. The Continental Congress had no power to tax. The Congress did get some money from the states and borrowed money from friendly countries such as France, Spain, and Holland. Wealthy Patriots such as Haym Salomon and Robert Morris also lent large sums of money to the war effort. Yet these amounts fell far short of the need.
To meet this need, the Congress and the states simply printed hundreds of millions of dollars’ worth of paper money. The paper money quickly lost its value. The face value of bills was greater than the supply of gold and silver backing them. This led to inflation (in«FLAY»shun), which means that it took more and more money to buy the same amount of goods. People began to have doubts about how much their paper bills were worth. Congress stopped printing paper money because no one would use it. This left the Americans with no way to finance their fight for independence.
New Ways of Thinking
The ideals of liberty and freedom inspired the American Revolution. These same ideals also caused some women to question their role in American society.
Abigail Adams was one example. In 1776 she wrote a letter to her husband, John Adams, a member of Congress, arguing for women’s rights:
____-
—	6.^'ZZ'Z
PRIMARY SOURCE
W
If particular care and attention is not paid to the ladies we are determined to foment a rebellion, and will not hold ourselves bound by any laws in which we have no voice, or representation. 99 Reading HELPDESK
inflation when it takes more and more money to buy the same amount of goods
—from Familiar Letters of John Adams and His Wife Abi9®
During the Revolution, t
Academic Vocabulary
issue a subject that people
have different views about
[6 The American Revolution
Questioning Slavery
The revolutionary quest for freedom and liberty led some white Americans to question slavery. In 1778 Governor William Livingston of New Jersey asked his government to free all enslaved people. He said slavery was “utterly inconsistent with the principles of Christianity and humanity.”
African Americans made similar arguments. In New Hampshire, enslaved people asked the government for their freedom so “that the name of slave may not be heard in a land gloriously contending for the sweets of freedom.”
As you have read, African Americans fought for the American cause and hoped the Revolution would help end slavery. The Pennsylvania legislature in 1780 adopted a plan to gradually free enslaved people—the first legislature in the world to take such action against slavery. Other Northern states soon took similar measures. Still, the issue of slavery would remain unsettled for many years.
Treatment of Loyalists
Not all Americans supported the Patriot cause. During the war, thousands of Loyalists fought on the side of the British. Some Loyalists spied on the Patriots. Many Loyalists fled, packing their belongings and selling whatever they could.
Some left hurriedly for England. Others took off for Spanish-owned Florida.
Known Loyalists who remained in the United States faced difficult times. Their neighbors often shunned them. Some became victims of violence. Loyalists who actively helped the British faced arrest. In a few rare cases, Patriots executed Loyalists.
H READING PROGRESS CHECK
1 Describing How were Loyalists treated by the Patriots during the war?
BIOGRAPHY
Abigail Adams (1744-1818)
Abigail Adams was the wife of John Adams, delegate to the Continental Congress. She had a dose relationship with her husband, and the two wrote often about the political issues of the day. Abigail Adams famously argued for women's rights in a letter to her husband, telling him, "If [particular] care and attention is not paid to the Ladies we are determined to [start] a [rebellion], and will not hold ourselves bound by any Laws in which we have no voice, or Representation."
L
1
CRITICAL THINKING
Analyzing Primary Sources What complaint is Abigail Adams making about the treatment of women? Include this lesson's information in your Foldable®.
, The American Revolution
0 Beginning (1776-1777)......
0 Middle (1778-1779)_________
o Ending (1780-1783)
LESSON 2 REVIEW -
<1
Review Vocabulary
1.	Explain the significance of the following terms from this lesson. 3oa
a. desert b. inflation
Answer the Guiding Questions
2.	Identifying Who were the key European allies of the Patriots?
3.	Explaining On what basis did Abigail Adams suggest women might not hold themselves bound by laws? 4B
DESCRIPTIVE WRITING
Take the perspective of a foreign soldier volunteering to serve in the United States in the fight against the British. Write a letter to family back home explaining why you have decided to risk your life in this cause. 290300 Lesson 2 207
-'?• .n
S'	«
netw®rks	*'
There's More Online!
& BIOGRAPHY	*
John Paul Jones
Ef chart/graph
Native American Alliances
GRAPHIC ORGANIZER
British Defeats in the South
■ : Ef MAP Revolutionary War in the
West and South
Sf PRIMARYSOURCE
Political Cartoons
Bf SELF-CHECK QUIZ Ef timeline
Bernardo de Galvez
Ef video
FSB_______Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills
4C Explain the issues surrounding important events of the American Revolution, including declaring independence; writing the Articles of Confederation; fighting the battles of Lexington, Concord, Saratoga, and Yorktown; enduring the winter at Valley Forge; and signing the Treaty of Paris of 1783.
22B Describe the contributions of significant political, social, and military leaders of the United States such as Frederick Douglass, John Paul Jones, James Monroe, Stonewall Jackson, Susan B. Anthony, and Elizabeth Cady Stanton. 29D Identify points of view from the historical context surrounding an event and the frame of reference which influenced the participants.
Reading HELPDESK

&

Lesson 3
Battlegrounds Shift
L QUESTION
WhydoescoiriHctdevelop? It Matters Because
Important battles of the War for Independence took place along the western frontier, at sea, and in the South.
Fighting in the West
guiding question How did the war in the West develop?
The Revolutionary War was of great interest to many Native American groups living in and around the 13 states. Some Native Americans helped the Patriots. More sided with the British. For them, the British seemed less of a threat than the Americans, who lived in their midst and took their land.
West of the Appalachian Mountains, the British and their Native American allies raided American settlements. Mohawk war chief Joseph Brant led a number of brutal attacks in southwestern New York and northern Pennsylvania. Farther west, Henry Hamilton, the British commander at Detroit, paid Native Americans for settlers’ scalps. This practice earned him the nickname, the “hair buyer.”
Virginia militia leader George Rogers Clark set out to end attacks in the West. In July 1778, Clark led a force of 175 westward down the Ohio River and over land. The Patriots captured a British post at Kaskaskia (ka.SKAS.kee.uh) in present-day Illinois. They then took the British town of Vincennes (vin.SEHNZ) in present-day Indiana. British troops under Hamilton recaptured Vincennes that December. Clark vowed to get it back. In February 1779, Clark and his troops
Taking Notes; Identifying Cause and Effect
Use a diagram like the one here to show why the British lost control in the South.
		
		British
	—►	Defeats in
		the South
Content Vocabulary
•	blockade
•	privateer
208 The American Revolution
At the time of the Revolution, about 200,000 Native Americans lived along the western frontier. Here they attack an American settlement in Pennsylvania's Wyoming Valley in 1778.
CRITICAL THINKING
Speculating Why do you think many Native Americans supported the British rather than the Americans?
li, Military & Historical Image
braved harsh winter conditions to surprise the British and force their surrender. Clark’s victory strengthened the American position in the West.
QPROGRESS CHECK
Summarizing What victories did the American forces win in the West?
The War at Sea
guiding question What was the result of the war at sea?
The Revolutionary War also took place at sea. Here Great Britain’s powerful navy enjoyed a major advantage. British vessels formed an effective blockade (blah»KAYD), keeping ships from entering or leaving American harbors. The blockade limited delivery of supplies and troops to Patriot forces.
Privateers
To break the blockade, Congress ordered 13 warships, but only two of the ships made it to sea. Several were quickly captured by the British. The American navy was too weak to operate well.
Congress also authorized some 2,000 ships to sail as privateers. A privateer (pry»vuh»TEER) is a privately owned merchant ship outfitted with weapons. The goal of the privateer is to capture enemy merchant ships and cargo.
Finding crews for these ships was not difficult. Sailors from the whaling and fishing ports of New England signed on eagerly for the profitable privateering trade. During the war, privateers captured more British ships than the American navy did.
blockade a measure to keep ships from entering or leaving a harbor privateer a privately owned ship outfitted with weapons
Lesson 3 209
f
Serapis meet in one ofthe most famous naval battles ofthe war. American naval officer John Paul Jones led the crew ofthe Bonhomme Richard in the conflict.
An American Naval Hero
The war at sea produced one of the war’s great heroes. A daring American naval officer, John Paul Jones, won his first successes raiding British ports. Near the coast of Great Britain in September 1779, Jones’s ship, Bonhomme Richard, met the British warship Serapis. The Bonhomme Richard and the Serapis fought for hours. The British captain asked whether Jones wished to surrender. Jones is said to have answered, “I have not yet begun to fight.”
In the end, it was the Serapis that surrendered. The naval victory made John Paul Jones a hero to the Patriots.
Q PROGRESS CHECK
Reading HELPDESK
Academic Vocabulary
impact an effect
Describing How did privateers contribute to the American war effort?
Fighting in the South
guidingquestioim What was the result of the war in the South?
In the early years of the war, the Americans had won several
battles in the South. In 1776 Patriot forces crushed Loyalists at tl.
Battle of Moore’s Creek, near Wilmington, North Carolina. The)
also saved the key port of Charles Town, South Carolina, from th
British. Although this was a small battle, its impact on the rest o: the war was great.


I
<i
210 The American Revolution
By 1778, these results, along with Patriot victories such as Saratoga, had convinced the British that bringing their old colonies back into the empire would not be easy. As a result, the British came up with a new plan to finish the war.
The new British plan focused on the South, where there were many Loyalists. The British hoped to use sea power and the support of the Loyalists to win important victories in the Southern states. At first, the strategy worked.
Early British Success
In late 1778, British general Henry Clinton sent 3,500 troops from New York to take Savannah, Georgia. The British occupied the coastal city and controlled most of the state.
Clinton himself led a force into the South in early 1780.
In May, he led a second British attack on Charles Town. This time the South Carolina city surrendered, and the British took thousands of prisoners. It marked the worst American defeat of the war.
After Clinton’s victory, he returned to New York. He left General Charles Cornwallis in command of British forces in the South. The Continental Congress sent forces under General Horatio Gates to face Cornwallis. The two armies met at Camden, South Carolina, in August 1780. The British won this first encounter. Yet Cornwallis soon found that he could not control the area he had conquered. He and his troops faced a new kind of warfare.

11

GEOGRAPHY CONNECTION
Starting in 1778, many Revolutionary War battles took place in the West and the South.
LOCATION
Based on this map, what was the southernmost battle between the Patriots and the British?
CRITICAL THINKING
Analyzing Visuals Why do you think the British wanted to capture ports at Savannah and Charles Town?
40-^
0	200 km
Lambert Azimuths Equal-Area projection i
3Sn(\i
95°W
British forces American victory & British victory ■ Fort
<	90°W
The Revolutionary War in the West and South 1778-1781
Kaskaskia July4,f7»
f '
*
. Ga.
85°W
80°W
IttM
'R.l.
York City
ATLANTIC
OCEAN
British capture Savannah, 1778
Patriots victorious at Kaskaskia, Cahokia, and Vincennes
After defeats at Charles Town and Camden, Patriots are victorious at Kings Mountain and Cowpens, 1780-1781
Washington and Rochambeau rush toward Virginia, Aug. 1781
French Admiral De Grasses keeps British ships away
Cornwallis trapped; the British surrender at Yorktown, 1781






Lesson 3 211
SKILLS PRACTICE_______________
Work with a partner. Before you read a selection, use the visuals, headings, and vocabulary words to ask questions about the content. After you finish, decide with your partner which questions were answered by the text and where you can find answers to the rest.
Spaniard Bernardo de Galvez fought against the British during the American Revolution.
Academic Vocabulary______________
sustain to suffer or experience
Hit-and-Run Tactics
The British had counted on strong Loyalist support in the South. They received less help than expected. Instead, as British forces moved through the countryside, small forces of Patriots attacked them. These bands of soldiers appeared suddenly, fired their weapons, and then disappeared. This hit-and-run technique caught the British off guard.
Francis Marion was one successful Patriot leader. Marion, who was known as the “Swamp Fox,” operated out of the swamps of eastern South Carolina. He was quick and smart. One British colonel grumbled that “the devil himself” could not catch Marion. Spain's Help
Great Britain also found itself with another new enemy. Spain declared war on Britain in 1779. The Spanish governor of Louisiana, Bernardo de Galvez (GAHL»ves), had tons of supplies and ammunition shipped up the Mississippi River to American troops in the Northwest Territory. It was with this help that George Rogers Clark captured the key posts of Kaskaskia and Vincennes. Galvez also raised an army to fight the British. Galvez’s forces drove the British out of the Gulf of Mexico region.
American Successes
After their victory at Camden, South Carolina, the British moved northward through the Carolinas in September 1780. Along the way, the British warned the local people to give up the fight for independence and join the British. If they refused, the British threatened to “hang their leaders, and lay their country waste..
The Americans who received this warning were mountain people. Fiercely independent, they had been neither Patriots nor Loyalists until the British warning angered them. They formed a militia army and set out to force the British from their land. At Kings Mountain, the American militia force killed or captured a British-led Loyalist force of about 1,000. The Patriot victory brought new support for independence from Southerners.
In October 1780, Nathanael Greene replaced Gates as commander of the Continental forces in the South. Rather than lead one attack on Cornwallis’s forces, Greene split his army in two. In January 1781, one section defeated the British at Cowpens, South Carolina. Another section joined Francis Marion’s raids. Greene combined his forces in March. Then, he met Cornwallis s
Build Vocabulary: Word Origins of Sayings
Today, people refer to the hit-and-run tactics used by some patriot forces as guerrilla warfare.
212 The American Revolution
SuperStock
This British cartoon dates from 1779, before the American Revolution ended. It shows a rider being thrown off a horse. The horse represents the former colonies. The rider represents Great Britain, and the man on the ground represents a Revolutionary War soldier.
CRITICAL THINKING
Analyzing Primary Sources What outcome of the war does the cartoonist predict?
army at Guilford Courthouse, in present-day Greensboro, North Carolina. Greene’s army was forced to retreat, but the British sustained great losses in the process. General Cornwallis gave up the campaign to conquer the Carolinas.
Cornwallis Retreats
Cornwallis realized the British had to act quickly to win the war. More French troops were coming to North America, and the Patriots held Virginia. Troops and supplies were moving south.
In April 1781, Cornwallis marched north to Virginia.
His troops carried out raids throughout the region. General Washington sent Lafayette and General Anthony Wayne south to push Cornwallis back. Meanwhile, Cornwallis took shelter at Yorktown, on the Virginia coast. The battle for the South was entering its final phase.
B PROGRESS CHECK
Evaluating What effect did the Patriot victory at Kings Mountain produce?
Include this lesson's information in your Foldable®.
,, The American Revolution
o .Beginning (1776-1777)
0 Hddle (1778-1779) o Ending (1780-1783)
LESSON 3 REVIEW
Review Vocabulary
1.	Use each of the following words in a sentence about the Revolutionary War. 3oa;3ob
a. blockade b. privateer
Answer the Guiding Questions
2.	Describing What role did many Native Americans take during the war in the West?
3.	Identifying Who was John Paul Jones, and what was his significance in the war? 22B
4.	Summarizing What happened during the British campaign in the South? 29B
EXPOSITORY WRITING
You have read about several military leaders in this lesson. Which leader do you think most helped the Patriot cause? Write a short essay to explain your answer. 22b;3od Lesson 3 213
networks
There's More Online!
Ef BIOGRAPHY
Comte deRochambeau
GRAPHIC ORGANIZER
Treaty of Paris
ef MAP Siege at Yorktown eT MUSIC Yankee Doodle & SELF-CHECK QUIZ Ef video

Lesson 4
The Final Years
'T*
■K H

OTll
riAL QUESTION Whydoesconfllctdewlop?
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills_______
1A Identify the major eras and events in U.S. history through 1877, including colonization, revolution, drafting of the Declaration of Independence, creation and ratification of the Constitution, religious revivals such as the Second Great Awakening, early republic, the Age of Jackson, westward expansion, reform movements, sectionalism, Civil War, and Reconstruction, and describe their causes and effects.
4B Explain the roles played by significant individuals during the American Revolution, including Abigail Adams, John Adams, Wentworth Cheswel I, Samuel Adams, Mercy Otis Warren, James Armistead, Benjamin Franklin, Bernardo de Galvez, Crispus Attucks, King George III, Haym Salomon, Patrick Henry, Thomas Jefferson, the Marquis de Lafayette, Thomas Paine, and George Washington.
4C Explain the issues surrounding important events of the American Revolution, including declaring independence; writing the Articles of Confederation; fighting the battles of Lexington, Concord, Saratoga, and Yorktown; enduring the winter at Valley Forge; and signing the Treaty of Paris of 1783.
10A Locate places and regions of importance in the United States during the 17th, 18th, and 19th centuries.
29D Identify points of view from the historical context surrounding an event and the frame of reference which influenced the participants.
Reading HELPDESK
IT MATTERS BECAUSE
The Patriots' and their allies'cleverness and commitment led to final victory in the Revolutionary War.
Victory at Yorktown
guiding question What events occurred in the victory at Yorktown?
While the British were carrying out their southern campaign, key events were taking place in the North. In July 1780, French warships appeared off Newport, Rhode Island. The ships carried French soldiers commanded by Comte de Rochambeau (Row*sham*BOH).
Eventually, Rochambeau joined up with General Washington, who was camped north of New York City. There the two leaders waited for the arrival of a second fleet of French ships. If and when the second French fleet arrived, Washington planned to attack the British army base in New York, which was under the command of General Henry Clinton.
Instead, both the ships and the troops would find a better opportunity to strike at the British. That opportunity would come farther south—at Yorktown, Virginia.
Washington Leaves for Virginia
As he waited outside New York, Washington followed reports of fighting in the South. In 1781 he sent Lafayette and Anthony to Virginia to stop Cornwallis. Once in Virginia, Lafayette sent many spies to the nearby British camp. None was as important as James, an enslaved African held by William Armistead. The secret
Taking Notes: Describing_____________
Use a diagram like this one to show what
the United States and Great Britain agreed to in the Treaty of Paris.
214	The American Revolution
Great
Britain
Content Vocabulary
•	siege
•	ratify
•	ambush
information James gathered helped Lafayette pin down Cornwallis and his army on a peninsula, a piece of land surrounded by water on three sides. The place was called Yorktown.
Washington also got important news about the French fleet he was waiting for: The ships were heading toward Chesapeake Bay instead of New York. They were going to join in the fight to defeat Cornwallis. With this news, Washington quickly changed his plans. He and Rochambeau would advance on the British at Yorktown rather than at New York.
Washington kept his new strategy, or plan of action, secret. He wanted Clinton to think the Patriots still planned to attack at New York. This, he hoped, would keep Clinton from sending aid to Cornwallis.
Washington and Rochambeau then rushed south with their armies. Secrecy was strict. Most soldiers did not know where they were going. One wrote, “We do not know the object of our march, and are in perfect ignorance whether we are going against New York, or... Virginia.”
The French and American troops marched 200 miles (322 km) in 15 days. General Clinton did not learn they were gone until it was too late. There was nothing he could do to stop the three forces—
Lafayette’s troops, Washington’s and Rochambeau’s army, and the French fleet—from meeting at Yorktown. View the map of the siege at Yorktown.
A
Trap at Yorktown Washington’s plan worked perfectly. By the end of September, 14,000 American and French troops stood against Cornwallis’s 8,000 British and Hessian troops at Yorktown. Meanwhile, the French fleet kept guard at Chesapeake Bay. British ships could not get in to help Cornwallis escape by sea. General Clinton and the rest of the British army sat helplessly in New York. They were unable to help Cornwallis. The British were trapped.
American and French forces began a siege (SEEJ)—they blocked off the British supply and escape routes. In this way, they hoped to force the British to surrender.
-Thinlina Like a —
HISTORIAN
Making Predictions
Throughout the Revolutionary War, Washington succeeded in holding his army together, despite many difficulties. One of these difficulties was political meddling. The Continental Congress often interfered with his military operations. During the gloomy winter at Valley Forge, some members of Congress and army officers plotted to replace Washington as commander in chief. How might Washington’s removal or resignation have affected the war?
In August 1781, Comte de Rochambeau joined Washington's Continental Army in its march to Yorktown.

siege an attempt to force surrender by blocking the movement of people or goods into or out of a place
Academic Vocabulary
strategy a plan of action
Lesson 4 215
/ Swamp
Rochambeau 9,000 V
GEOGRAPHY CONNECTION
General Cornwallis and his army left the Carolinas for Virginia in 1781. He wound up at Yorktown, on the shores of the Chesapeake Bay.
LOCATION
How would you describe the type of land on which Cornwallis and his forces camped at Yorktown? CRITICAL THINKING
Analyzing Visuals Does this location seem like it would be easy or difficult to defend? Explain. Washington's
Headquarters
(>,


^Gloucester
Yorktown
__
Field of
British
Surrender
Lafayette's
Headquarters
General von Steuben
oieneral
Lafayette
8,000
Lincoln,
Reading HELPDESK
Victory Over Cornwallis
The siege began to take effect. The British ran low on supplies and many soldiers were wounded or sick. On October 14, Washington’s aide, Alexander Hamilton, led an attack that captured key British defenses. Cornwallis could see that the situation was hopeless. On October 19, he surrendered his troops. The Patriots had won the Battle of Yorktown. They took nearly 8,000 British prisoners and captured more than 200 heavy guns.
At the surrender ceremony, the British marched between rows of French and American troops. A French band played “Yankee Doodle.” This was a song the British had used to taunt the Americans. A British band responded with a children’s tune, “The World Turned Upside Down.” With the mighty British surrendering to the upstart Americans, it seemed a fitting song for the situation.
HPROGRESS CHECK
Explaining Why did Washington advance on Yorktown?

Reading Strategy: Sequencing
Describe the sequence of events from October 9 to October 19 that led to the victory over Cornwallis.
SKILLS PRACTICE
When you read your text, evaluate the visuals such as pictures, charts, and graphs. Are they effective? How do they help you understand the content better?
The American Revolution
rints & Photographs Division, LC-DIG-ppmsca-05936
Independence Achieved
guiding question What helped the Patriots win independence?
The Patriot victory at Yorktown was a terrible blow to the British and their war effort. Still, the fighting went on after Cornwallis surrendered. The British still held Savannah, Charles Town, and New York. There would be a few more clashes on land and sea. However, the defeat at Yorktown convinced the British that the war was too costly to pursue, or proceed with.
The Americans and British sent delegates to Paris to work out a treaty. Benjamin Franklin, John Adams, and John Jay represented the United States. The American Congress ratified (RAT»ih«fyed), or approved, the first draft of the treaty in April 1783. The final Treaty of Paris was signed on September 3,1783. By that time Britain had also made peace with France and Spain.
Under the Treaty of Paris, Great Britain recognized the United States as an independent nation. The British also promised to withdraw all their troops from American territory. They gave Americans fishing rights to the waters off the coast of nearby Canada.
In turn, the United States promised that Americans would pay British merchants what they owed. The treaty also stated that the Congress would advise the new states to return property taken from Loyalists.
A
Conspiracy Against Congress Many months passed between the end of fighting in the Revolutionary War and the signing of the peace treaty. During that time, Washington was unwilling to dissolve the army. Instead, he camped his idle troops in Newburgh, New York.
Many of these soldiers believed they were owed pay from the Congress. When this pay did not come, the soldiers grew angry. Some officers sent a letter around in March 1783. If their demands were not met, the letter said, the army should use force against the Congress.
Washington realized that this threat of revolt was dangerous. The new nation could be destroyed. In a dramatic speech, he asked the angry soldiers to be patient. Then Washington urged the Congress to meet their just demands. The Congress agreed.
Washingtons leadership ended the threat to the new nation.
British forces first sang "Yankee Doodle" to poke fun at what they considered the awkward ways of the Americans. The Americans, however, quickly made "Yankee Doodle" their own. They created new verses that made fun of the British and praised George Washington.
CRITICAL THINKING
Speculating Why might songs and other forms of music be important in fighting a war? Explain. 
ratify to approve officially
Academic Vocabulary
pursue to proceed with
Lesson 4 217
Washington Returns Home
In late November 1783, the war truly ended. The last British troops left New York City. Washington could at last give up his command. The soldiers could return to their homes and their lives.
On December 4, Washington said farewell to his troops. Three weeks later he formally resigned, or gave up his position, at a meeting of the Congress. Washington said,
“Having now finished the work assigned me, I retire ... and take my leave of all the employments of public life.” Washington returned home to Mount Vernon, Virginia. There he planned to remain
and live quietly with his family.
After the war, Washington looked forward to a return to his home, Mount Vernon, in Virginia. He planned to take no role in the new government.
CRITICAL THINKING
Speculating Why do you think Washington hoped to get away from public life? Why the Americans Won
How did the Americans defeat powerful Great Britain? Remember, the Americans had several advantages in the war. First, they fought on their own land. The British had to move troops and supplies across an ocean. It was harder for them to get reinforcements, as the siege of Yorktown showed. When their ships were blocked, the British troops had no support.
Also, the Americans knew the land. They knew where to lay in ambush (AM»bush), or surprise attack. They were expert at wilderness fighting. The British, in contrast, had much difficulty controlling the American countryside once they occupied the cities. The Battle of Kings Mountain, which you read about in Lesson 3, illustrates this point. The rural people did not like being told what to do. They also had wilderness fighting skills that could defeat their new enemies.
Help from other countries contributed to the American
victory. The success at Yorktown would not have been possible without French soldiers and ships. Spain gave aid when they attacked the British. Individuals, such as Lafayette and von Steuben, came to America to provide vital services to the Patriot cause.
ambush an attack in which the attacker hides and surprises the enemy
Reading HELPDESK
.8 The American Revolution
Perhaps most important, the American Revolution was a movement of the people. Its outcome depended not on any one battle or event but on the determination and spirit of all Patriots. As Washington remarked about the patriotic crowds, “Here is an army they [the British] will never conquer.”
In 1776 the American colonists began a revolution. In the Declaration of Independence they outlined the principles of freedom and the rights they felt all peoples and nations should have. These ideas inspired people in other parts of the world.
For example, French rebels in 1789 began a revolution in defense of “Liberty, Equality, and Fraternity.” The French upheld these principles: “Men are born and remain free and equal in rights.”
In 1791 there was revolution in the French colony of Saint Domingue. Inspired by the ideals of the American and French revolutions, enslaved
Africans took up arms. They were led
by a man named Toussaint L’Ouverture
(too»SAN loo»vuhr«TOOR) and soon
shook off French rule. In 1804 Saint
Domingue—present-day Haiti—became
the second nation in the Americas to
achieve independence from colonial
rule. “We have asserted our rights,”
declared the revolutionaries. “We
swear never to yield them to any power
on earth.”
H PROGRESS CHECK
Explaining Why did Washington take action to
end the Newburgh Conspiracy?
Include this lesson's information in your Foldable®.
> .The American Revolution
o .Beginning (1776-1777)
Middle (1770-1779)
Ending (1700-1703)
The ideals of the American Revolution helped inspire the enslaved people of Haiti, who fought for the independence of their French colony.
LESSON 4 REVIEW
Review Vocabulary
1.	Define each of the following terms and use it in a sentence. 3oa;3ob
a. siege b. ratify c. ambush
Answer the Guiding Questions
2.	Sequencing Describe Washington's actions leading up to and during the Patriot victory at
YorktOWn. 1B;4B;4C;29B
3.	Explaining What were the terms ofthe Treaty of Paris of 1783?«
4.	Analyzing Maps Why were British ships unable to help Cornwallis escape by sea? What was the result ofthe siege at Yorktown? ioa
EXPOSITORY WRITING
What were the effects of the drafting ofthe Declaration of Independence for Americans? What were its effects in other countries?« Lesson 4 219
Activities
Directions: Write your answers using standard grammar, spelling, sentence structure, and punctuation.
0 Use your
Foldables
to explore the Essential Question.
EXPOSITORY WRITING
How did the experiences ofthe Patriots and the experiences ofthe British differ in the war? How did these differences contribute to the outcome? Use examples from the chapter to help you organize your essay. 290; 300 0 Social Studies Skills
comparing AND CONTRASTING Working in small groups, locate secondary sources that include time lines ofthe French Revolution and the American Revolution. Together, create a poster that compares and contrasts the major turning points of these two revolutions. Present the poster to the class. 29A;29B,29C;3OD
0 Thinking Like a Historian
interpreting outlines View the outline ofthe fighting forces on the next page. Compare the strengths and weaknesses ofthe fighting forces. List, in order, what you view as the two greatest strengths and the two greatest weaknesses. Based on your listing, what do you think will be the outcome ofthe war? 29c
0 Geography Activity
INTERPRETING MAPS
Study the map showing Patriot and Loyalist areas. Write two questions about the geographic distribution ofthe two groups that can be answered from the map. Share your questions with a classmate to answer. 293 220 The American Revolution
Assessment
Directions: Write your answers using standard grammar, spelling, sentence structure, and punctuation.
CHECKING FOR UNDERSTANDING
0 Explain the role played by the following individuals during the American Revolution. 4B
A.
James Armistead D. Haym Salomon B.
Wentworth Cheswell E. Marquis de Lafayette C.
Bernardo de Galvez F. Abigail Adams REVIEW THE GUIDING QUESTIONS
0 Explaining What factors led to Washington's success in the attack on Trenton? 4B
0 Analyzing What role did Wentworth Cheswell play in the Patriot cause? Why did many other African Americans fight alongside the Patriots? 4b;29d
0 Describing What were conditions like for Washington's troops in the winter of 1778 at Valley Forge? 4c
0 Summarizing What role did the French play in the Patriot victory at Yorktown? 29b
0 Explaining What role did Haym Salomon play in the Patriot war effort? 4B
0 Describing Describe how James Armistead helped set the stage for the defeat of Cornwallis at Yorktown.
4B;4t
0 Identifying Cause and Effect How did the drafting ofthe Declaration of Independence affect the French Revolution in 1789? ia;29b
0 Explaining Why did the British sign the Treaty of Paris? What did Great Britain agree to do under the treaty? ia;4c
© Analyzing Peter Salem and Wentworth Cheswell served heroically during the American Revolution. What values did they share with the Patriots? 290
Need Extra Help?
IfYou've Missed Question	o	o	o	o	o	0	o
Review Lesson	1-4	1	1	2	4	2	4
O	0		©	0	©	©	©	©	©	©
4	4	1	2	3	1	1	1-4	2	2	1-4
© Identifying Problems What are some ways the Congress tried to raise money for the Revolution?
Why did the decision to print more paper money cause inflation?
© Evaluating How did Bernardo de Galvez contribute to the Patriot war effort? Why was his support important? 4B
© Assessing What are some advantages the
Americans had over the British in the war? Which one of them do you think was the most significant? Why?
© Identifying Cause and Effect Why was the Battle of Saratoga a turning point in the American Revolution?
4C;29B
© Speculating How might the war have taken a different turn without the leadership of George Washington? Give examples. 4B
© Summarizing Why did the Marquis de Lafayette join the Patriot cause? In what ways did he contribute to the American victory? 4b
© Hypothesizing Benjamin Franklin spent part ofthe war as a delegate to France. What qualities do you think made him an effective delegate? 4b
© Applying Absolute Chronology Create a time line ofthe American Revolution. Begin with the year the United States declared its independence. End with the year the Treaty of Paris was signed. Include at least four events that occurred during the time period, ib
Revolutionary War Fighting Forces	
British Army	Continental Army
Experienced soldiers Well-supplied Far from home Time and money to move troops	Fighting on own soil Washington's leadership Lacked supplies Inexperienced
221
-n-R? Assessment (continued)
SHORT RESPONSE
PRIMARY SOURCE
"1 was not yet fourteen years of age. ...The boys were employed in waiting on the officers, but in time of action a boy was quartered [assigned] to each gun to carry cartridges."
—from Andrew Sherburne's Experiences on a Privateer During the Revolutionary War
(J) Identifying How old was Sherburne, and what were his duties aboard the ship?
£•) Drawing Inferences What dangers do you think Andrew Sherburne faced while on a privateer? 29B
EXTENDED RESPONSE
© Narrative Writing Write a letter to a famous Patriot of your choice who helped the United States win the Revolution. Thank the Patriot for his or her service and ask questions about the war effort. Finally, tell him or her about America in the modern era. State your view about whether the United States has lived up to the ideals upon which it was founded.
29E;30D
STANDARDIZED TEST PRACTICE
DBQ
ANALYZING DOCUMENTS
PRIMARY SOURCE
‘'And we not only groan under our own Burden, but with Concern, & Horror, look forward, & Contemplate, the miserable Condition of our Children, who are training up, and kept in Preparation, for a like State of Bondage, and Servitude. [We ask] your Honours serious Consideration, whether it is consistent with the present Claims, of the united States to hold so many Thousands .. .in perpetual Slavery."
—from Connecticut Slaves Petition for Freedom, 1779
© Analyzing According to the writer, what did enslaved Africans look upon with "horror"?
A.	their own burdens
B.	perpetual slavery
C.	the condition of their children
D.	the consideration of his audience
© Summarizing Which ofthe following best summarizes this excerpt? 29B
F.
Enslaved Africans have been fighting alongside the Patriots during the war G.
Enslaved Africans should be freed after the war knupr ------------ksvvu 11 11 u 111 y aiunvjoiuc. ll,c rdll
G.
Enslaved Africans should be freed after the war is over. H.
Slavery is not in agreement with the ideals of freedom on which the United States is based. I.
The Patriots need enslaved Africans in order to win the war. Need Extra Help?
If You've Missed Question	©	©	©	©	0
Review Lesson	3	3	1-4	2	2_
!2 The American Revolution
A
More Perfect Union 1777-1790
TIAL QUESTIONS
• Why do people form governments? newideas change the way people live? • How do governments change? K	..-ii'lLi
Bill

it iW'IS


I (ttvst

p';
W
"T
Legend has ifUmFBet^Ross sewed the first flag ofthe independent United States.
The Granger Collection, NYC.

networks
There's More Online about the first governments ofthe United States.
CHAPTERO
Lesson 1
The Articles of Confederation
Lesson 2
Forging a New Constitution
Lesson 3
A
New Plan of Government The Story
Matters...
The story goes that in June 1776, Betsy Ross is mourning her husband, a member ofthe militia killed that year in the line of duty. A seamstress, Ross is also trying to run her husband's furniture-covering business. One day, she gets a visit from George Washington and two other men. The men ask Ross to make a special flag. They show her their ideas for the flag, and Ross offers some of her own. Then, the seamstress gets to work.
That story may or may not be true. It is a fact, however, that on June 14, 1777, the Continental Congress voted to make the Stars and Stripes the national flag ofthe United States. This was one of the many decisions facing the leaders ofthe young United States.
Foldables
Go to the Foldables® library in the back of your book to make a Foldable® that will help you take notes while reading this chapter.
A
Mor&J&rfcct -UoiQQ.. \ Articles of that	\\ Ratifyinq the
Confederation'll	°0 Constitution,
November 1777« Nay-September| 1787.1799
223
f
WORLD EVENT
1
CHAPTER 8
Place and Time: United States 1777-1790
A few years after achieving independence, the United States made plans to expand into some of the land to the west. Leaders put forward a plan to settle the Northwest Territory and, over time, form new states.
Step Into the Place
MAP FOCUS
The British gave up their claim to the Northwest Territory in the Treaty of Paris. REGIONS
What geographical features made this territory desirable for settlement by people from the United States? ioa,-iia PLACE
What present-day states were made from the Northwest Territory? 3	At THINKING Drawing Conclusions Which areas of the territory do you think were likely to be settled first? Explain your answer. iia;29B

Step Into the Time
Time Line Review the time line. What years are covered in this time line? Identify two world events that might h
networks
There's More Online!
BZf BIOGRAPHIES
•	John Adams
•	Richard Henry Lee
ef charts	“““
•	Capitals ofthe United States
•	Articles of Confederation and the
Constitution
eT GAME Concentration Game Ef graphic organizer
Powers of National Government
sf MAP The Northwest Territory
eT SELF-CHECK QUIZ Sf VIDEO

Lesson 1


The Articles of Confederation
AL QUESTION
Whydopeop/eformjfwemments? 
THIS
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills 1A Identify the major eras and events in U.S. history through 1877, including colonization, revolution, drafting ofthe Declaration of Independence, creation and ratification ofthe Constitution, religious revivals such as the Second Great Awakening, early republic, the Age of Jackson, westward expansion, reform movements, sectionalism, Civil War, and Reconstruction, and describe their causes and effects.
4C Explain the issues surrounding important events ofthe American Revolution, including declaring independence; writing the Articles of Confederation; fighting the battles of Lexington, Concord, Saratoga, and Yorktown; enduring the winter at Valley Forge; and signing the Treaty of Paris of 1783.
5B Summarize arguments regarding protective tariffs, taxation, and the banking system.
6A Explain how the Northwest Ordinance established principles and procedures for orderly expansion ofthe United States.
14A Explain why a free enterprise system of economics developed in the new nation, including minimal government intrusion, taxation, and property rights.
15B Summarize the strengths and weaknesses ofthe Articles of Confederation.

Reading HELPDESK
IT MATTERS BECAUSE
After gaining independence, Americans faced the task of forming independent governments at both the state and national levels.
The Making of a Republic
guidingquestioim What kind of government was created by the Articles of Confederation! Becoming independent caused the country to enter a neweraasa young republic. After throwing oil British rule, the independent states faced the challenge of governing themselves. The 13 states needed a plan of government that would satisfy all their needs. Would the states be able to work together and still maintain their independence? How would each individual state govern itself? During the era of the early republic that followed the American Revolution, the young nation struggled to resolve these questions States Write Constitutions
The Continental Congress took up this last question even before declaring independence. In May 1776, Congress asked the states to organize their governments. Each state adopted a state constitution or plan of government. Eight states had drafted constitutions before
e end of the year. New York and Georgia followed in 1777 and assachuse«s in 1780. Connecticut and Rhode Island decided to
use their colonial charters as state constitutions.
tn nk er years Bnhsh rule, Americans were determined not
craftprk' °° ^UC- Bower *n the hands of one ruler or body. They
PennsvlvanW Utlons.t^lat Bruited the power of the governor.
anelectX C°nStltution ^ced the office entirely with an elected 12-person council.

Taking Notes: Identifying________________
As you read, use a diagram like the one shown to identify the powers ofthe national government under the Articles of Confederation.
A
More Perfect Union (rowers of National ^^Government
Content Vocabulary _ _ .
•	bicameral • depreciate
•	constitutional republic
•	ordinance
States also divided power between the governor (or council) and the legislature. Most states set up two-house, or bicameral, legislatures to divide the work of government even further.
The first state constitutions aimed to keep power in the hands of the people. For example, voters chose the state legislators, and states held elections often. In most states, only white males who were at least 21 years old could vote.
Because state constitutions limited the powers of the governors, the legislatures became the most powerful branch of government. The state legislatures tried to make taxes fair for everyone, but disagreements arose. The shift from British colonies to self-governing states held many challenges.
A
New Republic The American people also had to form a national government. People agreed the new country should be a constitutional republic, a government in which citizens rule through elected representatives. These representatives would serve for a specific term of office and pledge to govern by the laws set down in a written constitution, or plan of government.
At first, most Americans wanted a weak central government.
They expected that each state would remain free to act independently on most issues. The states would rely on a central government only to wage war and handle relations with other countries.
CAPITALS OF THE UNITED STATES
Length of Time as U.S. Capital
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania May 10,1775 to December 12,1776
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania March 4,1777 to September 18,1777
September 30,1777 to June 27,1778
June 30,1783 to November^ 1783
.. ~
York, Pennsylvania
Princeton, New Jersey
Trenton, New Jersey
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania December 6,1790 to May 14,1800 Washington, D.C.
November 1,1784 to December 24,1784 170C Aunuct 17 ■non

Nine different cities have served as the capital ofthe United States.
IDENTIFYING
What was the first capital ofthe United States? CRITICAL THINKING
Drawing Inferences Why do
you think the United States had so many different capital cities during the period shown?

bicameral having two separate lawmaking chambers constitutional republic a government in which citizens rule through elected representatives, according to a plan of government
;jSSjfc;
STATE HOUSE
BUILT I772-I779
gapitoloftiie united states NOVEMBER 26,1783 - AUGUST I3.1784 IN THIS STATE HOUSE,OLDEST IN THE NATION STILL ocMurn u«y« USE- GENERAL GEORGE WASHINGTON
■BSOaS:
amnsfissm
,W*S JEfFERSON MINISTER PLENIPOTENTIARY. FROM
On June 7,1776, Virginia's Richard Henry Lee moved that "a plan of confederation be prepared and transmitted to the respective colonies, for their consideration and approbation [approval]."
Creating the Articles of Confederation
In the summer of 1776—while also drafting the Declaration of Independence—the Second Continental Congress appointed a committee to write a plan for a new central government. The result was the Articles of Confederation. After much debate, Congress adopted the Articles—the nation’s first constitution-in November 1777.
The Articles of Confederation established a weak central government. The states kept most of their power. For the states, the Articles of Confederation were “a firm league of friendship” in which each state retained “its sovereignty, freedom, and independence.”
The Articles of Confederation gave the Congress the powerto conduct foreign affairs, maintain armed forces, borrow money, and issue currency. Congress did not have the power to regulate trade, force citizens to join the army, or impose taxes. If Congress needed to raise money or troops, it had to ask the states. States were not required to contribute.
The new central government had no chief executive. This is an official, such as a president or a governor, who carries out the laws and leads the government in its day-to-day operations. Under the Articles of Confederation, government carried on its business, such as selling western lands, through congressional committees All the states had to approve the Articles and any
amendments. Yet not every state supported the Articles of
Confederation at first. Under the new plan, each state had one vote regardless of population. States with large populations believed they should have more votes.
Disputes over western lands delayed ratification of the Articles By the 1780s, seven of the original states laid claim to areas west of the Appalachians. Maryland refused to approve the Articles until New York, Virginia, and other states abandoned their land claims and ceded, or gave up, such territory to the national government. This done, Maryland joined the other 12 states in approving the Articles. On March 1, 1781, the Confederation formally became the government of the United States of America.
The Confederation Government
The next several years were critical ones for the young republic. It soon became clear that the new national government was too weak to handle the problems facing the United States. The weak
Academic Vocabulary
abandon to give up

SKILLS PRACTICE
Write some questions about the most important ideas in
a lesson or a shorter section of your text. Exchange papers with a partner and answer one another's questions.
II
A
More Perfect Union WEAKNESSES OF THE ARTICLES OF CONFEDERATION
Congress had no authority to raise money by collecting taxes.
Congress had no control over foreign trade.
Congress could not force states to carry out its laws.
All 13 states had to agree to any amendments, making it nearly impossible to correct problems.
The Articles of Confederation had several key weaknesses.
0 SUMMARIZING
Summarize the basic problem with the Articles of Confederation.
Congress could not pass a law unless nine states voted in favor of it. Changing the Articles required the approval of all 13 states. This made it hard for Congress to pass laws or amend the Articles when there was any disagreement.
Even with these challenges, the new government managed some key achievements. Under the Confederation government, Americans negotiated a peace treaty with Britain and expanded the country’s foreign trade. The Confederation also helped with settling and governing the country’s western lands.
CRITICAL THINKING
Speculating Why do you think getting 13 states to agree on decisions and actions was so difficult?
Q READING PROGRESS CHECK
Drawing Inferences Why do you think most Americans in 1776 wanted a weak central government?
Policies for Western Lands
guiding question What process allowed new states tojoin the union?
The Articles of Confederation did not propose a way to add new states to the United States. Yet there were settlers living west of the Appalachian Mountains, outside the existing states. These Western settlers wanted to organize their lands as states and join the Union.
Under the terms of the Treaty of Paris, the British gave up control of the land north of the Ohio River and west of the Appalachian Mountains. Many Americans were eager to settle in this region. The new United States government had to establish policies for settlement of these western lands. Another challenge was to come up with an orderly process by which new territories could achieve the status of statehood.
The Ordinance of 1785
In 1785 the Confederation Congress passed an ordinance, or law, that set up a process to survey and sell the lands north of the Ohio River. The new law divided this large area into townships.
Reading in the Content Area: Charts__________________________________________________
Charts can take many forms. The simple chart on this page lists a series of statements or facts. It
presents a clear, short summary of key information. The title of the chart indicates the common
theme that unites the items in the chart.
Lesson 1 229
Under the Articles of Confederation, Congress could not tax citizens directly. Congress raised money by selling land in the Northwest Territory. The Ordinance divided land into townships, 6 miles (10 km) to a side. This created 36 square miles, or "sections."
PLACE
Which rivers acted as borders for the Northwest Territory? CRITICAL THINKING
Identifying Central Issues Why do you think Congress set up such a precise system for measuring out and dividing up the land?
II
Each township was 6 miles long (9.7 km) and 6 miles wide (9.7 km). These townships were to be further divided into 36 sections of 640 acres (259 ha). The government would sell each section at public auction, or sale, for at least a dollar an acre. Concerned about lawless people moving into western lands, Richard Henry Lee, the president of the Congress, urged that “the rights of property be clearly defined” by the government. Congress drafted another law to protect the interests of hardworking settlers.
The Northwest Ordinance
The Northwest Ordinance, passed in 1787, guaranteed the property rights of settlers and provided a democratic model for national expansion. It created a single Northwest Territory from lands north ofthe Ohio River and east of the Mississippi River. The lands were to be divided into three to five smaller territories. When a territory had 60,000 residents, the people could seek statehood. Each new state would have the same standing as the original 13 states.
Reading HELPDESK


ordinance a law
Academic Vocabulary
clause a special condition in a formal document
A
More Perfect Union The Northwest Ordinance had a bill of rights for the settlers in the territory. It guaranteed freedom of religion and trial by jury. It also stated, “There shall be neither slavery nor involuntary servitude in said territory.” This clause, or condition added to a document, marked the first attempt to stop the spread of slavery in the United States. The Ordinance of 1785 and the Northwest Ordinance attempted to make possible the settlement of the Northwest Territory in a peaceful and orderly way. In general, the laws were successful.
The United States Congress would later take a similar step in the South. In 1798 it created the Mississippi Territory from land west of Georgia. Congress organized the government of the territory in the same basic way as in the Northwest Territory— except that slavery was allowed.
Land Act of 1800
The Ordinance of 1785 and the Northwest Ordinance aimed to encourage settlement in the Northwest Territory. In time it became clear that people needed even more help. In 1800 Congress passed the Land Act. The act made it possible for people to pay for land a little at a time. Under the terms of this law, a person was required to buy at least 320 acres of land at a price of $2 per acre. The buyer could pay half of the money at the time of purchase and the rest in four yearly payments.
H READING PROGRESS CHECK
Explaining According to the Northwest Ordinance, when could a territory apply for statehood?

Much ofthe land in the West was sold to pay off debts from the Revolutionary War. The sale of these lands also provided opportunity for many settlers, who eagerly moved west.
'ffl








! I
Money is any object widely accepted as payment. Tobacco leaves were once used as money in colonial Virginia. Colonists also used other goods as well as coins as money. Eventually, governments began issuing paper money to make exchanges of goods and business dealings easier.
II
CRITICAL THINKING
Drawing Conclusions Why is it important to have a system of money that is recognized, agreed upon, and used by all people?
Reading HELPDESK

depreciate to fall in value
Problems at Home and Abroad
GUIDING QUESTION
In whatways was the Confederation government weak? Because of its weakness, the Confederation government had trouble with financial issues. Continentals, paper bills the Continental Congress had printed during the war, did not hold their value. By 1781, the currency had depreciated (dih«PREE«shee*ayt*ed), or fallen in value, so far that it was worth almost nothing. As more continentals appeared, people realized that Congress could not exchange or trade in the bills for gold or silver. The public began to doubt the money was worth anything. In 1779 it took 40 continentals to buy a single Spanish silver dollar. By 1781, a person needed 146 continentals to buy that Spanish coin. “Not worth a continental” became a common saying. At the same time, the price of food and other goods soared. In Boston and some other areas, high prices led to food riots.
In the 1780s, the Continental Congress faced a large debt. During the Revolutionary War, Congress had borrowed money from American citizens and foreign governments. It still owed Revolutionary soldiers pay for their military service. Without the power to tax, the Confederation could not easily raise money to pay its debts. The Continental Congress asked the states for money, but it could not force the states to pay. In fact, the states provided less than half of the money the federal government asked them to contribute.
Plan for Import Tax
Congress faced a collapse of the country’s finances. In 1781 it created a department of finance led by Philadelphia merchant Robert Morris. While serving in Congress, Morris had proposed a 5 percent tax on imported goods to help pay the national debt. The plan required a change to the Articles of Confederation. Twelve states approved the plan, but Rhode Island opposed it. Under the Articles, the single “no” vote was enough to block the plan. A second effort in 1783 also failed to win approval by all the states. The financial crisis grew worse.
Relations With Britain
Trouble with foreign governments also revealed the weaknesses o the American government. For example, American merchants complained that the British were blocking Americans from the
A
More Perfect Union West Indies and other British markets. In the Treaty of Paris of 1783, Britain had promised to withdraw from the lands east of the Mississippi River. British troops, however, continued to occupy several forts in the Great Lakes region.
In 1785 Congress sent John Adams to London to discuss these problems. Adams found the British unwilling to talk. They pointed to the failure of the United States to honor its promises made in the Treaty of Paris. The British claimed that Americans had agreed to pay Loyalists for the property taken from them during the Revolutionary War. Congress had proposed that the states pay the Loyalists. The states simply refused, and Congress could do nothing about it.
Relations With Spain
The United States had even greater problems with Spain. This European power, which controlled Florida as well as lands west of the Mississippi River, wanted to stop American expansion into its territory. To do this, Spain closed the lower Mississippi River to American shipping in 1784. Western settlers could no longer use the Mississippi River, which they relied on to ship goods to market.
In 1786 American diplomats reached a new trade agreement with Spain. Representatives from the Southern states, however, blocked the agreement because it did not include the right to use the Mississippi River.
The weakness of the Confederation and its inability to deal with problems worried many leaders, including George Washington. Americans began to agree that the country needed
| a stronger government.
O READING PROGRESS CHECK
| Explaining Why did the national government under the Articles of I Confederation have difficulty raising money?
During the early years of the republic, John Adams served as an ambassador to Great Britain. Adams was unable to convince the British to honor their promises made in the Treaty of Paris of 1783.
Include this lesson's information in your Foldable®.
A
More.Psf'fect Unw ? Articles of tMA ANew \\ Ratifying the Confederation	Constitution,
November 1777^-^^, 1787-1799
LESSON 1 REVIEW
Review Vocabulary
1.	Use each of these words in a sentence about the newly independent United States. 3oa;job
a. bicameral b. constitutional republic
Answer the Guiding Questions
2.	Describing What caused America to enter a new era as a republic? i«
3.	Explaining What powers were granted to the
Congress under the Articles of Confederation?
1SB
4.	Summarizing What were some ofthe accomplishments of the national government under the Articles of Confederation?
15B;29B
5.	Analyzing View the chart that identifies weaknesses ofthe Articles of Confederation. Which ofthe weaknesses do you think was the most difficult for the national government to overcome? Explain your choice. isb;29<
PERSUASIVE WRITING
You are a delegate to the Second Continental Congress. Congress is debating whether to allow the central government to impose taxes. Take a stand on this issue, and write a short essay defending your position. Give specific reasons for your opinion. sb;29d; job Lesson 1 233
I
networks
There's More Online!
Ef BIOGRAPHY
George Washington
Ef GRAPH
Framers of the Constitution
Ef GAME Identification Game
Ef GRAPHIC ORGANIZER
Plans for Creating a New
Government
Ef PRIMARYSOURCE
Plantation Life
Ef SELF-CHECK QUIZ VIDEO
la iw 1
Lesson 2
Forging a New Constitution
AL QUESTION
How do new ideas change the way people live. It Matters because
Bold action helped the nation overcome the serious shortcomings of the Articles of Confederation.


TEO
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills 1A Identify the major eras and events in U.S. history through 1877, including colonization, revolution, drafting of the Declaration of Independence, creation and ratification of the Constitution, religious revivals such as the Second Great Awakening, early republic, the Age of Jackson, westward expansion, reform movements, sectionalism, Civil War, and Reconstruction, and describe their causes and effects.
The Need for Change
guidingquestion IV/jflf problems did the government face under the Articles of Confederation?
4D Analyze the issues of the Constitutional Convention of 1787, including the Great Compromise and the Three-Fifths Compromise. 5A Describe major domestic problems faced by the leaders of the new republic such as maintaining national security, building a military, creating a stable economic system, setting up the court system, and defining the authority of the central government.
7B Compare the effects of political, economic, and social factors on slaves and free blacks.
15B Summarize the strengths and weaknesses of the Articles of Confederation.
21C Summarize a historical event in which compromise resulted in a peaceful resolution. 29D Identify points of view from the historical context surrounding an event and the frame of reference which influenced the participants.
Reading HELPDESK
A growing number of Americans became convinced that the government under the Articles of Confederation was too weak to deal with the country’s problems. Among these problems were serious economic difficulties.
After the Revolutionary War, the United States went through a depression, a period when economic activity slows and unemployment increases. Wartime damage to Southern plantations led to a sharp drop in rice exports. Trade also fell off when the British closed the West Indies market to American merchants. The little money the government did have went to pay debts to foreign countries. This resulted in a serious shortage of money in the United States.
Shays's Rebellion
Economic troubles hit farmers hard. Unable to sell their goods, they could not pay their taxes and debts. This led state officials to seize farmers’ lands and throw them in jail. This treatment angered many farmers. Some began to view the new governmed as just another form of tyranny. They wanted the government to

Taking Notes; Comparing and Contrasting
As you read, use a diagram like the one shown to take notes about each individual's role for creating a new government.
A
More Perfect Union Leader	Role
Edmund Randolph	
James Madison	
Koqer Sherman	
Gouverneur Morris	
Content Vocabulary
•	depression • compron,l5{
•	manumission
•	proportional

issue paper money and make new policies to help those in debt. A group of farmers in Massachusetts made this plea to state officials:
PRIMARY SOURCE


W
Surely your honours are not strangers to the distresses [problems] of the people but... know that many of our good inhabitants are now confined in [jail] for debt and taxes. 99 from "Petition from the Town of Greenwich, Massachusetts"
Resentment boiled in Massachusetts. In 1786 angry farmers led by former Continental Army captain Daniel Shays forced courts in the western part of the state to close.
The goal was to stop judges from legally taking away farmers’ lands.
The farmers’ revolt grew. In January 1787, Shays led a force of about 1,200 supporters toward the federal arsenal, or weapons storehouse, in Springfield,
Massachusetts. The farmers wanted to seize guns and ammunition. The state militia ordered the advancing farmers to halt and then fired over their heads.
The farmers did not stop. The militia fired again, killing four farmers.
Shays and his followers fled, and the uprising was over. Still, Shays’s Rebellion frightened Americans. Concern grew that the government could not handle unrest and prevent violence. On hearing of the rebellion, George Washington wondered whether “mankind, when left to themselves, are unfit for their own government.”
Slavery in the New Republic
The Revolutionary War called attention to the clash between the American belief in liberty and the practice of slavery.
Between 1776 and 1786, 11 states—all except South Carolina and Georgia—outlawed or taxed the importation of enslaved people.
Slavery existed and was legal in every state. In the North, however, it was not a major source of labor. People in that region began working to end slavery in America. In 1774 Quakers in Pennsylvania founded the first American antislavery society.
Shays's Rebellion divided the young country during the difficult 1780s.
depression a period when economic activity slows and unemployment increases
SKILLS PRACTICE
Use the words who, what, when, and where to ask questions. Use the words you know in the questions.
Lesson 2 235
In the South, much ofthe wealth came from large plantations that used enslaved labor to grow valuable crops such as tobacco, rice, and later, cotton. The reliance on slavery tended to keep Southern states from investing in other parts of their economy. Southern cities remained smaller than those in the North because there were fewer businesses in the South. The South also did not devote itself to improving its transportation systems or training its people to build new businesses and industries.
CRITICAL THINKING
Identifying Central Issues Why do you think the white South was so committed to keeping a slave-based economy?
Six years later, Pennsylvania passed a law that provided tor the gradual freeing of enslaved people. Between 1783 and 1804, Connecticut, Rhode Island, New York, and New Jersey passed laws that gradually ended slavery there.
Still, free African Americans faced discrimination. They were barred from many public places. Only a few states gave them the right to vote. Most of their children had to attend separate schools from white children. In response, free African Americans set up their own churches, schools, and aid groups.
Slavery continued to spread south of Pennsylvania. The plantation system depended on enslaved labor, and many white Southerners feared their economy could not survive without it.
That fear did not stop a number of slaveholders from freeing enslaved people. The number of free African Americans increased in Virginia after that state passed a law that encouraged manumission (maneyuh.MIH.shuhn), the freeing of individual enslaved persons.
Around this time, American leaders were deciding that the Articles of Confederation needed to be strengthened. The question of slavery would make those discussions more difficult.
Reading HELPDESK
a READING PROGRESS CHECK
Explaining Why did farmers in Massachusetts rebel in 1787?
*
manumission the freeing of individual enslaved persons
4


i6 A More Perfect Union
The Constitutional Convention
guiding question How did leaders reshape the government?
Although the American Revolution led to a union of 13 states, it had not yet created a nation. Some leaders were satisfied with independent state governments that were similar to the old colonial governments. Others wanted a strong national government. They demanded a change in the Articles of Confederation. Among the leading Americans supporting reform were James Madison, a Virginia planter, and Alexander Hamilton, a New York lawyer.
The Convention Begins
In September 1786, Hamilton called for a convention, or meeting, in Philadelphia to discuss trade issues. He also suggested that this convention consider what possible changes were needed to make “the Constitution of the Federal Government adequate to the exigencies [needs] of the Union.”
George Washington at first was not enthusiastic about the meeting. Then, news of Shays’s Rebellion made Washington change his mind. He agreed to attend the Philadelphia convention, and the meeting took on greater importance.
The Convention began in May 1787 and continued through one of the hottest summers on record. The 55 delegates included planters, merchants, lawyers, physicians, generals, governors, and a college president. Three of the delegates were under 30 years of age, and one, Benjamin Franklin, was over 80. Many of the delegates were well educated. At a time when
few people went to college,
26 of the delegates had college degrees.
Native Americans,
African Americans, and women were not represented at the Convention. These groups were not considered part of the political process at that time.
Having Washington and Franklin at the Convention guaranteed the public trust.
THE 55 FRAMERS
Lawyers —►j
Merchants *
Other*
Politicians
12 8 4
fudges, Physicians, Planters, philosopher, Professor, Surveyer
Source: Fifty-Five Fathers: The Story ofthe Constitutional Convention
Ofthe 55 people attending the Constitutional Convention, nearly half were college educated.
USING MATH SKILLS
What was the most common occupation among the men who attended the Convention?
CRITICAL THINKING
Evaluating Why do you think it is important for government leaders to have knowledge of the law?
Reading in the Content Area: Circle Graphs
Academic Vocabulary
Circle or pie graphs show how a whole is divided into different parts. To read a circle graph, imagine that
the circle is a pie. Compare the different sizes ofthe different pieces. Use any numbers or labels to help you measure and compare the sizes of each piece.
convention a meeting
Lesson 2 237
f
Trust was important because the convention did not just amend, or revise, the Articles of Confederation. It produced an entirely new constitution. Some questioned whether the Convention had such authority.
Yet the work went on. Two men from Philadelphia also had key roles. James Wilson did important work on the details ofthe Constitution, and Gouverneur Morris polished the final draft. James Madison, who was a keen supporter of a strong national government, kept a record of the convention’s work. Madison is often called the “Father of the Constitution” because he was the author of the basic plan of government that the Convention adopted.
The Convention Organizes
The delegates chose George Washington to lead the meetings. Delegates also decided that each state would have one vote on all questions. Decisions would be based on a majority vote ofthe states present. Sessions were not open to the public. In fact, the windows were closed in the sweltering heat to keep anyone from listening in. This made it possible for the delegates to talk freely.
I
f
i;
II
The Virginia Plan
Edmund Randolph of Virginia opened the Convention with a surprise. He proposed the Virginia Plan, which called for a strong national government. The plan, which was largely the work of James Madison, created a government with three branches: a two-house legislature, a chief executive chosen by the legislature, and a court system. The legislature would have powers to tax, regulate trade, and veto state laws. Voters would elect members ofthe lower house of the legislature. The members of the lower house would then choose members of the upper house. In both houses the number of representatives would be proportional or corresponding in size, to the population of each state. This would give a state such as Virginia many more delegates than Delaware, the state with the fewest number of people.
Delegates from the small states objected. They preferred a system in which all states had equal representation. Opponents of the Virginia Plan rallied around William Paterson of New Jersey On June 15, he presented another plan. This plan amended the Articles of Confederation, which was all the Convention had the power to do.
4

Reading HELPDESK
proportional having the proper size in relation to other objects or items
Academic Vocabulary
amend to change or revise
A
More Perfect Union VIRGINIA AND NEW JERSEY PLANS
Virginia Plan
New Jersey Plan
Edmund Randolph proposed the Virginia Plan.
William Paterson proposed the New Jersey Plan.
LegislativeBrand)'
•	Powerful legislature
•	Two houses, with membership proportional to state's population
•	Lower house elected by the people
•	Upper house elected by lower house
Executive Branch
•	Chosen by legislature
•	Limited power
•	Could veto legislation, subject to override
Judicial Branch
•	Would serve for life
•	Could veto legislation, subject to override
Legislative Branch
•	One house with equal representation from all states
•	Legislature could collect taxes from states
Executive Branch
•	Chosen by Congress
•	Would serve a single term
•	Subject to recall on request of state governors
Judicial Branch
•	Appointed by executive branch
•	Would serve for life
Both Plans
Were federal systems with three branches—legislative, executive, and judicial
Gave the federal government more powers than it had under the Articles of Confederation
The New Jersey Plan
Under this plan, the legislature would have a single house, with each state having one vote. Paterson argued that the Convention should not deprive smaller states of the equality they had under the Articles. The New Jersey plan gave Congress the power to set taxes, regulate trade, and elect an executive branch made up of more than one person. In sum, the New Jersey Plan favored a more powerful government than existed under the Articles but a less powerful government than the Virginia Plan proposed. Breading progress check
Explaining Why did New Jersey's delegates object to the Virginia Plan?
Delegates at the Constitutional Convention considered different plans.
COMPARING
In what ways were the two plans similar? CRITICAL THINKING
Explaining Explain how proportional representation favored larger states.
SKILLS PRACTICE
Before you read text, build background by discussing the topic with a partner. Tell your partner what you know, listen to what your partner knows, and combine your background knowledge.
Lesson 2 239
4
II
George Washington (1732-1799)
George Washington's military service is well known. He also became a key political leader in his later years. Washington did not want to attend the Constitutional Convention, but he did because he worried that the nation would not survive under the weak Articles of Confederation. The delegates unanimously chose him as the presiding officer, or leader, ofthe Convention. Washington said very little during the debates but later became one ofthe new Constitution's strongest supporters. He argued that later generations could make any changes necessary.
CHICAL THINKING
Drawing Inferences What can you infer from the fact that the other delegates chose Washington as the leader of the Convention? Reading HELPDESK
Agreeing to Compromise
GUIDING QUESTION
What compromises were reached in the new Constitution? The delegates had to decide whether to revise the Articles of Confederation or write a new constitution. On June 19, the states voted to work toward a new constitution based on the Virginia Plan. They still had to deal with the difficult issue of representation that divided the large and small states.
The Great Compromise
The Convention appointed a committee to settle the disagreement. Roger Sherman of Connecticut suggested what would later be called the Great Compromise. A compromise is the settling of a dispute when each party agrees to give up some of its demands. Sherman’s compromise proposed different representation in the two-house legislature. In the upper house-the Senate—each state would have two members. That is, the states would be equal in representation. In the lower house—the House of Representatives—the number of seats for each state would vary based on the state’s population. Larger states would have more representation.
The Three-Fifths Compromise
Delegates from the South and North disagreed on whether— and how—to count each state’s enslaved population. Including enslaved people as part of a state’s population would increase each Southern state’s size. This would give Southern states more seats in Congress. The Southern states liked this, but the Northern states did not. At the same time, larger populations would increase each Southern state’s taxes, because states were to be taxed based on their populations. The South was not happy about this.
As a solution to this dispute, delegates agreed to what was called the Three-Fifths Compromise. As part of this compromise, every five enslaved persons would count as three persons in the state s population total. This population total would be the basis for setting taxes and determining representation in Congress.
The Question of the Slave Trade
Most Northern states had already banned the slave trade. They wanted to prohibit it nationwide. Southern states considered slavery central to their economy. Northerners agreed to keep the new Congress from interfering with the slave trade until 1808.

compromise a settlement of a dispute by each party giving up some demands
A
More Perfect Union 1
Debating a Bill of Rights
State constitutions, such as those of Virginia and
Massachusetts, had a listing of key rights and freedoms. These are known as a declaration of rights, or a bill of rights. At the Convention, some delegates worried that without a bill of rights, the new national government might abuse its power. George Mason of Virginia proposed a bill of rights to be included in the Constitution. The delegates rejected this idea. Most of the delegates believed that the Constitution carefully defined government powers and provided enough protection of individual rights.
Approving the Constitution
On September 17, 1787, the delegates assembled to sign the Constitution they had created. Three delegates refused to sign— Elbridge Gerry of Massachusetts and Edmund Randolph and George Mason of Virginia. Gerry and Mason would not sign because the Constitution did not have a bill of rights. Randolph, who had put forth the Virginia Plan, felt the final document strayed too far from his own beliefs.
The other delegates did sign the document. The approved draft of the Constitution went out to the states for their approval. Under the Articles of Confederation, all 13 states would have had to agree to any change to the framework of government. The drafters of the new Constitution decided, however, that the document would go into effect with the approval of just 9 of the 13 states.
O READING PROGRESS CHECK
Explaining What compromises were reached concerning enslaved people?
i
(
i
! I
I

Include this lesson's information in your Foldable®.
A
More, Perfect Union ' Articles of tbA\ Al'lew \\ Ratifying the Confederation M Constitution, Constitution, November n77^ay-Segembec^ 1787_1799
I
LESSON 2 REVIEW
Review Vocabulary
1.	Write a sentence about the Constitutional Convention that uses both of these terms. 3oa;3ob a. proportional b. compromise
Answer the Guiding Questions
2.	Summarizing What weaknesses in the national government did Shays's Rebellion reveal? 5A;isb:29b
3.	Describing Why did leading Americans decide to create a new constitution? ia
4.	Explaining What is the significance of the year 1787 in the nation's history? ic
5.	Analyzing Why did the Constitutional Convention adopt the Three-Fifths Compromise? 4d
EXPOSITORY WRITING
You have been asked to write a short announcement to inform your community about the Great Compromise. Summarize the key points ofthe agreement.
Include any other details you think are important.
4D;21(;29B;30D
Lesson 2 241
t

What DoYou
Think?
Should the Constitution Be Ratified?
After the delegates in Philadelphia wrote the U.S. Constitution, it went before the American people for approval. Delegates in each state met at special conventions to decide whether to accept or reject the Constitution. In order for the Constitution to become the new plan for the government of the United States, 9 of the 13 states had to ratify, or approve, it.
Those who opposed the Constitution were called Anti-Federalists. Mercy Otis Warren and the other Anti-Federalist writers feared a strong national government would take away the rights of citizens. Federalists supported the Constitution. They believed that the Constitution would give the national government power to manage the problems facing the United States. At the same time, the Federalists argued, the Constitution would protect the rights of the individual.
PRIMARY SOURCE



The Constitutional Convention met at Independence Hall.
MERCY OTIS WARREN
« Our situation is truly delicate & critical. On the one hand we are in need ofa strong federal government founded on principles that will support the prosperity & union ofthe colonies. On the other we have struggled for liberty & made lofty sacrifices at her shrine: and there are still many among us who revere her name too much to relinquish (beyond a certain medium) the rights of man for the Dignity of Government. 99
!l:
Ill'
III)
A
More Perfect Union The original Constitution of the United States is on display in the Rotunda for the Charters of Freedom in the National Archives Building.
JAMES WILSON
™ I am satisfied that anything nearer to perfection could not have been , accomplished. If there are errors, it should be remembered, that the seeds of | reformation are sown in the work itself, and the concurrence of two-thirds of | the Congress may at any time introduce alterations and amendments.... I am bold
to assert, that it is the BEST FORM OF GOVERNMENT WHICH HAS EVER BEEN OFFERED
TO THE WORLD.
99 What Do You Think? DBQ
Vocabulary
revere deeply love and respect relinquish give up reformation change concurrence agreement
0 Identifying According to Warren, why should people be cautious about the new government?
4E,15A
0 Summarizing According to Wilson, how can the Constitution be improved in the future? 4e,ua,29b
0 Analyzing What are the differences between Warren's and Wilson's views about ratification of the Constitution? 4E
Lesson 2 243
networks
There's More Online!
& BIOGRAPHIES
•	John Locke
•	Baron de Montesquieu eT GAME Identification sf graphic organizer
Branches of the Federal
Government
Ef primary source
The Ninth Pillar
Ef SELF-CHECK QUIZ
VIDEO
Reading HELPDESK
	
Lesson 3
A
New Plan of Government 
I
riAL QUESTION How do governments change?
* OTff Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills 4E Analyze the arguments for and against ratification.
15A Identify the influence of ideas from historic documents, including the Magna Carta, the English Bill of Rights, the Mayflower Compact, the Federalist Papers, and selected Anti-Federalist writings, on the U.S. system of government.
15C Identify colonial grievances listed in the Declaration of Independence and explain how those grievances were addressed in the U.S. Constitution and the Bill of Rights.
15D Analyze how the U.S. Constitution reflects the principles of limited government, republicanism, checks and balances, federalism, separation of powers, popular sovereignty, and individual rights.
17A Analyze the arguments of the Federalists and Anti-Federalists, including those of Alexander Hamilton, Patrick Henry, James Madison, and George Mason.
20A Explain the role of significant individuals such as Thomas Hooker, Charles de Montesquieu, John Locke, William Blackstone, and William Penn in the development of self-government in colonial America.
IT MATTERS BECAUSE
The Constitution contains features that came from the best political thinkers and that have helped the nation survive and thrive.
The Constitution's Sources
guidingquestion From where did the Framers of the Constitution borrow their ideas about government?
Although an American document, the Constitution has roots in other civilizations. The delegates who wrote the document studied the history of political thought in an effort to avoid the mistakes of the past. Many ideas found in the Constitution came from European political institutions and writers.
The Framers who shaped the document were familiar with the parliamentary system of Britain. Many had taken part in their colonial or state assemblies. They valued the individual rights guaranteed by the British judicial system. Although the Americans broke away from British rule, they respected many British traditions, or cultural beliefs and practices. European Influences
The English Magna Carta (1215) placed limits on the power of the monarch. Parliament, England’s lawmaking body, became a force that the king or queen had to depend on to pay for wars and the royal government. Like Parliament, colonial assemblies controlled their colonies’ funds. The assemblies had some control over colonial governors.

Taking Notes: Categorizing_______________
As you read, use a chart like this one to identify the powers of each branch of the federal government.
A
More Perfect Union Branch	Example
Executive	
Legislative	
Judicial	
Content Vocabulary
•	federalism
•	legislative branch
•	executive branch
•	Electoral College
•	judicial branch
•	checks and balan«
•	amendment
The English Bill of Rights of 1689 was another model for Americans. In fact, many people in the United States felt the Constitution also needed a bill of rights. The Framers believed in the ideas about the nature of people and government put forth by European writers of the Enlightenment. The Enlightenment was a movement of the 1700s that promoted knowledge, reason, and science as a means of improving society. James Madison and other Framers of the Constitution were familiar with the writings of John Locke and Baron de Montesquieu (mahn»tuhs«KYOO), two philosophers of the Enlightenment.
The English philosopher Locke wrote that all people have natural rights. He stated that these natural rights include the rights to life, liberty, and property. In his Two Treatises of Civil Government (1690), he wrote that government is based on an agreement, or contract, between the people and their government. Americans interpreted natural rights to mean the rights of Britons defined in the Magna Carta and the English Bill of Rights. The Framers viewed the Constitution as a contract between the American people and their government. The contract protected peoples natural rights by limiting government power.
The French writer Montesquieu declared in The Spirit of Laws (1748) that the powers of government should be separated and balanced against each other. This separation would prevent any one person or group from gaining too much power. The Framers of the Constitution carefully spelled out and divided the powers of government.
Federalism
The Constitution created a federal system of government that divided powers between the national, or federal, government and the states. Under the Articles of Confederation, the states held most powers. Under the Constitution, the states gave up some powers to the federal government and kept others. Federalism (FE.duh.ruh.lih.zuhm), or sharing power between the federal and state governments, is one of the key features of the United States government. Under the Constitution, the federal government gained wide-ranging powers to tax, regulate trade, control the currency, raise an army, and declare war. It could also pass laws that were “necessary and proper” for carrying out its responsibilities. This power would allow Congress to make laws as needed to deal with new situations.
John Locke influenced many of the Framers of the Constitution. His views on natural rights are reflected in the Constitution.
federalism sharing power between the federal and state governments
Academic Vocabulary
tradition a longstanding cultural belief and practice
Lesson 3 245
SKILLS PRACTICE____________
Use sign language and gestures when you don't know enough words. Point to pictures to tell about your text.
The Constitution left some important powers to the states. The states kept the power to control trade inside their borders. They also could set up local governments and schools and establish marriage and divorce laws.
The Constitution also called for the sharing of some powers between the federal and state governments. Both federal and state governments would have the power to tax and to establish criminal justice systems.
While states had powers and shared others with the federal government, the Constitution and the laws of Congress were to he “the supreme law of the land.” No state could make laws or take actions that went against the Constitution. Federal courts would settle disputes between the federal government and the states on the basis of the Constitution.
Q READING PROGRESS CHECK
Identifying How were the principles of the Magna Carta reflected in colonial assemblies?
Government Structure
guidingquestion How does the Constitution limit the po wer ofthe government!
The Declaration of Independence had listed the many grievances, or complaints, Americans held against King George III and Parliament. The grievances included “imposing taxes on us without our consent” and opposed “the rights ofthe people.” The Framers ofthe Constitution sought to address these grievances by limiting the power of government and protecting the rights ofthe citizens.
The Framers of the Constitution used Montesquieu s idea of a separation of powers. They divided the federal government
FEDERAL AND STATE POWERS
The Constitution gives exclusive powers to the state and federal governments, and it also calls for some powers to be shared.
O IDENTIFYING
What is an example of a power shared by the federal and state governments?
O CRITICAL THINKING
Making Generalizations Why do you think both the national and state governments have the powerto collect taxes?
National
Government
National and State Governments
State
Governments
Reading HELPDESK
Coin money
Maintain army and navy
Declare war
Regulate trade between states and with foreign nations
Carry out all expressed powers
Establish courts Enforce laws
Collect taxes Borrow money
Provide for general welfare
Regulate trade within a state
Protect public welfare and safety
Conduct elections Establish local governments
legislative branch the lawmaking branch of government
executive branch the branch of government that executes, or carries out, the law; headed by the president
Electoral College the special 0
of electors chosen to vote for president an vice president
A
More Perfect Union 
Congress, shown here listening to the president deliver the State of the Union speech, consists of both the House of Representatives and the Senate. Congress currently has 100 senators and 435 representatives.
into three branches: legislative, executive, and judicial. The first three articles, or parts, of the Constitution describe each branch’s powers and responsibilities.
Government Branches
Article I of the Constitution declares Congress to be the legislative branch, or lawmaking branch, of the government. Congress is made up of the House of Representatives and the Senate. The powers of Congress include establishing taxes, coining money, and regulating trade.
Article II of the Constitution sets up the executive branch to carry out the nation’s laws and policies. At the head of this branch are the president and vice president. A special group called the Electoral College elects the president and vice president. Today, voters in each state choose the electors who make up the Electoral College.
Article III deals with the judicial branch, or court system.
The nation’s judicial power resides in “one supreme Court” and any lower federal courts Congress creates. The Supreme Court and other federal courts hear cases involving the Constitution, federal laws, and disputes between states.
Checks and Balances
The Constitution contains a system of checks and balances. This means each branch of government has ways to check, or limit, the power of the other branches. With this system, no single branch can gain too much power in the government. You will learn more about this system in another chapter.
H READING PROGRESS CHECK
Explaining How is power in the federal government divided among the three branches of government?
judicial branch the branch of government that includes the courts that settle disputes and questions ofthe law
checks and balances a system by which each branch of government limits power of other branches
Academic Vocabulary
reside to exist in
Lesson 3 247
r Connections to-
TODAY
The Bill of Rights
Various groups have drafted their own specialized versions of the Bill of Rights. For instance, in 2010 New Jersey lawmakers drafted an “Anti-Bullying Bill of Rights.” This legislation was designed to protect students from bullying and cyberbullying. The bill calls for anti-bullying training for teachers and gives school administrators tools for responding to bullying.
CRITICAL THINKING
Drawing Conclusions Why do you think lawmakers today refer to the Bill of Rights when proposing and promoting legislation?
Debate and Adoption
guiding question How was the Constitution ratified?
Before the Constitution could go into effect, nine states had to ratify, or approve, it. Americans debated the arguments for and against the Constitution in newspapers, at meetings, and in everyday conversations.
Federalists and Anti-Federalists
People who supported the new Constitution were called Federalists. They took this name to stress that the Constitution would create a system of federalism, a government in which power is divided between the national government and the states. In a series of essays, known as the Federalist Papers, Alexander Hamilton, James Madison, and John Jay argued for ratification of the Constitution. To win support, the Federalist Papers reminded Americans of the flaws in the Articles of Confederation. Hamilton, Madison, and Jay claimed that the United States would not survive without a strong national government. The Constitution, they argued, would create a better framework of government that would maintain a federal system in which there was a separation of powers that would protect the rights ofthe people.
Those who opposed the Constitution were called Anti-Federalists. They wrote their own essays, which later came to be known as the Anti-Federalist Papers. Anti-f ederalists argued that a strong national government would take away liberties Americans had fought for in the American Revolution. They warned that the government would ignore the will ofthe states and favor the wealthy few over the common people. Anti-Federalists favored local government that was controlled more closely by the people. A Bill of Rights
The strongest criticism of the Constitution may have been that it lacked a bill of rights to protect individual freedoms. Several state conventions announced that they would not ratify it unless a bill of rights was included. George Mason, an Anti-Federalist from Virginia, expressed the problem:
PRIMARY SOURCE
Reading HELPDESK
There is not a declaration of rights, and the laws ofthe general government beim paramount to the laws and constitutions ofthe several States, the declarations of rig in the separate States are no security. 99
....— ■ ............. ■
amendment a change, correction, or improvement added to a document
from "Objections to This Constitution of Government/' September 178?
The Ninti PILLAR erected !
a The Ratification, of the Conventions of nine States, fhall be fufficient for the etbablifh-ment of this Conftitution, between the States fo ratifying the fame.” Art. vii. INCIPIENT MAGNI PROCEDERE MENSES.
The pillars in this cartoon represent the ratifying vote by each state convention.
CRITICAL THINKING
Drawing Conclusions Why is the ninth pillar significant?
Ratifying the Constitution
On December 7,1787, Delaware became the first state to approve the Constitution. By June 21,1788, the ninth state—New Hampshire-had ratified it. In theory, this made the Constitution law. However, without the support of the largest states—New York and Virginia— the new government could not succeed.
In Virginia, Anti-Federalist Patrick Henry claimed the Constitution did not place enough limits on government power. Still, Virginia did ratify the document after being promised that a bill of rights would be added as amendments (uh»MEHND»muhnts), or changes, to the document. This promise was met in 1791. In July 1788, New York ratified the Constitution, followed by North Carolina in November 1789
| and Rhode Island in May 1790.
I H READING
progress check £ Analyzing Why did Anti-Federalists oppose the ratification of the Constitution?
Foldables
; Study Organizer J
Include this lesson's information in your Foldable®.
A
More.'Perfect. Union ° Articles of th4\ M l',ew	Ratifying the
Confederation Vi Cor?t'^'°2' Constitution, November 1777$ May-S^temben$ 1787_1799
LESSON 3 REVIEW
Review Vocabulary
1.	Explain the relationship between the following terms. 3oa
a.	Electoral College b. executive branch
2.	Explain the significance ofthe following terms. 3oa
a.	federalism	d. checks and balances
b.	legislative branch	e. amendment
c.	judicial branch
Answer the Guiding Questions
3.	Analyzing How is federalism reflected in the U.S. Constitution? ud
4.	Analyzing Read the primary source quotation by George Mason. How did the addition of a bill of rights to the Constitution address the concerns of Anti-Federalists? ha
5.	Analyzing What argument did Federalists Hamilton, Madison, and Jay make in favor of ratifying the U.S. Constitution? iamejua
EXPOSITORY WRITING
Article 1, Section 8, ofthe U.S. Constitution gives Congress powers to "make all laws... necessary and proper" for carrying out its duties. Do you think the Anti-Federalists supported or opposed this idea? Explain. 2»b A
More Perfect Union Lesson 3 249
Activities A0
Directions: Write your answers using standard grammar, spelling, sentence structure, and punctuation.
O
Use your fj0®S3!S to explore the Essential Questions. EXPOSITORY WRITING
How would you explain the behavior of the people of the United States in the period between 1776 and 1783? Write a summary that explains the goals of the people in throwing off British rule, writing the Articles of Confederation, and then establishing the Constitution. Be sure to explain how these actions relate to the question of why people form governments, how governments affect people's lives, and how governments change. «; 29b; 2»d © Social Studies Skills
CITING SOURCES
With a partner, research to find information about Shays's Rebellion. Find an important fact from each of at least two sources and include a bibliography. Each item in the bibliography should include: the author of the source, its title, the publisher, and the publication date. 3ob © Thinking Like a Historian
IDENTIFYING cause AND EFFECT In a chart, identify at least three reasons Americans believed the Articles of Confederation needed to be strengthened.	isb;29d;3od
© Geography Activity
INTERPRETING MAPS
This map shows areas of Massachusetts that voted for and areas that voted against the ratification of the U.S. Constitution. Based on the map, where was Federalist support in Massachusetts weakest?	29c
VISUAL LITERACY
V

Vv
ATLANTIC
OCEAN

1___1 Areas that voted mostly
for ratification
L... .1 Areas that voted mostly against ratification
Lambert Conformant onic projection
A


30
A
More Perfect Union 1
Assessment
Directions: Write your answers using standard grammar, spelling, sentence structure, and punctuation.
CHECKING FOR UNDERSTANDING
O
Delegates to the Constitutional Convention of 1787 made several compromises. What compromises did they make? Why was compromise so important to the writing of the U.S. Constitution? ia:4D;2k 0 Using Standard Spelling Identify the appropriate word in each sentence from the choices provided.
a.	Congress asked the states to organize (they're, their) governments.
b.	Because of (its, it's) weakness, the Confederation had trouble with financial issues.
c.	"Surely (you're, your) honors are not strangers to the distresses of the people."
REVIEW THE GUIDING QUESTIONS
0 Explaining How did the Northwest Ordinance establish a democratic model for national expansion? What principles did it guarantee settlers in new territories? 6a
O
Identifying Problems What problems did the American government and Britain continue to have over the Treaty of Paris of 1783? sa 0 Identifying Why did the United States go through a depression after the Revolutionary War? sa
0 Describing What compromise did delegates from the North and South reach on the question of slavery?
0 Analyzing What was the main reason that Anti-Federalists Patrick Henry and George Mason opposed the ratification of the U.S. Constitution? 4E;i7A
0 Making Connections What ideas from the English Magna Carta influenced the Framers of the Constitution?
0 Identifying When was the U.S. Constitution written? When was it ratified by enough states to go into effect?
CRITICAL THINKING
0 Contrasting Why did the Framers of the Constitution divide powers between the federal government and
the states? How do those powers differ? isd;29b
Need Extra Help?	________
IfYou've Missed Question	o	o	o	o	0	0	0	0	0
Review Lesson	2		1	1	2	2	3	3	3
© Describing Describe how the weaknesses of the Confederation government led the country almost to the point of financial collapse, sa
© Explaining How did the ideas of John Locke influence the Framers of the U.S. Constitution? 2oa
© Explaining Why did slavery continue to spread after the Revolutionary War? How did the drafting of the Constitution reflect a growing divide between Northern and Southern states on the question of slavery? «b
© Analyzing How does the Constitution establish a system of checks and balances? How does this system reflect the principle of limited government? iso
© Drawing Conclusions Why did Anti-Federalist Patrick Henry call for amendments to the Constitution? Why did the Federalists promise to add these amendments? 4b,-i7A;29b
© Summarizing What happened in Shays's Rebellion? Why did the rebellion help convince George Washington to join the Convention? sa;29b
© Analyzing How did the Great Compromise solve a problem of representation at the Constitutional Convention? 4D
© Explaining Why did the Continental Congress establish a new national government in 1777? What document served as the basis for the new government?
© Explaining Why did it take several years to ratify the Articles of Confederation? 4t
© Explaining The Northwest Ordinance set up a process for settling western lands. What action did Congress take regarding the property rights in the new settlements? ma
© Identifying What writers are associated with the Federalist Papers? What position regarding the Constitution did these writers support? i7A
©	©	©	©	©	©	©	©	©	©	©	©
1	3	2	3	3	2	2	1	1	1	3	~T
251
rtii
»...... «
Assessment (continued)
© Evaluating Sources Based on Language Writers choose words according to their emotional meaning as well as their dictionary meaning. Review the writings by Mercy Otis Warren and James Wilson in the chapter feature. Identify words that Warren uses that have emotional meaning. Explain why Wilson capitalized the phrase at the end of the passage.
I SHORT RESPONSE
DBQ
PRIMARY SOURCE
"There shall he neither slavery nor involuntary servitude in the said territory.... Provided, always, that any person escaping into the same. . . such fugitive may be lawfully reclaimed and conveyed [transferred I to the person claiming his or her labor or service as aforesaid."
—Article 6 of the Northwest Ordinance, 1787
6A
® Explaining What practices were not allowed in the Northwest Territory?
® Finding the Main Idea What was the legal status of escaped enslaved people in the Northwest Territory?
29B
EXTENDED RESPONSE
® Persuasive Writing Write an essay in which you: 9e,jod
•	defend the Constitution as a model of democracy; or
•	express criticism of the Constitution based on differences between its ideals and the status of women and enslaved people in the 1700s.
STANDARDIZED TEST PRACTICE
ANALYZING DOCUMENTS
DBQ
PRIMARYSOURCE
"That [the Constitution] will meet the full and entire approbation [approval! of every state is not perhaps to be expected; but each will doubtless consider,
... that [the Constitution] may promote the lasting welfare of that country so dear to us all, and secure her freedom and happiness."
—George Washington, 1787
Summarizing Which most closely reflects Washington's main point? 29b
A.
The Constitution gives too much power to the legislative branch. B.
The Constitution is not popular and will never win approval. C.
The Constitution takes away too much power from the states. D.
The Constitution is good for the nation overall. ® Analyzing Which idea is not part of Washington's response? 29b
F.
All states will eventually approve it. Need Extra Hein? 6. Serving one state's interests would be harmful to the other states.
H.
The approval of every state is not expected. I.
The welfare of the country is important to all the states. IfYou've Missed Question	©	©	©	©	©
Review Lesson	1	1	2,3	2	
The Constitution
1788-Today
Seven Principles I
TVie
People
Rule
It is Madison's Virginia Plan that provides the basic framework and many of the central ideas of the Constitution. It is his detailed notes taken throughout the months of debate that serve as a record of the convention. Then, as the nation debates ratification, Madison's contributions to the Federalist Papers help persuade many Americans to accept the new document. Later, he sponsors the Bill of Rights, the first 10 amendments to the Constitution, which help protect the basic liberties Americans enjoy to this day.
EEEBS
Go to the Foldables® library in the back of your book to make a Foldable® that will help you take notes while reading this chapter.
A
More Perfect Union CHAPTER 9
Place and Time: The Nation s Capital 1788 to Today
The Constitution established a strong central government. The home of that government is the District of Columbia— Washington, D.C.
-	‘‘V


Step Into the Place
MAP FOCUS
Washington, D.C., serves as the capital of the United States and the home to many important buildings and offices. LOCATION
Between what two states is the district located? PLACE
What are some of the buildings or institutions of national importance located in v V»
■' •-Ci
V ■
v.'	,'1
A joint session of Congress—including both the House and the Senate—listens to the president deliver the State of the Union Address.
In the United States, immigrants can become citizens—and accept the rights and responsibilities that go along with it.
f
f ' J	t
Drawing Conclusions One of the
reasons that the site of Washington D.C., was chosen as the capital was that it was in the center of the country as it existed in 1790. What are the advantages of such
networks ef MAP Explore the interactive version of
There's More Online! this map on NETWORKS.
Ef TIMELINE Explore the interactive version of this time line on NETWORKS.
. Capitol Heights

1865
Thirteenth Amendment ends slavery
1870 Fifteenth Amendment protects African American voting rights
1920 Nineteenth Amendment establishes women's right to vote
	£ £ i	-Ir/w*
	Landover. Z /
	/	". iifl > zig
1974 President Nixon resigns as president
1954 Brown v. Board of	J
Education of Topeka ends segregation in public schools	f
2009 Barack Obama becomes first African American president |
Barack Obama
2009-
						
					i L»	
* 		IWU 	_l		1	or * _LJ		I o V	■ w	to *	*	f _u	d
networks
There's More Online!
Sf CHART/GRAPH
•	Amending the Constitution
•	The Federal Court System
eT DIAGRAM A System of
Checks and Balances
eT graphic organizer
Major Principles of the Constitution
eT SELF-CHECK QUIZ EC VIDEO
Lesson 1
Principles of the Constitution
AL QUESTION
Why do people form governments? 17EKS Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills _
15B Summarize the strengths and weaknesses of the Articles of Confederation.
15C Identify colonial grievances listed in the Declaration of Independence and explain how those grievances were addressed in the U.S. Constitution and the Bill of Rights.
15D Analyze how the U.S. Constitution reflects the principles of limited government, republicanism, checks and balances, federalism, separation of powers, popular sovereignty, and individual rights.
16A Summarize the purposes for and process of amending the U.S. Constitution.
16B Describe the impact of 19th-century amendments, including the 13th, 14th, and 15th amendments, on life in the United States. 18C Evaluate the impact of selected landmark Supreme Court decisions, including Dred Scott v. Sandford, on life in the United States.
19B Summarize rights guaranteed in the Bill of Rights.

Reading HELPDESK
IT MATTERS BECAUSE
The Constitution is the foundation of our country's government.
Our Constitution
GUIDINGQUESTION
What basic principles of government are set forth by the Constitution! The United States Constitution sets forth seven key principles upon which the American system of government rests. These principles are: (1) popular sovereignty, (2) a republican form of government, (3) limited government, (4) federalism, (5) separation of powers, (6) checks and balances, and (7) individual rights. The principles of the Constitution ensure government restraint as well as power. At the same time, the Constitution sets limits so that Americans need never fear tyranny.
Popular Sovereignty
The idea that the power of government lies with the people is called popular sovereignty, or “the right of the people to rule.” The Declaration of Independence had identified many grievances against King George III, including imposing taxes on the colonists without their consent and suspending their legislatures. The principles of the Constitution guard against the abuse of power by government. Republicanism
A republic is a government in which power is held by the people and exercised by their elected representatives. The principle of republicanism includes several ideas. Citizens have the opportunity to choose their representatives. Republicanism


Taking Notes: Listing______________________
As you read, use a diagram like the one shown to identify the seven major principles on which the Constitution was based.
256 The Constitution
Major
Principles^
Content Vocabulary
Popular sovereignty . enumerated P°wer
•	constitutional . reserved power
iwpublic	-concurrent power
•	limited government • republicanism
rejects the idea that the power to rule is inherited. Republicanism stresses the values of individual liberty and inalienable rights.
The Constitution establishes a republican form of government. A constitutional republic is a government in which the people rule through elected representatives who govern according to a constitution that limits the government’s power. Limited Government
The Framers were wary of a government that might take away people’s rights or favor certain groups. At the same time, they realized that the nation needed a stronger government than the Articles of Confederation had provided. Their goal was to establish limited government, in which the powers of government are strictly defined. A limited government has only those powers that are given to it by the people.
Federalism
The original 13 states had fought hard to win independence from Great Britain. The Articles of Confederation protected that independence, but it failed to create a national government strong enough to deal with many challenges the young nation faced.
The United States has a federal government, in which the many state governments and the single federal government share power. This system is known as federalism.
The Constitution creates the federal system. It explains how powers are distributed among different levels of government. The Constitution spells out the powers given to Congress and establishes the executive and judicial branches.
The Constitution lists enumerated powers, or those powers that are specifically given to Congress. Enumerated powers include the power to coin money, regulate interstate and foreign trade, maintain the armed forces, and create federal courts. The states cannot exercise these powers.
Reserved powers are those powers that belong to the states. The Constitution does not specifically list the reserved powers.
The Tenth Amendment declares that all powers not specifically granted to the federal government “are reserved to the States.”
The reserved powers include the power to establish schools, pass marriage and divorce laws, and regulate trade within a state.
Under the Constitution, the federal government and the state governments share certain powers. These are the concurrent powers. Examples of concurrent powers are the right to raise taxes, borrow money, provide for the public welfare,

republicanism favoring a republic with elected representation as the best form of government
The power to coin money is an enumerated power. Congress also has the power to print currency, such as the paper bills shown here.

0\
popular sovereignty the belief that government is subject to the will of the people constitutional republic a government in which citizens rule through elected representatives, according to a plan of government
limited government government with limited powers strictly defined by law enumerated power a power specifically given Congress in the Constitution
reserved power a power belonging only to the states concurrent power
a power shared by the states and
federal government
Lesson 1 257


The right to carry out criminal justice is a concurrent power, and the federal government and the states have their own justice systems.
and administer criminal justice. Each state and the federal government can exercise these powers at the same time.
While states have their own laws and powers, the Constitution is “the supreme Law of the Land.” If a state law contradicts the Constitution or federal law, the Constitution or federal law prevails. This is stated in Article VI, Clause 2, of the Constitution—the “Supremacy Clause.
Separation of Powers
To make sure no person or group in government has too much power, the Constitution provides for a separation of powers. This means the Constitution separates the legislative, executive, and judicial powers of government. It then places these powers in three different branches of government. Each branch has different—and limited—powers, duties, and responsibilities. Checks and Balances
The Framers did more than separate the powers of government. They set up a system of checks and balances. Under this system, each branch of government can check, or limit, the power of the other branches. This system helps maintain a balance in the power of the three branches.
Here is an example of how the system of checks and balances works: Congress (legislative branch) has the power to pass a law. If the president (executive branch) disagrees with the law, he or she can reject it through the presidential power of the veto. This veto power checks the power of Congress. At the same time, Congress can override the veto. This checks the power of the executive branch.
The United States Supreme Court (judicial branch) also has
important checks on the other branches. The Supreme Court has the power to interpret the Constitution and to decide whether or not actions by the legislative and executive branches are allowed.
Congress can check decisions made by the courts by beginning the process of changing the Constitution itself. For example, the Supreme Court ruled in the 1857 Dred Scott v. Sandford decision that African Americans—enslaved or free—were not citizens. In 1866 Congress proposed the Fourteenth Amendment. The amendment was meant to grant full citizenship to formerly enslaved African Americans. When ratified by the states in 1868, the Fourteenth Amendment had the effect of overruling the Dred Scott decision.
There are several other ways in which the branches of government check and balance one another. The diagram
separation of powers a principle by which powers
are divided among different branches of government to make
sure no one branch has too much power
individual rights constitutional principle that
recognizes people's fundamental rights
II
Reading HELPDESK

Academic Vocabulary
contradict to go against or state the opposite
258 The Constitution
A SYSTEM OF CHECKS AND BALANCES
Can impeach president;
Can override veto;
Can reject appointments;
Can refuse to approve treaties
Can impeach judges; Can reject appointment of judges
EXECUTIVE BRANCH
actions unconstitutional
JUDICIAL BRANCH
“A System of Checks and Balances” shows how each branch of government can check the power of the other branches.
Individual Rights
The Constitution that the Framers wrote in 1787 did not have a Bill of Rights. These ten amendments became part of the Constitution in 1791. They guarantee basic liberties and individual rights, including:
•	Freedom of religion
•	Freedom of speech and of the press
•	Freedom to assemble in groups and to protest against the government
•	The right to bear arms
•	The right to a speedy and public trial by jury
•	The right to be free from unreasonable searches and seizures by the government
•	Freedom from “cruel and unusual” punishments
Since 1791, other constitutional amendments have expanded on the rights of the American people. For example, amendments have abolished slavery, defined citizenship, guaranteed equal protection of the law” for all people, and guaranteed the right to vote for people aged 18 and older. Amendments have also authorized the direct, popular election of senators.
D READING PROGRESS CHECK
Each branch of government can check and balance the power of the other branches in several ways.
IDENTIFYING
What is an example of a legislative branch check on the judicial branch? CRITICAL THINKING
Analyzing Do you think the different branches of government are truly balanced? Why or why not?
Describing What is the purpose of the system of checks and balances?
Lesson 1 259
Amending the Constitution
guiding question How is the Constitution able to change over time?
The United States Constitution is one of the world’s oldest written constitutions. It is also a short document compared to many other constitutions. Its clear, direct language has helped support stable government for well over two centuries. At the same time, the Constitution has enabled government to adapt to changing times and to deal with challenges that the original Framers never dreamed of—from radio communications to nuclear power to space exploration and more.
The Constitution has changed as a result of formal amendment. The Framers allowed for this process when they wrote the Constitution. People have suggested many hundreds of amendments over the years. Yet the nation has amended its Constitution only 27 times. The Framers deliberately made the amendment process difficult.
As the diagram “The Amendment Process” shows, amending the Constitution involves two steps. The first is the formal proposal of an amendment. Congress can do this by a two-thirds vote. Also, two-thirds of the state legislatures can call a
THE AMENDMENT PROCESS
Af
Of the hundreds of amendments people have proposed or suggested, only 27 have become part of the Constitution.
Q IDENTIFYING
Where do amendments to the Constitution get their start? CRITICAL THINKING
Drawing Conclusions Do you
think the process for amending the Constitution is too easy, too difficult, or about right? Explain.
STEP 1:PROPOSAL A
constitutional amendment can be proposed in one of two ways: b At a convention called by 2/3 of the states
implied power power not enumerated in the Constitution but suggested in its language
a By 2/3 of the members of both the House & Senate
STEP 2: RATIFICATION After an amendment is proposed, it must be ratified. This too can be done in one of two ways:
Academic Vocabulary
involve to include
b By 3/4 of ratifying conventions in the
states
SKILLSPRACTICE
Read text with a partner. Help one another with the difficult sentences. Ask a teacher for help when you need it.

*

I

I
260 The Constitution
convention to propose an amendment, though this method has never been used.
The second step in the amendment process is ratification. Ratification of an amendment requires approval by three-fourths of the states. States can ratify the amendment at either a state convention or through a vote by the state legislature.
Amendments have brought significant changes to the nation. In addition to protecting our rights, amendments have extended the right to vote to a larger share of the population. The Fifteenth Amendment sought to ensure that African American men would have the right to vote. The Nineteenth Amendment extended voting rights to women. The Twenty-fourth Amendment outlawed poll taxes, giving more people the ability to vote. The Twenty-sixth Amendment lowered the voting age to 18.
Formal amendment is one way the Constitution has changed. The language of the Constitution has also been subject to different interpretations.
For example, over history, Congress has claimed for itself certain implied powers (ihm*PLYD). These are powers that are suggested but not directly stated in the Constitution. The source of the implied powers is Article I, Section 8, of the Constitution. Here is found the “necessary and proper clause,” or the “elastic clause.” This clause directs Congress to “make all Laws which shall be necessary and proper” for carrying out its duties.
Also in Article I, Section 8, is the “commerce clause.” This gives Congress power to “regulate Commerce with foreign Nations, and among the several States.” Congress has used this clause to expand its powers into areas, such as the regulation of television, that do not appear in the Constitution.
H READING PROGRESS CHECK
Summarizing What is the two-step process for amending the U.S. Constitution?
Over the course of American history, some unwritten customs of government have become so strong that they seem to have the effect of law. For example, until the Twenty-fifth Amendment, which was ratified in 1967, the Constitution did not specify that the vice president would assume the office of president in the event of a president’s death. Yet on eight occasions, that is exactly what happened. Each time the custom was applied, it acquired more force.
I
Include this lesson's information in your Foldable®
Foldables
l Study Organizer
i
LESSON 1 REVIEW
Review Vocabulary
1.	Write a paragraph in which you explain the differences among the following: 3oa; jod
a. enumerated power b. reserved power c. concurrent power d. implied power
2.	Explain the significance of the following terms: isd a. popular sovereignty b. limited government
Answer the Guiding Questions
3.	Analyzing Why did the Framers want to establish a system of limited government in the Constitution, and how did they accomplish that goal? isd
4.	Summarizing For what purposes has the U.S. Constitution been amended? Give specific examples. ha;29b
PERSUASIVE WRITING
Should Congress have the power to interpret the Constitution? Write a paragraph in which you argue for or against the wide application of the implied powers. 29E;3od Lesson 1 261
ihb u.
/mm
networks	|
There's More Online!	"
& BIOGRAPHY
Sandra Day O'Connor
GRAPHIC ORGANIZER
Branches of Government
ef SELF-CHECK QUIZ ef SLIDE SHOW The Oval Office ef VIDEO


.MSW;'
I
Lesson 2
3

I
— JL
VOTE
Government and the People
ITIAL QUESTION
Howdonewideaschangethewaypeoplelive? Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills
16B Describe the impact of 19th-century amendments, including the 13th, 14th, and 15th amendments, on life in the United States. 19C Explain the importance of personal responsibilities, including accepting responsibility for one's behavior and supporting one's family.
19D Identify examples of responsible citizenship, including obeying rules and laws, staying informed on public issues, voting, and serving on juries
19E Summarize the criteria and explain the process for becoming a naturalized citizen of the United States.
19F Explain how the rights and responsibilities of U.S. citizens reflect our national identity.
21B Describe the importance of free speech and press in a constitutional republic.
It Matters because
In a nation where the people rule, citizens must understand their government and their rights and responsibilities.
The Federal Government
guiding question What are the three branches of government?
To achieve a separation of powers, the Constitution divides the federal government into three branches. They are called the legislative, executive, and judicial branches.
The Nation's Legislature
Congress is the legislative branch of government. It has two houses—the House of Representatives and the Senate. Currently, the House has 435 voting members and 6 nonvoting delegates from the District of Columbia, Puerto Rico, Guam, American Samoa, the Virgin Islands, and the Northern Mariana Islands. Representatives, who must be at least 25 years old, serve two-year terms. There is no limit to the number of terms a person can serve.
The number of representatives from each state is based on the states population. States with more people have more representatives in Congress, though every state has at least one representative. The federal government resets each states share of the 435 House seats every 10 years. A states number of representatives may go up or down depending on population changes.
Reading HELPDESK

• naturalization
Taking Notes: Summarizing
Write a short summary of the job of each branch of government as you read along. Then compare how each branch differs from the other two. 262 The Constitution
Content Vocabulary
•	judicial review
•	due process
•	equal protection
The Senate has 100 senators, two from each state. Senators must be at least 30 years old, and they serve six-year terms. Only one-third of the seats come up for election every two years. As with House members, there are no term limits for senators.
Article I of the Constitution describes the role of Congress. Congress makes the nation’s laws. These laws are not just rules for behavior. Congress passes laws that impose taxes, authorize the spending of money, and create government programs. Congress also has the job of declaring war.
Both houses of Congress must agree on a bill, or proposed law. Once both houses do this, the bill goes to the president. If the president signs the bill, it becomes law.
The Executive Branch
The executive branch is led by the president and vice president, who each serve four-year terms. It also includes the president’s cabinet, or top advisers, and many other offices, departments, and agencies. The executive branch’s main job is to administrate, or carry out, the laws passed by Congress. The president does, however, propose laws to Congress.
The president has many other powers laid out in Article II of the Constitution. These include directing foreign policy, naming ambassadors, and negotiating treaties with other nations. The president is also the commander-in-chief of the armed forces.
The Constitution places the military under the control of the president, a civilian. The Framers realized that, if military force was not controlled, it could endanger the nation.
The Judicial Branch
Article III of the Constitution establishes a Supreme Court and allows for Congress to create lower courts. Congress has established district courts, which are the main trial courts for the federal government, and appeals courts, which hear cases on appeal from lower courts. There are several other types of federal courts as well. For example, there are special federal courts for hearing bankruptcy cases. Bankruptcy is a legal process for people or businesses that cannot pay off their debts.
The Supreme Court is at the top of the United States legal system. It rules on only the most difficult legal questions, and its rulings are never appealed.
The Supreme Court also has the power of judicial review.
The Court can review the actions of the executive and legislative branches to determine whether they violate the Constitution.
SKILLS PRACTICE
Look at the text used in class. Point to and say the words you know.
The Oval Office is the official office of the president of the United States.

! !
\\W
* * H f


judicial review power of the court to judge whether or not actions of other branches are constitutional
Academic Vocabulary administrate to carry out
BIOGRAPHY
Sandra Day O'Connor (1930-)
In his 1980 election campaign, Ronald Reagan promised to name the first woman justice to the Supreme Court. During his first year in office, a vacancy opened on the Court. Reagan chose Sandra Day O'Connor, an Arizona appeals court judge, to fill the vacancy. O'Connor served as a justice until 2006. In an interview, she discussed the increased opportunities for women she had witnessed: "When I went to law school, about 1 percent of all law students were women. And last year, over 50 percent were."
Members are nominated by the president and approved by Congress. Today the Supreme Court is made up of nine justices-the chief justice and eight associate justices. The Constitution gave Congress the power to set this number. Justices serve no fixed term. Unless removed for bad behavior, they stay on the bench until they retire or die.
The main duties of the justices are to hear and rule on cases they choose from among the thousands that are presented to them each year. They listen to arguments, and then they must present and explain their decision called the Courts opinion. This opinion is then used by lower courts in making their rulings, P READING PROGRESS CHECK
Identifying What parts of the Constitution discuss the establishment and duties of the three branches of our federal government?
CRITICAL THINKING
Identifying Points of View What view does Sandra Day O'Connor express about the progress of women's opportunities? Explain.
Reading HELPDESK
What it Means to be a Citizen
GUIDINGQUESTION
What are the rights and elements of participation of American atm? Citizens of the United States enjoy certain rights and liberties. Being a citizen also involves some responsibilities.
Our Rights
Our rights fall into three main categories: 1’he right to be protected from unfair government actions, the right to be treated equally with others, and the right to enjoy basic freedoms.
Our government must treat people fairly and accordingto clear rules. This is spelled out in the Fifth Amendment, which says no one shall “be deprived of life, liberty, or property, without due process of law.” Due process means the government must follow established procedures in taking action against a citizen.
The Fourteenth Amendment guarantees all people equal protection of the laws. This principle means all people, regardless of race, religion, or political beliefs, must receive the same treatment under the law.
The First Amendment outlines many of our basic freedoms These include freedom of religion, freedom of speech and of the press, freedom of assembly, and freedom to petition the government. The Framers knew that in a free society in which the people rule, people must be able to share ideas.
Our rights and freedoms have limits. For example, government can limit our freedom of speech or our right to hold a protest
I

due process the legal rules and procedures the government must observe before depriving a person of life, liberty, or property equal protection the equal application of the law regardless of a person's race, religion, political beliefs, or other qualities
naturalization
the process of becoming a citizen of another country
Academic Vocabulary
diminish reduce, make smaller
264 The Constitution
if it threatens public safety. Also, one person’s exercise of his or her rights cannot take away others’ rights. Limits on rights and freedoms must be applied equally to all people.
The Duties and Responsibilities of Citizenship
A citizen is a person who owes loyalty to a nation and is entitled to its protection. For the most part, anyone born on U.S. soil is automatically a U.S. citizen. U.S. soil includes American territories and military bases around the world.
Citizenship is also granted to anyone born outside of the United States if one parent is a U.S. citizen. A person who was born in another country can become a citizen through the process called naturalization (NA«chuh*ruh»lih.ZAY.shuhn).
A number of responsibilities—things we are expected or required to do—come with citizenship. For example, citizens must obey the law, pay their taxes, and sit on a jury if they are called. All males 18 and older must register with the government in case they are needed to defend the country. Exercising the right to vote is an important responsibility that allows citizens to participate in government and guide its direction.
Other responsibilities are more personal in nature. They include supporting one’s family, getting an education, and being informed about public issues. Respecting the property, rights, and opinions of others and being accountable for one’s behavior are also key responsibilities. If people do not fulfill their responsibilities as citizens, the quality of our government and communities is diminished.
B READING PROGRESS CHECK
Identifying What are some examples of responsible citizenship?
Early in United States history, voting was generally limited to white men who owned property. Today, the right to vote is available to most citizens 18 years of age or older.
f NOW
\VOTE
HEBE
CRITICAL THINKING
Drawing Conclusions Why do you think the people of the United States have steadily expanded the eligibility to vote?
Foldables
I
Study Organizer i Include this lesson's information in your Foldable®.
Seven Principles	line ^People Rule
	. ■ - - •" ' o
LESSON 2 REVIEW
Review Vocabulary
1.	Write a brief paragraph that includes the following terms: joa;jod
a. due process	b. equal protection
2.	Explain the significance of these terms: joa
a. judicial review	b. naturalization
Answer the Guiding Questions
3.	Analyzing How is the principle of separation of powers established by the U.S. Constitution reflected in the structure of the federal government? ud
4.	Explaining How do the responsibilities of citizenship reflect our identity as a democratic nation? i»f
5.	Explaining Explain at least two ways you can fulfill the responsibility of supporting or helping your family.
19C
EXPOSITORY WRITING
Write a letter to a citizen in another country explaining how the rights established by the First Amendment reflect our country's national identity. i9F;jod Lesson 2 265
« Activities
Directions: Write your answers using standard grammar, spelling, sentence structure, and punctuation.
O
Use your to explore the Essential Question. EXPOSITORY WRITING
Leading up to the American Revolution, the American colonists were upset by what they considered abuses of power by the British government. The Declaration of Independence listed the colonists'complaints. How did the U.S. Constitution and the Bill of Rights address the American grievances expressed in the Declaration of Independence. Write your response in an essay. isc;jod 0 Social Studies Skills
USING A DECISION-MAKING PROCESS
Should the Electoral College be replaced? Some Americans want to abolish it and replace it with a system that lets people vote directly for a president. In a small team, gather information about the Electoral College. List and consider the options, discuss their advantages and disadvantages, and then decide which option is best. Share your findings with the other teams. Discuss and evaluate the other teams'solutions. 29E
Thinking Like a Historian
CREATING DATABASES
Use your school or public library to research U.S. Supreme Court Cases during the time period 1792-1850. Choose four cases and collect this information: the name of the case, the year the opinion was rendered, and the conclusion of the case. Create a chart, organizing the information in rows and columns for easy reference. Discuss with your classmates how this information could be entered into a database for rapid retrieval and sorting, and why someone might want to keep track of information in this manner. 291
Geography Activity
interpreting MAPS The Constitution authorized the federal government to determine the population, or take a census, every 10 years. This map shows the results of the first census in 1790. The count included states and future states. Under the Constitution, which states or future states would have the fewest representatives in Congress based on the 1790 population figures? Explain how you arrived at your answer.

29H;29J
BRITISH TERRITORY
New Hampshire 141,885 Vermont* 85,539.	'
400 miles
0	400 km
Albers Equal-Area projection
.Jfritory
Northwest of Ohio R.
SPANISH
TERRITORY
J'/'- A-/
/ Maine^paft o/ Massachusetts)
/f96,540
-Massachusetts 378,787 ’-Rhode Island 68,825 ^Connecticut 237,946 " New Jersey 184,139 "Delaware 59,094 s Maryland 319,728
50 W


ATLANTIC
OCEAN
6O°W
* Vermont became a state in 1791 ** Kentucky became a state in 1792
Territory ’ South of Ohio R.
South Carolina 249,073
3$
ft*

70°W
Population
M
More than 450,000 IB 300,000-450,000 S® 150,000-300,000 LzJ 75,000-150,000 CZZ1 Less than 75,000 L_J Territories L_J Foreign lands 266 The Constitution
Assessment S3
Directions: Write your answers using standard grammar, spelling, sentence structure, and punctuation.
CHECKING FOR UNDERSTANDING
0 Summarize the rights guaranteed by each of the amendments contained in the Bill of Rights. 191$; isd
A.
First Amendment B.
Second Amendment C.
Third Amendment D.
Fourth Amendment E.
Fifth Amendment F.
Sixth Amendment 6.	Seventh Amendment
H.
Eighth Amendment I.
Ninth Amendment J.
Tenth Amendment REVIEW THE GUIDING QUESTIONS
0 Identifying How is serving on juries one of the duties ofa responsible citizen? wo
0 Summarizing What are some amendments that have become part of the Constitution since 1791?
29B
0 Identifying Cause and Effect What effect did the ratification of the Fifteenth Amendment have on life in the United States? wb;29b
0 Analyzing How does the U.S. Constitution reflect the principle of republicanism? isd
CRITICALTHINKING
0 Analyzing How is judicial review part of the checks and balances established in the U.S. Constitution?
150
0 Describing Why are freedom of speech and freedom of the press important parts of democratic government? When can the government limit free speech? 21B
0 Evaluating What did the Supreme Court decide in the Dred Scott v. Sandford easel How did Congress respond to the decision? i6b;i8a;ibc
0 Identifying Why do citizens of a democratic nation have the responsibility of staying informed? How does this responsibility help them participate in the election process? wd
0 Explaining How do our rights as citizens reflect our identity as a democratic nation ? mf
0 Evaluating How do the two houses of Congress establish a system of representation? Do you think the system is a fair and balanced way to represent the interests of the people? 29E
0 Analyzing Write a paragraph analyzing how the three branches of government work together to create a system of checks and balances. isd;jod
0 Analyzing How does the U.S. Constitution reflect the principle of popular sovereignty? isd
0 Identifying Our government is based on the principle of "consent of the governed." Explain why voting is part of responsible citizenship, wd
0 Applying Relative Chronology Read the descriptions of events which took place during the history of the United States. Place the events in the correct chronological order, ib
A.
Richard Nixon resigns as president. B.
Sandra Day O'Connor becomes the first female Supreme Court justice. C.
James Madison sponsors the Bill of Rights. D.
George Washington takes the oath of office as the first president of the United States. E.
Supreme Court rules that Dred Scott and all other African Americans are not citizens in Dred Scott v. Sandford. Need Extra Help?
IfYou've Missed Question	o	©	0	0	0	0	0	0	0		0	0	0	0	0
Review Lesson	Constitution	2	1	1	1	2	2	1	2	2	2	1	1	1	1
267
C0MFI1II
Assessment (continued) DBQ
SHORT RESPONSE
As Benjamin Franklin was leaving the last session of the Constitutional Congress, a woman asked, "Well, Doctor, what have we got: a republic oi a monarchy?" Franklin answered, "A republic, if you can keep it.
© Interpreting What do you think Franklin meant by his remark? 29b
© Identifying Points of View What does he suggest about citizen rights and responsibilities in a republic? 290
EXTENDED RESPONSE
© Expository Writing The Constitution contains features that allow for it to be changed and to be interpreted. Do you consider this to be a strength or a weakness of the Constitution? Write an essay to explain your view, jod
STANDARDIZED TEST PRACTICE
I ANALYZING DOCUMENTS
DBQ
PRIMARY SOURCE
"The complete independence of the courts of justice is peculiarly essential in a limited Constitution. By a limited Constitution, I understand one which contains certain specified exceptions to the legislative authority; such, for instance, as that it shall pass no bills of attainder Haws imposing punishment without a trial], no ex post facto [after the fact] laws, and the like. Limitations of this kind can be preserved in practice no other way than through the medium of courts of justice, whose duty it must be to declare all acts contrary to the manifest tenor of the Constitution void. Without this, all the reservations of particular rights or privileges would amount to nothing."
—The Federalist, No. 78
© Identifying In the Constitution, the power of one branch of the national government to limit the other branches is called isa
A.	civil rights.
B.	impeachment.
C.	checks and balances.
D.	bills of attainder.
© Identifying According to Federalist Ha 78, the Constitution should give courts the power to decide on the constitutionality of laws. This power is called
F.	judicial review.
G.	separation of powers.
H.	concurrent powers.
I.	popular sovereignty.
ISA
Need Extra Help?
IfYou've Missed Question	©	©	©	©
Review Lesson	1	2	1,2	1
268 The Constitution
The Constitution of the united States
The Constitution of the United States is truly a remarkable document. It was one of the first written constitutions in modern history. The Framers wanted to devise a plan for a strong central government that would unify the country, as well as preserve the ideals of the Declaration of Independence.
The entire text of the Constitution and its amendments follows. For easier study, those passages that have been set aside or changed by the adoption of amendments are printed in blue. Also included are explanatory notes that will help clarify the meaning of each article and section.
269
The Preamble introduces the Constitution and sets forth the general purposes for which the government was established. The Preamble also declares that the power of the government comes from the people.
The printed text of the document shows the spelling and punctuation of the parchment original.
Article I. The Legislative Branch
The Constitution contains seven divisions called articles. Each article covers a general topic. For example,
Articles I, II, and III create the three branches of the national government— the legislative, executive, and judicial branches. Most of the articles are divided into sections.
70 The Constitution
Preamble
We the People of the United States, in Order to form a more perfect Union, establish Justice, insure domestic Tranquility, provide for the common defence, promote the general Welfare, and secure the Blessings of Liberty to ourselves and our Posterity, do ordain and establish this Constitution for the United States of America.
Article I
Section 1
All legislative Powers herein granted shall be vested in a Congress of the United States, which shall consist of a Senate and House of Representatives.
Section 2
[ 1.] The House of Representatives shall be composed of
Members chosen every second Year by the People of the several States, and the Electors in each State shall have the Qualifications requisite for Electors of the most numerous Branch of the State Legislature.
[2.] No person shall be a Representative who shall not have attained the Age of twenty five Years, and been seven Years a Citizen of the United States, and who shall not, when elected, be an Inhabitant of that State in which he shall be chosen.
[3.] Representatives and direct Taxes shall be apportioned among the several States which may be included within this Union, according to their respective Numbers, " ■ shall be determined In adding to the wlmlc dumber free Pei sons, including 11 lose In i u n d l o Su r \ i c c I m a n of Years, and excluding I ndiaim mil luxed, Iliice lilflr ’ all other Persons. The actual Enumeration shall be made within three Years after the first Meeting of the Congress of the United States, and within every subsequent Term often Years, in such Manner as they shall by Law direct. The Number of Representatives shall not exceed one for every thirty Thousand, but each State shall have at Least one Representative; and until such enumeration shall be made, the State of New I lampslure shall he entitled to chuse three; Massachusetts eight, Rhode Island and Providence Plantations one, Connecticut five, dev-Ywe six, New Jersey four, Pennsylvania eight, Delaware one. Maryland six, Virginia ten, North Carolina five. South Carolina five, and Georgia three.
[4.] When vacancies happen in the Representation from any State, the Executive Authority thereof shall issue Writs of Election to fill such Vacancies.
[5.] The House of Representatives shall chuse their Speaker and other Officers; and shall have the sole Power of Impeachment.
Section 3
[1.] The Senate of the United States shall be composed of two Senators from each State, chosen by the Legislature thereof, for six Years; and each Senator shall have one Vote.
[2.] Immediately after they shall be assembled in Consequence of the first Election, they shall be divided as equally as may be into three Classes. The Seats of the Senators of the first Class shall be vacated at the Expiration of the second Year, of the second Class at the Expiration of the fourth Year, and of the third Class at the Expiration of the sixth Year, so that one third may be chosen every second Year; and if Vacancies happen by Resignation, or otherwise, during the Recess of the Legislature of any State, the Executive thereof may make temporary Appointments until the next Meeting of the Legislature, which shall then fill such Vacancies.
[3.] No Person shall be a Senator who shall not have attained to the Age of thirty Years, and been nine Years a Citizen of the United States, and who shall not, when elected, be an Inhabitant of that State for which he shall be chosen.
[4.] The Vice President of the United States shall be President of the Senate, but shall have no Vote, unless they be equally divided.
[5.] Ihe Senate shall chuse their other Officers, and also a President pro tempore, in the Absence of the Vice President, or when he shall exercise the Office of the President of the United States.
[6.] The Senate shall have the sole Power to try all Impeachments. When sitting for that Purpose, they shall be on Oath or Affirmation. When the President of the United States is tried, the Chief Justice shall preside: And no Person shall be convicted without the Concurrence of two thirds of the Members present.
[7.] Judgment in Cases of Impeachment shall not extend further than to removal from Office, and disqualification to hold and enjoy any Office of honor, Trust or Profit under the United States: but the Party convicted shall nevertheless be liable and subject to Indictment, Trial, Judgment and Punishment, according to Law.
Electing Senators Originally, senators were chosen by the state legislators of their own states. The Seventeenth Amendment changed this, so that senators are now elected by the people.
I
There are 100 senators, 2 from each I state. The vice president serves as president of the Senate.
Impeachment One of Congress's I powers is the power to impeach—
! to accuse government officials of j wrongdoing, put them on trial, and I if necessary remove them from
office. Which body has the power I to decide the official's guilt or I innocence?
Vocabulary____________________
impeachment: bringing charges against an official
president pro tempore: presiding officer of Senate who serves when the vice president is absent
indictment: charging a person with an offense
The Constitution 271
Section 4
[1.] The Times, Places and Manner of holding Elections for Senators and Representatives, shall be prescribed in each State by the Legislature thereof; but the Congress may at any time by Law make or alter such Regulations, except as to the Places of chusing Senators.
[2.] The Congress shall assemble at least once in every Year, and such Meeting shall he mi the Inst Meiidav in 1 )cceir.\ unless they shall by l aw appoint a dilleieiit 1 )a\.
Section 5
[1.] Each House shall be the Judge of the Elections, Returns and Qualifications of its own Members, and a Majority of each shall constitute a Quorum to do Business; but a smaller Number may adjourn from day to day, and may be authorized to compel the Attendance of absent Members, in such Manner, and under such Penalties as each House may provide.
[2.] Each House may determine the Rules of its Proceedings, punish its Members for disorderly Behaviour, and, with the Concurrence of two thirds, expel a Member.
[3.] Each House shall keep a Journal of its Proceedings, and from time to time publish the same, excepting such Parts as may in their Judgment require Secrecy; and the Yeas anti Nays of the Members of either House on any question shall, at the Desire of one fifth of those Present, be entered on the Journal.
[4.] Neither House, during the Session of Congress, shall, without the Consent of the other, adjourn for more than three days, nor to any other Place than that in which the two Houses shall be sitting.
Section 6
[1.1 The Senators and Representatives shall receive a
Compensation for their Services, to be ascertained by Law, and paid out of the Treasury of the United States. They shall in all Cases, except Treason, Felony and Breach of the Peace, be privileged from Arrest during their Attendance at the Session of their respective Houses, and in going to and returning from the same; and for any Speech or Debate in either House, they shall not be questioned in any other Place.
[2.] No Senator or Representative shall, during the Time for which he was elected, be appointed to any civil Office under the Authority of the United States, which shall have been created, or the Emoluments whereof shall have been encreased during such time; and no Person holding any Office under the United States, shall be a Member of either House during his Continuance in Office.
Section 7
[1.] All Bills for raising Revenue shall originate in the House of Representatives; but the Senate may propose or concur with Amendments as on other Bills.
[2.] Every Bill which shall have passed the House of Representatives and the Senate, shall, before it become a Law, be presented to the President of the United States; If he approve he shall sign it, but if not he shall return it, with his Objections to that House in which it shall have originated, who shall enter the Objections at large on their Journal, and proceed to reconsider it. If after such Reconsideration two thirds of that House shall agree to pass the Bill, it shall be sent, together with the Objections, to the other House, by which it shall likewise be reconsidered, and if approved by two thirds of that House, it shall become a Law. But in all such Cases the Votes of both Houses shall be determined by yeas and Nays, and the Names of the Persons voting for and against the Bill shall be entered on the Journal of each House respectively. If any Bill shall not be returned by the President within ten Days (Sundays excepted) after it shall have been presented to him, the Same shall be a Law, in like Manner as if he had signed it, unless the Congress by their Adjournment prevent its Return, in which Case it shall not be a Law.
[3.] Every Order, Resolution, or Vote to which the Concurrence of the Senate and House of Representatives may be necessary (except on a question of Adjournment) shall be presented to the President of the United States; and before the Same shall take Effect, shall be approved by him, or being disapproved by him, shall be repassed by two thirds of the Senate and House of Representatives, according to the Rules and Limitations prescribed in the Case of a Bill.

Section 8
[1.] The Congress shall have the Power To lay and collect Taxes, Duties, Imposts and Excises, to pay the Debts and provide for the common Defence and general Welfare of the United States; but all Duties, Imposts and Excises shall be uniform throughout the United States;
[2.] To borrow Money on the credit of the United States;
[3.] To regulate Commerce with foreign Nations, and among the
several States, and with the Indian Tribes;
[4.] To establish an uniform Rule of Naturalization, and uniform Laws on the subject of Bankruptcies throughout the United States,
[5.] To coin Money, regulate the Value thereof, and of foreign Coin, and fix the Standard of Weights and Measures;
[6.] To provide for the Punishment of counterfeiting the Securities and current Coin of the United States;
[7.] To establish Post Offices and post Roads;
Where Tax Laws Begin All tax
laws must originate in the House of Representatives. This ensures that the branch of Congress that is elected by the people every two years has the major role in determining taxes.
j How Bills Become Laws A bill may become a law only by passing both
J houses of Congress and by being signed by the president. The president
i can check Congress by rejecting— j vetoing—its legislation. How j can Congress override the
president's veto?
Powers of Congress Expressed j powers are those powers directly ) stated in the Constitution. Most of \ the expressed powers of Congress \ are listed in Article I, Section 8.These | powers are also called enumerated
powers beca u se they a re n u m bered
1-18. Which clause gives
Congress the power to declare war?
Vocabulary__________________________
bill: draft of a proposed law revenue: income raised by government resolution: legislature's formal
expression of opinion
impost: tax
naturalization: procedure by which a citizen of a foreign nation becomes a citizen of the United States.
The Constitution 273
Elastic Clause The final enumerated j power is often called the "elastic dause.''This clause gives Congress the right to make all laws "necessary and proper" to carry out the powers expressed in the other clauses of Article I. It is called the elastic clause because it lets Congress "stretch" its powers to meet situations the Founders could never have anticipated.
What does the phrase "necessary and proper" in the elastic clause mean? Almost from the beginning, this phrase was a subject of dispute. The issue was whether a strict or a broad interpretation of the Constitution should be applied.The dispute was first addressed in 1819, in the case of McCulloch v. Maryland, when the Supreme Court ruled in favor of a broad interpretation.
Habeas Corpus A writ of habeas corpus issued by a judge requires a law official to bring a prisoner to court and show cause for holding the prisoner. A bill of attainder is a bill that punished a person without a jury trial. An "ex post facto" law is one that makes an act a crime after the act has been committed. What does the Constitution say about bills of attainder?
Vocabulary_________
tribunal: a court insurrection: rebellion
[8.] To promote the Progress of Science and useful Arts, by securing for limited Times to Authors and Inventors the exclusive Right to their respective Writings and Discoveries;
[9.] To constitute Tribunals inferior to the supreme Court; [10.] To define and punish Piracies and Felonies committed on
the high Seas, and Offences against the Law of Nations;
[11.] To declare War, grant Letters of Marque and Reprisal, and make Rules concerning Captures on Land and Water;
[12.] To raise and support Armies, but no Appropriation of Money to that Use shall be for a longer Term than two Years;
[13.] To provide and maintain a Navy;
[14.] To make Rules for the Government and Regulation of the land and naval Forces;
[15.] To provide for calling forth the Militia to execute the Laws of the Union, suppress Insurrections and repel Invasions;
[16.] To provide for organizing, arming, and disciplining, the Militia, and for governing such Part of them as maybe employed in the Service of the United States, reserving to the States respectively, the Appointment of the Officers, and the Authority of training the Militia according to the discipline prescribed by Congress;
[17.] To exercise exclusive Legislation in all Cases whatsoever, over such District (not exceeding ten Miles square) as may, by Cession of particular States, and the Acceptance of Congress, become the Seat of Government of the United States, and to exercise like Authority over all Places purchased by the Consent of the Legislature of the State in which the Same shall be, for the Erection of Forts, Magazines, Arsenals, dock-Yards, and other needful Buildings, —And
[18.] To make all Laws which shall be necessary and proper for carrying into Execution the foregoing Powers, and all other Powers vested by this Constitution in the Government of the United States, or in any Department or Officer thereof.
Section 9
[1.] I he Migration or Import at ion ot such Pc i son s as anv of the States now existing shall think proper to admit, shall not he prohibited by the Congress prior to the Year one thousand eight hundred and eight, hut a l ax or duty may he imposed on such Importation, not exceeding ten dollars tor each Person.
[2.] The Privilege of the Writ of Habeas Corpus shall not be suspended, unless when in Cases of Rebellion or Invasion the public Safety may require it.
[3.] No Bill of Attainder or ex post facto Law shall be passed. [4.] No Capitation, or other direct, Tax shall be laid, unless
in Proportion to the Census or Enumeration herein before directed to be taken.
"ItT °r	°n Articles exported from any
274 The Constitution
[6.] No Preference shall be given by any Regulation of Commerce or Revenue to the Ports of one State over those of another: nor shall Vessels bound to, or from, one State, be obliged to enter, clear, or pay Duties in another.
[7.] No Money shall be drawn from the Treasury, but in Consequence of Appropriations made by Law; and a regular Statement and Account of the Receipts and Expenditures of all public Money shall be published from time to time.
[8,] No Title of Nobility shall be granted by the United States: And no Person holding any Office of Profit or Trust under them, shall, without the Consent of the Congress, accept of any present, Emolument, Office, or Title, of any kind whatever, from any King, Prince, or foreign State.
Section 10
[1.] No State shall enter into any Treaty, Alliance, or Confederation; grant Letters of Marque and Reprisal; coin Money; emit Bills of Credit; make any Thing but gold and silver Coin a Tender in Payment of Debts; pass any Bill of Attainder, ex post facto Law, or Law impairing the Obligation of Contracts, or grant any Title of Nobility.
[2.] No State shall, without the Consent of the Congress, lay any Imposts or Duties on Imports or Exports, except what may be absolutely necessary for executing its inspection Laws: and the net Produce of all Duties and Imposts, laid by any State on Imports and Exports, shall be for the Use of the Treasury of the United States; and all such Laws shall be subject to the Revision and Controul of the Congress.
[3.] No State shall, without the Consent of Congress, lay any Duty of Tonnage, keep Troops, or Ships of War in time of Peace, enter into any Agreement or Compact with another State, or with a foreign Power, or engage in War, unless actually invaded, or in such imminent Danger as will not admit of delay.
Article II
Section 1
[1.] The executive Power shall be vested in a President of the United States of America. He shall hold his Office during the Term of four Years, and, together with the Vice President, chosen for the same Term, be elected, as follows.
[2.] Each State shall appoint, in such Manner as the Legislature thereof may direct, a Number of Electors, equal to the whole Number of Senators and Representatives to which the State may be entitled in the Congress: but no Senator or Representative, or Person holding an Office of Trust or Profit under the United States, shall be appointed an Elector.
Limitations on the States Section 10 lists limits on the states. These restrictions were designed, in part, to prevent an overlapping in functions and authority with the federal
I government.
Article II. The Executive Branch
Article II creates an executive branch to carry out laws passed by Congress. Article II lists the powers and duties of the presidency, describes qualifications for office and procedures for electing the president, and provides for a vice president.
Vocabulary___________________
appropriations: funds set aside for a specific use
The Constitution 275
Previous Elections The Twelfth Amendment, added in 1804, changed the method of electing the president stated in Article II, Section 3. The Twelfth Amendment requires that the electors cast separate ballots for president and vice president.
Qualifications The president must be a citizen of the United States by birth, at least 35 years of age, and a resident of the United States for 14 years.
Vacancies Ifthe president dies, resigns, is removed from office by impeachment, or is unable to carry out the duties of the office, the vice president becomes president.
The Twenty-fifth Amendment sets procedures for presidential succession.
Salary Originally, the president's salary was $25,000 per year. The president's current salary is $400,000. The president also receives annual nontaxable expense and travel accounts. The president also receives living accommodations in two residences—the White House and Camp David.
[3.] The Electors shall meet in their respective States, and vote by Ballot for two Persons, of whom one at least shall not be an Inhabitant of the same State with themselves. And they shall make a List of all the Persons voted tor, and ol the Number of Votes for each; which List they shall sign and entity aud transmit sealed to the Seat ot the (jo\et nment ot the L ruled States, directed to the President ot the Senate. I he President of the Senate shall, in the Presence ot the Senate and 1 louse nt Representatives, open all the (.ertitnates, and the \otes shall then be counted. The Person having the greatest Number ot Votes shall be the President, it such Number he a \laiont\ ut the whole Number of Idee tors appointed; and it there he im than one who have such Majority and have an equal Numhe of Votes, then the 1 louse ot Representatives shall immediate, chuse by Ballot one ot them tor President; and it unperson have a Majority, then trom the'ti\c 1 ugliest on the' l ist the said House shall in like Manner June the President. I kit in clausing the President, the \ otes shall he taken hv States, the Representation from each State' ha\ ing one \ote; A quorum for this Purpose shall consist ot a Member or Members tron; two thirds ot the States, and a Majoritv ot all the' States shah be necessary to a Choice. In e\cry (fuse, a 11cr the' ( hoieeof the President, the Person having the greatest Number ot \m of the Electors shall be the \’iw President. But it there shouie. remain two or more who have equal V otes, the Senate shah chuse from them by Ballot the Vice President.
[4.] The Congress may determine the Time of chusing the Electors, and the Day on which they shall give their Votes; which Day shall be the same throughout the United States.
[5.] No Person except a natural born Citizen, or a Citizen of the United States, at the time of the Adoption of this Constitution, shall be eligible to the Office of President; neither shall any Person be eligible to that Office who shall not have attained to the Age of thirty five Years, and been fourteen Years a Resident within the United States.
[6.] In Case of the Removal of the President from Office, or of his Death, Resignation, or Inability to discharge the Powers and Duties of the said Office, the Same shall devolve on the Vice President, and the Congress may by Law provide for the Case of Removal, Death, Resignation or Inability, both of the President and Vice President, declaring what Officer shall then act as President, and such Officer shall act accordingly, until the Disability be removed, or a President shall be elected.
[7.] The President shall, at stated Times, receive for his Services, a Compensation, which shall neither be encreased nor diminished during the Period for which he shall have been elected, and he shall not receive within that Period any other Emolument from the United States, or any of them.
[8.] Before he enter on the Execution of his Office, he shall take the following Oath or Affirmation:—“I do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will faithfully execute the Office of President of the United States, and will to the best of my Ability, preserve, protect and defend the Constitution of the United States.”
Section 2
[1.] The President shall be Commander in Chief of the Army and Navy of the United States, and of the Militia of the several States, when called into the actual Service of the United States; he may require the Opinion, in writing, of the principal Officer in each of the executive Departments, upon any Subject relating to the Duties of their respective Offices, and he shall have Power to grant Reprieves and Pardons for Offences against the United States, except in Cases of Impeachment.
[2.] He shall have Power, by and with the Advice and Consent of the Senate, to make Treaties, provided two thirds of the Senators present concur; and he shall nominate, and by and with the Advice and Consent of the Senate, shall appoint Ambassadors, other public Ministers and Consuls, Judges of the supreme Court, and all other Officers of the United States, whose Appointments are not herein otherwise provided for, and which shall be established by Law: but the Congress may by Law vest the Appointment of such inferior Officers, as they think proper, in the President alone, in the Courts of Law, or in the Heads of Departments.
[3.] The President shall have Power to fill up all Vacancies that may happen during the Recess of the Senate, by granting Commissions which shall expire at the End of their next Session.
Section 3
He shall from time to time give to the Congress Information of the State of the Union, and recommend to their Consideration such Measures as he shall judge necessary and expedient; he may, on extraordinary Occasions, convene both Houses, or either of them, and in Case of Disagreement between them, with Respect to the Time of Adjournment, he may adjourn them to such Time as he shall think proper; he shall receive Ambassadors and other public Ministers; he shall take Care that the Laws be faithfully executed, and shall Commission all the Officers of the United States.
The Cabinet Mention of "the principal officer in each of the executive departments" is the only suggestion of the president's cabinet to be found in the Constitution. The cabinet is an advisory body and its power depends on the president. Section 2, Clause 1 also makes the president—a civilian—the head of the armed services. This established the principle of civilian control of the military.
Presidential Powers An executive order is a command issued by a president to exercise a power which he or she has been given by the U.S. Constitution or by a federal statute.
The Constitution places the military under the control of the president, a civilian.The Framers realized that, if military force was not controlled, it could endanger the nation. In times of emergency, presidents sometimes have used the executive order to override the Constitution and Congress. During the Civil War, President Lincoln suspended many fundamental rights, such as closing down newspapers that opposed his policies and imprisoning people who disagreed with him. Lincoln said that these actions were justified to preserve the Union.
The Constitution 277
Article III. The Judicial Branch The
term judicial refers to courts.
The Constitution set up only the Supreme Court, but provided for the establishment of other federal courts. The judiciary of the United States has two different systems of courts. One system consists of the federal courts, whose powers derive from the Constitution and federal laws.The other includes the courts of each of the 50 states, whose powers derive from state constitutions and laws.
Statute Law Federal courts deal mostly with "statute law," or laws passed by Congress, treaties, and cases involving the Constitution itself.
The Supreme Court A Court with "original jurisdiction" has the authority to be the first court to hear a case.
The Supreme Court has "appellate jurisdiction"and mostly hears cases appealed from lower courts.
Vocabulary__________________
original jurisdiction: authority to be the first court to hear a case
appellate jurisdiction: authority to hear cases that have been appealed from lower courts
3 Section 4
j	The President, Vice President and all civil Officers of the
J
United States, shall be removed from Office on Impeachment ’	for, and Conviction of, Treason, Bribery, or other high Crimes
j and Misdemeanors.
I
Article III
Section 1
j	The judicial Power of the United States, shall be vested in
i	one supreme Court, and in such inferior Courts as the
■	Congress may from time to time ordain and establish. The
Judges, both of the supreme and inferior Courts, shall hold their Offices during good Behaviour, and shall, at stated Times, receive for their Services, a Compensation, which shall not be diminished during their Continuance in Office.
Section 2
»	[1.] The judicial Power shall extend to all Cases, in Law and
Equity, arising under this Constitution, the Laws of the United States, and Treaties made, or which shall be made, under their Authority;—to all Cases affecting Ambassadors, other public Ministers and Consuls;—to all Cases of admiralty and maritime Jurisdiction;—to Controversies to which the United States shall be a Party;—to Controversies between two or more States;—between ,i si,ue,md( it:/, of another State; between ( 111/ ein> < > I J11 lei ent Staler — between Citizens of the same State claiming Lands under Grants of different States, and between a State, or the Citizens thereof, and foreign States, Citizens or Subjects.
[2.] In all Cases affecting Ambassadors, other public Ministers and Consuls, and those in which a State shall be Party, the supreme Court shall have original Jurisdiction. In all the other Cases before mentioned, the supreme Court shall have appellate Jurisdiction, both as to Law and Fact, with such Exceptions, and under such Regulations as the Congress shall make.
[3.] The Trial of all Crimes, except in Cases of Impeachment, shall be by Jury; and such Trial shall be held in the State where the said Crimes shall have been committed; but when not committed within any State, the Trial shall be at such
lace or Places as the Congress may by Law have directed.
Section 3
[1.] Treason against the United States, shall consist only in levying War against them, or in adhering to their Enemies, giving them Aid and Comfort. No Person shall be convicted of Treason unless on the Testimony of two Witnesses to the same overt Act, or on Confession in open Court.
[2.] The Congress shall have Power to declare the Punishment of Treason, but no Attainder of Treason shall work Corruption of Blood, or Forfeiture except during the Life of the Person attainted.
Article IV
Section 1
Full Faith and Credit shall be given in each State to the public Acts, Records, and judicial Proceedings of every other State. And the Congress may by general Laws prescribe the Manner in which such Acts, Records and Proceedings shall be proved, and the Effect thereof.
Section 2
[1.] The Citizens of each State shall be entitled to all
Privileges and Immunities of Citizens in the several States. [2.] A Person charged in any State with Treason, Felony, or
other Crime, who shall flee from Justice, and be found in another State, shall on Demand of the executive Authority of the State from which he fled, be delivered up, to be removed to the State having Jurisdiction of the Crime.
[3.] No Person held to Service of Labour in one State, under the haws thereof, escaping into another, shall, in Consequence of any haw or Regulation therein, be discharged from such Service or Labour, but shall be delivered up on Claim of the Party to whom such Service or habour may be due.
Section 3
[L] New States may be admitted by the Congress into this Union; but no new State shall be formed or erected within the Jurisdiction of any other State; nor any State be formed by the Junction of two or more States, or Parts of States, without the Consent of the Legislatures of the States concerned as well as of the Congress.
[2.] The Congress shall have Power to dispose of and make all needful Rules and Regulations respecting the Territory or other Property belonging to the United States; and nothing in this Constitution shall be so construed as to Prejudice any Claims of the United States, or of any particular State.
I

New States Congress has the power to admit new states. It also determines the basic guidelines for applying for statehood. Two states, Maine and West Virginia, were created within the boundaries of another state. In the case of West Virginia, President Lincoln recognized the West Virginia government as the legal government of Virginia during the Civil War. This allowed West Virginia to secede from Virginia without obtaining approval from the Virginia legislature.


Vocabulary___________________
treason: violation of the allegiance owed by a person to his or her own country, for example, by aiding an enemy
278 The Constitution
The Constitution 279
Republic Government can be classified in many different ways. The ancient Greek philosopher Aristotle classified government based on the question "who governs?" According to Aristotle, all governments belong to one of three major groups:
(1)	autocracy—rule by one person;
(2)	oligarchy—rule by a few persons; or (3) democracy—rule by many persons. A republic is a form of democracy in which the people elect representatives to make the laws and conduct government.
Section 4
The United States shall guarantee to every State in this Union a Republican Form of Government, and shall protect each of them against Invasion; and on Application of the Legislature, or of the Executive (when the Legislature cannot be convened) against domestic Violence.
Article V. The Amendment Process
Article V spells out the ways that the Constitution can be amended, or changed. All of the 27 amendments were proposed by a two-thirds vote s of both houses of Congress. Only	:
the Twenty-first Amendment was	j
ratified by constitutional conventions	f
of the states. All other amend-	i
ments have been ratified by state	j
legislatures. What is an amendment? j
Article VI. National Supremacy
Article VI contains the "supremacy ! clause." This clause establishes that the f Constitution, laws passed by Congress, f and treaties of the United States "shall j be the supreme Law of the Land." I The "supremacy clause" recognized	j
the Constitution and federal laws as	j
supreme when in conflict with those of } the states.	I
,„,J
Article V
The Congress, whenever two thirds of both Houses shall deem it necessary, shall propose Amendments to this Constitution, or, on the Application of the Legislatures of two thirds of the several States, shall call a Convention for proposing Amendments, which, in either Case, shall be valid to all Intents and Purposes, as Part of this Constitution, when ratified by the Legislatures of three fourths of the several States, or by Conventions in three fourths thereof, as the one or the other Mode of Ratification may be proposed by the Congress; Provided (hat m> A iiicii J mail wliiJi ma\ be . prior to the Year One thousand eight hundred and eight u in any Manner alleel the lirsi and loin th ( la uses m the Yu Section ofthe first Artie!.a; and that no State, without its Consent, shall be deprived of its equal Suffrage in the Senate.
Article VI
[i.] All Debts contracted and Engagements entered into, before the Adoption of this Constitution, shall be as valid against the United States under this Constitution, as under the Confederation.
'£■ [2.] This Constitution, and the Laws of the United States which shall be made in Pursuance thereof; and all Treaties made, or which shall be made, under the Authority of the United States, shall be the supreme Law of the Land; and the Judges in every State shall be bound thereby, any Thing in the Constitution or Laws of any State to the Contrary notwithstanding.
[3.] The Senators and Representatives before mentioned, and the Members of the several State Legislatures, and all executive and judicial Officers, both of the United States and ofthe several States, shall be bound by Oath or Affirmation, to support this Constitution; but no religious Test shall ever be required as a Qualification to any Office or public Trust under the United States.
i
Vocabulary_______________
amendment: a change to the Constitution
ratification: process by which an amendment is approved
f
Article VII
The Ratification of the Conventions of nine States, shall be sufficient for the Establishment of this Constitution between the States so ratifying the Same.
Done in Convention by the Unanimous Consent ofthe States present the Seventeenth Day of September in the Year of our Lord one thousand seven hundred and Eighty seven and of the Independence of the United States of America the Twelfth. In witness whereof We have hereunto subscribed our Names,
Signers
George Washington, President and Deputy from Virginia
New Hampshire
John Langdon
Nicholas Gilman
Massachusetts Nathaniel Gorham Rufus King Connecticut
William Samuel Johnson Roger Sherman New York
Alexander Hamilton
New Jersey
William Livingston David Brearley William Paterson Jonathan Dayton
Pennsylvania
Benjamin Franklin Thomas Mifflin Robert Morris George Clymer Thomas FitzSimons Jared Ingersoll James Wilson Gouverneur Morris
Delaware
George Read
Gunning Bedford, Jr.
John Dickinson Richard Bassett Jacob Broom
Maryland
James McHenry
Daniel of St. Thomas Jenifer
Daniel Carroll
ArticleVII. Ratification ArticleVII addresses ratification and declares that the Constitution would take effect after it was ratified by nine states.
Virginia
John Blair
James Madison, Jr.
North Carolina
William Blount
Richard Dobbs Spaight Hugh Williamson
South Carolina
John Rutledge
Charles Cotesworth
Pinckney
Charles Pinckney
Pierce Butler
Georgia
William Few
Abraham Baldwin
A J - K A
r II Attest: William Jackson,
Secretary
280 The Constitution
The Constitution 281
Bill of Rights The first 10 amendments are known as the Bill of Rights (1791). These amendments limit the powers of government. The First Amendment protects the civil liberties of individuals in the United States. The amendment freedoms are not absolute, however. They are limited by the rights of other individuals. What freedoms does the First Amendment protect?
Amendment I
Congress shall make no law respecting an establishment of religion, or prohibiting the free exercise thereof; or abridging the freedom of speech, or of the press; or the right of the people peaceably to assemble, and to petition the Government for a redress of grievances.
Amendment II
A well regulated Militia, being necessary to the security of a free State, the right of the people to keep and bear Arms, shall not be infringed.
Amendment VI
In all criminal prosecutions, the accused shall enjoy the right to a speedy and public trial, by an impartial jury of the State and district wherein the crime shall have been committed, which district shall have been previously ascertained by law, and to be informed of the nature and cause of the accusation; to be confronted with the witnesses against him; to have compulsory process for obtaining Witnesses in his favor, and to have the assistance of counsel for his defence.
Amendment III
No Soldier shall, in time of peace be quartered in any house, without the consent of the Owner, nor in time of war, but in a manner to be prescribed by law.
Amendment VII
In Suits at common law, where the value in controversy shall exceed twenty dollars, the right of trial by jury shall be preserved, and no fact tried by a jury, shall be otherwise reexamined in any Court of the United States, than according to the rules of common law.
Rights to a Speedy, Fair Trial A
basic protection is the right to a speedy, public trial. The jury must hear witnesses and evidence on both sides before deciding the guilt or innocence of a person charged with a crime.
This amendment also provides that legal counsel must be provided to a defendant. In 1963, the Supreme Court ruled, in Gideon v. Wainwright, that if a defendant cannot afford a lawyer, the government must provide one to defend him or her. Why is the right to a “speedy" trial important?
Rights of the Accused This amendment contains important protections for people accused of crimes. One of the protections is that government may not deprive any person of life, liberty, or property without due process of law. This means that the government must follow proper constitutional procedures in trials and in other actions it takes against individuals. According to Amendment I/, what is the function of a grand jury?
Vocabulary_________________________
quarter: to provide living accommodations
warrant: document that gives police particular rights or powers
probable cause: a reasonable basis to believe a person is linked to a crime
common law: law established by previous court decisions
Amendment IV
The right of the people to be secure in their persons, houses, papers, and effects, against unreasonable searches and seizures, shall not be violated, and no Warrants shall issue, but upon probable cause, supported by Oath or affirmation, and particularly describing the place, to be searched, and the persons or things to be seized.
Amendment V
| No person shall be held to answer for a capital, or 1 otherwise infamous crime, unless on a presentment or * indictment of a Grand Jury, except in cases arising in the
land or naval forces, or in the Militia, when in actual service in time of War or public danger; nor shall any person be subject for the same offence to be twice put in jeopardy of life or limb; nor shall be compelled in any criminal case to be a witness against himself, nor be deprived of life, liberty, or property, without due process of law; nor shall private property be taken for public use without just compensation.
Amendment VIII
Excessive bail shall not be required, nor excessive fines imposed, nor cruel and unusual punishments inflicted.
Amendment IX
The enumeration in the Constitution, of certain rights, shall not be construed to deny or disparage others retained by the people.
Amendment X
The powers not delegated to the United States by the
Constitution, nor prohibited by it to the States, are reserved to the States respectively, or to the people.
Amendment XI
The Judicial power of the United States shall not be construed to extend to any suit in law or equity, commenced or prosecuted against one of the United States by Citizens of another State, or by Citizens or Subjects of any Foreign State.
bail: money that an accused person provides to the court as a guarantee that he or she will be present for a trial
282 The Constitution
Powers of the People This amendment prevents government from claiming that the only rights
/ people have are those listed in the Bill of Rights.
Powers of the States The final amendment of the Bill of Rights protects the states and the people from an all-powerful federal government. It establishes that powers not given to the national government—or denied to the states—by the Constitution belong to the states or to the people.
i Suits Against States The Eleventh ;---i Amendment (1795) limits the
jurisdiction of the federal courts.
I
The Supreme Court had ruled that [ a federal court could try a lawsuit \ brought by citizens of South Carolina j against a citizen of Georgia. This case, j Chisholm v. Georgia, decided in 1793, ! raised a storm of protest, leading to s passage of the Eleventh Amendment.
The Constitution 283
Election of President and Vice President The Twelfth Amendment (1804) corrects a problem that had arisen in the method of electing the president and vice president.
This amendment provides for the Electoral College to use separate ballots in voting for president and vice president. If no candidate receives a majority of the electoral votes, who elects the president?
1..
Amendment XII
The electors shall meet in their respective states and vote by ballot for President and Vice-President, one of whom, at least, shall not be an inhabitant of the same state with themselves; they shall name in their ballots the person voted for as President, and in distinct ballots the person voted for as Vice-President, and they shall make distinct lists of all persons voted for as President, and of all persons voted for as Vice-President, and of the number of votes for each, which lists they shall sign and certify, and transmit sealed to the seat of the government of the United States, directed to the President of the Senate;—The President of the Senate shall, in the presence of the Senate and House of Representatives, open all the certificates and the votes shall then be counted;—The person having the greatest number of votes for President, shall be the President, if such number be a majority of the whole number of Electors appointed; and if no person have such majority, then from the persons having the highest numbers not exceeding three on the list of those voted for as President, the House of Representatives shall choose immediately, by ballot, the President. But in choosing the President, the votes shall be taken by states, the representation from each state having one vote; a quorum for this purpose shall consist of a member or members from two-thirds of the states, and a majority of all the states shall be necessary to a choice. And il the Ib i of Represcntatixcs shall not dumsc a I'rcsiUcnl whcnnc! the right nl choice shall devolve upon then), helore the lourth day ol March next lolluw no, then the \ ice I’leadc shall act as President, as in t he < esc nl the death nr other constitutional disahility ol l he Ih esidenI. The person having the greatest number of votes as Vice-President, shall be the Vice-President, if such number be a majority of the whole number of Electors appointed, and if no person have a majority, then from the two highest numbers on the list, the Senate shall choose the Vice-President; a quorum for the purpose shall consist of two-thirds of the whole number of Senators, and a majority of the whole number shall e necessary to a choice. But no person constitutionally ineligible to the office of President shall be eligible to that of Vice-President of the United States.
Amendment XIII
Section 1
Neither slavery nor involuntary servitude, except as a punishment for crime whereof the party shall have been duly convicted, shall exist within the United States, or any place subject to their jurisdiction.
Abolition of Slavery Amendments ; Thirteen (1865), Fourteen (1868),
and Fifteen (1870) often are called the Civil War amendments because they grew out of that great conflict.
5 The Thirteenth Amendment outlaws slavery.
Section 2
Congress shall have power to enforce this article by appropriate legislation.
Amendment XIV
Section 1
All persons born or naturalized in the United States, and subject to the jurisdiction thereof, are citizens of the United States and of the State wherein they reside. No State shall make or enforce any law which shall abridge the privileges or immunities of citizens of the United States; nor shall any State deprive any person of life, liberty, or property, without due process of law; nor deny to any person within its jurisdiction the equal protection of the laws.
Section 2
Representatives shall be apportioned among the several States according to their respective numbers, counting the whole number of persons in each State, excluding Indians not taxed. But when the right to vote at any election for the choice of electors for President and Vice President of the United States, Representatives in Congress, the Executive and Judicial officers of a State, or the members of the Legislature thereof, is denied to any of the male inhabitants of such State, being twenty-one years of age, and citizens of the United States, or in any way abridged, except for participation in rebellion, or other crime, the basis of representation therein shall be reduced in the proportion which the number of such male citizens shall bear to the whole number of male citizens twenty-one years of age in such State.
Section 3
No person shall be a Senator or Representative in Congress, or elector of President and Vice President, or hold any office, civil or military, under the United States, or under any State, who, having previously taken an oath, as a member of Congress, or as an officer of the United States, or as a member of any State legislature, or as an executive or judicial officer of any State, to support the Constitution
Rights of Citizens The Fourteenth ? Amendment (1868) originally was
intended to protect the legal rights j of the freed slaves. Today it protects
the rights of citizenship in general by prohibiting a state from depriving
j any person of life, liberty, or property J without"due process of law." In
addition, it states that all citizens have the right to equal protection of the law in all states.
Representation in Congress This section reduced the number of members a state had in the House of Representatives if it denied its citizens the right to vote. Later civil rights laws and the Twenty-fourth Amendment guaranteed the vote to African Americans.
Vocabulary
abridge: to reduce
284 The Constitution
The Constitution 285
Public Debt The public debt acquired by the federal government during the Civil War was valid and could not be questioned by the South. However, the debts of the Confederacy were declared to be illegal. Could former slaveholders collect payment for the loss of their slaves?
Right to Vote The Fifteenth Amendment (1870) prohibits the government from denying a person's right to vote on the basis of race. Despite the law, many states denied African Americans the right to vote by such means as poll taxes, literacy tests, and white primaries. During the 1950s and 1960s, Congress passed successively stronger laws to end racial discrimination in voting rights.
Election of Senators The
Seventeenth Amendment (1913) states that the people, instead of state legislatures, elect United States senators. How many years are in a Senate term?
Vocabulary________________
emancipation: freedom from slavery
of the United States, shall have engaged in insurrection or j	rebellion against the same, or given aid or comfort to the
:	enemies thereof. But Congress may by a vote of two-thirds
i of each House, remove such disability.
Section 4
f	The validity of the public debt of the United States,
i authorized by law, including debts incurred for payment of J pensions and bounties for service in suppressing insurrection
or rebellion, shall not be questioned. But neither the United
States nor any State shall assume or pay any debt or obligation incurred in aid of insurrection or rebellion against the United States, or any claim for the loss or emancipation of any slave; but all such debts, obligations and claims shall be held illegal and void.
Section 5
The Congress shall have power to enforce, by appropriate legislation, the provisions of this article.
I
Amendment XV I Section 1
The right of citizens of the United States to vote shall not be denied	or abridged	by	the	United States	or by	any
|	State on account of race, color,	or previous condition	of
j	servitude.
{
J
Section 2 J
4	The Congress shall have power to enforce this article by
appropriate legislation.
Amendment XVI
The Congress shall have power to lay and collect taxes on incomes, from whatever source derived, without
j apportionment among the several States and without regard to ?	any census or enumeration.
Amendment XVII
|	Section 1
The Senate ofthe United States shall be composed of two Senators from each State, elected by the people thereof, for six years; and each Senator shall have one vote. The electors in each State shall have the qualifications requisite for electors of t e most numerous branch of the State legislatures.
286 The Constitution
Section 2
When vacancies happen in the representation of any State in the Senate, the executive authority of such State shall issue writs of election to fill such vacancies: Provided, That the legislature of any State may empower the executive thereof to make temporary appointments until the people fill the vacancies by election as the legislature may direct. Section 3
This amendment shall not be so construed as to affect the election or term of any Senator chosen before it becomes valid as part of the Constitution.
Amendment XVIII
Section 1
Alter one year from ratification of this article, the manufacture, sale, or transportation of intoxicating liquors within, the importation thereof into, or the exportation thereof from the United States and all territory subject to the iurisdiction thereof for beverage purposes is hereby prohibited.

Section 2
the Congress and the several States shall have concurrent power to enforce this article by appropriate legislation.
Section 3
This article shall he inoperative unless it shall have been ratified as an amendment to the Constitution by the legislatures of the several States, as provided in the Constitution, within seven years from the date ofthe submission hereof to the States by the Congress.
Amendment XIX
Section 1
The right of citizens of the United States to vote shall not be denied or abridged by the United States or by any State on account of sex.
Section 2
Congress shall have power by appropriate legislation to enforce the provisions of this article.
Prohibition The Eighteenth Amendment (1919) prohibited the production, sale, or transportation of alcoholic beverages in the United States. Prohibition proved to be difficult to enforce. This amendment was later repealed by the Twenty-first Amendment.
Woman Suffrage The Nineteenth Amendment (1920) guaranteed women the right to vote. By then women had already won the right to vote in many state elections, but the amendment put their right to vote in all state and national elections on a constitutional basis.

The Constitution 287
"Lame-Duck" Amendments The
Twentieth Amendment (1933) sets new dates for Congress to begin its term and for the inauguration of the president and vice president. Under the ! original Constitution, elected officials J who retired or who had been defeated < remained in office for several months. : For the outgoing president, this period ran from November until March. Such i outgoing officials had little influence and accomplished little, and they were called lame ducks because they were so inactive. I/Pficif date was fixed as Inauguration Day?
Succession This section provides that ifthe president-elect dies before taking office, the vice president-elect becomes president.
Amendment XX
Section 1
The terms of the President and Vice President shall end at noon on the 20th day of January, and the terms of the Senators and Representatives at noon on the 3d day of January, of the years in which such terms would have ended if this article had not been ratified; and the terms of their successors shall then begin.
Section 2
The Congress shall assemble at least once in every year, and such meeting shall begin at noon on the 3d day of January, unless they shall by law appoint a different day.
Section 3
If, at the time fixed for the beginning of the term of the President, the President elect shall have died, the Vice President elect shall become President. If a President shall not have been chosen before the time fixed for the beginning of his term, or if the President elect shall have failed to qualify, then the Vice President elect shall act as President until a President shall have qualified; and the Congress may by law provide for the case wherein neither a President elect nor a Vice President elect shall have qualified, declaring who shall then act as President, or the manner in which one who is to act shall be selected, and such person shall act accordingly until a President or Vice President shall have qualified.
Section 4
The Congress may by law provide for the case of the death of any of the persons from whom the House of Representatives may choose a President whenever the right of choice shall have devolved upon them, and for the case of the death of any of the persons from whom the Senate may choose a Vice President whenever the right of choice shall have devolved upon them.
Section 5
Section 1 and 2 shall take effect on the 15th day of October following the ratification of this article.
Vocabulary
president elect: individual who is elected president but has not yet begun serving his or her term
288 The Constitution
Section 6	{
This article shall be inoperative unless it shall have-	|
been ratified as an amendment to the Constitution by the legislatures of three-fourths of the several States within seven years from the date of its submission.
Amendment XXI
Section 1
The eighteenth article of amendment to the Constitution of the United States is hereby repealed.
Section 2
The transportation or importation into any State, Territory, or possession of the United States for delivery or use therein of intoxicating liquors, in violation of the laws thereof, is hereby prohibited.
Section 3
This article shall be inoperative unless it shall have been ratified as an amendment to the Constitution by conventions in the several States, as provided in the Constitution, within seven years from the date of the submission hereof to the States by the Congress.
Amendment XXII
Section 1
No person shall be elected to the office of the President more than twice, and no person who had held the office of President, or acted as President, for more than two years of a term to which some other person was elected President shall be elected to the office of the President more than once. But this Article shall not apply to any person holding the office of President when this Article was proposed by the Congress, and shall not prevent any person who may be holding the office of President, or acting as President, during the term within which this Article becomes operative from holding the office of President or acting as President during the remainder of such term.
(
III)
Repeal of Prohibition The Twenty-first Amendment (1933) repeals the Eighteenth Amendment. It is the only amendment ever passed to overturn an earlier amendment. It is also the only amendment ratified by special state conventions instead of state legislatures.
Term Limit The Twenty-second Amendment (1951) limits presidents to a maximum of two elected terms.
It was passed largely as a reaction to Franklin D. Roosevelt's election to four terms between 1933 and 1945.
I
1
I


Section 2
This article shall be inoperative unless it shall have been ratified as an amendment to the Constitution by the legislatures of three-fourths of the several States within seven years from the date of its submission to the States by the Congress.
The Constitution 289
Electors for the District of Columbia
The Twenty-third Amendment (1961) allows citizens living in Washington, D.C., to vote for president and vice president, a right previously denied residents of the nation's capital. The District of Columbia now has three presidential electors, the number to which it would be entitled if it were a state.
Abolition of Poll Tax The Twenty-fourth Amendment (1964) prohibits poll taxes in federal elections. Prior to the passage of this amendment, some states had used such taxes to keep low-income African Americans from voting. In 1966 the Supreme Court banned poll taxes in state elections as well.
The Vice President The Twenty-fifth Amendment (1967) established a process for the vice president to take over leadership of the nation when a president is disabled. It also set procedures for filling a vacancy in the office of vice president.
This amendment was used in 1973, when Vice President Spiro Agnew resigned from office after being charged with accepting bribes. President Richard Nixon then appointed Gerald R. Ford as vice president in accordance with the provisions of the Twenty-fifth Amendment. A year later, President Nixon resigned during the Watergate scandal and Ford became president. President Ford then had to fill the vice presidency, which he had left vacant upon assuming the presidency. He named Nelson A. Rockefeller as vice president. Thus individuals who had not been elected held both the presidency and the vice presidency. Whom does the president inform if he or she cannot carry out the duties of the office?
Amendment XXIII
j	Section 1
j	The District constituting the seat of Government of the
!	United States shall appoint in such manner as the Congress
i	may direct:
|	A number of electors of President and Vice President
I	equal to the	whole number of Senators and	Representatives
J	in Congress	to which	the District would	be	entitled if it
were a State, but in no event more than the least populous State; they shall be in addition to those appointed by the States, but they shall be considered, for the purposes of the election of President and Vice President, to be electors appointed by a State; and they shall meet in the District and perform such duties as provided by the twelfth article of amendment.
Section 2
The Congress shall have power to enforce this article by appropriate legislation.
j Amendment XXIV
Section 1
The right of citizens of the United States to vote in any primary or other election for President or Vice President,
j for electors for President or Vice President, or for Senator or Representative in Congress, shall not be denied or abridged by the United States or any State by reason of failure to pay any poll tax or other tax.
|	Section 2
j	The Congress shall have power to enforce this article by
j	appropriate legislation.
1
I r
Amendment XXV
Section 1
j	In case of the removal of the President from office or his death
j or resignation, the Vice President shall become President.
j Section 2
j Whenever there is a vacancy in the office of the Vice | President, the President shall nominate a Vice President who j shall take the office upon confirmation by a majority vote of S both Houses of Congress.
290 The Constitution
Section 3
Whenever the President transmits to the President pro tempore of the Senate and the Speaker of the House of Representatives his written declaration that he is unable to discharge the powers and duties of his office, and until he transmits to them a written declaration to the contrary, such powers and duties shall be discharged by the Vice President as Acting President.
Section 4
Whenever the Vice President and a majority of either the principal officers of the executive departments or of such other body as Congress may by law provide, transmit to the President pro tempore of the Senate and the Speaker of the House of Representatives their written declaration that the President is unable to discharge the powers and duties of his office, the Vice President shall immediately assume the power and duties of the office of Acting President.
Thereafter, when the President transmits to the President pro tempore of the Senate and the Speaker of the House of Representatives his written declaration that no inability exists, he shall resume the powers and duties of his office unless the Vice President and a majority of either the principal officers of the executive department or of such other body as Congress may by law provide, transmit within four days to the President pro tempore of the Senate and the Speaker of the House of Representatives their written declaration that the President is unable to discharge the powers and duties of his office. Thereupon Congress shall decide the issue, assembling within forty-eight hours for that purpose if not in session. If the Congress, within twenty-one days after receipt of the latter written declaration, or, if Congress is not in session, within twenty-one days after Congress is required to assemble, determines by two-thirds vote of both Houses that the President is unable to discharge the powers and duties of his office, the Vice President shall continue to discharge the same as Acting President; otherwise, the President shall resume the power and duties of his office.
Voting Age The Twenty-sixth
Amendment XXVI
Section 1
1 Amendment (1971) lowered the voting age in both federal and state elections to 18.
The right of citizens of the United States, who are eighteen years of age or older, to vote shall not be denied or abridged by the United States or by any State on account of age.
The Constitution 291
Congressional Pay Raises The
Twenty-seventh Amendment (1992) makes congressional pay raises effective during the term following their passage. James Madison offered the amendment in 1789, but it was never adopted. In 1982 Gregory Watson, then a student at the University of Texas, discovered the forgotten amendment while doing research for a school paper. Watson made the amendment's passage his crusade.
Section 2
The Congress shall have power to enforce this article by appropriate legislation.
Amendment XXVII
No law, varying the compensation for the services of Senators and Representatives, shall take effect, until an election of representatives shall have intervened.
Joint meeting of Congress

'ill
292 The Constitution
T 7 -	•
- 4
4


Abigail Adams is thoughtful and smart. Like other women of her day, she does not lead a public life. Yet to her husband—patriot and now President John Adams—she is a trusted adviser.
During her husband's presidency, she watches with a keen eye as the first political parties form. She helps her husband identify his true friends— and his secret enemies.
Her involvement in politics shocks some people. For a time, it even costs her a dear friendship with Thomas Jefferson.
The division of the nation into different political parties was a trying time for the United States. It was one of the challenges facing the young nation in the Federalist Era.



IlillSgSfils
Goto the Foldables® library in the back of your book to make a Foldable® that will help you take notes while reading this chapter.
1 Rrst I^ IPresdency)	First Political Parties
i	;	1	
Zj )	)	
Conflicts!	!	1 I	1	1	
293
Chapter 10
Place and Time: United States 1789 to isoo
In 1790 the United States occupied the eastern areas of the continent, but people were moving to the l/l/esf. There were fewer states than today, but some were larger than they are now. Other countries controlled much of the land that now makes up the nation. Some areas were claimed by more than one country.
The United States 1790
A/


"jC
Step Into the Place
MAP FOCUS
The United States in 1790 was concentrated on the East Coast and surrounding areas. LOCATION
Look at the map. Where is your state located? Did your state exist in 1790? PACIFIC OCEAN
LOCATION
What other countries had territory near the new United States? s -CP
CRITICAL THINKING
Drawing Inferences What does this map suggest about why settlers in the United States were moving west?
Hawaii
PACIFIC
OCEAN
29B

200 miles I

0	200 km
Oblique Mercator projection
200 miles
0	200 km
Lambert Azimuthal Equal Aiea pm/cchon
Step Into the Time
TIMELINE
What events on this time line suggest that the United States was early in its history as a nation? 29c 1789 • Washington becomes first president
• Judiciary Act passes
1791 Bill of Rights added to Constitution
WORLD EVENTS
networks ef MAP Explore the interactive version of
There's More Online! this map on NETWORKS.
Ef TIMELINE Explore the interactive version of this time line on NETWORKS.
7O';W
George Washington 1789-1797
1795 Nation's first chief justice, John Jay, retires from the Supreme Court
John Adams 1797-1801
1798 • Alien and
Sedition Acts pass
• XYZ affair occurs
1800 • Congress meets in Capitol for first time
• Library of Congress founded
z
netw©rks
There 's More Online!
BIOGRAPHY
Alexander Hamilton
Bf charts/graphs
Protective Tariffs
Bf game
Crossword Puzzle
■ eT GRAPHIC ORGANIZER
;	Leaders and Roles
: eT SELF-CHECK QUIZ
i Ef SLIDESHOW
The U.S. Supreme Court
bT video


Lesson 1
The First President

TEKS
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills 1A Identify the major eras and events in U.S. history through 1877, including colonization, revolution, drafting of the Declaration of Independence, creation and ratification of the Constitution, religious revivals such as the Second Great Awakening, early republic, the Age of Jackson, westward expansion, reform movements, sectionalism, Civil War, and Reconstruction, and describe their causes and effects.
5A Describe major domestic problems faced by the leaders of the new republic such as maintaining national security, building a military, creating a stable economic system, setting up the court system, and defining the authority of the central government.
5B Summarize arguments regarding protective tariffs, taxation, and the banking system.
15B Summarize the strengths and weaknesses of the Articles of Confederation.
19B Summarize rights guaranteed in the Bill of Rights.
21C Summarize a historical event in which compromise resulted in a peaceful resolution. 22B Describe the contributions of significant political, social, and military leaders of the United States such as Frederick Douglass, John Paul Jones, James Monroe, Stonewall Jackson, Susan B. Anthony, and Elizabeth Cady Stanton.

Reading HELPDESK
Taking Notes: Describing_____________
As you read, use a table like this one to describe important figures in the nation's early years. Use as many as seven rows. 196 The Federalist Era
L QUESTION
What are the diaracteristia of a leader? it Matters Because
George Washington and his administration established many customs and processes that are still in place today.
Washington Takes Office
guiding question What dedsions did Washington and the new Congress have to mill about the new government?
Under the Articles of Confederation, the United States had several presidents. Their job was to lead Congress, and they were not strong chief executives. The government under the Articles was weak and ineffective. When delegates met to reform the government, they wrote a new Constitution that included a strong executive branch headed by a single president.
With the ratification of the Constitution and national elections, a new government was in place by the spring of 1789. On April 30, George Washington took the oath of office as the first president of the United States. During the early Republic era, the Washington administration and those that followed put finances in order, witnessed the birth of political parties, improved its transportation system, and more than doubled its territory. By 1824, the United States had been transformed into a strong independent nation.
Washington knew that his actions and decisions would set Pr®cedents (PREH«suh»duhnts), or traditions, that would help shape the nations future. “No slip will pass unnoticed,” he said. Washington worked closely with Congress to create an effective government. In those first years, the president and Congress created departments within the executive branch and set up the
Name	Role
George Washington	
	Vice President
Content Vocabulary
•	precedent
•	cabinet
•	bond
court system. Congress added the Bill of Rights to the Constitution. Washington set the standard for how long a president should serve and for how the nation should relate to other nations.
The Cabinet
The executive branch of government took shape during the summer of 1789. Congress set up three departments and two offices within the executive branch. Washington chose leading political figures to head them. He picked Thomas Jefferson to head the State Department, which handles relations with other nations. He named Alexander Hamilton to manage the nation’s money at the Department of the Treasury. Henry Knox was the choice to look after the nation’s defense as the secretary of the Department of War. To address the government’s legal affairs, Washington chose Edmund Randolph to be attorney general. Congress also created the office of postmaster general.
The department heads and the attorney general had many important duties. Among them was giving advice to the president.
Together, this group of top executive advisers formed what is called a cabinet.
Congress was unsure how much power the president ought to have over the cabinet. In a vote on this question, senators were evenly divided. Vice President John Adams broke the tie. He voted to allow the president the power to dismiss cabinet officers without Senate approval. This established presidential power over the whole executive branch.
Establishing the Court System The first Congress also faced the job of forming the nation’s court system. Some favored a uniform legal system for the entire nation. Others favored keeping the existing state systems. The two sides reached an agreement in the Judiciary Act of 1789. This act established a federal court system. The states kept their own laws and courts, j but the federal courts had the power to j reverse state decisions. The act marked | a first step in creating a strong and i independent national judicial system.

precedent something done or said that becomes an example for others to follow cabinet a group of advisers to a president
Academic Vocabulary
uniform ofthe same form with others
President Washington (far right) relied on the expert advice of his cabinet. Henry Knox is seated at left. Next to him are Thomas Jefferson, Edmund Randolph (back turned), and Alexander Hamilton.

Lesson 1 297

In 1789 Congress created a federal court system with three levels. Those three levels today include the district courts at the lower level, the appeals courts in the middle, and the Supreme Court at the top. Use the Internet to research this system, and create a chart or diagram that compares the powers of each level.
The Constitution established the Supreme Court as the finai authority on many issues. President Washington chose John Jay to lead the Supreme Court as chief justice. The Senate approved Jay’s nomination.
The Bill of Rights
Americans had fought a revolution to gain independence from British control. They did not want to replace one unjust government with another one. As protection from the powers of a strong national government, many Americans wanted the Constitution to include a bill ot rights. It would guarantee civil liberties. In fact, some states had agreed to ratify the Constitute only with the promise that a bill of rights be added.
To fulfill this promise, James Madison introduced a set of amendments during the first session of Congress. Congress passed 12 amendments, and the states ratified 10 of them, in December 1791, these 10 amendments, together called the Billot Rights, became part of the Constitution.
The Declaration of Independence had listed many grievances the American colonists held against King George III. To address those grievances, the Bill of Rights limits the power of government. It protects individual liberty, including freedom of speech and the rights of people accused of crimes. The Tenth Amendment says that any power not listed in the Constitution belongs to the states or the people. Madison hoped this amendment would help protect Americans against a national government that was too powerful.
The Supreme Court Building, built in 1935, is the seat of the Supreme Court of the United States.
READING PROGRESS CHECK
Listing What were three important actions taken by the first Congress?
Reading Strategy: Identifying Cause and Effect
A cause i an event that triggers some event. An effect is the event that occurs
as a result of the cause. Read about the Bill of Rights. Identify the cause that
triggered the effect-the ratification ofthe Bill of Rights.
298 The Federalist Era
bond a certificate that promises to repay borrowed money in the future—plus an additional amount of money, called interest
I
Photographs Division [LC-DIG-pga-03160]
The New Economy
guidingquestion How did the economy develop under the guidance of Alexander Hamilton?
As president, Washington focused on foreign affairs and military matters. He rarely suggested new laws and almost always approved the bills that Congress passed. For the government’s economic policies, the president depended on Alexander Hamilton, secretary of the treasury. Hamilton was in his early thirties when he took office, but he had bold plans and clear policies in mind.
Hamilton faced a difficult task. The federal and state governments had borrowed money to pay for the American Revolution. They now owed millions of dollars to other countries and to American citizens. As a result, the nation faced serious financial trouble. Hamilton tried to improve the government’s finances, establish a stable economic system, and strengthen the country at the same time.
Hamilton's Plan
The House of Representatives asked Hamilton to make a plan for the “adequate support of the public credit.
This meant that the United States needed a way to borrow money for its government and economy. To be able to borrow in the future, the government had to prove it could pay back the money it already owed.
Hamilton proposed that the federal government take over and pay off the states’ wartime debts. He argued that paying off the debt as a nation would build national credit and make it easier for the nation to borrow money.
Hamilton also believed that federal payment of state debts would give the states a strong interest in the success of the national government.
The Plan Faces Opposition
Congress agreed to part of Hamilton’s
plan—to pay the money owed to other
nations. However, Hamilton’s plan
to pay off the debt owed to American
citizens caused protest.
When borrowing money from citizens during the American Revolution, the government issued bonds. These are notes that promise repayment of borrowed money in the future.
Alexander Hamilton shaped the new nation's economy.
CRITICAL THINKING
Evaluating What effect did Hamilton believe his debt payment plan would have on the relationship between the states and the federal government?
7?
i* V
Lesson 1 299
PROTECTIVE TARIFFS
In the late 1700s, American industries lacked experience. As a result, it often cost American manufacturers more to make a product than it cost foreign makers. To raise the price of imported products, the U.S. government used protective tariffs. This helped protect American industries by making foreign-made goods more expensive and, therefore, less attractive to American buyers.
BREAKDOWN OF COST
Hat made in U.S,
Hat made in Britain
Britain
SKILLS PRACTICE
When you are speaking and do not know a word you want to use, think of a synonym. If you cannot think of a synonym, use a definition or description to tell the listener what you mean.
Reading HELPDESK
Tariffs affected the price consumers paid for goods.
USING MATH SKILLS
Use the figures above to calculate the cost of producing 100 hats in the United States and 100 hats in Britain. Which is greater?
USING MATH SKILLS
Now calculate the cost of buying 100 American-made and 100 British-made hats with the tariff. Which is greater?
CRITICAL THINKING
Speculating How might the issue of U.S.-imposed tariffs impact U.S. relations with Britain?

While waiting for repayment, many bond owners— shopkeepers, farmers, and soldiers—sold their bonds. They accepted less money than the bonds’ stated value. Olten, the buyers of these bonds were speculators, people who risk money in hopes of making a large profit in the future.
Now, Hamilton was proposing to pay off the old bonds at full value. This would make the speculators rich. The original bondholders would get nothing. Many people were upset by this idea. One newspaper said Hamilton’s plan was “established at the expense of national justice, gratitude, and humanity.”
Even stronger opposition came from the Southern states. These states had accumulated, or built up, much less debt than the Northern states. Several had already repaid their debts. Yet Hamilton wanted the entire nation to pay all the debt together, Southern states complained about having to help pay other states’ debts.
Compromise and a Capital
To win support for his plan, Hamilton worked out a conrprom's< with Southern leaders. If they voted for his plan to pay off the
state debts, he would support locating the nation’s capital in the South.	F
Congress ordered a special district to be laid out between Virginia and Maryland along the banks of the Potomac River. There, George Washington chose the site for the new capital city, later named Washington, District of Columbia, in his honor. While workers prepared the new city, the nation’s capital shifted from New York City to Philadelphia
Academic Vocabulary _____________________________
accumulate to build up or collect
compromise a settlement of a disagreement reached by each side giving up some of what it wants in order to reach an agreement 300 The Federalist Era
protective tariff a tax on
imported items designed to protect a country's industries from foreign competition
The Fight for a National Bank
Hamilton also asked Congress to create a national bank—the Bank of the United States. The proposed bank would hold government funds and make debt payments. It would also issue a single form of money for use throughout the nation. At that time, different states and banks issued their own currencies. Having a national currency would make trade and all other financial actions much easier.
Madison and Jefferson opposed a national bank, believing it would only help the wealthy. They argued that the Constitution did not give Congress the power to create a bank. Hamilton believed the Constitution indirectly gave Congress power to create a bank when it gave Congress power to collect taxes and borrow money. Washington agreed, and Congress created the national bank.
Tariffs and Taxes
Hamilton believed that the United States needed more manufacturing. He proposed protective tariffs—high taxes on imports. The tariffs would raise money for the government and protect American industries from foreign competition. The South had little industry and opposed such tariffs. Congress passed only low tariffs. Hamilton also believed the federal government had the right to impose direct taxes on the people and called for taxes to pay the national debt. Congress approved several taxes, including a tax on the manufacture of whiskey.
Hamilton’s ideas created conflict. Jefferson and Madison worried that Hamilton was building a dangerously powerful government run by the wealthy. They began to organize opposition to Hamilton and the policies he favored.
O READING PROGRESS CHECK
Explaining Why did Hamilton believe that paying off states' wartime debts was important for the future of the nation?
SKILLS PRACTICE______________
Work with a partner. Take turns using your vocabulary words in sentences.
Include this lesson's information in your Foldable®
LESSON 1 REVIEW
Review Vocabulary
1.	Some words have more than one meaning. Use a dictionary to find second meanings for the lesson vocabulary words cabinet and uniform. Write grammatically-correct sentences using these these terms with their alternate meanings. 3ob
2.	Explain the meaning of the term protective tariffs and why Hamilton believed they would help the United States. sb,-3oa
Answer the Guiding Questions
3.	Describing Describe the nation's court system that was established by the Judiciary Act of 1789. sa
4.	Summarizing What were the arguments for and against Hamilton's plans for a national bank? sb;29b
EXPOSITORY WRITING
How was President George Washington's leadership important in shaping the new national government? Write a paragraph explaining the qualities that made Washington an effective leader. ia;22a;3od Lesson 1 301
I
Texasjssential Knowledge and Skills 1A Identify the major eras and events in U.S. history through 1877, including colonization, revolution, drafting ofthe Declaration of Independence, creation and ratification ofthe Constitution, religious revivals such as the Second Great Awakening, early republic, the Age of Jackson, westward expansion, reform movements, sectionalism, Civil War, and Reconstruction, and describe their causes and effects.
SA
Describe major domestic problems faced by the leaders ofthe new republic such as maintaining national security, building a military, creating a stable economic system, setting up the court system, and defining the authority of the central government. SB
Summarize arguments regarding protective tariffs, taxation, and the banking system. 5E Identify the foreign policies of presidents Washington through Monroe and explain the impact of Washington's Farewell Address and the Monroe Doctrine.
22A Analyze the leadership qualities of elected and appointed leaders ofthe United States such as George Washington, John Marshall, and Abraham Lincoln.
23C Identify ways conflicts between people from various racial, ethnic, and religious groups were resolved.
IT MATTERS BECAUSE
George Washington's strong leadership brought stability to the young government.
Trouble in the New Nation
guidingquestion What challenges on the frontier did the new government face?
Washington faced difficult challenges while in office. Britain and France were pushing the United States to get more involved in their conflicts. President Washington stood firm against this pressure. Native Americans, aided by the British and Spanish, fought the westward advance of American settlers. In addition, there was growing unrest from within the American population, The Whiskey Rebellion
The new government wanted to collect taxes on some products made in the United States. In 1791 Congress passed a tax on the manufacture and sale of whiskey, a type of alcohol made from grain. Western Pennsylvania farmers were especially upset by this tax. Their anger turned into violence in July 1794. An armed mob attacked tax collectors and burned down buildings. This protest, called the Whiskey Rebellion, alarmed government leaders. They viewed it as a challenge to the power of the new government. Washington sent federal troops to meet the challenge. His action sent a strong message to the public: The government would use force to maintain order.

Reading HELPDESK
Taking Notes: Identifying Cause and Effect
As you read, use a diagram like this one to describe how the treaties mentioned in this lesson affected the United States.
502 The Federalist Era
k
Treaty
Treaty of
Greenville
Jsy s Treaty
I
Pinckney’s Treaty Effect
Content Vocabulary
• impressment
Challenges in the West
Washington worried about ongoing European interest in the Northwest Territory. The British and Spanish were trying to stir up Native American anger against American settlers in the region. To block these efforts, Washington signed treaties with Native American groups. Yet American settlers ignored the treaties and moved onto lands promised to Native Americans. Fighting broke out between the two groups.
Again, Washington decided to use force. He sent an army under General Arthur St. Clair to restore order in the Northwest Territory. In November 1791, St. Clair’s army met a strong Native American force led by Little Turtle, a Miami chief. More than 600 U.S. soldiers died in the battle. It was the worst defeat U.S. forces had ever suffered against Native Americans.
Americans hoped an alliance with France would help them achieve full control in the West. The possibility of French involvement led Great Britain to take action. In 1794 the British urged Native Americans to destroy American settlements west of the Appalachians. The British also began building a new fort in Ohio.
Native Americans demanded that settlers who were living north of the Ohio River leave the area. In response, Washington sent Anthony Wayne, a Revolutionary War general, to the region.
The United States fought with Native Americans in the Northwest Territory for control of land and resources.
GEOGRAPHY CONNECTION
PLACE
In what present-day state was most ofthe land ceded by the Native Americans in the Treaty of Greenville? CRITICAL THINKING
Speculating Why do you think the Native Americans were willing to make the Treaty of Greenville with the United States?
Atademit Vocabulary
maintain to keep
Lesson 2 303
BIOGRAPHY
John Jay (1745-1829)
John Jay attended college at the age of 14 and the First Continental Congress at the age of 28. Later, with Alexander Hamilton and James Madison, he wrote essays for The Federalist defending the Constitution.
George Washington appointed Jay the first chief justice ofthe United States in 1789.To avoid warwith Great Britain, Jay negotiated Jay's Treaty. This unpopular treaty ruined his chances for the presidency.
In August 1794, Wayne’s army defeated more than 1,000 Native Americans under Shawnee chief Blue Jacket. The Battle of Fallen Timbers, near present-day Toledo, Ohio, crushed the Native Americans’ hopes of keeping their land. In the Treaty of Greenville (1795), Native American leaders agreed to surrender most of the land in what is now Ohio.
Q READING PROGRESS CHECK
Analyzing Why did Washington's efforts to gain the peaceful cooperation of Native Americans in the West fail?
TNI

CRITICAL THINKING
Drawing Inferences What can you infer about Jay based on his accomplishments in life? SKILLS PRACTICE
Pay attention to gestures people make as they speak. If the teacher explains the meaning of words before the lesson, listen for them in the lesson.
Reading HELPDESK
Problems with Europe
guidingquestion Why did Washington want to remain neutral in foreign conflkti
In 1789 France erupted in revolution. Americans cheered at first as the French rose up against their king. The French struggle against royal tyranny was familiar to them. By 1793, however, the revolution had turned terribly violent. Some Americans were horrified by the bloodshed. Public opinion became divided.
When Britain and France went to war in 1793, some Americans sympathized with France. Others supported Britain. Washington hoped that the United States could stay neutral and not take either side.
Washington Struggles to Stay Neutral
Staying neutral proved difficult. The French tried to draw the United States into their conflict with Britain. They sent Edmond Genet (zhuh«NAY) to ask American volunteers to attack British ships. President Washington issued the Proclamation of Neutrality, which prohibited Americans from fighting in the war. The proclamation also barred French and British warships from American ports. Congress responded to the conflict by creatinga new navy in 1794.
Britain also challenged Washington’s desire for neutrality. The British captured American ships that traded with the French Then, they forced the American crews into the British navy. Americans were outraged by this practice of impressment.
Washington sent John Jay, chief justice ofthe United States, to discuss a solution with the British. The result of this negotiation was called Jay’s Treaty. In the treaty, the British agreed to withdraw from American soil. There was no mention of impressment or British interference with American trade. Few
impressment seizing people against their will and forcing them to serve in the military or other public service
The Federalist Era
Academic Vocabulary issue to deliver or hand out
Build Vocabulary: MultipleMeanto!!^
The word issue can also be a noun, meaning 3 troublesome subject," as in the sentence, "I W9,IJ the issue to the rest ofthe class."
’\
Americans approved of the treaty.	7 k	w
Washington also found fault with it but believed it would end the crisis. After fierce debate, the Senate approved Jay’s Treaty in a close vote.
Pinckney's Treaty With
Spain
Spanish leaders were nervous
about Jay’s Treaty. They feared
that the United States and Great
Britain would now work together
against Spain in North America.
Washington sent U.S. diplomat
Thomas Pinckney to Spain to
settle differences between the nations. In 1795 Pinckney’s Treaty gave the Americans free navigation of the Mississippi River and the right to trade at New Orleans.
Washington Leaves Office
After eight years in office, Washington decided not to seek a third term as president. In his Farewell Address, Washington urged his fellow citizens to “observe good faith and justice toward all nations.... It is our true policy to steer clear of permanent alliances.” These parting words influenced the nation’s foreign policy for more than 100 years. Washington also warned against something he saw as a growing threat to the young nation: political parties. Differing ideas about the extent of federal power in the early republic, however, soon caused the formation of the nation’s first political parties.
H READING PROGRESS CHECK
Explaining What was the significance of Jay's Treaty? When George Washington decided to step down after two terms as president, he set a precedent. No president served more than two terms until Franklin Roosevelt began his third term in 1941.
CRITICAL THINKING
Analyzing Visuals What does this picture suggest about the public's feeling toward President Washington?
Include this lesson's information in your Foldable®.
	First Presidency	First Years as a Nation	First Political Parties
cT			
Conflicts			
			
LESSON 2 REVIEW
Review Vocabulary
1.	Use the word impressment in a sentence about the
United States during Washington's presidency. 3OA;3OB
Answer the Guiding Questions
2.	Describing Describe the Whiskey Rebellion and the government's actions in response to it. sa
3.	Explaining What role did foreign nations play in President Washington's relations with Native American groups?
5A;SE
4.	Describing What was Washington's policy toward Britain and France, and why was it complicated? $e
NARRATIVE WRITING A
tribute is a speech showing respect and gratitude. Write a one-paragraph tribute that you might have delivered on President George Washington's retirement. 300 Lesson 2 305

THK
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills 5A Describe major domestic problems faced by the leaders of the new republic such as maintaining national security, building a military, creating a stable economic system, setting up the court system, and defining the authority of the central government.
5C Explain the origin and development of American political parties.
5E Identify the foreign policies of presidents Washington through Monroe and explain the impact of Washington's Farewell Address and the Monroe Doctrine.
21A Identify different points of view of political parties and interest groups on important historical and contemporary issues. 22A Analyze the leadership qualities of elected and appointed leaders of the United States such as George Washington, John Marshall, and Abraham Lincoln.
29D Identify points of view from the historical context surrounding an event and the frame of reference which influenced the participants.
Reading HELPDESK
it Matters because
Our nation's two-party political system developed from Americans taking opposing sides on political issues.
Opposing Parties
guidingquestion Howdid different opinions lead to the first political parties?
The American people generally admired President Washington and his service to the nation. Still, harsh attacks appeared from time to time in newspapers. One paper even called Washington “the scourge and the misfortune of his country.”
Most of the attacks on Washington came from supporters of Thomas Jefferson. They hoped to weaken support for the policies of Alexander Hamilton, which the president seemed to favor.
In fact, by 1796, the supporters of Jefferson and Hamilton were beginning to form the nation’s first political parties.
At that time, many Americans thought political parties were harmful to good government. The Constitution made no mention of parties because its authors saw no good use for them. Washington disapproved of political parties, or “factions” as they were known. He warned that they would divide the nation.
To others, though, it seemed natural that people would disagree about issues. They also knew that people who hold similar views tend to band together.
Washington s cabinet was clearly divided on key issues. Alexander Hamilton and Thomas Jefferson had very different views. They disagreed on economic policy and foreign relations.

Taking Notes: Comparing and Contrasting
As you read, use a diagram like this one to compare and contrast the goals of the first two U.S. political parties.
,306 The Federalist Era
Federalists Issue Republicans
Role of Federal Government
Content Vocabulary ___
•	partisan • sedition
•	caucus • nullify
•	alien • states'
rights
They did not share the same opinion on the power of the federal government or on the meaning of the Constitution. Even Washington was partisan (PAHR.tuh.zuhn)—clearly favoring one faction. The president believed he stood above politics, but he usually supported Hamilton’s views.
Political Parties Emerge
The differences found in Washington’s cabinet also existed in Congress and among the public. They formed the basis for two distinct political parties that emerged at this time.
One party was the Federalists. Led by Hamilton, this group favored a strong federal government. They believed the Constitution gave government “implied” powers.
These implied powers are not enumerated, or listed clearly in the Constitution. The Federalists argued for a loose interpretation of the Constitution. They pointed out that the Constitution gave Congress the power to make all laws “necessary and proper” to carry out its enumerated powers.
The Democratic-Republicans, or Republicans, stood against the Federalists. Jefferson and James Madison led this faction. They believed in a strict reading of the Constitution. They rejected the Federalist idea of implied powers. They believed congressional powers were limited to what is absolutely necessary to carry out the enumerated powers.
Debate over the national bank highlighted these differences. The Constitution gave Congress specific powers to do such things as issue and borrow money. To Hamilton, this implied that the federal government could
create a bank to help with these tasks. Jefferson, however, thought the bank was unconstitutional.
-Thinkinq Like a —
HISTORIAN
Analyzing Political Cartoons
Newspapers that supported Washington and Hamilton ridiculed Thomas Jefferson in print and in cartoons. In this cartoon, Jefferson is throwing the U.S. Constitution into a fire. The eagle is a symbol of the United States. What is the eagle trying to do in this cartoon?
The Role of the People
The two parties also disagreed about the role of ordinary citizens in government. Federalists supported representative government in which elected officials ruled in the people’s name. They did not, however, believe it was wise to let the public become too involved in politics.
Federalists thought that educated, wealthier men should hold f public office. They did not trust ordinary people to make good 1 decisions. In Hamilton’s words, “The people are turbulent and 1 changing; they seldom judge or determine right.
partisan firmly favoring one party Academic Vocabulary -------------------
orfaction	distinct dearly different from the others
Lesson 3 307
Hamilton led the Federalist Party, which favored broad federal powers. Federalists believed that wealthy, educated men should be elected to office and control the government.
Jefferson and the Republican Party wanted to limit federal powers and protect the powers ofthe states. Republicans thought it was important for ordinary people to participate in government.
SKILLS PRACTICE
The Republicans feared a strong central government controlled by only a few people. They believed that representative government and liberty would be safe only if ordinary people took part fully in government. As Jefferson wrote, “I am not among those who fear the people. They, and not the rich, are our dependence [what we depend on] for continued freedom.” Washington's Reaction
The growing differences between the parties—and between Hamilton and Jefferson—troubled President Washington. He tried to get his two cabinet members to work out their differences. He wrote to Jefferson, trying to persuade him: “I... ardently wish that some line could be marked out by which both of you could walk.”
Washington’s efforts to get Jefferson and Hamilton to work together failed. The split was so strong that Jefferson left the cabinet and his job as secretary of state. Soon afterward, Hamilton resigned as secretary of the treasury. The rival groups and their points of view moved further apart. As the election of 1796 approached, the two parties each prepared to seek control of the presidency.
The Presidential Election of 1796
To prepare for the election, both parties held caucuses (K AW*kuhs»uhz). At these meetings, members of Congress and other leaders nominated, or chose, their parties’ candidates for office.
Each party chose two presidential candidates, and the electors voted for any two. The Federalists chose John Adams and Charles Pinckney. The Republicans chose Thomas Jefferson and Aaron Burr. There was no candidate identified as a vice presidential candidate on the ballot.
The Federalists carried the New England region. Republican strength lay in the Southern states. Adams got 71 electoral votes, winning the election. Jefferson finished second with 68 votes. Under the rules of the Constitution at that time, the person with the second-highest electoral vote total—Jefferson—became vice president. The administration that took office on March 4,1797, had a Federalist president and a Republican vice president.
OREADING PROGRESS CHECK
Reading HELPDESK
Read text with a partner. Ask one another to read the key terms and the bold-faced words. Tell or draw what they mean.
caucus a meeting of members of a political party to choose candidates for upcoming elections
Contrasting How were the beliefs of the Federalist Party different from the beliefs ofthe Democratic-Republican Party?
Reading Strategy: Identifying Points of View
Mnct mint-*+*.«.** ~---
_________ ________Of" yfeilf_____________________________________________________	____——
Most quotations express a person's point of view—what that person thinks or feels about a situation Reread Hamilton's and Jefferson's quotations on the role of the people. Study the details. Try toreSta the quotations in your own words. Then explain each person's point of view.
John Adams as President
guidingquestion IV/j at important events occurred during the presidency of John A dams?
John Adams spent most of his life in public service. He was well known as one of Massachusetts’s most active Patriots in the period before and during the Revolutionary War. He served two terms as vice president under Washington before becoming president. His time in office, however, was troubled.
The XYZ Affair
The nation was in the middle of a dispute with France when Adams took office. The French viewed the 1794 Jay’s Treaty as an American attempt to help the British in their war with France. To punish the United States, the French seized American ships that carried cargo to Britain.
President Adams sent a team of diplomats to Paris to try to resolve the dispute in the fall of 1797. French officials chose not to meet with the Americans. Instead, the French sent three agents who demanded a bribe and a loan for France from the Americans. The Americans refused.
When Adams learned what had happened, he was furious.
The president urged Congress to prepare for war. In his report to Congress, Adams used the letters X, Y, and Z in place of the French agents’ names. As a result, the event came to be called the XYZ affair.
Alien and Sedition Acts
When the public found out about the XYZ affair, many grew angry at foreign attempts to influence their government. They became more suspicious of aliens—residents who are not citizens. Many Europeans who had come to the United States in the 1790s supported the ideals of the French Revolution. Some Americans questioned whether these aliens would remain loyal if the United States went to war with France.
In response to these concerns, Federalists in 1798 passed the Alien and Sedition Acts. Sedition (sih.DIH.shuhn) means activities aimed at weakening the government. The Alien and Sedition Acts allowed the president to imprison aliens. The president could also deport—send out of the country those thought to be dangerous. President Adams was a strong supporter of these laws.
Academic Vocabulary
resolve to find a solution; to settle a conflict
Connections to
TODAY
Modern Political Parties
Today’s Democratic Party started as the Democratic-Republican Party, which Thomas Jefferson and James Madison helped create in the 1790s. The Federalists no longer exist. Ihe modern Republican Party was founded in the 1850s during the antislavery movement. These two political parties— Democrats and Republicans— now dominate the political process, filling most offices across the country. You can use the Internet to learn about the Democratic and Republican Parties of today.
alien a person living in a country who is not a citizen of that country
sedition activities aimed at weakening the established government by inciting resistance or rebellion to authority
Lesson 3 309
THE ALIEN AND SEDITION ACTS
1
Naturalization Act
Required that aliens be residents for 14 years instead of 5 years before they
. became eligible forU.S. citizenship
Sedition Act
Made it a crime to speak, write, or publish "false, scandalous, and malicious" criticisms of the government
[ Why they were passed I The Federalist-controlled Congress
wanted to:	|
•	strengthen the federal government f
•	silence Republican opposition 3
Results
• Discouraged immigration and led some foreigners already in the country to leave
> Convicted 10 Republican newspaper editors who had criticized the Federalists in government
Reaction
• Opposition to Federalist party grows
•Ledtomovementto allow states to overturn ; federal laws
COMPARING
How were the Naturalization and Alien Acts alike? SUMMARIZING
What were the goals of the Alien, Sedition, and Naturalization Acts? O CRITICAL THINKING
Identifying Cause and Effect Wha
was one cause and one effect of the Sedition Act?
Reading HELPDESK
Domestic and Foreign Affairs
Democratic-Republicans saw the Alien and Sedition Acts as Federalist tyranny. They looked to the states to respond and protect people’s liberties. Madison and Jefferson wrote stateme of protest that the Virginia and Kentucky legislatures passed a; resolutions.
The Virginia and Kentucky Resolutions of 1798 and 1799 claimed that the Alien and Sedition Acts violated the Constitution. They declared that the states should not put then into action. The Kentucky Resolution further said that states could nullify (NUH»luh«fy)—legally overturn—federal laws tb thought were unconstitutional.
The resolutions supported the principle of states' rights. T principle held that the powers of the federal government were limited to those clearly granted by the Constitution. To prevent
nullify to legally overturn
states' rights the idea that states should have all powers that the Constitution does not give to the federal government or forbid to the states
The Federalist Era
the federal government from becoming too powerful, the states should have all other powers not expressly forbidden to them.
The issue of states’ rights would remain an important issue in American politics for many years.
Meanwhile, the Federalists urged Adams to declare war on France. Adams, however, resisted this pressure. Instead, he sent a representative to seek peace with France.
In 1800 the French agreed to a treaty and stopped their attacks on American ships. Though it had benefits for the United States, the agreement with France was unpopular and hurt Adams’s chance for reelection. Rather than cheering the agreement, Hamilton and his supporters opposed their own president. The Federalists were now split. This improved Democratic-Republican
| hopes for winning the presidency in the 1800 election.
< ___
Q READING PROGRESS CHECK
X	“	“
| Explaining How did the Virginia and Kentucky Resolutions reflect a states' i rights interpretation of the Constitution?
Abigail Adams was the first First Lady to occupy the White House. She lived there while the building was still under construction. Adams found the unfinished East Room so large that she used it for hanging the family laundry.
LESSON 3 REVIEW
Review Vocabulary
1.	Use the following words in a sentence about the development of political parties. sc;3oa;3ob
a. partisan b. caucus
2.	Use the following terms in a paragraph about the presidency of John Adams. 3od
a. alien	b. sedition
c. nullify	d. states'rights
Answer the Guiding Questions
3.	Describing How did Hamilton's views about the power of the federal government differ from the views of Jefferson and Madison? 2»d
4.	identifying How did President Adams handle conflict with France during his administration? se
EXPOSITORY WRITING
View the cartoon that shows Thomas Jefferson and the eagle. Write a short essay to answer these questions: What or whom does the eagle represent? Do you think the cartoon shows bias? If so, is the cartoon biased for Thomas Jefferson or against him? Explain. 29F
Lesson 3 311
Activities A3
Directions: Write your answers using standard grammar, spelling, sentence structure, and punctuation.
O
Use your .fiBTOffl to explore the Essential Questions. ANALYZING
Washington was the first of several generals who later became president. Think about this statement: A good general makes a good president. Is this an opinion or a fact? Do you agree or disagree? Explain. 29E © Social Studies Skills
COMPARING AND CONTRASTING
Create a chart that compares and contrasts the views of the Federalists and the Democratic-Republicans. 21 a; 29b,- 290; 30c; 300 © Thinking Like a Historian
SPECULATING
In the first years of the United States under the Constitution, the first political parties started to develop. This ran against the hopes and expectations of many of the people who had written the Constitution. Write a brief essay in which you attempt to explain why the country may have been better off without political parties. ia; sc © Geography Activity
INTERPRETING maps The map and graphs give results of the election of 1796, in which John Adams was elected president. How many electoral votes did Jefferson get from his home state of Virginia? From which state did John Adams get the greatest number of electoral votes? 29h; 293
The Election of 1796
ELECTORAL VOTE TOTAL:
139 
MAI 6

z Terr. NWof Ohio R.
Terr.
South of Ohio R.

DE3 'MD
POPULAR VOTE TOTAL:
66,841 •Fourteen electors in Pennsylvania voted for Jefferson and one voted for Adams Seven Sectors in Maryland voted for Jefferson and four voted for Adams
-S:"XinSr°rdfOrJeffe,SOnM
electors in North Carolina voted for Jefferson and one voted for Adams.
I
Adams (Federalist) I
Jefferson (Democratic-Republican) ■■ Mixedi Territories J
312 The Federalist Era
Assessment
VtnWl
Directions: Write your answers using standard grammar, spelling, sentence structure, and punctuation.
o
CHECKING FOR UNDERSTANDING
O
How did the U.S. Constitution and the Bill of Rights address the grievances expressed earlier in the Declaration of Independence? Write your response in a paragraph. ia;isc REVIEW THE GUIDING QUESTIONS
0 Summarizing What did Hamilton plan to do with the money from taxes? Why did Jefferson and Madison oppose Hamilton's policies? sb
0 Identifying What compromise did Hamilton and Southern leaders reach over his plan to pay off state debts? 21C
0 Explaining Why did Native American leaders agree to give up most of their land in what is now Ohio? 290
0 Explaining Why did political parties arise in the 1790s? What were the parties and their principles? Who were their leaders? sc
0 Describing What challenges to national security did Washington face in the Northwest Territory? sa
0 Explaining Why did Republicans fear a strong central government? 2ia;29d
CRITICAL THINKING
0 Analyzing Why was it important to many Americans that the Constitution include a Bill of Rights? isc
Hypothesizing In his Farewell Address, Washington said that it is "our true policy to steer clear of permanent alliances" with other nations. How do you think these words influenced American foreign policy? se
0 Drawing Conclusions Why do you think Washington wanted the United States to stay neutral when France and Britain went to war? 29B
<D Analyzing What are some ways George Washington's strong leadership helped bring stability to the young nation? Give examples. 22A
0 Evaluating Why did the Democratic-Republicans and the Federalists disagree about the Alien and Sedition Acts? Which position would you have supported? 21A
0 Making Connections In the previous chapter, you read about the system of checks and balances. How does the principle of states'rights reflect this system? isd;29d
0 Identifying Problems and Solutions What challenge did Congress face when establishing the nation's court system? How did Congress solve the problem? sa
0 Evaluating How effective was John Adams in addressing the challenges of his presidency? 22A
I
Hl
Need Extra Help?
IfYou've Missed Question	O	O	O	O	0	0	0	0	0		0	0	0	0	0
Review Lesson	1	1	1	2	3	2	3	1	2	2	1,2	3	3	1	3
313
Assessment (continued)
DBQ
SHORT RESPONSE
This 1798 cartoon shows an exchange between a Republican and a Federalist over the Sedition Act.
© Interpreting Images What is happening in the cartoon, and how are others reacting? 29B
© Interpreting Images What does the cartoon suggest about politics in the early republic? 290
EXTENDED RESPONSE
© Narrative Writing You are a citizen of the United States in 1796. It is a presidential
election year. Write a letter to a friend in another country in which you describe the political events of the Washington administration and the upcoming election. Offer your thoughts about the two new political parties. 290,300
DBQ
STANDARDIZED TEST PRACTICE
(analyzing documents The following passage is from the Treaty of Greenville.
PRIMARY SOURCE
II
"The Indian tribes who have a right to those lands, are quietly to enjoy them, hunting, planting, and dwelling thereon,.. . but when those tribes ... shall.. . sell their lands they are to be sold only to the United States; and until such sale, the United States will protect all the said Indian tribes ... against all citizens of the United States. . . . "
—from the Treaty of Greenville, 1795
© Identifying What does the United States government promise Native Americans in this document?
A.
Money will be set aside from the sale of their lands. B.
United States citizens will share Native American hunting lands. C.
They will be protected until their lands are sold. D.
They have the right to make war against others. © Analyzing How does this document control the sale of Native American lands? 29a
F.
Native Americans must sell their land only to the United States. G.
Native Americans cannot sell their land to anyone. H.
Native Americans are free to sell their lands to the highest bidder. I.
Native Americans must share the profits from selling their land. Need Extra Help?
IfYou've Missed Question	©	©	©	©	©
Review Lesson	3	3	3	2	2,
14 The Federalist Era
The Jefferson Era
1800-1816
ESSENTIAL QUESTIONS
• How io governments change? ‘Howdoesgeographyinfluencethewaypeoplelive? • Why does conflict develop? ''.nr

"■ Z;




networks
There's More Online about the Jefferson Era.
CHAPTER
11
Lesson 1
A
New Party in Power Lesson 2
The Louisiana Purchase
Lesson 3
A
Time of Conflict Lesson 4
The War of 1812

Shawnee leader Tecumseh nffldd Motive Americans to resist Amed^RSement

Intheearly 1800s.


CHAPTER 11
Place and Time: America woo to i8i6
During the Jefferson Era and the years immediately following it, the United States grew rapidly. The Louisiana Purchase roughly doubled the size of the country, and explorers probed the unknown lands beyond the frontier.
■'C •!**« :
BiSf''
The Expanding Nation 1803-1807
Ft. Clatsop, winter quarters
1805-1806 a
OREGON, TERRITORY O
(Disputed between several nations)
Co/t'mbiciK.


iwnterou
Step Into the Place
MAP FOCUS
After the United States purchased the Louisiana Territory from France in 1803, it sent explorers into its new lands—and beyond. LOCATION
What part of the Louisiana Territory did Lewis and Clark explore? What other territory did they explore? ioa;29C MOVEMENT
In which direction did the Pike expedition travel when it started out? CRITICAL THINKING
Analyzing What were the major geographic obstacles that Lewis and Clark encountered during their journey through the Louisiana Territory? 29C;29J 
.,z
i7/■;( W’J
PURI
PACIFIC OCEAN


200 miles
___1
L-
0	200 km
Lambert Azimuthal Equal-Area projection
w
}/r
X,
4:1
Step Into the Time
TIMELINE
Based on the time line, what conclusions can you draw about the relationship 1 U-S. presidents]
1803 Supreme Court establishes judicial review
1804 Lewis and Clark begin expedition
MI
L-l networks	M
There's More Online!	*
eT GAME Identification
GRAPHIC ORGANIZER
B|g Republicans and the Role
of Government
ST MAP
Presidential Election of 1800 SELF-CHECK QUIZ
sf SLIDESHOW Monticello & VIDEO -V4

7$
■CBi
ELECTION OF
1800 ___Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills
1A Identify the major eras and events in U.S. history through 1877, induding colonization, revolution, drafting of the Declaration of Independence, creation and ratification of the Constitution, religious revivals such as the Second Great Awakening, early republic, the Age of Jackson, westward expansion, reform movements, sectionalism, Civil War, and Reconstruction, and describe their causes and effects.
5A Describe major domestic problems faced by the leaders of the new republic such as maintaining national security, building a military, creating a stable economic system, setting up the court system, and defining the authority of the central government.
16A Summarize the purposes for and process of amending the U.S. Constitution.
18A Identify the origin of judicial review and analyze examples of congressional and presidential responses.
18B Summarize the issues, decisions, and significance of landmark Supreme Court cases, including Marbury v. Madison, McCulloch v. Maryland, and Gibbons v. Ogden.
22A Analyze the leadership qualities of elected and appointed leaders of the United States such as George Washington, John Marshall, and Abraham Lincoln.
Reading HELPDESK
Taking Notes: Analyzing_________
As you read, use a diagram like this one to analyze the ways in which the Republicans changed the government.
A
New Party in Power JAL QUESTION
How do governments change? IT MATTERS BECAUSE
In the election of 1800, the nation experienced a peaceful transferal
power from one party to the other.
The Election of 1800
GUIDINGQUESTION
IV/jflf did the election of 1800 show about the nature of politics! In the election of 1800, the Federalist Party supported President Adams for a second term and Charles Pinckney for vice president. The Republicans nominated Thomas Jefferson for president and Aaron Burr as his running mate.
The election campaign of 1800 was very different from the political campaigns we see today. Neither Adams nor Jefferson traveled around the country to gather support. Many thought direct campaigning improper for a person who would be president. Instead, hundreds of letters were sent to leading citizens and newspapers to make candidates’ views public.
The campaign was bitterly fought. Each political party made personal attacks against the other. For example, the Federalists accused Jefferson, who believed in freedom of religion, of being godless. The Republicans warned that the Federalist Party favored the wealthy and would bring back monarchy.
The Vote Is Tied
Under the Constitution, voters in a presidential election are really electing groups of people called electors. These electors form what is known as the Electoral College. They cast the ballots that
Content Vocabulary
•	customs duty
•	jurisdiction
Boundary disputed by Britain and the U.S.
POPULAR VOTE TOTAL:
67,282 Eight electors in Pennsylvania voted for Jefferson and seven for Adams.
Eight electors in North Carolina voted for Jefferson and four for Adams. Five electors in Maryland voted for Jefferson and five for Adams.
actually elect the president and vice president. Each state has as many electors and electoral votes as it has members of Congress.
At that time, the Constitution said that electors were to cast two ballots—without indicating which was for president and which was for vice president. The candidate with the majority of votes became president, and the candidate with the next-largest number of votes became vice president. In 1800, 73 electors cast their ballots for Jefferson and Burr. Each candidate, therefore, got the same number of votes. Because of the tie vote, the House of Representatives had to decide the election.
In the House, Federalists tried to keep Jefferson from becoming president by supporting Burr. For 35 ballots, the election remained tied. Finally, one Federalist decided not to vote for Burr.
Because no one wanted to see another tie between a presidential and vice-presidential candidate, in 1803 Congress passed the Twelfth Amendment to the Constitution, which was ratified the following year. From then on, electors cast one of their votes for president and the other for vice president.
Jefferson's Inauguration
On the day he became president, Jefferson dressed in his everyday clothes. He walked to the Senate to take the oath of office. President Adams did not attend.
Each state sent electors to the Electoral College. Territories (shown in yellow) did not.
INTERPRETING MAPS
Which areas tended to support Adams?
CRITICAL THINKING
Drawing Conclusions Why do you think the supporters for Adams and those for Jefferson tended to be concentrated in particular regions of the country?
Reading Strategy: Predicting--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Good readers think ahead as they are reading. They predict, or guess, what might happen next. Find a good stopping
place, like the bottom of this page, and ask yourself a question about what might happen next. For example, you
might ask, "Since Jefferson was a Republican who had just defeated the Federalists, how might he change the
government?" Try to answer your question, then read ahead to see whether your predictions are correct.	Lesson 1 j j g
The Jefferson Era
BIOGRAPHY
Thomas Jefferson (1743-1826)
In addition to his many achievements in government and politics, Jefferson was a noted inventor and architect. His inventions include a plow that was twice as fast as older ones, a machine for making macaroni, and a device that encoded messages. He also designed the house on his plantation (Monticello) and founded the University ofVirginia.
CRITICAL THINKING
Analyzing Based on his interests and skills, what qualities do you think Jefferson might have had? SKILLS PRACTICE
When you speak in class, think about the ideas and sentence types you will use. Put connected ideas together in one sentence.
customs duty a tax collected on goods that are imported jurisdiction the power or right to interpret and apply a law
In his Inaugural Address, Jefferson outlined his goals, including “a wise and frugal government and the support of the state governments in all their rights. Jefferson believed that a large federal government threatened liberty and that individual states could better protect freedom. He wanted to limit the power, size, and authority of the central government.
H READING PROGRESS CHECK
Identifying What criticism did each political party make of the other inthe election of 1800?
Jefferson as President
guiding question What did Jefferson want to accomplish during his presidency?
Thomas Jefferson had strong ideas about government, and he surrounded himself with people who shared similar views. Jefferson and Albert Gallatin, secretary of the treasury, reduced the national debt and cut down on military expenses. Jefferson also limited the number of federal government workers to a few hundred people. At the same time, his government got rid of most federal taxes. They only collected customs duties, or taxes on imported goods. Under Jefferson, the government’s income would come from customs duties and from the sale of western lands. He believed that these changes would help to create a stable economic system.
Judiciary Act of 1801
After the election and before Jefferson took office, the Federalists passed an act to expand the nation’s court system. John Adams used this act, the Judiciary Act of 1801, to make hundreds of appointments during his last days as president. Adams also asked John Marshall to serve as chief justice. Congress was then still under Federalist control and supported Adams’s choices. In this way, Adams blocked Jefferson from making appointments and made sure the Federalists controlled the courts.
Adams s appointments could not take effect until these last-minute appointees, known as midnight judges,” received certain official papers, called commissions. When Jefferson became president, some of these appointees had not yet received their commissions. Jefferson told Secretary of State James Madison not to deliver them.
Academic Vocabulary
similar sharing qualities, but not the same as; like principle a fundamental, or basic, law or idea
The Growing Power of the
Supreme Court
One of the appointees who did not
get his commission was William
Marbury. He asked the Supreme
Court to force its delivery. The Court
said it did not have the jurisdiction
(jur»iss»DIK»shuhn)—the legal
authority—to force delivery of
Marbury’s commission. Marbury had
argued that an act of Congress gave the Court such authority, but the Court ruled that that act violated the Constitution.
The ruling in Marbury v. Madison affected much more than William Marbury’s career. In this landmark case, Chief Justice John Marshall established the three principles of judicial review: (1) the Constitution is the supreme law of the land;
(2) the Constitution must be followed when there is a conflict with any other law; and (3) the judicial branch can declare laws unconstitutional. In short, Marshall claimed for the courts the power to find acts of other branches unconstitutional. Judicial review is a key check on the legislative and executive branches.
In his 34-year term as chief justice, Marshall helped broaden the power of the Court. He also expanded federal power at the expense of the states. In McCulloch v. Maryland (1819), the Court held that Congress does have implied powers and that states cannot tax the federal government. In Gibbons v. Ogden (1824), the Court held that federal law overrules state law in matters affecting more than one state. In Worcester v. Georgia (1832), the Court decided that states could not regulate Native Americans. Only the federal government had that power.
Dreading progress check
What was the significance of the Marbury v. Madison ruling?
til!!'
Jefferson's home at Monticello in Charlottesville, Virginia, is considered an architectural masterpiece.
FoldablesI Study Organizer J £	1800	
		S—
Include this lesson's		
information in your	103	.Z
Foldable®.		

LESSON 1 REVIEW
Review Vocabulary
!• Write a sentence about the Jefferson administration that uses the term customs duty. 3oa; job
Answer the Guiding Questions
Summarizing How did Congress change the process of electing a president after the election 0f1800?i6A
Analyzing How did President Jefferson act on his beliefs about government? 22A
4.	Summarizing Explain how the powers of the Supreme Court and federal law were extended by landmark court cases during this period. isb;2»b
EXPOSITORY WRITING
During John Marshall's term on the Supreme Court, federal and Court power expanded. Write a paragraph contrasting these decisions with Thomas Jefferson's stated views on the proper size and power of the federal government. 5a;29b;3oo Lesson 1 321
networks
There's More Online!
Ef BIOGRAPHY
•	Toussaint L'Ouverture
*	Sacagawea
CHART/GRAPH
Alexander Hamilton and Aaron Burr
Ef graphic organizer
Exploring the West
eT MAP Exploring the Louisiana Territory
ef SELF-CHECK QUIZ
ef SLIDESHOW The Lewis & Clark Expedition
VIDEO

TCKS
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills 1A Identify the major eras and events in U.S. history through 1877, including colonization, revolution, drafting of the Declaration of Independence, creation and ratification of the Constitution, religious revivals such as the Second Great Awakening, early republic, the Age of Jackson, westward expansion, reform movements, sectionalism, Civil War, and Reconstruction, and describe their causes and effects.
1C Explain the significance of the following dates: 1607, founding of Jamestown; 1620, arrival of the Pilgrims and signing of the Mayflower Compact; 1776, adoption of the Declaration of Independence; 1787, writing of the U.S. Constitution; 1803, Louisiana Purchase; and 1861-1865, Civil War.
5A Describe major domestic problems faced by the leaders of the new republic such as maintaining national security, building a military, creating a stable economic system, setting up the court system, and defining the authority of the central government.
5E Identify the foreign policies of presidents Washington through Monroe and explain the impact of Washington's Farewell Address and the Monroe Doctrine.
6E Identify areas that were acquired to form the United States, including the Louisiana Purchase.
1OA Locate places and regions of importance in the United States during the 17th, 18th, and 19th centuries.
Reading HELPDESK

Taking Notes: Describing
L v j ( A fll ILW IK
Lesson 2
The Louisiana Purchase
QUESTION
Howdoesgeographylnfluencethewaypeoplelive? IT MATTERS BECAUSE
The Louisiana Purchase changed the size and shape of the nation and helped hasten westward expansion.
Westward, Ho!
guiding question How did Spain and France play a role in Americans moving west?
In 1800 the territory of the United States extended as far west as the Mississippi River. The area west of the river—known as the Louisiana Territory—belonged to Spain. The Louisiana Territory was an enormous area of land, stretching south to the city of New Orleans and west to the Rocky Mountains. Its northern boundaries remained undefined.
During the early 1800s, Americans moved west in search of land and adventure. These pioneers, many of them farmers, expanded settlement in Kentucky and Tennessee. Many also set out for even less-populated areas in the Northwest Territory. They made a long and exhausting journey over the Appalachian Mountains. Pioneers heading to the western lands had to travel along rough, muddy roads or cut their way through thick forests.
These westward-bound pioneers loaded their household goods into Conestoga (kah*neh*STOH»guh) wagons, sturdy vehicles topped with white canvas. The settlers traveled with their two most valued possessions: rifles and axes. They needed rifles for protection and to hunt animals for food. They used axes to cut paths for their wagons through the dense forests.
Many of the settlers set up farms along rivers that fed into the Upper Mississippi River. Farmers needed access to the Mississippi to transport their crops to markets. Their goods traveled down the Mississippi to New Orleans, where workers loaded them onto other ships bound for markets on the East Coast. The Spanish controlled the region, but they allowed the Americans to sail on the Lower Mississippi and trade in New Orleans. For the western farmers, this agreement was vital to their economic survival.
The French Threat
For some years, the Spanish allowed American goods to move freely in their territory. In 1802 the Spanish suddenly changed their policy, no longer allowing American goods to move into and beyond New Orleans. President Jefferson learned that Spain and France had secretly agreed to transfer the Louisiana Territory to France. Jefferson believed that France had also gained Florida in its secret agreement with Spain.
This news alarmed Jefferson. The agreement between Spain and France posed a serious threat to the United States. France’s leader, Napoleon Bonaparte, had plans to create empires in Europe and the Americas. French control would put American trade along the Mississippi River at risk. Congress authorized Robert Livingston, the new minister to France, to offer as much as $2 million for New Orleans and West Florida in order to gain control of the territory. Napoleon and Santo Domingo
Napoleon dreamed of a Western empire. He saw the Caribbean island of Santo Domingo as an important naval base from which he could control such an empire. Events in Santo Domingo, however, ended Napoleon’s dream. Inspired by the ideas of the French Revolution, Toussaint L’Ouverture (too*SAN loo»vuhr»TOOR) led enslaved Africans and other laborers in Santo Domingo in a revolt against the island’s plantation owners. After fierce fighting, the rebels won and declared the colony an independent republic. L’Ouverture established a new government.
In 1802 Napoleon sent troops to regain control of Santo Domingo, but they were not successful. By 1804, the French were driven out of Santo Domingo. The country adopted the name Haiti, from the name used by the original inhabitants of the island.
Q READING PROGRESS CHECK
I
Explaining Why did farmers in the West settle near rivers that fed into the Mississippi River?
Build Vocabulary: Word Origins
As you read, use a diagram like this one to describe the areas that Lewis and Clark and Zebulon Pike explored.
The Jefferson Era
Lewis and 1—IK Clark	|—1/	
Zebulon I— Pike	p—iX	
Content Vocabulary • secede
The Conestoga wagon took its name from Conestoga, Pennsylvania, the town where it was first made.
11A Analyze how physical characteristics of the environment influenced population distribution, settlement patterns, and economic activities in the United States during the 17th, 18th, and 19th centuries.
11C Describe how different immigrant groups interacted with the environment in the United States during the 17th, 18th, and 19th centuries. 23C Identify ways conflicts between people from various racial, ethnic, and religious groups were resolved.
29D Identify points of view from the historical context surrounding an event and the frame of reference which influenced the participants.
When Toussaint L'Ouverture defeated the French in Haiti, France lost interest in Louisiana.



Lesson 2 323
SKILLS PRACTICE____________
Look for pictures and bold-faced words in your text. Do they remind you of anything you have seen, done, or heard before?
An Expanding Nation
guiding question How did the Louisiana Purchase open an area of settlement’
Napoleon had a problem: he needed money to finance his war against Britain. Without Santo Domingo, Napoleon had little use for Louisiana. In order to solve his money problem, he decided to sell the Louisiana Territory. A French official told U.S. representatives Robert Livingston and James Monroe that the entire Louisiana Territory was for sale. The offer took Livingston and Monroe by surprise. They did not have the authority to accept such an offer.
The deal, however, was too good to pass up. The new territory would provide plenty of cheap land for farmers for future generations. It would also give the United States control of the Mississippi River, which would protect domestic shipping interests. These benefits convinced Livingston and Monroe to close the deal, even though they did not have authorization to buy the whole territory. After a few days of negotiation, the parties agreed on a price of $15 million.
Jefferson worried that such a large purchase might not be legal. The Constitution said nothing about acquiring new territory. By what authority could he and the federal government buy the land? He thought of seeking a constitutional amendment, but he realized there was no time for such a step. Jefferson decided the government’s treaty-making powers allowed the purchase of the new territory. The Senate approved the purchase in October 1803. The purchase of the Louisiana Territory doubled the size of the United States.
The Lewis and Clark Expedition
Reading HELPDESK
Americans knew little about the land west of the Mississippi, and Jefferson wanted to learn more about the new territory he had just acquired. He persuaded Congress to sponsor an expedition to gather information about the new land. The expedition would document findings about the territory’s people, plants, and animals and recommend sites for future forts.
The expedition had another goal: finding and mapping the fabled Northwest Passage, a water route across North America. In order to trade with Asia, Europeans had to sail around Africa. Because the trip was long and costly, European explorers searched, unsuccessfully, for a more direct route. Once the Americas were colonized, Americans and Europeans continued

Academic Vocabulary
authority the power to influence or command thought, opinion, or behavior purchase the act of buying something
324 The Jefferson Era
Build Vocabulary: Related Words
Meriwether Lewis kept a journal—a record of the experiences, ideas, and thoughts he had during the expedition. The word journalism generally means the collection or presentation of the news, but in particular the direct presentation of facts or events without the writer's interpretation.
to sail around Africa or around the tip of South America in order to reach Asia. Finding a water route across North America became more important than ever.
Jefferson chose Meriwether Lewis, his 28-year-old private secretary, to head the expedition. Lewis joined the militia during the Whiskey Rebellion and had been in the army when Jefferson hired him as his private secretary in 1801. Jefferson apparently looked forward to one day sending out an expedition to explore the continent. He hired Lewis with that in mind. William Clark was co-leader of the expedition. Clark was 32 years old and a friend of Lewis’s. Clark also brought along York, an enslaved African American and lifelong companion of Clark’s. York was a key member of the expedition. He was especially helpful building ties with Native Americans, many of whom had never before seen an African American and were drawn to him.
Lewis and Clark were well-informed amateur scientists. They also had experience doing business with Native Americans. Together they assembled a crew of expert sailors, gunsmiths, carpenters, scouts, and a cook. Two men of mixed Native American and French heritage served as interpreters.
View the map “Exploring the Louisiana Territory” to follow the expedition’s route. In the spring of 1804, the expedition left St. Louis and worked its way up the Missouri River. On May 5,1805, Lewis described what they encountered along the trail, in his journal:
Sacagawea
(c. 1788-1812?)
Sacagawea was the daughter of a Shoshone chief. Lewis and Clark hired her and her husband, a French Canadian fur trader, as interpreters. Sacagawea proved extremely valuable. She negotiated the purchase of horses, found edible plants, and made moccasins and clothing. According to Clark, her presence helped calm the fears of Native Americans the group met during their journey.
CRITICAL THINKING
Speculating What challenges might the expedition have faced without Sacagawea?
PRIMARY SOURCE
W
Buffalo Elk and goats or Antelopes feeding in every direction... [T]he buffalo furnish us with fine veal and fat and beef.... We have not been able to take any fish for some time past. The country is as yesterday beautiful in the extreme. 99 —from the journals of Lewis and Clark
The expedition encountered many Native American groups on the journey. A Shoshone woman named Sacagawea (SA»kuh»juh»WEE*uh) joined their group as a guide.
After 18 months and nearly 4,000 miles (6,437 km), Lewis and Clark reached the Pacific Ocean. They spent the winter there. Then they headed back east, returning in September 1806. The explorers had collected valuable information about people, plants, animals, and the geography of the West. Perhaps most important, their journey inspired people to move westward.
,4
From 1804 to 1806, Meriwether Lewis and William Clark mapped and explored more than 7,000 miles (11,265 km).




I


Pike's Expedition
Lewis and Clark were not the only people Jefferson sent to explore the wilderness. Lieutenant Zebulon Pike led two expeditions west between 1805 and 1807. He traveled through the Upper Mississippi River valley and into present-day Colorado. In Colorado, he found a snowcapped mountain he called Grand Peak, known today as Pikes Peak.
From Pike’s travels, Americans learned about the Great Plains and Rocky Mountains. Pike also mapped part of the Rio Grande and traveled across northern Mexico and what is now southern Texas.
A
Federalist Plan to Secede The Louisiana Purchase troubled Federalists in the Northeast. They feared the westward expansion would weaken New England’s
GEOGRAPHY CONNECTION
Expeditions led by Meriwether Lewis and William Clark and by Zebulon Pike explored the territory of the Louisiana Purchase and beyond.
MOVEMENT
In what direction did Lewis and Clark travel when they first set out on their journey? CRITICAL THINKING
Comparing and Contrasting How were the two expeditions similar, and how were they different?
Reading HELPDESK

secede to withdraw or break away from a nation or organization
326 The Jefferson Era
power in political and economic affairs.
A group of Federalists in Massachusetts plotted to secede (seh.SEED), or withdraw, from the Union. New-England would become the “Northern Confederacy.”
The plotters realized that if the confederacy were to last, it had to include New York as well as New England. The Massachusetts Federalists needed a powerful friend in New York who would support their plan. They turned to Aaron Burr.
|||f
Hamilton and Burr Duel
Alexander Hamilton was concerned about rumors of secession. He had never trusted Aaron Burr, and now he heard that Burr had secretly agreed to lead New York out of the Union. Hamilton accused Burr of plotting treason. Meanwhile, Burr was suffering setbacks in his political career. Blaming Hamilton for these troubles, Burr challenged him to a duel.
The two men—armed with pistols—met in Weehawken,
New Jersey, in July 1804. Hamilton hated dueling, which was illegal but popular among upper-class Americans at the time. Hamilton pledged not to shoot at his rival, but Burr took no such pledge. He aimed to shoot Hamilton, and he was successful. Seriously wounded, Hamilton died the next day.
Burr fled to avoid arrest.
2
j H READING PROGRESS CHECK
| Identifying Cause and Effect Name two effects of the Lewis and Clark £ expedition.
LESSON 2 REVIEW
Review Vocabulary
1.	Identify a word that means the opposite of secede. 3oa
Answer the Guiding Questions
2.	Identifying Why did Jefferson want to purchase Louisiana from France? se
1
After the duel, Aaron Burr fled to South Carolina. Never tried for Hamilton's death, Burr returned to Washington, D.C., and completed his term as vice president.
Include this lesson's information in your Foldable®.
1800
1803
3.	Explaining What was the significance of the Louisiana Purchase in 1803? i<
4.	Describing What constitutional issue did Jefferson face in purchasing Louisiana? sa
DESCRIPTIVE WRITING
Write a one-paragraph journal entry from the perspective of a participant of the Lewis and Clark expedition, describing your feelings and expectations as you set out on your journey. 2$d;3od Lesson 2 327
networks
i
There's More Online! eT IMAGE Stephen Decatur
ef GAME Identification
ef GRAPH Imports and Exports, 1800-1820
ef graphic organizer
U.S.
Actions SELF-CHECK QUIZ VIDEO
lL
.. •

Lesson 3
A
Time of Conflict TIAL QUESTION
Why does conflict develop? 
TEK5
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills 5A Describe major domestic problems faced by the leaders of the new republic such as maintaining national security, building a military, creating a stable economic system, setting up the court system, and defining the authority of the central government.
5D Explain the causes, important events, and effects of the War of 1812.
5E Identify the foreign policies of presidents Washington through Monroe and explain the impact of Washington's Farewell Address and the Monroe Doctrine.
21A Identify different points of view of political parties and interest groups on important historical and contemporary issues. 22B Describe the contributions of significant political, social, and military leaders of the United States such as Frederick Douglass, John Paul Jones, James Monroe, Stonewall Jackson, Susan B. Anthony, and Elizabeth Cady Stanton. 23C Identify ways conflicts between people from various racial, ethnic, and religious groups were resolved.
29D Identify points of view from the historical context surrounding an event and the frame of reference which influenced the participants.
Reading HELPDESK
IT MATTERS BECAUSE
As the United States grew, tensions emerged within and beyond the nation's borders.
American Ships on the High Seas
guidingquestion How did the United States become involved in a conflict with Tripoli?
In 1785 the ship Empress of China returned to New York from China. The ship’s cargo of tea and silk sold for a great profit. The chance for similar profit inspired others to follow in the Empress of China’s wake. Soon, American merchant ships were sailing regularly to China and India, as well as South America, Africa, and lands along the Mediterranean Sea.
In the mid-1790s, France and Britain were at war. French and British merchant ships stayed home to avoid capture by their enemies. American merchants took advantage of this opportunity. By 1800, the United States had almost 1,000 merchant ships trading around the world.
Piracy on the Seas
The practice of piracy, or robbery on the seas, made some foreign waters dangerous. Pirates from the Barbary States of North Africa—Morocco, Algiers, Tripoli, and Tunis—terrorized European ships sailing on the Mediterranean Sea.
The Barbary pirates demanded that governments pay tribute, or protection money, to allow their country’s ships to pass safely. If tribute was not paid, the pirates attacked and took ships and
W7
Taking Hates’. Analyzing____________
As you read, use a diagram like this one to analyze the actions the United States took in response to each of the following situations. 18	The Jefferson Era
	Action Taken
Demand for Tribute	
Attack on the Chesapeake	
Tecumseh’s Confederation	
Content Vocabulary
•	tribute
•	neutral rights
•	embargo
•	nationalism
imprisoned their crews. European countries often paid this tribute. They believed that it was less expensive to pay the Barbary pirates than it was to go to war with them.
War With Tripoli
The Barbary States also demanded that the United States pay tribute. In 1801 the ruler of Tripoli asked the United States for even more money. When President Jefferson refused to pay, Tripoli declared war on the United States. In response, Jefferson sent ships to blockade Tripoli.
In 1804 pirates seized the U.S. warship Philadelphia. They towed the ship into Tripoli Harbor and threw the crew into jail. Stephen Decatur, a 25-year-old U.S. Navy captain, took action. He slipped into the heavily guarded harbor with a small raiding party. Decatur burned the captured ship to prevent the pirates from using it. A British admiral praised the deed as the “most bold and daring act of the age.”
Stephen Decatur and crew attack one of Tripoli's gunboats.
CRITICAL THINKING
Drawing Conclusions Why do you think Stephen Decatur was considered a national hero?



tribute money paid to a leader or state for protection	
	Lesson 3 329
As tensions between the United States and Great Britain worsened, the British warship Leopard attacked the American vessel Chesapeake off the coast of Virginia. How do you think the American people reacted to this violent conflict?
The war ended with the signing of a peace treaty in June I805, Tripoli agreed to stop demanding tribute, but the United States ! had to pay $60,000 for the release of the prisoners. Although the ’ United States no longer had to pay tribute to Tripoli, it continued | paying other Barbary States until 1816.
Violating Neutral Rights
Thomas Jefferson won reelection in 1804. The nation was at peace—but trouble was brewing. Across the Atlantic Ocean, Great Britain and France were fighting another war that threatened to interfere with American trade.
When Britain and France went to war again in 1803, the United States traded with both countries. By not taking sides in the war, the United States was able to continue with this trade. A nation not involved in a conflict enjoyed neutral rights, meaning its ships could sail the seas and not take sides.
American merchants prospered for two years. By 1805, however, Britain and France were each trying to block the other from trading with the United States. Britain blockaded the French coast and threatened to search all ships trading with France. France then announced that it would search and seize ships caught trading with Britain.
The British Abuse American Shipping
Officers of the British ship Leopard impress American sailors from the Chesapeake in 1807.
Reading HELPDESK
The British desperately needed sailors for their naval war. Many of their own sailors had deserted due to the terrible living conditions hard labor, harsh treatment, and terrible food—in the British Royal Navy. British naval ships began stopping American ships to search for suspected British deserters. The British then forced these suspected deserters to return to the British navy.
The practice of forcing people into military or naval services is called impressment (ihm«PREHS*muhnt). While some of the sailors taken were deserters from the British navy, the British impressed hundreds of native-born and naturalized American citizens.
The British often waited for American ships outside an American harbor, where they boarded and searched them. In June 1807, the British warship Leopard stopped the American vessel Chesapeake off the coast of Virginia. The Leopard’s captain demanded that he be allowed to search the American ship for .ritph deserters’ but the Chesapeake’s captain refused. In reply,
e ritish opened fire, crippling the Chesapeake and killing three crew members.

I
neutral rights privileges or freedoms that are granted to nations that do not choose a side in a conflict embargo a prohibition or blocking of trade with a certain country
330 The Jefferson Era
Academic Vocabulary
react to act in response to something
When news of the attack spread, Americans reacted with an anti-British fury not seen since the Revolutionary War. Secretary of State James Madison called the attack an outrage. Many Americans demanded war against Britain, but President Jefferson wanted to avoid war.
More Problems for American Trade
SKILLS PRACTICE
As you read classroom materials, list examples of well-written sentences with different structures. Compare your list with a partner's list.
When Britain violated America’s neutral rights, Jefferson banned some trade with Britain. After the attack on the Chesapeake, he took stronger measures.
Congress passed the Embargo Act in December 1807. An embargo (ihm»BAHR*goh) prohibits trade with another country. The act targeted Great Britain, but the embargo banned imports from and exports to all foreign countries. Jefferson wanted to prevent Americans from using other countries as go-betweens for forbidden trade.
The embargo of 1807 was a disaster. With ships confined to their harbors, unemployment rose in New England. Without European markets, the South could not sell its tobacco or cotton. The price for wheat fell in the West, and river traffic stopped. Britain, meanwhile, simply bought needed goods from other countries. Congress repealed the Embargo Act in March 1809. In its place, it passed the Nonintercourse Act. This act, which prohibited trade only with Britain and France, was also unpopular and unsuccessful.
Read the information and analyze the graph, then answer these questions.
INTERPRETING GRAPHS
Describe the imbalance of trade that occurred in the years after 1810.
CRITICAL THINKING
IMPORTS AND EXPORTS
1800-1820 A nation's balance of trade is the difference between the value of its exports and the value of its imports. A nation has a trade surplus, or positive balance of trade, when it exports more than it imports. It has a trade deficit, or negative balance of trade, when it imports more than it exports. For example, if the United States imported $50 in tea and exported $100 in cotton, it would have a trade surplus.
New Orleans was a major port in the early 1800s.
Identifying Cause and Effect
How did the conflict with the British affect American trade?
Nonintercourse Act
1820
= Exports: goods sold	Imports: goods purchased
_____Balance of trade: difference between the value of a nation's
exports and its imports

Source: Historical Statistics of the United States
Lesson 3 331
The Election of 1808
Jefferson, following Washington’s precedent, made it clear that he would not be a candidate for a third term. The Republicans chose James Madison from Virginia as their candidate. The Federalists hoped that voter anger over the embargo would help them win. They nominated Charles Pinckney. Pinckney carried most of New England, but the Federalists gained little support from the other regions. Madison won the presidency with 122 electoral votes. Pinckney received just 47 votes.
IS READING PROGRESS CHECK
Tecumseh called on Native Americans to unite in order to stop American expansion.
Explaining How did the war between Britain and France affect the United States?
War at Home and Abroad
guidingquestion What issues challenged James Madison during his presidency?
James Madison took office under unfavorable conditions. He faced major problems. The nation was involved in the embargo crisis, and Britain continued to halt American ships. Cries for war with Britain grew louder. Meanwhile, trouble was also brewing in the West.
War Looms
In 1810 Congress passed a new trade law. It would permit direct trade with either France or Britain, depending on which country first lifted its trade restrictions, or limits, against the United States. The British took no action, but Napoleon acted quickly, promising to end France’s trade restrictions.
In spite of that promise, the French continued to seize and sell American ships. On the verge of war, Americans were divided only over who the enemy should be. Although angry over French actions, Madison believed Britain was the bigger threat to the United States.
Broken Treaties
4
►
III......
Reading HELPDESK
Madison also received news about problems in the West. Ohio had become a state in 1803. White settlers wanted more land in the Ohio Valley. Native Americans had already given up millions of acres. Now the settlers were moving onto lands that were guaranteed to Native Americans by treaty.

nationalism a strong sense of devotion to one's country
Academic Vocabulary
restriction a rule or regulation that limits something
SKILLS PRACTICE___________________
When you see a new English word, think about whether you have seen it before. If so, write where you have seen it and what you know about it.
As tensions grew, some Native Americans renewed their contacts with British agents and fur traders in Canada.
Other Native Americans pursued a new strategy. Tecumseh (tuh»KUHM»suh), a powerful Shawnee chief, tried to build a confederacy among Native American nations in the Northwest.
Tecumseh wanted to halt white movement into Native American lands. He believed that a strong alliance—with the backing of the British in Canada—could achieve that goal. Tecumseh also thought the treaties the U.S. government made with individual Native American nations were worthless. “The Great Spirit gave this great island to his red children,” he said. No one nation, he believed, had the right to give it away.
Working alongside Tecumseh was his brother, Tenskwatawa (ten»skwah*TAH»wuh). Known as the Prophet, Tenskwatawa urged Native Americans to return to their ancient customs. His message gained a large following. He founded Prophetstown in northern Indiana, near where the Tippecanoe and Wabash Rivers meet.
Tecumseh Meets the Governor
The governor of the Indiana Territory, William Henry Harrison, became alarmed by the growing power of the two Shawnee brothers. Fearing that they would form an alliance with the British, Harrison sent Tecumseh a letter. He warned Tecumseh that the United States had more warriors than all the Native American groups combined.
Tecumseh replied to Harrison in person.
SKILLS PRACTICE
Talk about a lesson or chapter with a partner. Point to pictures and use gestures. Use the English words you know.
The Prophet lacked his brother's military skill and was badly defeated in the Battle of Tippecanoe.
PRIMARY SOURCE
M
Since the peace was made, you have killed some Shawnees, Delawares and Winnebagoes. You have taken land from us and I
do not see how we can remain at peace if you continue to do so. You
try to force red people to do some injury. It is you that are pushing
them on to some mischief.... You try to prevent the Indians from
doing as they wish—to unite and let them consider their lands
common property of the whole. 99
—from The Centennial History of Oregon, 1811-1912, by Joseph Gaston
The Battle of Tippecanoe
Harrison attacked Prophetstown
while Tecumseh was away trying
to expand the confederacy in 1811.
After more than two hours of
battle, the Prophet’s forces fled.
illl

LESSON 3 REVIEW
Include this lesson's information in your Foldable®.
f 		. ======«
1800	1803
	
	—-—
U- J'
1812	1810
—			-
The Battle of Tippecanoe was a victory for the Americans. Yet it came at a cost. After his people’s defeat, Tecumseh joined forces with the British who, settlers believed, had supplied his confederacy with guns.
The War Hawks Call for War
Meanwhile, President Madison faced demands for a more aggressive policy toward Britain. The loudest voices camefroma group of young Republican members of Congress known as the War Hawks. Led by Henry Clay of Kentucky and John Calhoun of South Carolina, they represented the West and South.
The War Hawks supported increases in military spending and were driven by hunger for land. War Hawks from the West wanted the fertile forests of southern Canada, whereas the southerners wanted Spanish Florida. The War Hawks also wanted to expand the nations power. Their nationalism (NA*shuh*nuh»lih»zuhm)—or loyalty to their country—appealed to a renewed American patriotism.
Not everyone, however, wanted war. The Federalists in the Northeast remained strongly opposed to it.
The Eve of War
By the spring of 1812, Madison knew that he could no longer avoid war with Britain. In a message to Congress on June 1, Madison asked them to declare war.
The British had already decided to end their policy of search and seizure of American ships. Unfortunately, news of Britain’s change in policy did not reach Washington, D.C., until it was too late. Once set in motion, the war machine could not be stopped. H READING PROGRESS CHECK
Contrasting How did people from the South, Northeast, and West feel about going to war with Britain?
Review Vocabulary
1. How did tribute and neutral rights affect shipping?
JOA
“I. Explain the significance of the following terms: joa a. embargo b. nationalism
Answer the Guiding Questions
3. Identifying Cause and Effect Was Jefferson's Embargo Act effective? Why or why not? se;29b 334 The Jefferson Era
4.	Identifying How was conflict between the Barbary States and the United States resolved?«c
5.	Explaining Describe three factors that led to war with Britain in 1812. so
EXPOSITORY WRITING
Which of the challenges that the United States faced in this period do you feel was the most serious? Write a paragraph explaining your choice. sa;3od 1
networks
There's More Online!
BIOGRAPHY
Dolley Madison
gf GAME Concentration Game
ef GRAPHIC ORGANIZER
Battles and Outcomes
MAP
The War of 1812 Sf SELF-CHECK QUIZ ef VIDEO
RDel ■■«££>
Md.
-Chesapeakei

f
w
Lesson 4
The War of 1812
AL QUESTION
Why does conflict develop? P TEKS
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills 1A Identify the major eras and events in U.S. history through 1877, including colonization, revolution, drafting of the Declaration of Independence, creation and ratification of the Constitution, religious revivals such as the Second Great Awakening, early republic, the Age of Jackson, westward expansion, reform movements, sectionalism, Civil War, and Reconstruction, and describe their causes and effects.
5B Summarize arguments regarding protective tariffs, taxation, and the banking system.
5D Explain the causes, important events, and effects of the War of 1812.
11B Describe the positive and negative consequences of human modification of the physical environment of the United States.
12C Explain the reasons for the increase in factories and urbanization.
13A Analyze the War of 1812 as a cause of
d	economic changes in the nation.
? s 21A Identify different points of view of 11 political parties and interest groups on y important historical and contemporary issues.
11	22B Describe the contributions of significant
11 political, social, and military leaders of the
| United States such as Frederick Douglass, John | g	Paul Jones, James Monroe, Stonewall Jackson,
| >	Susan B. Anthony, and Elizabeth Cady Stanton,
s I 26B Identify examples of American art, o | music, and literature that reflect society in | &	different eras.
I o	29D Identify points of view from the historical
S |	context surrounding an event and the frame of
~	reference which influenced the participants.

Reading HELPDESK
It Matters Because
The War of 1812 changed how Americans felt about their country and how other countries viewed the United States.
Defeats and Victories
guidingquestion In what ways was the United States unprepared for war with Britain?
When the war began, the War Hawks were confident the United States would achieve a quick victory over the British. In reality, though, the Americans were unprepared for war.
The fighting force was small and ill-prepared. The regular army had fewer than 12,000 soldiers, 5,000 of whom were new recruits. Added to that were the state militias with between 50,000 and 100,000 poorly trained soldiers. Commanders who had served in the American Revolution were now too old to fight. In addition, not everyone supported the conflict. Some states opposed “Mr. Madison’s War.” The Americans also underestimated, or misjudged, the strength of the British and their Native American allies.
In July 1812, the war began. General William Hull led the American army from Detroit into Canada, where they met Tecumseh and his warriors. Fearing a massacre by the Native Americans, Hull surrendered Detroit to the British. Several other American attempts to invade Canada also ended in failure. General William Henry Harrison led one of these unsuccessful efforts. He decided that the Americans could make no headway as long as the British controlled Lake Erie.
Outcome
Taking Notes: Describing
As you read, use a graphic organizer like the one shown here to record and describe each
Content Vocabulary • frigate
Academic Vocabulary
underestimate to
judge something below its actual value
Lesson 4 335
U.S.
Naval Strength The U.S. Navy had three of the fastest frigates (FRIH.guhts), or warships, afloat. When the Constitution destroyed two British vessels early in the war, Americans rejoiced. Privateers, armed private ships, also captured many British vessels, boosting American morale.
Oliver Hazard Perry, commander of the Lake Erie naval forces, had his orders. He was to assemble a fleet and seize the lake from the British. The showdown came on September 10, 1813, when the British ships sailed out to face the Americans. In the bloody battle that followed, Perry and his ships destroyed the British naval force. After the battle, Perry sent General Harrison the message, “We have met the enemy and they are ours.”
With Lake Erie in American hands, the British and their Native American allies tried to pull back from the Detroit area. Harrison and his troops cut them off. In the fierce Battle of the Thames, Tecumseh was killed.
American forces also attacked York (present-day Toronto), burning the parliament. Still, though America had won several victories by the end of 1813, Canada remained under British rule. Defeat of the Creek
Before his death in the Battle of the Thames, Tecumseh had talked with the Creek in the Mississippi Territory about forming a confederation to fight the United States. With his death, hopes for such a confederation ended. The British-Native American alliance also came to an end.
In March 1814, Andrew Jackson led U.S. forces in an attack on the Creek in the Battle of Horseshoe Bend. More than 550 Creek people died in that battle, and the Creek were forced to give up most of their lands.
Q READING PROGRESS CHECK

Reading HELPDESK
Explaining Why was Perry's victory on Lake Erie important?
The British Offensive
GUIDING QUESTION
Why were Americans filled with national pride after the Battleof New Orleans? Before fighting broke out with the United States, the British had already been at war with the French. Fighting two wars was difficult. Britain had to send soldiers and ships to both France
frigate a fast, medium-sized warship	Build Vocabulary; gefate(/ |yorrf$
The word proceeded in the quotation on the next page is similar to the word preceded. The prefixes pro-and pre- can both mean "before, or in front of." In this case pro means "forward," and the word proceeded means "to go forward." The word preceded means "to be or go in front of."
336 The Jefferson Era
and the United States. In the spring of 1814, British fortunes began to improve. After winning the war against Napoleon,
Britain was free to send more forces against the United States.
In August 1814, the British sailed into Chesapeake Bay and launched an attack on Washington, D.C. British troops quickly overpowered the American militia on the outskirts of the city. Then they marched into the American capital. “They proceeded, without a moment’s delay, to burn and destroy everything in the most distant degree connected with the government,” reported a British officer. Among the buildings set ablaze were the Capitol and the president’s mansion. Fortunately, a thunderstorm put out the fires before they could completely destroy the buildings.
The British did not try to hold Washington, D.C. Instead, they headed north to Baltimore. They attacked that city in mid-September, but the people of Baltimore were ready and held firm. A determined defense and fierce artillery fire from Fort McHenry in the harbor kept the British from entering the city.
As the bombs burst over Fort McHenry during the night of September 13, local attorney Francis Scott Key watched. The next morning he saw the American flag still flying over the fort. Deeply moved, Key wrote a poem that became known as “The Star-Spangled Banner.” Congress designated “The Star-Spangled Banner” as the national anthem in 1931.
GEOGRAPHY CONNECTION
During the War of 1812, approximately 286,000 Americans fought the British, and an estimated 2,200 were killed in battle.
MOVEMENT
Based on this map, from what three places did the British attack the Americans? CRITICAL THINKING
Drawing Conclusions Based on this map, in what area did the British have their greatest success? Explain your answer. i«gi,
TERRITORY	*
V,
V i’C-
/lass.
onn.
"R.I.
Fort
American forces British forces American victory British victory
British naval blockade
-Del -Md.
-Chesapeake Bay
Ky.
888
ATLANTIC
OCEAN
& 1. The British navy blockades the coast, 1812
& 2. Perry defeats the British on Lake Erie, 1813
J$r 3. Harrison defeats British
and Native American forces at the Battle of Thames, 1813
4.	The British burn Washington, D.C., 1814
5.	Americans recapture Washington, D.C., and defeat the British at Ft. McHenry, 1814
6.	Americans win the Battle of Lake Champlain, 1814
& 7. Jackson defeats the
British at New Orleans, 1815
400 miles
Gulf of Mexico'
90°W
0	400 km
Albers Equal-Area projection \	.70°W^
AO N


Dolley Madison (1768-1849)
Dolley Payne Todd married James Madison in 1794, several years after the death of her first husband. While James Madison served as President Jefferson's secretary of state, Dolley acted as hostess for the widowed president. During the War of 1812 she showed remarkable bravery. In 1814 as the British approached the capital, she refused to leave the White House until she had packed up many valuable items, a painting of George Washington, and other priceless valuables.
CRITICAL THINKING
Drawing Conclusions Why do you think Dolley Madison risked danger to save White House valuables? A
Turning Point at Plattsburgh While British forces were attacking Washington and Baltimore, British general Sir George Prevost led about 10,000 soldiers south from Canada. Their goal was to capture Plattsburgh on the shore of Lake Champlain. An American naval force on the lake defeated the British fleet in September 1814. Fearing the Americans would surround them, the British retreated into Canada.
The Battle of Lake Champlain convinced the British to end the war in North America. They had defeated Napoleon in Europe. To keep fighting the United States would result in little gain and was not worth the effort.
The End of the War
In December 1814, American and British representatives met in Ghent, Belgium, to sign a peace agreement. The Treaty of Ghent did not change any existing borders. There was no mention of the impressment of sailors. Even neutral rights had become a dead issue since Napoleon’s defeat.
One final battle occurred before word of the treaty reached the United States. On January 8, 1815, the British advanced on New Orleans. Waiting for them were Andrew Jackson and his troops, who hid behind thick cotton bales. The bales absorbed the British bullets, while the British advancing in the open provided easy targets for American troops. In a short but gruesome battle, hundreds of British soldiers were killed. At the Battle of New Orleans, Americans achieved a decisive victory and Andrew Jackson became a national hero.
Nationalism and Economic Growth
Many New England Federalists had opposed “Mr. Madisons War.” In December 1814, they met at the Hartford Convention in Connecticut. To protect their interests, they made a list of proposed amendments to the Constitution. Some even talked about seceding from the Union.
The Federalists’ grievances seemed unpatriotic in the triumph following the war. The party lost support and declined as a political force, leaving only one major political party. The War Hawks of the Republican Party carried on the Federalist belief in a strong national government. They favored trade, western expansion, the energetic development of the economy, and a strong army and navy.
Reading HELPDESK
Academic Vocabula''y____________________ SKILLS PRACTICE
goal something one is trying to accomplish
and deepen your understanding. Ask your partner questions about what you both have read, and answer your partner's questions.
338 The Jefferson Era
The War of 1812 helped the United States to gain its economic independence. As a result of the war, Americans became less reliant on Europe for products and developed more of their own manufacturing. For example, the British blockade of America’s Atlantic coast during the war caused a shortage of cotton cloth throughout the country. The blockade forced Americans to set up cloth manufacturing and other industries.
s The war also spurred the building of canals and roads to move | people and goods more quickly from one region to another. In | addition, the difficulty of paying for the war led to the creation of | a new national bank, the Second Bank of the United States. Above 5 all, the war sparked a feeling of national pride that for a time united I Americans and released new energies for expanding the economy.
D READING PROGRESS CHECK
S
Identifying Cause and Effect Identify three effects of the War of 1812. !
SFOLDABLESi
[study Organizer
Include this lesson's information in your Foldable®.
==	—
1800	1803
U-	
1812	1810
LESSON 4 REVIEW
Review Vocabulary
1.	Use the word frigate in a sentence about the developments of this era. 3oa; job
Answer the Guiding Questions
2.	Explaining Why was the Battle of the Thames important for the United States in the War of 1812?
50
3.	Identifying Cause and Effect How did the
outcome of the war affect the Federalist Party's efforts to change the Constitution? sd;29b
4.	Explaining Explain how the War Hawks	i
influenced the Republican Party after the	;
War of 1812. so	H
EXPOSITORY WRITING
Consider the causes ; and costs of the war, the Treaty of Ghent, and the	p!
impact ofthe war on the American people. Was	|
the War of 1812 worth fighting? Did it help or hurt
the young United States? State your opinion in a	!
brief essay, so; 29E	J
Lesson 4 339
n Activities
Directions: Write your answers using standard grammar, spelling, sentence structure, and punctuation.
0 Use your IjECESHSSI explore the Essential Questions.
expository writing What do you think were the two most significant changes in the United States during the Jefferson Era? Explain why you consider them important. sa; 3od
0 Social Studies Skills
INTERPRETING REPORTS
Find a report or case study about the Supreme Court case of Marbury v. Madison. What is the issue surrounding the"midnight"appointments? Did the Court decide that Marbury had a right to the appointment? Marbury v. Madison established the Supreme Court's power of judicial review. Why is this significant? 18B
0 Thinking Like a Historian
IDENTIFYING cause and effect Significant changes occurred during Thomas Jefferson's presidency. Some of those changes still affect us today. Use a chart like the one shown to identify changes and note modern effects of those changes. ia;29b;3oc
0 Visual Literacy
interpreting IMAGES During his presidency, Jefferson had to respond to British and French attacks on American shipping. Examine the political cartoon. What are Britain's King George and France's Napoleon Bonaparte doing? Is the cartoon critical or supportive of Jefferson and his response? How do you know?	29A; 290
Ji
	Geography	Civics and Government
Jefferson Era		
Today		
A.
King George of England B.
Thomas Jefferson C.
Napoleon Bonaparte of France 340 The Jefferson Era
Assessment
Directions: Write your answers using standard gram mar, spelling, sentence structure, and punctuation.
CHECKING FOR UNDERSTANDING
0 Identify the significance of each of the following individuals and terms in relation to the foreign policy of the United States.
5E
A.
Thomas Jefferson B.
Louisiana Purchase C.
Tripoli D.	impressment
E.
Tecumseh F.
Treaty of Ghent REVIEW THE GUIDING QUESTIONS
0 Identifying Who were the Federalist and Republican candidates for president in the election ofl 800? How did their political positions differ?
0 Explaining Why did Jefferson believe that customs duties would help create a stable economic system?
SA;29D;29E
0 Analyzing Why was control of the Mississippi River an important part of the Louisiana Purchase? ha
0 Describing How did Lieutenant Zebulon Pike contribute to the westward expansion of the United States? 1A
0 Explaining Why did Tecumseh form an alliance with the British after the Battle of Tippecanoe? 290
0 Explaining Why were Americans angered by the British practice of impressment? so
0 Identifying What are some advantages Britain had over the United States at the beginning of the War Of 1812?	29B
0 Explaining What happened at the Battle of Horseshoe Bend?
CRITICAL THINKING
© Summarizing What did Chief Justice Marshall rule in the cases of McCulloch v. Maryland and Gibbons v. Ogden? What do these rulings reveal about his vision of state and federal power? Why were they significant?
18B
© Speculating In 1804, enslaved Africans and other laborers on Santo Domingo won independence from France. How do you think Jefferson felt about their victory? 29D
© Drawing Conclusions Why did Alexander Hamilton and Aaron Burr fight a duel in 1804? Who do you think was more responsible for the conflict? 29b
© Assessing President Madison believed that Britain posed a bigger threat to American interests than France. Do you agree with his assessment? Why, or why not?
5E;29E
© Analyzing How did Adams use the Judiciary Act of 1801 to strengthen the power of the Federalists? Do you think that Adams acted appropriately? Explain your response. isa;29e
© Identifying Problems and Solutions What was the problem with the Embargo Act of 1807? How might Congress have solved the problem? 29B
© Analyzing Primary Sources Research to find one of the reports Lewis and Clark sent back from their expedition. Summarize the report. What challenges did they face? What discoveries did they make?
29A.-29B
© Analyzing In what ways did the War of 1812 affect and change the economy of the United States? Give examples, ua
(J) Identifying What is judicial review, and what was its origin? iba
Need Extra Help?
If You've Missed Question	O	O	O	O	O	O	O	O	O	©	©	©	©	©	©	©	©	©
Review Lesson	1,2,3,4’	1	1	2	2	3	3	4	4	1	2	2	3	1	3	2	4	1
341
chaptern Assessment (continued)
DBQ
SHORT RESPONSE
GSSD
'Third.—Congress shall not have power to lay any embargo on the ships or vessels ofthe citizens ofthe United States, in the ports or harbors thereof, for more than sixty days."
"Fifth.—Congress shall not make or declare war, or authorize acts of hostility against any foreign nation, without the concurrence of two-thirds of both Houses, except such acts of hostility be in defense ofthe territories of the United States when actually invaded."
—Amendments to the Constitution Proposed by the Hartford Convention, 1814
(£> Drawing Conclusions Do these changes suggest support for or disapproval of the policies of Jefferson and Madison? Explain. 29B;29D
© Analyzing Why did these amendments fall out offavor after the War of 1812?	29B
EXTENDED RESPONSE
© Expository Writing Thomas Jefferson has just begun his first term as president ofthe United States. Write an article summarizing his views and explaining what you expect from his presidency. sa;29B;29e
STANDARDIZED TEST PRACTICE
ANALYZING DOCUMENTS
DBQ
PRIMARY SOURCE
"The only way to stop this evil [white settlement of Indians' land I, is for all the red men to unite in claiming a common and equal right in the land as it was at first, and should be now—for it never was divided, but belongs to all.... Sell a country! Why not sell the air, the clouds, and the great sea, as well as the earth?"
—Tecumseh in a letter to President Harrison, 1810 © Finding the Main Idea What does Tecumseh suggest in this letter? 29B
A.
Native Americans should get a good price for selling their land. B.
Native Americans should give the land to white people. C.
Native Americans should work together to keep out white settlers. D.
Native Americans should sell the land and divide the profits equally. © Finding the Main Idea What does this letter suggest about Tecumseh's views of earlier Native American agreements to sell their land? 29B;29d
F.
He supports these agreements. G.
He believes Native Americans were misled. H.
He believes they had no right to sell the land. I.
He believes the prices received for the land were too low. Need Extra Help?
If You've Missed Question	©	©	©	©
Review Lesson	4	4	1	3
342 The Jefferson Era
Growth and Expansion
1790-1840
networks
There's More Online about the growth of the United States during the first part of the nineteenth century.	_
CHAPTER
12

Lesson 1
A
Growing Economy Lesson 2
Moving West
Lesson 3
Unity and Sectionalism
siSiS^W... f IlllSlIlliSli ■
The Story
Matters...
From the earliest colonial days, each generation of settlers has carved out new western lands in the wilderness. They have cleared swaths of forests to build farms and settle new towns.
In 1775 Kentucky pioneer Daniel Boone leads a group of men through the Appalachian Mountains along the Cumberland Gap into the land Boone calls "Kentucke." They clear and widen an existing trail to create the Wilderness Road. This becomes the major pathway for settlers migrating westward. By 1792, Kentucky has become a state—the first U.S. state located west ofthe Appalachians.
.Growth and Expansion
A
Growing Economy , Moving West
, lUnity and Sectionalism
Go to the Foldables® library in the back of your book to make a Foldable® that will help you take notes while reading this chapter.
◄ Daniel Boone was the most famous of America's early frontiersmen.
INTERFOTO/Alam
343
CHAPTER 12
Place and Time: United States i?90toi840
In the early 1800s, United States industry and agriculture grew rapidly. Many Americans moved westward, created new settlements and cities, and improved methods of transportation.
Step Into the Plate
MAP FOCUS
During the early 1800s, industrialization grew. The map on the next page shows major industrial cities that emerged during this time. In 1818 General Andrew Jackson was ordered to stop the Native American raids coming from Florida.
To accomplish this goal, he invaded areas of West Florida and Spanish East Florida.
His actions helped Spain realize it could not defend or control Florida.

Connecting the Atlantic Ocean to the Great Lakes, the « Erie Canal greatly enabled shipping into western lands.
PLACE
Look at the map. Which cities near the Great Lakes saw industrial growth? 29C LOCATION
Which industrial cities lie south of Virginia and Kentucky? 29C
CRITICAL THINKING
Identifying Cause and Effect How do you think a region's geography influenced industrial growth in that region? iiA
S'
networks eT MAP Explore the
,	, .. n .. , interactive version of
There's More Online!	this map on
NETWORKS.
Ef TIMELINE Explore the interactive version of this time line on NETWORKS.
I
i.
1
networks
There's More Online!
Bf DIAGRAM
Lowell Factory System
Sf GRAPH
Measuring Population
KT GRAPHIC ORGANIZER
Free Enterprise System
Ef PRIMARY SOURCE
Lowell Offering
SELF-CHECK QUIZ
Ef VIDEO I iy.i
Lesson 1
Rural
92.8%
.	1 M
fsi»
A
Growing Economy 
I
LL QUESTION
How does geography influence Hie way people live? ■
TEKS
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills_______________ 11A Analyze bow physical characteristics of the environment influenced population distribution, settlement patterns, and economic activities in the United States during the 17th, 18th, and 19th centuries.
12A Identify economic differences among different regions of the United States.
12B Explain reasons for the development of the plantation system, the transatlantic slave trade, and the spread of slavery.
12C Explain the reasons for the increase in factories and urbanization.
12D Analyze the causes and effects of economic differences among different regions of the United States at selected times in U.S. history.
13B Identify the economic factors that brought about rapid industrialization and urbanization
14B Describe the characteristics and the benefits of the U.S. free enterprise system during the 18th and 19th centuries.
27A Explain the effects of technological and scientific innovations such as the steamboat, the cotton gin, and interchangeable parts.
27C Analyze how technological innovations changed the way goods were manufactured and marketed, nationally and internationally. 28A Compare the effects of scientific discoveries and technological innovations that have influenced daily life in different periods in U.S. history.
28B Identify examples of how industrialization changed life in the United States.
Reading HELPDESK
IT MATTERS BECAUSE
The Industrial Revolution of the late 1700s changed how people lived and worked.
Industrial Growth
guidingquestion How did new technology affect the way things were made?
In colonial times, most Americans lived in the same place that they worked, which was usually a farm. When they wanted or needed something, they made it. Using their hands and simple tools, people made much of their own furniture, farm equipment, household items, and clothing.
In the mid-1700s, people began producing goods through new methods. In Great Britain, inventors built machines that did some of the work involved in cloth making, such as spinning thread. These new machines ran on the power of flowing water. British cloth makers built factories, called mills, along rivers. In the mills, they installed large numbers of machines. To tend the machines, mill owners paid people wages, regular payment of money in return for work. People began to leave their homes and farms to work in the mills and collect wages. This historic change is so important that it is known as the Industrial Revolution.
The Industrial Revolution in the United States
The Industrial Revolution reached the United States around 1800. Mills and factories first appeared in New England because of its geography. First, New England’s poor soil made farming difficult People willingly gave up farm work to earn wages in mills and

Growth and Expansion
Taking Notes: Finding the Main Idea
Use a diagram like this one to identify the major elements of the free enterprise system.
Content Vocabulary ____________
•	cotton gin	• capitil'51"
•	interchangeable part • capi*a'
•	patent
.freee"‘e,p
Comparing
factories. Second, New England’s many rivers and streams offered ^-Thinkinr I ike n -the waterpower needed to run factory machinery. Third, the	Plj t cTAn t\ KT
area had many ports. These ports allowed the shipping in of raw	I HIMOKJLAJN
materials, such as cotton, and the shipping out of finished goods,
such as cloth.
New Inventions
At the heart of the Industrial Revolution was technology. First, new machines changed the way people made cloth. Inventions ’ such as the water frame and spinning jenny spun thread, and the power loom wove the thread into cloth. Compared to making thread or cloth by hand, the machines saved time and money.
Other inventions followed. In 1793 Eli Whitney invented the cotton gin. The word gin is short for “engine.” It quickly removed the seeds from picked cotton and allowed a huge increase in cotton production.
In 1798 Eli Whitney received a contract from the U.S. government to make 10,000 rifles in 28 months. To produce this large quantity in a short time, Whitney devised a manufacturing method that would produce interchangeable parts. The idea was to make large quantities of uniform pieces that could replace any other identical pieces. Interchangeable parts opened the way for producing many different kinds of goods on a mass scale and for reducing the price of the goods.
The Rise of Factories
In 1790 Congress passed a patent law to protect the rights of
inventors. A patent gives an inventor the sole legal right to make	*'
money from an invention for a certain period of time. Thus,
patents, then and now, encourage technological innovation.	■>
The British also tried to protect their inventions. One law prohibited textile workers from sharing technology or leaving the country. Still, a British worker named Samuel Slater brought these secrets to the United States. He memorized the design of the machines used in the British factory in which he worked.
In the 1790s, Slater built copies, in the United States, of British machines that made cotton thread. Slater’s mill marked an important step in the Industrial Revolution in the United States.,
Francis Cabot Lowell improved on Slater s mill in 1814. Lowell s Massachusetts textile, or cloth, factory not only made thread, it also wove the thread into cloth. Lowell began the factory system in which all manufacturing steps are combined in one place.
Working in a factory was very different from working and living on a farm. Think about how working for wages changed the lives of people who had been used to making most of the goods they needed. How do you think life was different for the women in the picture below?
These young factory workers from the 1840s, known as "Lowell Girls," lived and worked together.



iH i

cotton gin a machine that removes seeds from cotton fiber interchangeable part a part of a machine or device that can be replaced by another, identical part
patent sole legal right to an invention and its profits
Academic Vocabulary
technology equipment that makes use of advanced knowledge and skill to solve a problem or do a task
Lesson 1 347
LOWELL FACTORY SYSTEM
o The first steps in textile production are to dean the raw cotton and turn loose cotton into crude yarn.
@ The spinning process transforms the yarn into thread.
© At the weaving stage, power looms interlace the threads into coarse cloth or fabric.
© Fabric is measured and batched for dyeing. Vegetable dyes are the earliest known dyes.
The Lowell factory system combined all the different steps of making cloth under one roof.
IDENTIFYING
What is the source ofthe power in this mill? CRITICAL THINKING
Explaining How was this system an improvement over earlier technology? Reading HELPDESK
Free Enterprise
The capitalist economic system of the United States helped spur industrial growth. In capitalism, individuals and businesses own property and decide how to use it. The people—not the government—control capital, which includes the buildings, lam machines, money, and other items used to create wealth.
We also use the term free enterprise to describe the Americ; economic system. People are free to work wherever they wish and to buy, sell, and produce whatever they want. The main elements of free enterprise are economic freedom, relatively low taxes, profit, private property, and competition. Business owners produce the products they think will sell the best and make the most profit. Businesses compete for customers with low prices an high quality. This competition helps push businesses to improve. P READING PROGRESS CHECK
Describing How did New England's physical geography support the growt of industries?

capitalism an economic system in which people and companies own the means of production
capital money or other items, such as machines or buildings, used to create wealth
free enterprise a type of economy in which people are free to buy, sell, and produce whatever they want
348 Growth and Expansion
Agriculture Grows
GUIDINGQUESTION
Why did agriculture remain the leading occupation of Americans in the 1800s? While many New Englanders went to work in factories in the early 1800s, most Americans still lived and worked on farms.
In the Northeast, farms were small, so a family could do all the necessary work. Farmers in the Northeast usually sold their products locally.
Agriculture moved west along with American settlers.
Western farmers in the region north of the Ohio River found land that could support a thriving agriculture. Many of these farmers concentrated on raising pork and cash crops such as corn and wheat.
In the South, cotton production rose sharply after the invention of the cotton gin. In addition, the cotton gin encouraged planters to grow cotton over a much wider area. Southern farmers seeking new land moved west to plant and farm cotton. Large plantations across the Deep South were devoted to the cultivation of the valuable crop. Between 1790 and 1820, cotton production soared from 3,000 to 300,000 bales per year in the South.
The success and spread of cotton production created a huge demand for enslaved workers. Trade in enslaved Africans expanded. Between 1790 and 1810, the number of enslaved Africans in the United States rose from about 700,000 to 1.2 million.
As farmers moved west, the crops they planted varied according to the climate. While cotton was the common choice in the warmer South, grain crops such as wheat (shown here) and corn dominated the cooler areas to the north.
H READING PROGRESS CHECK
Identifying What economic activity was most widespread in the United States in the early 1800s?
POPULATION CHANGE
URBAN AND RURAL POPULATION
1820 Urban 7.2%
POPULATION GROWTH
1800-1840 Source: Historical Statistics ofthe United States
The population ofthe United States shifted and grew during this period.
DESCRIBING
How would you describe the areas where people lived in 1820?
CRITICAL THINKING
Contrasting How is the population in 1840 different from what it was in 1800?
Academic Vocabulary_____
element a part of a larger whole
SKILLS PRACTICE
As you read, use a graphic organizer of your choice to take notes. Below the graphic organizer, use your notes to write a summary of what you read.
Lesson 1 349
Build Vocabulary: Word Origins
The area now known as the South Street Seaport in New York City offered hotels, restaurants, and businesses. The value of trade in the area increased from $84 million in 1825 to $146 million in 1836.
Economic Independence
guiding question Howdid the growth of factories and trade affect cities?
Small investors—such as shopkeepers, merchants, and farmers-provided the money necessary to build most new businesses. These people invested money in hopes of earning profits if the businesses were successful. Low taxes, minimum government regulations, private property, and competition encouraged the growth of the free enterprise system in the young nation. Growth of Corporations
In the 1830s, changes in the law paved the way for the growth of corporations. A corporation is a type of business that can have many owners. Because of their legal status, corporations can grow to a large size. They sell stock—shares of ownership in a company to raise the money to build factories and expand their business. Large corporations began to appear in this era, and their great size helped drive industrialization.

The word corporation comes from the Latin word corpus, which means "body." It is a group of people that acts together. A corporation continues to exist even after the people who first formed it have one. 350 Growth and Expansion
Reading HELPDESK
Cities Grow Up
The growth of factories and trade led to the growth of towns and cities. Many cities developed along rivers because factories could take advantage of the waterpower and easily ship goods to markets. Older cities such as New York, Boston, and Baltimore also grew as centers of commerce and trade.
Along New York City’s South Street, shipping piers extended for three miles (five km). One traveler wrote of the busy waterfront:
PRIMARY SOURCE
..
W
Every thought, word, look, and action of the multitude seemed to be absorbed by commerce. 99 —from The Growing Years, by Margaret L. Coit
To the west, towns such as Pittsburgh, Cincinnati, and Louisville were located on major rivers. As farmers in the West shipped more products by water, these towns grew rapidly.
Cities and towns looked different from modern urban areas. They featured wood and brick buildings and unpaved streets. Barnyard animals often roamed freely. There were no sewers to carry away waste, so diseases such as cholera and yellow fever were a threat. Fire was another danger. Sparks from a fireplace could easily ignite wooden buildings. Fires could be disastrous since few cities had organized fire companies. Yet cities offered many opportunities, such as a variety of jobs and steady wages.
As cities grew, residents built libraries, museums, and shops for people to enjoy during their leisure time. For many, the jobs and attractions of city life outweighed the dangers.
H READING PROGRESS CHECK
Analyzing Why were rivers important for the growth of cities?
Foldables
Study Organizer
o,Growth and Expansion
A
Growing Economy f o Moving Vest____________
o :Umty and Sectionalism
Include this lesson's information in your Foldable®
LESSON 1 REVIEW
Review Vocabulary
1.	Write a paragraph about Eli Whitney, using the terms cotton gin, patent, and interchangeable part and explaining their effects. 27a,-3oa; job
2.	Explain in a paragraph the connection between capital, capitalism, and free enterprise. i4B;3oa;3od
Answer the Guiding Questions
3.	Explaining Why did the development of interchangeable parts lead to an increase in factories in the United States? 12C27A
4.	Identifying Cause and Effect How did the
invention of the cotton gin change America's society and economy? 27d,-28A;2sb;29b
5.	Explaining What factors led to the development of the free enterprise system in the United States? ma
EXPOSITORY WRITING
In 1790 Congress passed a patent law. What did the law do? Why might the patent law encourage scientists to work on inventions and innovations? ub Lesson 1 351
networks
There's More Online!
Ef GAME Tic-Tac-Toe
Ef GRAPHIC ORGANIZER
Transportation
Developments
Ef maps
•	The National Road
•	Canals 1820-1860
SELF-CHECK QUIZ
Ef slideshow The Erie Canal
Lesson 2
Moving West
At QUESTION How does geography influence the way people live?
*
1TEKS Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills
1A Identify the major eras and events in U.S. history through 1877, including colonization, revolution, drafting of the Declaration of Independence, creation and ratification of the Constitution, religious revivals such as the Second Great Awakening, early republic, the Age of Jackson, westward expansion, reform movements, sectionalism, Civil War, and Reconstruction, and describe their causes and effects.
6E Identify areas that were acquired to form the United States, including the Louisiana Purchase. 10B Compare places and regions of the United States in terms of physical and human characteristics
11A Analyze how physical characteristics of the environment influenced population distribution, settlement patterns, and economic activities in the United States during the 17th, 18th, and 19th centuries.
11B Describe the positive and negative consequences of human modification of the physical environment of the United States.
11C Describe how different immigrant groups interacted with the environment in the United States during the 17th, 18th, and 19th centuries. 27A Explain the effects of technological and scientific innovations such as the steamboat, the cotton gin, and interchangeable parts.
27B Analyze the impact of transportation and communication systems on the growth, development, and urbanization of the United States.
27C Analyze how technological innovations changed the way goods were manufactured and marketed, nationally and internationally.
Reading HELPDESK
IT MATTERS BECAUSE
Settling the West led to improvements in transportation that helped the nation grow and prosper.
Headed West
guiding question What helped increase the movement of people and goods?
In 1790 the first census—the official count of a population-revealed that there were nearly 4 million Americans. At that time, most of these people still lived in the narrow strip of land between the Appalachian Mountains and the Atlantic Ocean. That pattern, however, was changing. For years, a few rugged American settlers had been crossing the Appalachian Mountains and settling in western lands. Now, a steady stream of settlers began moving west.
Daniel Boone and the Wilderness Road
Explorer and pioneer Daniel Boone was among the early western pioneers. In 1769 he explored a Native American trail through the Appalachian Mountains. Called Warriors’ Path, it led Boone through a break in the mountains—the Cumberland Gap. Beyond the gap lay the gentle hills of a land now called Kentucky. For two years, Boone explored the area’s dense forests and lush meadows.
In 1775 Boone rounded up 30 skilled foresters to make the trail easier to cross for pioneers migrating west. Boone’s crew widened Warriors’ Path, cleared rocks from the Cumberland

Hi
Taking Notes: Sequencing
1300	1310
Use a time line like this one to identify and place in chronological order the major developments in transportation during the early 1800s.
352 Growth and Expansion
1320	1330
—H----—I
Content Vocabulary
•	census •canal
•	turnpike • lock
Gap, cut down trees in Kentucky, and marked the trail. The new Wilderness Road, as it came to be known, served as the main southern highway from the eastern states to the West. More than 100,000 people traveled it between 1775 and 1790.
Building Roadways
The nation needed good inland roads for travel and to ship goods. Private companies built many turnpikes, or toll roads. Tolls, or fees paid by travelers, helped pay the cost of building the roads. Many roads had a base of crushed stone. In some areas, workers built “corduroy roads.” These roads had a surface made up of logs laid side by side, like the ridges of corduroy cloth.
Ohio became a state in 1803. The new state asked the
i- Connections to-
TODAY
The National Road
Drivers today can follow a modern road that closely follows the route of the National Road. It is U.S. Route 40, which continues past the end of the original National Road all the way to Utah. The Internet also offers a great deal of information about the route
I and key points along it.
federal government to build a road to connect it with the East.
In 1806 Congress approved funds for a national road to the West, though it took five more years for members to agree on the route.
Work on the project began in 1811 in Cumberland, Maryland. The start of the War of 1812 with Great Britain halted construction. As a result, the road’s first section, which ran from Maryland to Wheeling in present-day West Virginia, did not open until 1818.
census the official count of a population turnpike a road on which tolls are collected
Academic Vocabulary reveal to show
GEOGRAPHY CONNECTION
The National Road was the nation's first federally funded highway. When completed in 1837, the gravel road extended from the eastern seaboard to Vandalia, Illinois.
MOVEMENT
What towns did the National Road pass through on its way to Vandalia? CRITICAL THINKING
Speculating In what ways do you think the National Road affected communities near which it passed? POPULATION IN OHIO, INDIANA, AND ILLINOIS
Year	Ohio	Indiana	Illinois
1800	45,465	5,641	—
1810	230,760	24,520	12,282
1820	581,434	147,178	55,211
1830	937,903	343,031	157,445
Source: United States Census
Lesson 2 353
Robert Fulton did not invent the technology of the steamboat, but his Clermont helped lead to the growth of steamboats in the United States. The 140-foot (43 m) Clermont was large, fast, and comfortable.
I
Reading HELPDESK
The route closely followed that of a military road George Washington had built in 1754. It eventually reached Ohio and then Vandalia, Illinois. Congress viewed the road as vital to military readiness but did not take on any other road-building projects.
Traveling on Rivers
River travel was far more comfortable than travel by road, which was often rough and bumpy. Also, boats or river barges could carry far larger loads of farm products or other goods.
River travel had two big drawbacks, however. First, most major rivers in the eastern region flowed in a north-south direction, while most people and goods were headed east or west. Second, while traveling downstream was easy, moving upstream against the current was slow.
In the 1780s and 1790s, boat captains were already using steam engines to power boats in quiet waters. These early engines, however, did not have enough power to overcome the strong currents and winds found in large rivers, lakes, or oceans.
The Clermont's First Voyage
In 1802 Robert Livingston, a political and business leader, hired Robert Fulton to build a steamboat with a powerful engine. Livingston wanted the steamboat to carry cargo and passengers up the Hudson River from New York City to Albany.
In 1807 Fulton launched his steamboat, the Clermont. The boat made the 150-mile (241 km) trip from New York City to Albany in 32 hours. Using only sails, the trip would have taken four days.
The Clermont offered many comforts. Passengers could sit or stroll on deck or relax in sleeping compartments below deck. The engine was noisy, but its power provided a smooth ride.



canal an artificial waterway
Academic Vocabulary_______________
region an area defined by a feature or characteristic
; i
lock a separate compartment in which water levels rise and fall in order to raise or lower boats on a canal
354 Growth and Expansion
I
1
Steamboats ushered in a new age of river travel. Shipping goods and moving people became cheaper and faster. Regular steamboat service began along the Mississippi River, between New Orleans and Natchez, Mississippi, in 1812. Steamboats also contributed to the growth of river cities such as Cincinnati and St. Louis. By 1850 some 700 steamboats were carrying cargo and passengers within the United States.
New Waterways
Steamboats improved transportation but were limited to major rivers. No such river linked the East and the West.
Business and government officials led by DeWitt Clinton in New York developed a plan to connect New York City with the Great Lakes region. They would build a canal—an artificial waterway—across the state of New York. The canal would connect the Hudson River with Buffalo on Lake Erie. From these points, existing rivers and lakes could connect a much wider area. The Erie Canal
Thousands of workers, many of them Irish immigrants, helped build the 363-mile (584 km) Erie Canal. Along the way they built a series of locks—separate compartments in which workers could raise or lower the water level. The locks worked like an escalator to raise and lower boats up and down hills.
Canal building was a hazardous task. Many workers died as a result of cave-ins or blasting accidents. Another threat was disease, which bred in the swamps where the workers toiled.
After more than eight years of hard work, the Erie Canal opened on October 26, 1825. Clinton, who was now governor of New York, boarded a barge in Buffalo and traveled on the canal to Albany. From there he sailed down the Hudson River to New York City. As crowds cheered, officials poured water from Lake Erie into the Atlantic Ocean.

"NT
Canals 1820-1860

GEOGRAPHY CONNECTION
The Erie Canal was just one of many canals built between 1820 and 1860.
HUMAN-ENVIRONMENT INTERACTION
Which canal helped connect Lake Michigan to the Mississippi River? CRITICAL THINKING
Drawing Inferences Why do you think so many of the canals were built north of the Ohio River and in the Northeast?
■


-Mass.

Mich.
A0x
Illinois and Michigan ‘ Canal >
La Salle-
Chic
Toledo/
Pa*
"R.I. Conn.
60°W
Canal
Ind.
f'Miami and : Erie Canal
Hadelphia
Oh.,
Wabash and Erie Cana!
Jiincinn!
jLOhio and WErie Canal
‘^Evansville
Ky.
D.C.
Md. ftond
ATLANTIC
OCEAN
0
200 miles
-James and Kanawha Canrt
0	200 km
w Albers Equal-Area projection
70'

The Erie Canal brought industry and economic growth to communities all along its length.
CRITICAL THINKING
Analyzing Why do you think the canal helped populations grow?
Canal Travel Expands
At first, the Erie Canal did not allow steamboats because their powerful engines could cause damage to the canal’s earthen banks. Instead, teams of mules or horses hauled the boats and barges. A two-horse team pulled a 100-ton (91 t) barge about 24 miles (39 km) in one day. This was fast compared with travel by wagon. In the 1840s, workers strengthened the canal banks so that steam tugboats could pull the barges.
The Erie Canal’s success did not go unnoticed. By 1850 the country had more than 3,600 miles (5,794 km) of canals. Canals lowered shipping costs and brought prosperity to towns along their routes. They also linked regions of a growing country.
D READING PROGRESS CHECK

Reading HELPDESK
Explaining How did the steamboat change river travel?
The Move West Continues
guiding question Why did Americans tend to settle near rivers?
The United States added four new states between 1791 and 1803— Vermont and the western states of Kentucky, Tennessee, and Ohio. Then, between 1816 and 1821, Indiana, Illinois, Mississippi-Alabama, and Missouri also became states.

Build Vocabulary: Multiple Meaning Words_______________________
Some words with the same spelling and sound have more than one meaning. The word lock also means "a device for keeping something (door, window, box) closed and unable to open."
356 Growth and Expansion
SKILLS PRACTICE
List expressions you hear during class instruction and discussion. Read the list to a partner and discuss the meaning ofthe expressions.
The formation of new states reflected the dramatic growth ofthe region west of the Appalachians. In 1800 only 387,000 white settlers lived west of the Appalachian Mountains. By 1820 that number had grown to more than 2.4 million people. Ohio, for example, had only 45,000 settlers in 1800. By 1820 it had 581,000 residents.
Early pioneer families often settled in communities along the great rivers, such as the Ohio and the Mississippi. These waterways provided a highway for shipping crops and other goods to markets. The growth of canals also helped expand the area open to settlement. Canals allowed people to settle on lands farther from the large rivers.
People often preferred to settle with others from their original homes. It was mainly people from Tennessee and Kentucky who settled Indiana, for example. Michigan’s pioneers came mostly from New England.
Western families often gathered together for social events.
Men took part in sports such as wrestling. Women met for quilting and sewing parties. Both men and women took part in cornhuskings. These were gatherings where farm families shared the work of stripping the outer layers from corn.
Life in the West did not have many of the conveniences of Eastern town life. The pioneers had not traveled to the West to live a pampered life. They wanted to make new lives for themselves and their families.
At the same time, these new settlers brought with them many ofthe same hopes and dreams held by people in the East. In this way, the western migration of American pioneers helped spread an American culture and way of life.
H READING PROGRESS CHECK
Describing What was life like for families on the western frontier?
r Connections to
TODAY
Moving West
Americans have always been on the move, searching for new opportunities or better climates. In recent years, leading destinations for American migrants have been states such as Florida, Arizona, and Nevada. Ibis migration pattern represents a longstanding trend of Americans leaving the Northeast and Midwest for the South, West, and Southwest.
Include this lesson's information in your Foldable®.
Foldables
• Study Organizer
.Growth and Exponsion	
A
Grov/inq Economy w 	Moving West
	Unity and Sectionalism
LESSON 2 REVIEW
Review Vocabulary
1.	Use each of these terms in a different sentence that explains the term's meaning. 3oa;3ob
a. census b. turnpike
2.	Write a sentence that explains how canals and locks are related. 3oa;3ob
Answer the Guiding Questions
3.	Analyzing What were the effects of improvements in transportation? 27B
4.	Analyzing How did rivers play a role in the settlement ofthe West? What effect did the steamboat have on urbanization? iia,-27b
EXPOSITORY WRITING
Write a paragraph explaining how life in the West was different from life in the East. iob;3«d Lesson 2 357
1
networks
There's More Online!
eT biography
Henry Clay
GRAPHIC ORGANIZER
Effects of the Missouri
Compromise
Ef maps
•	The Missouri Compromise
*	Acquisition of Florida
Ef SELF-CHECK QUIZ
eT video

’ • ■ -rs
Lesson 3




Unity and Sectionalism
TIAL QUESTION
Why does conflict develop? 
TEKS
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills 5B Summarize arguments regarding protective tariffs, taxation, and the banking system.
It Matters Because
Although national pride was evident throughout the country, each region—North, South, and West—wanted to further its own economic and political interests.
I

I
I

5D Explain the causes, important events, and effects of the War of 1812.
5E Identify the foreign policies of presidents Washington through Monroe and explain the impact of Washington's Farewell Address and the Monroe Doctrine.
6E Identify areas that were acquired to form the United States, including the Louisiana Purchase.
7A Analyze the impact of tariff policies on sections of the United States before the Civil War.
7D Identify the provisions and compare the effects of congressional conflicts and compromises prior to the Civil War, including the roles of John Quincy Adams, John C. Calhoun, Henry Clay, and Daniel Webster.
10B Compare places and regions of the United States in terms of physical and human characteristics.
15D Analyze how the U.S. Constitution reflects the principles of limited government, republicanism, checks and balances, federalism, separation of powers, popular sovereignty, and individual rights.
18B Summarize the issues, decisions, and significance of landmark Supreme Court cases, including Marbury v. Madison, McCulloch v. Maryland, and Gibbons v. Ogden.
Reading HELPDESK
National Unity
GUIDING QUESTION
How did the country change after the War of 1812? With the end of the War of 1812, the intense divisions that once split the nation faded. In their place was a feeling of unity. In the 1816 presidential election, James Monroe, the Republican candidate, faced no serious opposition. The Federalists, weakened by doubts about their loyalty during the war, barely survived as a national party. Monroe won the election by an overwhelming margin.
A
Boston newspaper called this time the Era of Good ; Feelings. The new president was a living, breathing symbol of this mood. Monroe had been involved in national politics since the American Revolution. He wore breeches, or knee-length pants, I and powdered wigs—styles no longer in fashion. Yet with his	I
sense of dignity, Monroe represented a united country, free of political strife.
Outgoing President James Madison’s last message to Congress in 1817 expressed a growing nationalism, or strong loyalty to the nation. The War of 1812 had made clear that Jefferson’s ideal j, of a limited central government could not meet the needs of a nation in times of crisis. Sounding more like a Federalist than a Republican, Madison urged the federal government to guide
Taking Notes: Identifying Cause and Effect
Use a diagram like this one to show how the Missouri Compromise affected different parts of the country. 358 Growth and Expansion
Maine		
Missouri	-	
Louisiana Territory		
Content Vocabulary______ _
•	sectionalism • interstate commerce
•	monopoly • cede
, the growth of trade and industry. The large Republican majority in Congress agreed. The Republicans, who had once strongly supported states’ rights, now promoted federal power.
* Henry Clay's American System
Henry Clay, a Republican and Speaker of the House, proposed
,	a nationalist program to help the nation grow. Clay’s American
System aimed to help the economy in each section of the country and increase the power of the federal government. Clay called for higher tariffs, a new Bank of the United States, and internal improvements, including the building of roads, bridges, and canals
< Not all congressional leaders agreed with Clay, and they did r not accept all of his ideas. Congress did not spend much money
on internal improvements, but other parts of the American System did become law.
21A Identify different points of view of political parties and interest groups on important historical and contemporary issues.
21C Summarize a historical event in which compromise resulted in a peaceful resolution.
22A Analyze the leadership qualities of elected and appointed leaders of the United States such as George Washington, John Marshall, and Abraham Lincoln.
22B Describe the contributions of significant political, social, and military leaders of the United States such as Frederick Douglass, John Paul Jones, James Monroe, Stonewall Jackson, Susan B. Anthony, and Elizabeth Cady Stanton.
29D Identify points of view from the historical context surrounding an event and the frame of reference which influenced the participants.
The Second Bank of the United States
The charter for the First Bank of the United States expired in 1811, and Congress let the bank die. In 1816 the Republican majority in Congress approved the creation of a new national bank. President Madison signed the bill creating the Second Bank of the United States.
After the First Bank closed, many state banks had acted unwisely. They made too many loans and allowed too much money into circulation.
These actions led to inflation, a rise in the prices of goods. As prices rose, American families could buy less and less with each dollar. The absence of a national bank also meant the federal government had no safe place to keep its funds. The Second Bank of the United States restored stability to the money supply, helping American businesses to grow. Competition From Britain
Another challenge facing the economy was a flood of British goods following the War of 1812. British factories often had more advanced technology and methods than American factories. The British turned out goods of higher quality and at a lower price than goods made in the United States. Naturally, buyers preferred these goods. By flooding the United States with their goods, the British hoped to keep American businesses from competing.

.......*..........................
Congress created the Second Bank of the United States to restore order to the United States money supply. Today, the Federal Reserve System serves that same function.
CRITICAL THINKING
Making Connections Is the idea of having a central bank for the nation consistent with the idea of free enterprise? Explain. Academic Vocabulary____
intense very strong internal within the country
Lesson 3 359
The varying views toward tariffs in different regions of the country were the result of each region’s unique economy. The South, for example, not only purchased manufactured goods from foreign nations, its planters also sold crops overseas. When imports from Europe decreased, Europeans had fewer dollars to buy cotton, tobacco, and other goods from the American South.
Ll! h
Reading HELPDESK
; ■ ' .....
sectionalism rivalry based on the special interests of different areas
i
New Tariffs
American manufacturers called for high tariffs to protect their growing industries. To address this problem, Congress passed the Tariff of 1816. Unlike earlier revenue tariffs, which were meant to provide income for the federal government, this tariff was designed to protect American manufacturers from foreign competition by placing high taxes on imports. Merchants who paid the tariff on imported goods simply added the cost of the tariff to their prices. This made imported items more expensive for consumers and encouraged them to buy cheaper, American-made goods.
When Congress passed protective tariffs in 1818 and 1824 that were even higher than the Tariff of 1816, some Americans protested. Southerners were especially angry. They felt that the tariff protected Northern manufacturers at their expense. The South had few factories, so people there saw little benefit from high tariffs. What the Southern states did see were higher prices for the goods they had to buy.
Growing Sectionalism
The tariff dispute illustrated a growing sectionalism (SEHK»shuh»nuh«lih*zuhm)—differences in the goals and interests of different parts of the country. Such differences had existed since colonial times. Now it seemed they were growing sharper. In fact, they soon brought an end to the Era of Good Feelings.
In the early 1800s, three distinct sections developed in the United States—the North, the South, and the West. The North included New England and the Mid-Atlantic states. The South covered what is now the Southeast. The West included the area between the Appalachian Mountains and the Mississippi River. Geography, economics, and history all contributed to sectional differences and differing ways of life in the United States. As the differences grew deeper, however, people began to wonder whether sectionalism might divide the nation.
Each section of the country had a strong voice in Congress in the early 1800s. Henry Clay of Kentucky represented the interests of Western states. John C. Calhoun of South Carolina spoke for Southern interests. Daniel Webster of Massachusetts protected the interests of New England. Each leader, although a nationalist at this time, remained concerned with protecting the interests of his own section of the country.
360 Growth and Expansion
Nationalism and the Supreme Court
Under the strong leadership of Chief Justice John Marshall, the U.S. Supreme Court backed the powers ofthe national ’ government over the states in three landmark decisions in the early 1800s. In the case of Fletcher v. Peck in 1810, the Court ruled that courts could declare acts of a state government void if they violated provisions of the Constitution. Then, in 1819, the Court decided the case of McCulloch v. Maryland. It said that the state of Maryland could not tax the local office of the Bank ofthe United States because it was the property of the national government. Allowing such a tax, the Court said, would give states too much power over the national government.
In this ruling, the Court also declared that the national bank was constitutional, even though the Constitution did not specifically give Congress the power to create a bank. Marshall observed that the Constitution specifically gave Congress power to issue money, borrow money, and collect taxes. Congress could also, he reasoned, do whatever was “necessary and proper” to carry out those powers.
In 1824 the Court again ruled in favor of federal government power in Gibbons v. Ogden. The state of New York had granted a monopoly (muh«NAH»puh«lee)—sole control of an industry— to a steamship operator running ships between New York and New Jersey. Under New York’s law, no other operator could run steamboats on the same route. The Supreme Court said that only Congress had the power to make laws governing interstate commerce, or trade between states.
Missouri Statehood
In 1819 the Missouri Territory asked Congress for admission as a state. Most Missouri settlers had come from Kentucky and Tennessee, which allowed slavery. They believed slavery ought to be legal in Missouri.
Representative James Tallmadge proposed that Missouri gradually abolish slavery in order to be admitted to the Union.
The House passed this plan, but the Senate blocked it.
At the time, the population in the North was slightly larger than that in the slave states of the South. Consequently, the North had 105 members in the House of Representatives, compared to the South’s 81 members. Representation in the Senate was balanced, with 11 slave states and 11 free states. The addition of Missouri as a free state would put the South in the minority in both houses of Congress.
BIOGRAPHY
Henry Clay (1777-1852)
Henry Clay had a long career in Congress that began when he was elected to fill a Senate vacancy when he was just 29, a year shy ofthe Constitution's age requirement. Clay's ability to resolve arguments earned him the nickname "The Great Compromiser." He believed strongly in the nation. In a speech on the Senate floor, he once said: "If the... sad event ofthe dissolution [breaking up] of this Union is to happen,... I shall not survive to behold the sad and heart-rending [upsetting] spectacle."
CRITICAL THINKING
Analyzing Primary Sources How does Clay's statement reflect nationalist views?
'■!


monopoly a market where there is only one provider interstate commerce economic activity taking place between two or more states
Lesson 3 361
GEOGRAPHY CONNECTION
Missouri's application for statehood sparked a national debate that led to the Missouri Compromise.
REGIONS
Under the Missouri Compromise, was the Unorganized Territory open or closed to slavery? CRITICAL THINKING
Making Predictions Why do you think the Missouri Compromise will not be a permanent solution to the question of slavery? Predict the long-term effects of this compromise on the nation. Explain. Reading HELPDESK
The Missouri Compromise
Debates in Congress heated to the boiling point. Fearing a split in the Union, Henry Clay suggested the Missouri Compromise. Clay proposed that Maine, in the Northeast, enter the Union as a free state. Missouri could then enter as a slave state. This would keep an even balance of power in the Senate—12 free states and 12 slave states.
The Missouri Compromise also addressed the question of slavery in the rest of the Louisiana Purchase territory. The compromise drew a line west from the southern boundary of Missouri—at 36°30' N latitude. The compromise blocked slavery north of the line but permitted it south of the line.
The Missouri Compromise promised a temporary solution to sectional conflict. It did nothing to solve the basic problem, however. Americans who moved west took their different ways of life with them. White Southerners wanted to take an economy based on slavery to their new homes. Northerners believed in labor by free people and wanted to establish that in the West. It was a disagreement that seemed to have no peaceful solution.
P READING PROGRESS CHECK
Summarizing What was the significance of the Supreme Court's decision in Gibbons v. Ogden!


SKILLS PRACTICE
Work with a partner. Take turns telling information learned in a recent lesson.
Reading in the Content Area: Historical Maps_________________
Maps often use shading to show changes over time. To read a map of this type, point to each shaded area on the map as you read the map key. You may want to cover other areas, if possible.
362 Growth and Expansion
Foreign Affairs
GUIDING QUESTION
How did the United States define its role in the Americas? The War of 1812 heightened Americans’ pride in their country. Americans also realized that the United States had to establish a new relationship with the powers of Europe.
Relations with Britain
During James Monroe’s presidency, the United States and Britain reached two key agreements. In the 1817 Rush-Bagot Treaty, both countries agreed to limit the number of armed naval vessels on the Great Lakes. Each country was to take apart or destroy other armed ships on the Great Lakes.
The Convention of 1818 set the northern boundary of the Louisiana Purchase territory between the United States and Canada at the 49th parallel. Each country agreed to maintain its border without armed forces. Secretary of State John Quincy Adams also negotiated the right of Americans to settle in the Oregon Country.
Relations with Spain
Spain controlled the colonies of East Florida and West Florida. In 1810 American settlers in West Florida rebelled against Spanish rule. The United States government then argued that West Florida was included in the Louisiana Purchase. In 1810 and 1812, the United States took control of sections of West Florida.
GEOGRAPHY CONNECTION
The United States acquired Florida in 1819.
PLACE
Which states include land that was once part of Florida? CRITICAL THINKING
Drawing Condusions Why do you think Spain came to believe that keeping Florida was impossible? ading in the Content Area: Lines of Latitude
UUIIIIJ III UIG WIUCH*
r»« ---------------------------------- map on this page shows a single line running horizontally a line of latitude, or	^ar^3,° N'
line runs dose to the city of St. Augustine in Florida. Farther north, not shown on this map, is the 49th
allel. This line became the boundary between Canada and the Louisiana Territory in
Lesson 3 363
At this 1813 meeting, the Congress of Chilpancingo, Mexican leaders declared independence from Spain and drafted a constitution calling for a republican government. Mexico would finally achieve independence in 1821.
Reading HELPDESK
cede
to transfer control of something
The territory claimed by the United States reached west to the borders of Louisiana and Mississippi. Spain objected to losing part of West Florida but took no action against the United States.
Native Americans living in Spanish East Florida sometimes raided American settlements in Georgia. General Andrew Jackson was ordered to stop these Seminole raids. Jackson believed his order included pursuing the Seminoles into Florida. In the spring of 1818, William McIntosh, a Creek chief, led Creek allies against the Seminoles in Georgia. Meanwhile, Jackson followed fleeing Seminoles into Spanish West Florida. After pursuing the Seminoles, Jackson and his troops moved farther into West Florida. There they seized the Spanish forts at Pensacola and San Marcos. Secretary of State Adams had not authorized Jackson’s actions, but he did nothing to stop them or to punish Jackson.
Jackson s raid demonstrated American military strength compared to that of Spain. Secretary of State Adams believed that the Spanish did not want war and wanted to settle the dispute. Adams was correct, and with the Adams-Onis Treaty of 1819, Spain ceded, or gave up control of, all claims and ownership to both East and West Florida. They also gave up claims to Oregon Country in the Pacific Northwest, while the United States agreed to Spanish control of Texas.

Reading Strategy; Summarizing______________________
When you summarize, you reduce the important content into short and simple form. Summarize the effects ofthe Missouri Compromise described on this page.
364 Growth and Expansion
Spain Loses Power
Meanwhile, Spain was losing power elsewhere in its vast empire. In 1810 a priest named Miguel Hidalgo (ee.DAHL.goh) led a rebellion in Mexico. Hidalgo called for racial equality and the redistribution of land. The Spanish captured and executed Hidalgo, but by 1821 Mexico had gained its independence from Spain.
Simon Bolivar, also known as “the Liberator,” led the independence movement that won freedom for the present-day countries of Venezuela, Colombia, Panama, Bolivia, and Ecuador. Jose de San Martin successfully achieved independence for Chile and Peru. By 1824 Spain had lost control of most of South America. The Monroe Doctrine
In 1822 four European nations—France, Austria, Russia, and Prussia—discussed a plan to help Spain regain its American holdings. The possibility of increased European involvement in the Americas troubled President Monroe. There were also concerns about Russia’s intentions for controlling land in the Northwest.
The president issued a statement on December 2, 1823:
The United States would not get involved in the internal affairs or wars in Europe. It also would not interfere with any existing European colonies in the Americas. At the same time, the statement said, North America and South America “are henceforth not to be considered as subjects for future colonization by any European powers.” The Monroe Doctrine, as the statement came to be known, served as a clear warning to European nations to keep out of the Americas. It became a guiding force in American foreign policy in the decades ahead.
D READING PROGRESS CHECK
Explaining Why did President Monroe issue the Monroe Doctrine?
Include this lesson's information in your Foldable®.
.Growth and Expansion
Q A
Growing Economy . Moving West
i o Unity and Sectionalism
LESSON 3 REVIEW
Review Vocabulary
1.	Use each of these terms in a sentence that explains the term's meaning. 3oa;job
a. monopoly b. interstate commerce c. cede
2.	What does the term sectionalism mean? 3oa
Answer the Guiding Questions
3.	Summarizing Why did Northerners and Southerners have different views on protective tariffs? 5B;7A;10B;29D
4.	Summarizing How did the Missouri Compromise attempt to settle the issue of slavery in the territories? What were the provisions ofthe compromise? 70;2ic
5.	Identifying What was decided in the Rush-Bagot Treaty and the Convention of 1818? se
6.	Explaining What was the impact ofthe Monroe Doctrine?
5E
PERSUASIVE WRITING
Members ofCongress agreed to the Missouri Compromise in an attempt to prevent serious conflict. Write a letter to a member ofCongress arguing for or against this compromise. 29d;3od Lesson 3 365
Life on the Mississippi
U R
t Steamboats carried passengers and cargo up and down the Mississippi.
366 Growth and Expansion
by Mark Twain
Samuel Langhorne Clemens (1835-1910), known as Mark
Twain, was born in Missouri. He spent his early years along the Mississippi River in the town of Hannibal.
Later, as a young man, Clemens trained as a river pilot’s apprentice. He used his experiences as a basis for many of the stories in his memoir, Life on the Mississippi. This book is a collection of humorous anecdotes and folktales that provides a glimpse into Twain’s life before he became a famous author.
Mark Twain used memories of his youth in writing Life on the Mississippi.
«I remember the annual processions of mighty rafts that used to glide by Hannibal when I was a boy,—an acre or so of white, sweet-smelling boards in each raft, a crew of
two dozen men or more. ...99
—from Life on the Mississippi
PRIMARY SOURCE
6i Between La Salle s opening of the river and the time when it may be said to have become the vehicle of anything like a regular and active commerce, seven sovereigns had occupied the throne of England, America had become an independent nation.
The river's earliest commerce was in great barges—keelboats, broadhorns. They floated and sailed from the upper rivers to New Orleans, changed cargoes there, and were tediously warped and poled back by hand. A voyage down and back sometimes occupied nine months. In time this commerce increased until it gave employment to hordes of rough and hardy men; rude, uneducated, brave, suffering terrific hardships with sailor-like stoicism;... heavy fighters, reckless fellows, every one, elephantinely jolly, foul-witted, profane; prodigal of their money, bankrupt at the end ofthe trip, fond of barbaric finery, prodigious braggarts; yet, in the main, honest, trustworthy, faithful to promises and duty, and often picturesquely magnanimous.
Vocabulary
sovereign one who holds power tedious boring stoicism the quality of not reacting to pleasure or pain elephantine having great size profane not religious prodigal wasteful prodigious large in size or quantity
magnanimous noble, generous
heyday the peak of one's strength
By and by the steamboat intruded. Then for fifteen or twenty years, these men continued to run their keelboats down-stream, and the steamers did all ofthe upstream business, the keelboatmen selling their boats in New Orleans, and returning home as deck passengers in the steamers.
But after a while the steamboats so increased in number and in speed that they were able to absorb the entire commerce; and then keelboating died a permanent death.
The keelboatman became a deck hand, or a mate, or a pilot on the steamer; and when steamer-berths were not open to him, he took a berth on a Pittsburgh coal-flat, or on a pine-raft constructed in the forests up toward the sources of the Mississippi.
Literary Element
Imagery is the use of descriptive and figurative language. It appeals to at least one ofthe five senses: hearing, seeing, tasting, smelling and touching. As you read, identify images that create a sensory experience. For example, how does Twain's description ofthe rafts appeal to your sense of smell?
In the heyday ofthe steamboating prosperity, the river from end to end was flaked with coal-fleets and timber rafts, all managed by hand, and employing hosts ofthe
rough characters whom I have been trying to describe. I remember the annual processions of mighty rafts that used to glide by Hannibal when I was a boy,—an acre or so of white, sweetsmelling boards in each raft, a crew of two dozen men or more, three or four wigwams scattered about the raft's vast level space for storm-quarters,—and I remember the rude ways and the tremendous talk of their big crews... for we used to swim out a quarter or third of a mile and get on these rafts and have a ride. M
Analyzing Literature DBQ
0 Identifying Cause and Effect Based on the excerpt, how did the steamboat change life along the Mississippi River? 26b;2za;29b
0 Describing How does Twain describe the boatmen on the barges on the Mississippi River? Describe how the steamboat affected these men.
26A
0 Evaluating Consider Twain's boyhood and early career. Do you think his descriptions of how life changed along the Mississippi are reliable and valid? Why or why not? 29G
Lesson 3 367
Activities
Directions: Write your answers using standard grammar, spelling, sentence structure, and punctuation.
O
Use your to explore the Essential Questions. EXPOSITORYWRITING
How did the spread of the population in the United States over a wider area create challenges and tensions? Write an essay that responds to this question. 300 © Social Studies Skills
CREATING MAPS
Compare the map of the Missouri Compromise on page 362 to the one showing the Growing Industrial Cities on page 345. What do the maps suggest about the role industry played in the rise of American sectionalism? Create a thematic map showing your response. 10A;12D;29C;29H
© Thinking Like a Historian
IDENTIFYING CAUSE AND EFFECT
Create a diagram like the one shown to explain the effects of innovations such as the factory system and the cotton gin. 27a; 29b © Visual Literacy
interpreting IMAGES This picture shows DeWitt Clinton, the governor of New York, pouring water from Lake Erie into the Atlantic Ocean. What does the picture want to communicate by showing this action? 290
368 Growth and Expansion
Assessment
Directions. Write your answers using standard grammar, spelling, sentence structure and punctuation.
CHECKING FOR UNDERSTANDING
o Explain the significance of each of the following individuals during this period of growth and expansion: 22B
A.
Eli Whitney 6. Daniel Boone C.
John Marshall D.
Henry Clay E.
James Monroe REVIEW THE GUIDING QUESTIONS
0 Explaining Why did the Industrial Revolution in
the United States first appear in New England? ha
0 Identifying What are the main elements of a free enterprise system? mb
0 Explaining Why did pioneer families tend to settle in communities along major rivers? ha
0 Describing Why did the federal government decide to build the National Road? hb
0 Identifying What role did Henry Clay play in creating the Missouri Compromise? 21c; 22B
0 Explaining Why did President Madison and Congress approve the creation of a new national bank? sb
CRITICAL THINKING
0 Formulating Questions Look at the chart on population growth from 1800-1830 on page 353. What are three questions you can ask about the chart? 2»j
0 Making Connections How did the development of the factory system contribute to rapid economic growth? 270
<D Evaluating How important was the Erie Canal in helping to connect, unify, and expand the nation? Explain your response, hb
0 Summarizing The Supreme Court ruling in Gibbons v. Ogden dealt with trade between states. Summarize the issues involved in the case, ibb
0 Speculating Why do you think many pioneers gave up the conveniences of life in Eastern towns for life on the frontier? 290
0 Summarizing What did the Supreme Court rule in the case of McCulloch v. Maryland? Why was this ruling significant? ibb;29b
0 Synthesizing I n what ways does the dispute over protective tariffs illustrate a growing sectionalism in the United States? 7A
0 Interpreting Reread the excerpt from Mark Twain's memoir Life on the Mississippi. How do you think he feels about the end of keelboating on the Mississippi River? Support your response.
29D
0 Identifying Problems and Solutions Why was
there inflation after the First Bank of the United States closed? How was the problem resolved?
5B
0 Evaluating How effective do you think the Missouri Compromise was in addressing the growing problem of sectionalism? 21c
0 Describing How did Irish immigrants contribute to the building of the Erie Canal? 11c
! 1
i
Need Extra Help?
IfYou've Missed Question	0	0	0	O	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0
Review Lesson	1,2,3,4	1	1	2	2	3	3	2	1	2	3	2	3	3		3	3	2
369
a. '	\	‘	£
I)
Assessment (continued) DBQ
I SHORT RESPONSE
PRIMARY SOURCE
"Section 8. And be it further enacted, That in all that territory ceded by Trance to the United States, under the name of Louisiana,.. . slavery and involuntary servitude... shall be, and is hereby, forever prohibited.
—Missouri Compromise
© Identifying Problems Describe the issue that this portion of the Missouri Compromise is seeking to resolve. 21c
Explaining Why was it necessary to make this agreement? 21c
EXTENDED RESPONSE
© Expository Writing Describe the forces that tended to unify Americans in the early 1800s as well as some of the important points of disagreement. se;7A;bb;27b;3od
Your essay should include the Industrial Revolution and the growth of American cities; the settlement of the western United States; transportation systems in the early and mid-1800s; sectional conflicts and the American System; and relations of the United States with foreign nations.
DBQ
STANDARDIZED TEST PRACTICE
ANALYZING DOCUMENTS
The following are the words of President James Monroe:
PRIMARY SOURCE
"With the existing colonies ... of any European power we have not interfered and shall not interfere. But with the [Latin American] governments who have declared their independence and maintained it... we could not view any [involvement] for the purpose of oppressing them by any European power in any other light than as the [showing] of an unfriendly disposition toward the United States."
—James Monroe, speech to Congress, December 1823 ® Identifying In this statement, Monroe is issuing the se
A.
American Plan. B.
Missouri Compromise. C.
Monroe Doctrine. D.
Latin American Doctrine. © Finding the Main Idea In this statement, Monroe pledges to se;2»b
F.	respect existing colonies but not new attempts to control Latin America.
6. open Latin America to colonization from European powers.
H.	respect new European colonies but seek freedom for old ones.
I.	be unfriendly toward Latin American governments.
370 Growth and Expansion
Need Extra Help?
IfYou've Missed Question	<D	©		©	
Review Lesson	3	3	1,2,3,4	3	3 
f"
The Jackson Era
1824-1845
networks
There's More Online about the people and events of the Jackson Era.
CHAPTER
13

Lesson 1
\ Jacksonian Democracy
Lesson 2
Conflicts Over Land
Lesson 3
Jackson and the Bank
ENTIAL QUESTIONS
• What are the characteristics of a leader? me the consequences when cultures interact? ‘How do governments change? "1


The Story
Matters...
He has put up a strong fight to save the land he believes the United States had promised his people.
Now, weakened by illness, Osceola is ready for peace. He arrives at Fort Peyton carrying a white flag of truce. There, United States soldiers arrest Osceola and send him as a prisoner to a South Carolina fort.
At the fort, Osceola senses death approaching. He prepares by dressing in his finest clothes. Luckily for history, artist George Catlin is at the prison that day. He asks Osceola's permission to paint him in his fine clothing. Within days of sitting for this portrait, Osceola is dead.
In this chapter you will learn more about how Native Americans struggled to protect their land, rights, and freedom.



Go to the Foldables® library in the back of your book to make a Foldable® that will help you take notes while reading this chapter.
1 °	o	o
	Conflicts V	I Jackson \
\ Jacksonian u	Over '	tt and
democracy's	1 Land	j the Bank
CHAPTER 13
N^w Jersey
Florida
Territory
Gulf of Mexico
ATLANTIC OCEAN
I I
Ceded by Native Americans C___]
Ceded to Native Americans <1   Common removal route
«   Cherokee removal route
◄H— Chickasaw removal route Choctaw removal route =■ Creek removal route Seminole removal route ■ Fort
--- Borders as of 1840
The Seminole of Florida
80°W
is
k 400 miles
|	| Seminole area,
1740-1822
|	| Seminole area,
1822-	1842
r~l Seminole reservation,
1823-	1832
■ Fort	Battle
/Is American settlement spread to the West, Americans came into conflict with the Native Americans who lived there. Over time, Native Americans were pushed even farther west.
Rhode Island Connecticut

Step Into the Place
MAP FOCUS
During the Jackson Era, the Indian Removal Act forced the Seminole and other eastern Native Americans to move from their homelands to new homes west ofthe Mississippi River. REGION
Look at the map. In what part of Florida did the Seminole live? 10A;29C;29J
MOVEMENT
How did the removal route ofthe Seminole differ from that of the other groups? iob
HUMAN-ENVIRONMENT INTERACTION
What kinds of challenges might Native Americans have encountered when traveling such long distances? CRITICALTH1NKING
Analyzing How might the removal ofthe Native Americans have enabled greater expansion ofthe United States? 29J 



95<’W
9(rw
85ctf
75°W
70°W
Step Into the Time
TIMELINE
Look at the time line. What events suggest a weakening of Spain's colonial empire in the Americas? 29c James Monroe
1817-1825
WORLD EVENTS
1821 Spain officially transfers Florida to the United States
1823 Monroe Doctrine is issued
John Q. Adams
1825-1829
1830
Congress passes Indian Removal Act
Andrew Jackson
1829-1837
1833 Congress passes Force Bill
Gulf of Mexico n.i
Dade Mai
_ AU .h.n, 1 inrnln elected Martin Van Buren William Henry 1845 Florida becomes a State 1834 Abraham Lincoln	1837-1841 Harrison 1841	i
to Illinois state legislature	/CZ\	1845 Texas
1838 Cherokee forced to move west
annexed by United States
1
i
1839 Scottish blacksmith
networks ,
There's More Online!
gf BIOGRAPHY	kb
Andrew Jackson	lF
gf GRAPHIC ORGANIZER A
' Democrats and National Republicans
IMAGE
Jackson's Inauguration gf MAPS
*	The Election of 1824
•	The Election of 1828
SELF-CHECK QUIZ & VIDEO
IL IN
3ttt 5


Lesson 1

TEKS
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills 1A Identify the major eras and events in U.S. history through 1877, including colonization, revolution, drafting of the Declaration of Independence, creation and ratification of the Constitution, religious revivals such as the Second Great Awakening, early republic, the Age of Jackson, westward expansion, reform movements, sectionalism, Civil War, and Reconstruction, and describe their causes and effects.
5C Explain the origin and development of American political parties.
5F Explain the impact of the election of Andrew Jackson, including expanded suffrage. 7A Analyze the impact of tariff policies on sections of the United States before the Civil War.
7D Identify the provisions and compare the effects of congressional conflicts and compromises prior to the Civil War, including the roles of John Quincy Adams, John C. Calhoun, Henry Clay, and Daniel Webster.
8B Explain the causes of the Civil War, including sectionalism, states'rights, and slavery, and significant events of the Civil War, including the firing on Fort Sumter; the battles of Antietam, Gettysburg, and Vicksburg; the announcement of the Emancipation Proclamation; Lee's surrender at Appomattox Court House; and the assassination of Abraham Lincoln.
17B Explain constitutional issues arising over the issue of states' rights, including the Nullification Crisis and the Civil War.
21A Identify different points of view of political parties and interest groups on important historical and contemporary issues.
Reading HELPDESK
Jacksonian Democracy
L QUESTION
Whatarethediaracteristicsofaleader? IT MATTERS BECAUSE
During the Jackson Era, elections became more democratic and our modern political system began to take shape.
New Parties Emerge
guiding question What new ways of campaigning appeared during the elections of 1824 and 1828?
From 1816 to 1824, the United States had only one major political party. This was the Democratic-Republican Party. The party was far from united. In 1824, four Democratic-Republican candidates competed for the presidency. Party leaders chose William H. Crawford, a former senator from Georgia, to be their candidate. Three other candidates were favorite sons—that is, they received backing from their home states rather than the national party. Their views reflected the interests of their regions.
Two favorite sons, Andrew Jackson and Henry Clay, were from the West. Clay, of Kentucky, was Speaker of the House of Representatives. Jackson, of Tennessee, was a hero of the War of 1812. Raised in poverty, he claimed to speak for Americans who had been left out of politics. The third favorite son, John Quincy Adams of Massachusetts, was the son of former president John Adams. He was popular with merchants of the Northeast.
The House Chooses the President
In the election, Jackson received a plurality (pluh»RA«luh»tee) of the popular vote—the largest share. No candidate received a majority, or more than half, of the electoral votes. The


Content Vocabulary
> favorite son • mudslinging • nominating ' plurality	. bureaucracy convention
■ majority	. spoils system
THE ELECTION OF
1824 * Eight electors in Maine voted for Adams and one voted for Jackson.
**Two electors in Delaware voted for Jackson and one voted for Crawford.
*** Twenty-six electors in New York voted for Adams, five voted for Crawford, four voted for Clay and one voted for Jackson, t Seven electors in Maryland voted for Jackson, three voted for Adams and one voted for Crawford, tt Three electors in Louisiana voted for Jackson and two voted for Adams.
ttt Two electors in Illinois voted for Jackson and one voted for Adams.
The election of 1824 produced great controversy.
Constitution requires that the House of Representatives select the president when no candidate has won a majority of the electoral vote.
As the House prepared to vote, Clay met with Adams. Clay agreed to use his influence as Speaker to defeat Jackson. With Clay’s help, the House chose Adams for president. Adams quickly named Clay to be secretary of state. In the past this office had been the stepping-stone to the presidency. Jackson’s followers accused the two men of making a “corrupt bargain” and stealing
the election.
Adams as President
Adams and Clay denied any wrongdoing. No one ever uncovered any evidence of a bargain. Still, the charge cast a shadow over Adams’s presidency.
In his first message to Congress, Adams announced his plans. In addition to improving roads and waterways, he wanted to build a national university and support scientific research.
Adams’s proposals upset his opponents. They wanted a more limited role for the federal government. It would be wrong, they believed, for government to spend money on such projects. Congress finally approved funds for improving rivers, harbors, and roads, but this was far less than Adams wanted.
favorite son a candidate for national office who has support
mostly from his or her home state
plurality the largest number of something, but less than a majority
majority greater than half of a total number of something
INTERPRETING GRAPHS
In what place did the candidate who won the most electoral votes finish in the House vote?
CRITICAL THINKING
Drawing Conclusions On what basis might Jackson have expected to win the presidency?
Lesson 1 375
THE ELECTION OF
1828 Andrew Jackson won the election of 1828.
0.39%
4,443
43.68%
501,967
Jackson (Democrat)	____Other
Adams (National Republican) ■■ Mixed
ELECTORAL VOTE TOTAL:
POPULAR VOTE TOTAL:
1,149,216 55.93%
642,806
Six electors in Maryland voted for Adams and five voted for Jackson.
* Eight electors in Maine voted for Adams and one voted for Jackson.
** Twenty electors in New York voted for Jackson and sixteen voted for Adams.
USING MATH SKILLS
How many more electoral votes did Jackson get than he needed to win the election?
CRITICAL THINKING
Comparing How did having only two presidential candidates in 1828 affect the results of this election?
The Election of 1828
By 1828, the Democratic-Republican Party had split. Jacksons supporters called themselves Democrats. The National Republicans supported Adams. Most Democrats favored states’ rights and distrusted strong central government. The National Republicans wanted a strong central government. They supported measures such as building roads and a national bank to facilitate economic growth.
During the campaign, both sides resorted to mudslinging, or attempts to ruin their opponents reputation with insults. The candidates also used slogans, buttons, and rallies. Such practices became a regular part of American political life.
In the election, Jackson received most of the votes cast in the frontier states. He also received many votes in the South, where his support for states’ rights was popular. John C. Calhoun of South Carolina, who had been Adams’s vice president, switched parties to run with Jackson. Calhoun also supported states’ rights. Jackson won the election easily. Shortly after the election, Jacksons supporters officially formed the Democratic Party. With the election of Jackson—a man from humble origins who had the support of the common man—the nation entered a new era: The Age of Jackson.
READING PROGRESS CHECK
Reading HELPDESK
Contrasting How did Democrats and National Republicans differ in their views?
mudslinging amethodinelection campaigns that uses gossip and lies to make an opponent look bad
bureaucracy a system of government in which specialized tasks are carried out by appointed officials ratherthan by elected ones
Academic Vocabulary_______
facilitate to help make happen participate to take part in
376 The Jackson Era
Jackson as President
GUIDINGQUESTION
How did Andrew Jackson make the American political system more democratic? Andrew Jackson had qualities most Americans admired. He was a patriot, a self-made man, and a war hero. Thousands of ordinary people came to Washington for his inauguration.
Expanded Voting Rights
President Andrew Jackson promised “equal protection and equal benefits” for all Americans—at least, all white American men. Jackson’s promise reflected the spirit of the times.
In the nation’s early years, only men who owned property or paid taxes could vote. By the 1820s, many states had loosened these requirements. White male sharecroppers, factory workers, and others could now participate in the political process. By 1828, nearly all states let voters, rather than state legislatures, choose presidential electors. Women still could not vote. African Americans and Native Americans had few rights of any kind.
Making Government More Democratic
Jackson disliked interest groups, organized groups of people who try to influence government in a way that helps their own interests. He also disliked people whose power came from privilege. Instead, Jackson and other Democrats wanted to further open government to the people. They were disturbed that the federal government had become a bureaucracy (byuh»RAH«kruh«see), a system in which nonelected officials carry out laws.
Andrew Jackson's supporters gather outside the White House hoping to shake hands with a president who seemed to be just like them.
CRITICAL THINKING
Drawing Conclusions Why do you think people identified so closely with Andrew Jackson? Andrew Jackson (1767-1845)
Like many of his supporters, Andrew Jackson was born in a log cabin. A j noted war hero, Jackson was called "Old Hickory" because he was said to be as tough as a hickory stick. Small ; farmers, craftspeople, and others who felt left out of the expanding American economy admired Jackson. They felt that his rise from a log cabin to the White House demonstrated the kind of J success story possible only in the United States.
CRITICAL THINKING
Drawing Inferences Why do you think voters would identify with a candidate who was from humble beginnings? Soon after taking office in 1829, Jackson fired many federal workers and replaced them with his supporters. The fired employees protested. But one Jackson supporter said: To the victors belong the spoils.” In other words, because Jackson had won the election, his supporters had the right to the spoils, or benefits, of victory. This practice of replacing current government employees with supporters of the winner is called the spoils system.
Jackson’s supporters also abandoned the unpopular caucus system, in which top party leaders chose the party’s candidates for office. Instead, parties began using nominating conventions (NAHM«ih»nayt«ing kuhn*VEN*shuhnz), where delegates from the states chose the party’s presidential candidate. This system allowed many more people to participate in the selection of candidates.
H READING PROGRESS CHECK
Analyzing Why was it important to expand voting rights?
The Tariff Debate
guidingquestion Howdida fight over tariffs become a debate about states'rights versus federal rights?
A tariff is a tax on imported goods. In 1828 Congress passed a high protective tariff on manufactured goods from Europe. Manufacturers in the United States—mostly in the Northeast-welcomed the tariff. Because tariffs made European goods more expensive, Americans were more likely to buy U.S.-made goods. Southerners, however, hated the new tariff. The South traded cotton to Europe for manufactured goods, and the new tariff would make these items more expensive.

Mn ii
SKILLS PRACTICE_______________
Read text with a partner. When the language or sentence structure is challenging, paraphrase the difficult sentences.
Reading HELPDESK
.............
spoils system the practice of handing out government jobs to supporters; replacing government employees with the winning candidate's supporters
Vice President Calhoun, who believed in states’ rights, claimed that a state could nullify, or refuse to accept, a federal law if it was not in that state’s best interests. According to the states’ rights position, the Constitution was an agreement among the states to establish a national government. If an act of the national government went beyond the powers granted by the Constitution, a state had the right to refuse to obey.
President Jackson disagreed. If a state could nullify any federal law it considered unconstitutional, the power of the federal government would cease. He feared nullification could destroy the Union.
nominating convention a meeting in which representative members of a political party choose candidates to run for important elected offices
I
378	The Jackson Era
In 1830, at a Washington dinner marking Thomas Jefferson’s birthday, Jackson had a chance to make his feelings on nullification known. He offered a toast. Looking directly at Calhoun, the president declared, “Our Union! It must be preserved!” Answering Jackson’s challenge, the vice president rose with a toast of his own: “The Union, next to our liberty, most dear.” To make sure his meaning was clear, Calhoun added, “It can only be preserved by respecting the rights of the states.”
In 1832 Congress passed a lower tariff. It was not enough to cool the protest. South Carolina passed the Nullification Act, declaring it would not pay the “illegal” tariffs of 1828 and 1832. The state threatened to secede, or break away, from the Union if the federal government interfered.
To ease the crisis, Jackson backed a bill that would gradually lower the tariff. Jackson also vowed to uphold the law and asked Congress for the power to use the power of the federal government if it was needed.
Early in 1833, Congress passed the lower tariff bill and also the Force Bill, allowing Jackson to use the military to enforce federal law. South Carolina accepted the new tariff but nullified the Force Bill. Both sides claimed victory and the issue was put to rest—at least, temporarily.
Q READING PROGRESS CHECK
Drawing Inferences How might the workers at a factory in the Northeast react to the lowering of the tariff?
FoLDABLES'
(study Organizer jj
Include this lesson's information in your Foldable®
o
Jacksonian >emocracy!
Conflicts
Over
Land
Jackson
and
the bank
LESSON 1 REVIEW
Review Vocabulary
1.	Show understanding of the following terms
by using them in a sentence about the election of 1824. 30A;30B a. plurality b. majority
2.	Use the following terms in a sentence that illustrates how the terms are connected. joa;3ob a. bureaucracy b. spoils system
Answer the Guiding Questions
3.	Identifying Cause and Effect How did the
breakup of the Democratic-Republican Party affect American democracy? 2i*29B
4.	Explaining How did the election of 1828 show the growth of democracy? ia;sf
5.	Explaining How was the fight over tariffs related to the issue of states' rights? bb:i7b
EXPOSITORY WRITING
Andrew Jackson once said, "One man with courage makes a majority." Write a paragraph explaining what you think Jackson meant by this quote and how this idea influenced his leadership, 5*22*300 Lesson 1 379
I
networks
There's More Online!	p
GAME
Crossword Puzzle gf GRAPHIC ORGANIZER
.' Seminole and Cherokee Resistance
Ef MAP The Removal of Native Americans, 1820-1840
Ef PRIMARY SOURCE Osceola
SELF-CHECK QUIZ
gf VIDEO


u j. O'
Lesson 2
Conflicts Over Land
QUESTION
What an the consequences when cultures interact? 1

TEKS
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills 1A Identify the major eras and events in U.S. history through 1877, including colonization, revolution, drafting of the Declaration of Independence, creation and ratification of the Constitution, religious revivals such as the Second Great Awakening, early republic, the Age of Jackson, westward expansion, reform movements, sectionalism, Civil War, and Reconstruction, and describe their causes and effects.
5G Analyze the reasons for the removal and resettlement of Cherokee Indians during the Jacksonian era, including the Indian Removal Act, Worcester v. Georgia, and the Trail of Tears. 7D Identify the provisions and compare the effects of congressional conflicts and compromises prior to the Civil War, including the roles of John Quincy Adams, John C. Calhoun, Henry Clay, and Daniel Webster.
9D Identify the effects of legislative acts such as the Homestead Act, the Dawes Act, and the Morrill Act.
10B Compare places and regions of the United States in terms of physical and human characteristics.
18A Identify the origin of judicial review and analyze examples of congressional and presidential responses.
23C Identify ways conflicts between people from various racial, ethnic, and religious groups were resolved.
IT MATTERS BECAUSE
The forced removal and relocation of Native Americans in the 1830s largely ended the Native American presence in the eastern United States.
Reading HELPDESK
Removing Native Americans
guidingquestion Why were Native Americans forced to abandon their land and move wesG
As the nation expanded west, many Native Americans still remained in the East. The Cherokee, Creek, Seminole, Chickasaw, and Choctaw peoples lived in the mountains, plateaus, and swamps of Georgia, Alabama, Mississippi, and Florida. These groups had created successful farming communities that were much like many other American communities. As a result, Americans considered them “civilized” and called them the “Five Civilized Tribes.”
Though Americans recognized the success of the Five Civilized Tribes, they did not necessarily respect their rights.
In fact, some white people wanted the Native Americans’ lands for themselves. To make this possible, they wanted the federal government to force eastern Native Americans to relocate to lands west of the Mississippi River.
Andrew Jackson supported the white settlers’ demand for Native American land. He had once fought the Creek and Seminole in Georgia and Florida to give the settlers more land. When he became president in 1829, he stated that he wanted to move all Native Americans to the Great Plains. Many people

Taking Notes: Describing______________
As you read, use a graphic organizer like this one to describe how each group of Native Americans resisted removal, and the result. 380 The Jackson Era
Like most people of the Americas in the early 1800s, the Seminole in this village lived off the land they farmed.


believed this region to be a wasteland where American settlers would never want to live. Many people thought that if all Native Americans moved there, conflict with them would be ended.
The Cherokee Versus Georgia
In 1830 President Jackson pushed the Indian Removal Act through Congress. This law allowed the federal government to pay Native Americans to move west. Jackson then sent officials to make treaties with the Native Americans in the Southeast. In 1834 Congress established the Indian Territory. Most of the region was located in what is now the state of Oklahoma. This area was to be the new home for the Native Americans of the Southeast.
Most eastern Native American peoples felt forced to sell their land and move west. The Cherokee refused to do so. In treaties of the 1790s, the federal government had recognized the Cherokee as a separate nation. However, the state of Georgia, in which many Cherokee lived, refused to accept the Cherokee’s status. In 1830 Georgia made Cherokee land part of the state. It also began to enforce state laws in the Cherokee Nation.
As pressure for relocation mounted, the Cherokee appealed to the American people:
PRIMARY SOURCE
ft We are aware, that some persons suppose it will be for our advantage to remove beyond the Mississippi.... Our people universally think otherwise.... We wish to remain on the land of our fathers. 99
—Appeal of the Cherokee Nation, 1830
relocate to move to another place
Academic Vocabulary
federal relating to a national government
Build Vocabulary: Multiple Meaning Words__________________________
The term federal applies to more than just the national government of the United States. It describes any system of government in which several smaller state or district governments unite but still keep control over their own internal affairs.
Lesson 2 381
I '

This painting depicts the Cherokee on the Trail of Tears.
CRITICAL THINKING
Interpreting Images What does this image suggest about the Native Americans' experience on the Trail of Tears? Use details from the painting to explain your answer. Reading HELPDESK
Still, Georgia pressured the Cherokee. In response, the Cherokee turned to the U.S. Supreme Court. In Worcester v. Georgia (1832), Chief Justice John Marshall ruled that Georgia had no right to interfere with the Cherokee. President Jackson, who supported Georgias efforts to remove the Cherokee, defiantly opposed the Supreme Court s ruling. “John Marshall has made his decision,” Jackson is said to have declared, “now let him enforce it.” No one was willing or able to challenge the failure of the president and Congress to enforce the Courts ruling.
The Trail of Tears
By 1835, the Cherokee were divided about what to do. That year the federal government convinced a small number of Cherokee— about 500 of them—to sign the Treaty of New Echota. In this treaty, the group agreed to give up all Cherokee land by 1838.
Cherokee Chief John Ross sent a protest to the U.S. Senate. Ross explained that the few Cherokee who signed the treaty did not speak for all the 17,000 Cherokee in the region. Many white Americans, including senators Daniel Webster and Henry Clay, also opposed the treaty as unfair. However, their pleas did not change the minds of President Jackson or the white settlers. In 1836 the Senate approved the treaty by a single vote.

•H 1
■! i
Reading in the Content Area; Bar Graphs_________________________________
Bar graphs often have vertical bars, but they may also appear with horizontal bars, as in the graph on the opposite page. In such graphs, the subject of each bar appears on the left. The item being measured—in this case, people—appears at the bottom of the graph.
382 The Jackson Era
When the treaty s 1838 deadline arrived, only about 2,000 Cherokee had moved west. Jackson’s successor, President Martin Van Buren, ordered the army to move the rest of them. In May 1838, General Winfield Scott arrived in the Cherokee Nation with 7,000 troops to remove the remaining Cherokee by force. He told them that resistance and escape were hopeless. The Cherokee knew that fighting would lead to their destruction. Filled with sadness and anger, Cherokee leaders gave in.
Between June and December 1838, soldiers rounded up Cherokee in North Carolina, Georgia, Alabama, and Tennessee. Under guard, the Cherokee began their march to Indian Territory in the West.
The forced relocation of some 15,000 Cherokee was a terrible ordeal. Most people were not prepared for the journey. Trouble started even before they set out. As the Cherokee crowded into camps and awaited the command to begin their march, illness broke out. As many as 2,000 Cherokee died.
Once on the trail, the Cherokee suffered from hunger and from exposure to the weather. These conditions led to the deaths of another 2,000 people.
When the relocation was over, about one quarter of the Cherokee population was dead. The Cherokee came to call their forced journey west the Trail Where They Cried. Historians call it the Trail of Tears.
SKILLS PRACTICE
Work with a partner. Ask your partner for help with the bold-faced words in your text. Ask your teacher if your partner does not know a word.
H READING PROGRESS CHECK
Analyzing What was the purpose of the Indian Removal Act?
NATIVE AMERICAN REMOVAL
FORCED MIGRATION,
1830-1840 5,000 10,000
NUMBER OF PEOPLE
15,000
20,000
After passage of the Indian Removal Act of 1830, the government began to force the Five Civilized Tribes living east of the Mississippi River to move to an area that was located in what is now part of the state of Oklahoma.
INTERPRETING GRAPHS
About how many Native Americans had to move to Indian Territory between 1830 and 1840?
CRITICAL THINKING
Drawing Inferences Which Native American groups in the South had the largest population in the early 1800s? How can you tell?
Lesson 2 383
networks
There's More Online!
GRAPHIC ORGANIZER
jAy The Bank War
eT maps
• Election of 1836
AR ----
MS AL
4	7
k LA	—
18888^

• Election of 1840
Ef primary sources
Lesson 3
•Jackson Political Cartoon
• Harrison Campaign Poster
eT self-check quiz
Jackson and the Bank
ITIAL QUESTION
How do governments change? 1

IT MATTERS BECAUSE
The ongoing struggle over the Bank of the United States represented the ongoing struggle over the role of the federal government.
I
TEKS
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills 1A Identify the major eras and events in U.S. history through 1877, including colonization, revolution, drafting of the Declaration of Independence, creation and ratification of the Constitution, religious revivals such as the Second Great Awakening, early republic, the Age of Jackson, westward expansion, reform movements, sectionalism, Civil War, and Reconstruction, and describe their causes and effects.
Jackson's War Against the Bank
guidingquestion What events occurred when President Jackson forced the National Bank to close?

5B Summarize arguments regarding protective tariffs, taxation, and the banking system.
5C Explain the origin and development of American political parties.
7D Identify the provisions and compare the effects of congressional conflicts and compromises prior to the Civil War, including the roles of John Quincy Adams, John C. Calhoun, Henry Clay, and Daniel Webster.
14B Describe the characteristics and the benefits of the U.S. free enterprise system during the 18th and 19th centuries.
18B Summarize the issues, decisions, and significance of landmark Supreme Court cases, including Marbury v. Madison, McCulloch v. Maryland, and Gibbons v. Ogden.
21A Identify different points of view of political parties and interest groups on important historical and contemporary issues. 21C Summarize a historical event in which compromise resulted in a peaceful resolution.
Reading HELPDESK
Andrew Jackson disliked the Second Bank of the United States long before he became president. Congress had set up the bank in 1816 to hold the federal government’s money and to control the nation’s money supply. Private bankers rather than elected officials ran the bank. Its president, Nicholas Biddle, represented everything Jackson disliked. Jackson prided himself on being a self-made western pioneer who had started with nothing. Biddle came from a wealthy Philadelphia family and had a good education and experience in financial matters.
In addition, the Bank’s assigned duties made it a powerful institution. Many western settlers depended on being able to borrow money to run their farms. The Bank’s strict policies made such loans difficult to obtain. Like many other westerners, Jackson viewed the Bank as a monopoly that favored wealthy Easterners and limited western growth.
The Bank and the Election of 1832
Jackson s opponents planned to use the Bank to defeat him in the 1832 presidential campaign. Senators Henry Clay and Daniel Webster were friends of Biddle. They persuaded Biddle to apply
Taking Notes: Identifying
Use a chart like this one to identify the actions taken by President Jackson that put the Bank of the United States out of business.
Content Vocabulary
• veto
r
I gankof UnitedI States Closes I
The Jackson Era
early for a new charter a government permit to run the Bank-even though the Bank’s charter did not expire until 1836. They thought this would force Jackson to take action against the bank.
Clay and Webster believed the Bank had the support of the American people. They thought that if Jackson tried to veto, or reject, the renewal of the Bank’s charter, he would lose support. Henry Clay wanted to run for president. He and Webster believed that Jackson’s veto would help Clay defeat the president in the 1832 election.
Jackson told Secretary of State Martin Van Buren, “The bank is trying to kill me. But I will kill it.” Jackson vetoed the bill. He argued that the Bank was unconstitutional despite the Supreme Court’s decision to the contrary in McCulloch v. Maryland (1819). This case had concerned whether the state of Maryland had the right to tax the national bank of the United States.
Webster and Clay were right about one thing. The Bank did play a large part in the election of 1832. Instead of gaining support for Clay as president, however, their plan backfired. Most people supported Jackson’s veto, and Jackson was reelected. Jackson then decided to “kill” the Bank even before its current charter ended. He ordered all government deposits withdrawn from the Bank and placed in smaller state banks. In 1836 he refused to sign a new charter for the Bank, and it closed.
BORIN TO COMMAND.
HAD I BEEN CONSULTED.
KTNU ANDREW THE FIRST.
Jackson's opponents compared him to a bad king—a tyrant with too much power.
CRITICAL THINKING
Analyzing Primary Sources What is the meaning of the documents that appear at Jackson's feet? The Panic of 1837
Jackson decided not to run for a third term in 1836. The Democrats chose Van Buren, Jackson’s vice president during his second term. The Whigs, a new party that included former National Republicans and other anti-Jackson forces, were the opposition. The Whigs nominated three candidates. Each had support in a different part of the nation. The Whigs hoped this tactic would keep Van Buren from getting a majority of the electoral votes. Then the election would be decided by the House of Representatives, which the Whigs controlled. The Whigs plan failed. Jackson’s popularity and support helped Van Buren win both the popular and the electoral vote.
Van Buren had barely taken office when a financial panic hit the nation. The panic was in part an effect of Jackson s victory over the Bank of the United States. When the Bank ceased operations in 1836, control over state banks vanis e
veto to reject a bill and prevent it from Academic Vocabulary-
becoming law	institution an organization that
has an important purpose in society
Lesson 3 387
Me
mmT 4«	abt> /
This cartoon blames President Van Buren's policies for the Panic of 1837. Van Buren is standing, second from the right.
Some of these banks began issuing huge amounts of banknotes. Concerned that these notes had little value, the government stopped accepting them as payment for purchasing public land, People began to Question the value of their banknotes, leading to economic panic.
The Panic of 1837 led to a depression, a severe economic downturn. Land values dropped and banks failed. Thousands of businesses closed. Many workers lost their jobs, and farmers lost their land. In cities across the nation, many people could not afford food or rent.
President Van Buren did little to ease the crisis. He believed in the principle of laissez-faire—that government should interfere as little as possible in the nation’s economy. However, Van Buren did persuade Congress to create an independent federal treasury in 1840. This meant that the government no longer had to deposit its money in private banks as it had been doing. It would keep its money in the federal treasury instead.
This new system prevented state and private banks from using government money to back their banknotes. It helped prevent further bank crises.
Calling it a “second declaration of independence,” Van Buren and his supporters hailed the passing of the federal treasury law. Still, members of Van Buren’s own Democratic Party joined the Whigs in criticizing the act. The split in the Democratic Party gave the Whigs a chance to win the presidency in 1840.
D READING PROGRESS CHECK
Summarizing How did the closing of the Second Bank of the United States contribute to the Panic of 1837?
Reading HELPDESK



Build Vocabulary: Word Origins_______________________________
The French term laissez-faire is a combination of a form of the verb laisser, which means "to let or allow," and the verb faire, meaning "to do." In translation, the phrase literally means "let them do." As a policy, it has been translated as "let them do as they please," referring to the people. In practice, it refers to giving the government the smallest role possible. 388 The Jackson Era
The Whigs in Power
guiding question What events occurred during the 1840s that led to the weakening of the Whig Party?
When Van Buren ran for reelection in 1840, Democrats had held the White House for 12 years. Now, with the country still in the depths of depression, the Whigs thought they had a chance to win the presidency.
ELECTION OF
ELECTION OF
ELECTORAL VOTE TOTAL:
POPULAR VOTE TOTAL:
2,402,405 I
Harrison (Whig) I
Van Buren (Democrat) Territories * Numbers on map show electoral votes per state.
Although the Whigs' tactics, or methods, failed to win the presidency in 1836, different tactics propelled William Henry Harrison into the White House in 1840.
ANALYZING VISUALS
Which 0 states that supported Van Buren in 1836 turned to Harrison in 1840?
CRITICAL THINKING
Drawing Conclusions What factors might explain the shift in support for the two parties shown in these maps?
Lesson 3 389
During the campaign of 1840, the log cabin image appeared in paintings, banners, and political cartoons.
The Log Cabin Campaign
To run against Van Buren, the Whigs united behind one of their 1836 candidates, William Henry Harrison. Like Andrew Jackson, Harrison was a hero of the War of 1812. John Tyler, a planter from Virginia, was Harrison’s running mate. Harrison had first gained fame with his victory over Tecumseh’s followers in the Battle of Tippecanoe in 1811. The Whigs made reference to this event in the campaign slogan: “Tippecanoe and Tyler Too.
Harrison needed the support of the workers and farmers who had voted for Jackson in order to win the election. The Whigs portrayed Harrison, who in reality was a wealthy Ohioan, as a simple frontiersman like Jackson. The Democrats attacked this image. They said that all Harrison was good for was sitting in front of a log cabin and collecting his military pension. These attacks played right into the hands of the Whigs, who adopted the log cabin as the symbol of their campaign.
While presenting Harrison as a “man of the people,” the Whigs portrayed Van Buren as a wealthy snob with perfume-scented whiskers. They blamed him for the depression and accused him of spending the people’s money on expensive furniture for the White House. The Whigs’ tactics
and the effects of the depression seemed to work. A record number of voters turned out to elect Harrison by a wide margin, making him the first Whig president.
Inauguration day 1841 was bitterly cold. Harrison insisted on delivering his long speech without a hat or coat. He died of pneumonia 32 days later. He served the shortest term of any president, and John Tyler became the first vice president to gain the presidency because of the death of a president. At age 50, Tyler was also the nation’s youngest president up to that time.
SKILLS PRACTICE
Look for words you know on signs you see. Think about what the words mean.
Reading HELPDESK


Academic Vocabulary	Reading Strategy: Sommor/ang
symbol a word or object that stands for something else
A summary is a short restatement of the ideas in a text. Summarizing helps you digest and remember the main points in what you have read. Read the text about the Log Cabin Campaign. On a separate sheet of paper, write one or two sentences that capture the main ideas about the campaign.
390 The Jackson Era
John Tyler's Presidency
John Tyler won the vice presidential election as a Whig. However, he had once been a Democrat and had opposed many Whig policies. Whig party leaders had put him on the election ballot with Harrison mainly to attract Southern voters. Whig Party leaders Daniel Webster and Henry Clay had believed they could control Harrison and run the country behind the scenes. Harrison’s death ruined that plan.
President Tyler vetoed several bills sponsored by Whigs in Congress. His lack of party loyalty outraged many Whigs. When he twice vetoed a bill to renew the charter of the Bank of the United States, all but one of his cabinet members resigned. Only Daniel Webster remained as secretary of state. Whig leaders actually expelled Tyler from the Whig Party.
The biggest success of the Tyler presidency came in the area of foreign relations. In 1842 the United States and Great Britain signed the Webster-Ashburton Treaty. This agreement settled a long dispute over the border between Maine and Canada and set a firm U.S.-Canadian boundary from Maine to Minnesota.
Except for opposing Tyler, the Whigs could not agree on their party’s goals. Increasingly, they voted by region—North, South, and West—not party. This division may explain why the Whig candidate, Henry Clay, lost the election of 1844 to Democratic candidate James Polk. After only four years, the Whigs were out of power.
The Whigs elected just one more president, Zachary Taylor, in 1848. Taylor also died in office. By then, the Whig Party had become badly divided over the issue of slavery. By the early 1850s the party had nearly disappeared. Many Northern Whigs left the party and helped to form a new political party—the Republican Party that we have today.
D READING PROGRESS CHECK
Describing How did the Whigs lose power in the election of 1844?
I
Include this lesson's information in your Foldable®.
Jacksonian
Democracy
u Conflicts Over Land
Jackson \ and
the bank
I •,
LESSON 3 REVIEW
Review Vocabulary
1- Use the word veto in a sentence that demonstrates your understanding of the term. joa;job
Answer the Guiding Questions
2.	Summarizing What had the Supreme Court ruled in McCulloch v. Maryland regarding a national bank?
Did President Jackson accept that ruling? Explain. sb;29b
3.	Identifying Why did President Tyler, a Whig, oppose the Second Bank of the United States? 2«
PERSUASIVE WRITING
Write a campaign slogan for Martin Van Buren and one for William Henry Harrison that each man could have used on campaign signs to attract voter support in 1840. 29d; job Lesson 3 391
92 The Jackson Era

Directions: Write your answers using standard grammar, spelling, sentence structure, and punctuation.
O
Use your uSEEjSt0 explore the Essential Questions. expository WRITING Why do you think Andrew Jackson was so popular in the 1820s and 1830s? Do you think he would be as popular a leader if he were president today? Research and examine information on the current and most recent past presidents. Then write an essay that examines Jackson's popularity and answers these questions. 22A; 2«
© Social Studies Skills
formulating questions Locate a secondary source such as a database that provides information about the population numbers and geographic distribution of Native Americans in the United States today. What are three questions you can ask about your findings? 29*,- 2»j
Thinking Like a Historian
using A problem-solving PROCESS John Tyler became the first vice president to succeed to the presidency after the death of a president. In effect, Tyler had been chosen by the presidential candidate, not by the voters. Is there another method by which the vice president might be chosen? In a small team, list and consider different options for choosing the vice president, and discuss their advantages and disadvantages. Decide on a solution to the problem. Share your findings with the other teams. Discuss and evaluate the other teams'solutions. 31A
Visual Literacy
INTERPRETING IMAGES
This poster advertises a meeting on behalf of presidential candidate William Henry Harrison. What is the image of Harrison portrayed in this poster? What elements contribute to producing that image? ILIKItlfiOV!
AID
REFORM!!
**" are, aae aad all, Invited attend ,
friend# nF
A» ibe OLD CO, kt ROOM. <M||r).,	’
On Saturday Evening next,
aw jliaxxj* iwxaw aaiwws»
T.
Mm- Arrw*..™,. »,er».r} ft, ,b, SprtHafteu Com,",,,,.
-Aad aba tn attead t© ©titer Important ItnafaeMu
A. MO8LE,
S««’ry Cnai. »f Arrange,
Assessment
Directions: Write your answers using standard grammar, spelling, sentence structure,
and punctuation.
CHECKING FOR UNDERSTANDING
0 President Jackson promised "equal protection and equal benefits"for ordinary Americans. What do his policies toward Native Americans suggest about these beliefs? 290
0 Using Standard Punctuation Quotation marks are used to set off words that present quoted or spoken language. Write the following sentences, adding quotation marks wherever they are needed. 3ob
A.
Looking directly at Calhoun, the president declared, Our Union! It must be preserved! B.
The vice president rose with a toast of his own: The Union, next to our liberty, most dear. REVIEW THE GUIDING QUESTIONS
0 Describing How did elections change during the Jackson era? ia;sf
0 Analyzing What are some qualities that made Jackson a popular candidate, political leader, and president? ia
0 Explaining Why did settlers want the federal government to relocate Native Americans? sc
0 Analyzing Why was the removal of the Cherokee from Tennessee and Georgia called the Trail of Tears?
5C
0 Explaining Why did Henry Clay and Daniel Webster want the Second Bank of the United States to apply early for a new charter? 7D
0 Explaining What was the "log cabin campaign," and how was it related to the expansion of voting rights?
21A
CRITICAL THINKING
G
Analyzing Why did Andrew Jackson accuse John Quincy Adams of "stealing the election" in 1824? How did this conflict affect the Democratic-Republican Party in the next presidential election?
© Drawing Conclusions What are interest groups? Why do you think Jackson saw them as a threat to open government? 2ia;2»b
© Speculating How would the owner of a cotton plantation in the South have reacted to higher protective tariffs? Explain your response. 7*
© Hypothesizing Why do you think President Jackson supported such harsh treatment of the Cherokee, the Seminole, and other Native American groups? sg;290
© Analyzing What are some ways treaties were used to remove the Cherokee and other Native American groups from their lands? How do you think Native American leaders felt about the process of signing a treaty? 23c
© Contrasting How do the physical characteristics of traditional Native American lands east of the Mississippi River differ from those in the new Indian Territory? Why do you think the federal government chose to relocate Native Americans there? iob; 2»b
© Synthesizing In what ways did the conflict over the Second Bank of the United States reveal the growing sectionalism in the United States? sb
© Identifying Cause and EffectWhy did Jackson's decision to close the Bank lead to the Panic of 1837? How did the panic cause a depression? ia;sb
© Summarizing What factors led to the decline of the Whig Party in the early 1850s? 2ia;29b
Need Extra Help?
IfYou've
Missed Question Review Lesson
O O O O O O G G
© © © © © © © © 1,2,3		1,3	1,2,3	2	2	3	3	1	1	1	2	2	2	3	3	3
393
t Assessment (continued)
DBQ
I SHORT RESPONSE
PRIMARY SOURCE
I ;
"We had never sold our country. We never received any annuities [payments] from our American father] And we are determined to hold on to our village!"
—Black Hawk, leader of a group of Sauk and Fox Native Americans
© Interpreting What do you think Black Hawk means when he states that his people "never sold our country"? 290
Drawing Inferences What does Black Hawk's statement suggest about Native Americans' level of trust toward the federal government? 29B
EXTENDED RESPONSE
Expository Writing Use the two primary sources on this page and what you have learned in the chapter to write an essay analyzing the Indian Removal Act and its effect on America's development as a nation. Did it help the nation grow? Why or why not? ia; sg
STANDARDIZED TEST PRACTICE
I ANALYZING DOCUMENTS
DBQ
John Ross, a chief of the Cherokee Nation, wrote the following in a letter to the House of Representatives in 1836:
PRIMARY SOURCE
"A [false] Delegation,... proceeded to Washington City with this pretended treaty, and by the false and fraudulent representations [replaced] the legal and accredited Delegation of the Cherokee people, and obtained for this instrument,... the recognition of the United States Government. And now it is presented to us as a treaty, ratified by the Senate, and approved by the President."
—John Ross, 1836
© Drawing Inferences What does Ross feel about the treaty? 29B; 290
A.
He thinks Congress made a mistake and will correct it. B.
He believes it was not negotiated by true representatives of his people. C.
He is happy that the treaty was ratified by the Senate. D.
He favors the treaty and wants Congress to recognize and enforce it. © Summarizing Ross thinks the treaty is 29B;290
F.	a legal document.
G.	the best the Cherokee can get.	Need Extra Help?
H.	false and illegal.
I.	like previous U.S. treaties with the Cherokee.
If You've Missed Question	©	©	©	©	©
Review Lesson	2	2	2	2	2
394 The Jackson Era
14
Manifest Destiny
networks
1818-1853
There's More Online about Manifest Destiny.
CHAPTER
IAL QUESTIONS
'How does geography influence the way people live? conflict develop? • How do new ideas change the way people live? Lesson 1
The Oregon Country
Lesson 2
Statehood for Florida and Texas
Lesson 3
War With Mexico
Lesson 4
California and Utah
The Story
Matters...
The six-month trip to the Oregon Country in the Northwest is hard and dangerous. Pioneers in "wagon trains" of up to 100 wagons wade or swim across swift rivers, climb steep mountains, face severe storms, and risk conflict with Native Americans.
These pioneers are also part of something bigger than themselves. They are helping the nation fulfill its "Manifest Destiny"—the idea that the United States should stretch from sea to shining sea.
Foldables
Go to the Foldables® library in the back of your book to make a Foldable® that will help you take notes while reading this chapter.
◄ Settlers traveled by wagon train along the Oregon Trail.
rionaa uiah
© Library of Congress Prints and Photographs Division [LC-DIG-ppmsca-02887]
CHAPTER 14
Place and Time: North America isoo to 1853
In thefirsthalfofthe 1800s, the United States greatly expanded its territory. By 1853, it stretched clear across the continent, from coast to coast.

Step Into the Place
MAP FOCUS
Note that the area controlled by the United States more than doubled in size during this period. REGIONS
After the Louisiana Purchase, from which country did the United States gain the most territory? 6E;29C PLACE
Which area of the country do you think was most densely populated in 1853?Why?HA CRITICAL THINKING
Speculating As the United States grew, how do you think Native Americans were affected? networks Ef MAP Explore the , „ A , interactive version of
there's More Online!	this map on
NETWORKS.
Ef TIME LINE Explore the interactive version of this time line on NETWORKS.
70°W
3$
Martin Van Buren William Henry John Tyler James Polk 'J846 Zachary Taylor 1837-1841 Harrison 1841	1841-1845	1845-1849 Congress 1849-1850
■■ fti <«)	® =- n
60°W


60°W
Step Into the Time
TIME LINE
Identify events on the U.S. Events time line that you think might be related to one another, and explain how you think they may be related. 29c WORLD EVENTS
James Madison 1809-1817
James Monroe 1818 The U.S. and Britain
set the northern border	f	1821 Spain transfers
ofthe Louisiana Purchase	( dB I Florida to the United St*
1824 Russia (Jives up its claim to land south of Alaska
John Q. Adams Andrew Jackson	Ma
1825-1829	1829-1837
.—"S.	/■'"'x	1836 Texans
/JB \	f>£u\	fightBattleof
I I I I
the Alamo 
France invades Algeria 1839 Opium War begins
1842 Treaty of
1846 Neptune
•____________T826 First
networks
There's More Online!
Ef GAME Concentration
Ef graphic organizer
Event Time Line 1819-1846
Ef images
•	The Fur Trade
•	The Whitman Massacre ef MAP Oregon Country
Ef self-check quiz sf video


Lesson 1
jig*

The Oregon Country
AL QUESTION
How does geography influencethe way people live? 1TEKS Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills
1A Identify the major eras and events in U.S. history through 1877, including colonization, revolution, drafting of the Declaration of Independence, creation and ratification of the Constitution, religious revivals such as the Second Great Awakening, early republic, the Age of Jackson, westward expansion, reform movements, sectionalism, Civil War, and Reconstruction, and describe their causes and effects.
6B Explain the political, economic, and social roots of Manifest Destiny.
6C Analyze the relationship between the concept of Manifest Destiny and the westward growth of the nation.
1OA Locate places and regions of importance in the United States during the 17th, 18th, and 19th centuries.
10C Analyze the effects of physical and human geographic factors on major historical and contemporary events in the United States.
IT MATTERS BECAUSE
Thousands of pioneers moved west, adding their struggles and triumphs to the American story.
Rivalry in the Northwest
guidingquestion Why did Americans want to control the Oregon Country?
The Oregon Country was a huge area located north of California, between the Pacific Ocean and the Rocky Mountains. It included all of what are now Oregon, Washington, and Idaho, plus parts of Montana and Wyoming. The region also contained about half of what is now the Canadian province of British Columbia.
In the early 1800s, four nations claimed the vast, rugged land known as the Oregon Country. The United States based its claim on Robert Gray’s discovery of the Columbia River in 1792 and the Lewis and Clark expedition. Great Britain had explored the Columbia River. Spain controlled California, and Russia had settlements south from Alaska into Oregon.
Adams-Onis Treaty
Many Americans wanted control of Oregon in order to gain access to the Pacific Ocean. During the administration of President James Monroe, Secretary of State John Quincy Adams negotiated the Adams-Onis Treaty of 1819 with Spain. Spain agreed to set the northern border of New Spain at what is now California’s northern border and gave up all claims to Oregon.
In 1824 Russia also gave up its claim to the land south of Alaska.
Reading HELPDESK
Taking Rotes; Sequencing
As you read, list key events on a time line such as this one.
i 919 1825 1336 1346 Content Vocabulary
398 Manifest Destiny
•	joint occupation
•	mountain man
•	emigrant
•	prairie schooner
•	Manifest Destiny

Dealing with Great Britain was more complicated. In 1818 Adams worked out an agreement with Britain for joint occupation. This meant that people from both the United States and Great Britain could settle there. When Adams became president in 1825, he proposed that the two nations divide Oregon along the 49° N line of latitude. Britain refused, and the countries extended the joint occupation.
Mountain Men in Oregon
Fur traders had been the first Americans to take up the challenge of living in the Oregon Country. They came to trap beaver, whose skins were in great demand in Europe. The British established trading posts in the region, as did merchant John Jacob Astor of New York. In 1808 Astor organized the American Fur Company. The country’s leading fur company, it traded on the East Coast, in the Pacific Northwest, and in China.
At first, the fur merchants traded with the Native Americans.
Gradually others joined the trade. These tough, independent men spent most of their time in the Rocky Mountains and were known as mountain men. Many had Native American wives.
They lived in buffalo-skin lodges and dressed in fringed buckskin pants, moccasins, and beads.
Over time, the mountain men could no longer make a living by trapping. Overtrapping had reduced the beaver population, thus limiting the number of pelts available, and changes in fashion reduced demand for pelts. Some mountain men moved to Oregon and settled on farms.
THE RISE AND FALL OF THE FUR TRAPPERS

In the early 1800s, fur trappers could find plenty of beaver in the Oregon Country. In Europe, people liked to wear hats made out of beaver pelts (skins). After several years, the trappers had caught too many
beavers. There were few left.
Also, silk hats began to become more popular than beaver hats. As the supply and demand for pelts dropped, fur trappers had to find a new way to make money.
Academic Vocabulary
joint occupation a situation in which people from two countries can occupy an area mountain man an adventurer of the American West
For a time, trapping furs was a profitable business.
EXPLAINING
What caused the number of beaver in the Oregon Country to decline? CRITICAL THINKING
Identifying Cause and Effect Why did fur trapping become an unprofitable business? SKILLS PRACTICE
_______________ Make a list of academic vocabulary words that have cognates in another language you know. Use these cognates to help other students learn academic vocabulary words.
plus in addition to access a way into something or someplace
I
Lesson 1 399
I !
t >
Before the 1847 Cayuse attack, the Whitman Mission was a popular stopping point for settlers traveling along the Oregon Trail.
CRITICAL THINKING
Drawing Conclusions Based on this picture, what do you think the Whitman Mission offered travelers on the way to the Oregon Country?
Reading HELPDESK
With their knowledge of the western lands, several mountain men, such as Jim Bridger and Kit Carson, found work as guides. They led the parties of settlers now streaming west. Beginning in the 1830s, the mountain men carved out several east-to-west passages that played a vital role in western settlement. The most popular route was the Oregon Trail. Others included the California Trail and the Santa Fe Trail.
READING PROGRESS CHECK
Identifying Which countries claimed the Oregon Country?
Oregon and Manifest Destiny
guiding question What is Manifest Destiny?
In the 1830s, Americans began traveling to the Oregon Country to settle. Economic troubles in the East and reports of Oregon’s fertile land drew many people.
Marcus and Narcissa Whitman
Among the first settlers were Dr. Marcus Whitman and his wife, Narcissa. They were missionaries who went to Oregon in 1836 and built a mission among the Cayuse people near the present site of Walla Walla,
Washington. They wanted to provide medical care and convert the Cayuse to Christianity.
The new settlers unknowingly brought measles to the mission. Native Americans had never been exposed to this disease. An epidemic killed many of the Cayuse children. The Cayuse blamed the Whitmans. They attacked the mission in November 1847 and killed the Whitmans and 11 others.
Along the Oregon Trail
The Whitman massacre was a shocking event, but it did little to stop the flood of pioneers on their way to Oregon. Drawn by reports of fertile Oregon land and driven by economic hard times in the East, many Americans took to the trail. These pioneers were called emigrants—people who leave their own country— because they left the United States to go to Oregon.

emigrant a person who leaves his or her country to live somewhere else prairie schooner a canvas-covered wagon used by pioneers in the mid-1800s 400 Manifest Destiny
7”

I®
*0-1
US
Astoria Ft Vancou Champ
PACIFIC
OCEAN
iHl!
400 miles
britishterritorv
.... JT ® ® llSlilllll

J
Tost®' «jr"" Unorganized
Independence

isifi
V
GEOGRAPHY
CONNECTtON The Oregon Trail was the most popular route for settlers heading west.
PLACE
What is the easternmost point on the trail? CRITICAL THINKING
Drawing Conclusions Why do
you think the Oregon Trail does not appear to follow a straight route?
120"W

In 1843 about a thousand emigrants made the journey.
Tens of thousands more would follow in the years ahead. Before the difficult 2,000-mile (3,219 km) journey, these pioneers packed all their belongings. They stuffed their canvas-covered wagons with supplies. From a distance these wagons looked like schooners, or ships at sea, and people
called them prairie schooners. Gathering in Independence or other towns in Missouri, the pioneers followed the Oregon Trail across the Great Plains, along the Platte River, and through the South Pass of the Rocky Mountains. Then they turned north and west along the Snake and Columbia Rivers into the Oregon Country.
America Seeks Its Manifest Destiny
Since colonial times, many Americans had believed their nation s mission should be to serve as a model of freedom and democracy. In the 1800s that vision changed.
Lesson 1 401
Push-pull factors are reasons for people to leave one area and move to another area. Push factors—such as lack of economic activity or a natural disaster such as a hurricane or flood—drive people away from an area. Pull factors—such as a desirable climate or the opportunity to own land— attract people to an area.
What were the push and pull factors affecting emigrants to Oregon?
Manifest Destiny the belief that the United States was destined by God to extend its boundaries to the Pacific Ocean
[Foldables!		
■ Study Organizer J		
Include this lessons		
information in your	Florida	Utah
Foldable®.		d-
	Texas	A-
Many believed that the nation’s mission was to spread freedom ■ by settling the entire continent. In 1819 John Quincy Adams 9 expressed what many Americans were thinking when he said	1
expansion to the Pacific was as certain as the Mississippi River 1 flowing to the sea.	|
In the 1840s, the United States entered a new era of westward 1 expansion. New York newspaper editor John O Sullivan declared j it was the United States’s “Manifest Destiny to overspread and to possess the whole of the continent which Providence has	j
given us.” O’Sullivan meant that the United States was clearly	‘
destined—set apart for a special purpose—by God to extend its boundaries all the way to the Pacific Ocean.
"Fifty-Four Forty or Fight"
Many Americans wanted the United States to take over all of Oregon. In the 1844 presidential election, James K. Polk, the Democratic nominee, supported this desire. Democrats used the slogan “Fifty-Four Forty or Fight,” referring to the line of latitude they believed should be the nation’s northern border in Oregon.
Polk’s Whig opponent, Henry Clay, did not take a strong position on the Oregon issue. Polk won the election because Whig support was not united behind Clay.
A firm believer in Manifest Destiny, Polk was focused on acquiring Oregon. Britain would not accept a border at 54°40' N latitude. In 1846 the two countries compromised. They set the border at 49° N latitude. It was the same boundary the British had rejected 21 years before.
B READING PROGRESS CHECK
Summarizing How did Polk's views differ from Clay's in the 1844 election?
LESSON 1 REVIEW
Review Vocabulary
1.	Using the following words, write sentences that describe settlers traveling on the Oregon Trail.
30A
a.	Manifest Destiny c. prairie schooner
b.	emigrant
4.	Explaining \Nhst did the political slogan "Fifty-Four Forty or Fight" mean? 6B
5.	Explaining What economic factors contributed to the settlement ofthe Oregon Country? 6B
Answer the Guiding Questions
2.	Describing How did overtrapping affect the physical environment ofthe West? ioc
3.	Explaining In what way were the American emigrants who settled in Oregon part of Manifest Destiny? ia
Manifest Destiny
PERSUASIVE WRITING
You are a scout in the 1830s who makes a living by guiding settlers to Oregon. Write a two-paragraph "advertisement" telling people why they should move to Oregon and why they should choose you to guide them. 3od 
* 4

networks
There's More Online!
gf BIOGRAPHIES
•	Davy Crocker t
•	Notable Tejanos
Ef GRAPHIC ORGANIZER
Texas History Time Line Ef map Texas War for Independence
Ef self-check QUIZ
Ef SLIDESHOWS
•Florida'sCapitol Buildings
Lesson 2
Statehood for Florida and Texas
• Remember the Alamo
Ef VIDEO
L QUESTION
Whydoes conflict develop? 
It Matters Because
P TEKS
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills 1A Identify the major eras and events in U.S. history through 1877, including colonization, revolution, drafting ofthe Declaration of Independence, creation and ratification ofthe Constitution, religious revivals such as the Second Great Awakening, early republic, the Age of Jackson, westward expansion, reform movements, sectionalism, Civil War, and Reconstruction, and describe their causes and effects.
6A Explain how the Northwest Ordinance established principles and procedures for orderly expansion of the United States.
7D Identify the provisions and compare the effects of congressional conflicts and compromises prior to the Civil War, including
, the roles of John Quincy Adams, John C.
Calhoun, Henry Clay, and Daniel Webster.
:	10A Locate places and regions of importance
I c in the United States during the 17th, 18th, and y	19th centuries.
10B Compare places and regions of the i|	United States in terms of physical and human
p	characteristics.
ip	11A Analyze how physical characteristics
j"	of the environment influenced population
distribution, settlement patterns, and economic activities in the United States during the 17th, 18th, and 19th centuries.
11B Describe the positive and negative
fh consequences of human modification ofthe physical environment of the United States.
23C Identify ways conflicts between people
P = from various racial, ethnic, and religious groups S3? were resolved.
L
Reading HELPDESK Through conflict and negotiations, the United States acquired Florida and Texas.
Florida
guidingquestion Howdid Florida become a state?
When Spain transferred Florida to the United States on July 17, 1821, Florida became an American territory. Under the terms of the Northwest Ordinance of 1787, Florida had an appointed territorial governor, a territorial legislature, and a nonvoting delegate to the United States Congress.
Tallahassee became the territorial capital in 1824. The capital was located about midway between St. Augustine and Pensacola, Florida’s major cities at that time. Not counting Native Americans, fewer than 8,000 people lived in the territory, including enslaved people. Later, as news of the area’s fertile land spread, thousands of new settlers streamed into Florida.
Many planters from Virginia, Georgia, and the Carolinas had worn out their soil with years of heavy planting. They left these lands with their depleted, or used up, soils for new land in Florida. Here, the planters established cotton and tobacco plantations, especially in northern Florida and the narrow strip in the northwest called the Panhandle. In addition, small farms and cattle ranches dotted the region of central Florida. The leading planters of northern Florida played a major role in the government and politics of the area.
Taking Notes: Sequencing______
As you read, list key events on a time line like this one.
Content Vocabulary
•	Tejano • annex
•	decree
•	barricade
Lesson 2 403
The Territory Grows
In 1837 the census for the territory of Florida reported that 48,000 people lived there. Enslaved people made up about one-half of Florida’s population. Officials organized a vote to determine if Floridians wanted to form a state. Only white men over 21 years of age voted in this election. These voters chose to seek statehood. Now Floridians had to draw up a state constitution and submit it to the U.S. Congress.
Florida voters chose 56 people to attend the constitutional convention in St. Joseph, a small port city on the Gulf Coast. The first constitution provided for a governor elected for four years and an elected General Assembly, or legislature. The constitution also allowed slavery and called for a system of public schools. The delegates approved the constitution on January 11,1839. Florida then sent the document to the U.S. Congress for final approval, or ratification.
Florida’s desire to enter the Union as a slave state caused some difficulty. Congress had long struggled to maintain an equal balance between slave and free states. As a result, it would take six years for Congress to act on Florida’s wish. Congress had to wait until another territory was ready to become a free state. Statehood for Florida
Iowa finally emerged as a free-state candidate. With the question of slavery removed. President John Tyler signed the Florida statehood bill. Florida became the twenty-seventh state in the United States on March 3, 1845. The next year, Iowa entered the Union as a free state. Thus, the balance between the slave and free states in the nation remained the same in Congress.
B READING PROGRESS CHECK
Identifying Cause and Effect What caused the population of Florida to grow?
The new capital in Tallahassee was chosen because it was about halfway between Florida's major cities at the time. This building was the second capitol, and it was in use from 1826 to 1839.
Reading HELPDESK
Academic Vocabulary
establish to set up or create remove to take away
404 Manifest Destiny
Oily
If you are planning a speech, think about different sentence types you can use.
Use the ones that are most effective for each idea in the speech.
Texas
guiding question How did Texas become a state?
In 1821 Mexico won its independence from Spain. The land that is now the state of Texas was part of Mexico. At the time, the non-Native American population of Texas was about 3,000. Most of these people were Tejanos (tay.HAH.nohs), or Mexicans who daimed Texas as their home. Wishing to increase settlement, Mexico offered vast tracts of land to people who would agree to bring families to settle there—as citizens of Mexico. Stephen F. Austin brought 300 American families to settle in Texas.
Austin’s success made him a leader among the American settlers.
At first, Mexico encouraged Americans to settle in Texas. Before long, Americans greatly outnumbered Tejanos. Tensions with Mexico developed when Americans refused to follow Mexico’s rules. These included learning Spanish and becoming Catholic. Many Americans also had enslaved African Americans, which Mexico threatened to ban. In 1830 Mexico issued a decree, or official order, closing its borders to further immigration. American settlers, led by Austin and Sam Houston, tried to make peace with Mexican leaders. These efforts failed. Texans—including Americans and Tejanos—began planning to break away from Mexico.
In 1835 the conflict grew violent. Mexican general Antonio Lopez de Santa Anna took an army into Texas to punish the rebels. In December of that year, the Texans captured the city of San Antonio from a larger Mexican force. Santa Anna was enraged. His army reached San Antonio in late February 1836. There it found a small Texan force barricaded, or blocked off, inside a mission building called the Alamo.
The Alamo
The Texans had only about 180 soldiers to take on Santa Annas army of several thousand. The Texans did have brave leaders, however, including folk hero Davy Crockett, commander William B. Travis, and a tough Texan named Jim Bowie.
fejano a Texan of Latin American, often Mexican, descent Sacree an official order barricade to block off
Alamo defenders were inspired by their leader, William Barret Travis.
Davy Crockett (1786-1836)
Davy Crockett was born in Tennessee and became known as a bear hunter, 1 soldier, and scout. Stories of his daring deeds turned him into a folk hero. He .? served three terms in Congress and j moved to Texas after he was defeated £ for reelection. He joined the Texas i army to fight against Mexico and fought to the death at the Alamo.
CRITICAL THINKING
Summarizing What were Crockett's major contributions to the United States? Foldables!
Study Organizer |l


For 13 long days, through several attacks, the defenders ofthe Alamo kept Santa Anna’s army at bay with rifle fire. On March 6, 1836, Mexican cannon fire smashed the Alamo’s walls.
The Mexican army was too large to hold back. They entered the fortress, killing all the defenders, including Travis, Crockett, Bowie, and a number of Tejanos. Only a few women and children and some servants survived to tell of the battle.
The Alamo defenders had been defeated, but they had bought the Texans time to gather troops and supplies. They had also provided the Texans with a rallying cry: “Remember the Alamo!”
Texas Declares Its Independence
During the siege at the Alamo, Texan leaders met at the town of Washington-on-the-Brazos. Among them were a number of Tejanos, who were also unhappy with Mexican rule. On March 2,1836—four days before the fall of the Alamo—they declared independence from Mexico. They then established the Republic of Texas.
Texan leaders set up a temporary government. This government named Sam Houston commander in chief of the Texan forces. Houston gathered an army of about 900 at San Jacinto (san juh»SIHN*toh), near the site of present-day Houston, s Santa Anna camped nearby with an army of more than 1,300. j On April 21, the Texans launched a surprise attack, shouting, j “Remember the Alamo!” They killed more than 600 soldiers s
Include this lesson's information in your Foldable®.
Florida
Utah

GEOGRAPHY CONNECTION
Texas became an independent republic after winning its independence from Mexico.
LOCATION
What battle took place northeast of Brazoria? CRITICAL THINKING
Drawing Conclusions Which side was the aggressor in this war? Explain your answer. Reading HELPDESK
annex to add a territory to one's own territory
-
11
Texas War for Independence 1835-1836
and captured about 700 more—including Santa Anna. On May 14,1836, Santa Anna signed a treaty that recognized the independence of Texas.
The Lone Star Republic
In September 1836, Texans elected Sam Houston as their president. Mirabeau Lamar, who had fought at the Battle of San Jacinto, served as vice president. Houston sent a delegation to Washington, D.C., to ask the United States to annex, or take control of, Texas.
Andrew Jackson, however, refused their request. The addition of another slave state would upset the balance of slave and free states in Congress. For the moment, Texas would remain an independent country.
Texas Becomes a State
Many Texans wanted to join the United States. Southerners favored Texas annexation, but Northerners opposed admitting another slave state to the Union. President Martin Van Buren did not want to inflame the slavery issue or risk war with Mexico. He put off the question of annexing Texas. John Tyler, who became president in 1841, supported Texas annexation. The Senate remained divided over the slavery issue and failed to ratify the annexation treaty.
The situation changed with the 1844 presidential campaign. Manifest Destiny was a popular idea at the time. The South wanted Texas. The North favored gaining all of Oregon.
Candidate James K. Polk supported both actions. After Polk
j won, Congress passed a resolution to annex Texas. In 1845 Texas 1 joined the Union.
Q READING PROGRESS CHECK
Ij Identifying Central Issues Why did it take a long time for the United States 55 to annex Texas?
Juan Seguin (above) and Jose Antonio Navarro (below) were Tejanos who supported and worked for an independent Texas.
J
1
1
LESSON 2 REVIEW
Review Vocabulary
1. Explain the significance of the following terms in Texas history, joa
a.	Tejano c. decree
b.	annex d. barricade
Answer the Guiding Questions
Explaining What factor explained Florida s six-year wait to have its request for statehood
approved? ia
3.	Analyzing How did Americans come to settle in Texas when it was part of Mexico? ia
4.	Making Connections How did the battle at the Alamo help the cause of Texas independence? 2?b
PERSUASIVE WRITING
Imagine you live in the 1820s and are trying to encourage Americans to settle in Texas. Write an advertisement that might attract settlers to this land, sod Lesson 2 407
1
networks
There's More Online!
& BIOGRAPHY
John C. Fremont
ET GRAPHIC ORGANIZER
Individual Achievements
& MAP
• Santa Fe Trail »War With Mexico
Sf primary source
The Bear Flag
Ef self-check quiz Ef video



Lesson 3
War With Mexico
AL QUESTION
Why does conflict develop? 
TCKS
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills____________ 1A Identify the major eras and events in U.S. history through 1877, including colonization, revolution, drafting of the Declaration of Independence, creation and ratification of the Constitution, religious revivals such as the Second Great Awakening, early republic, the Age of Jackson, westward expansion, reform movements, sectionalism, Civil War, and Reconstruction, and describe their causes and effects.
6B Explain the political, economic, and social roots of Manifest Destiny.
6D Explain the causes and effects of the U.S.-Mexican War and their impact on the United States.
1OA Locate places and regions of importance in the United States during the 17th, 18th, and 19th centuries.
IOC
Analyze the effects of physical and human geographic factors on major historical and contemporary events in the United States. 11A Analyze how physical characteristics of the environment influenced population distribution, settlement patterns, and economic activities in the United States during the 17th, 18th, and 19th centuries. 23A Identify selected racial, ethnic, and religious groups that settled in the United States and explain their reasons for immigration.
Reading HELPDESK
IT MATTERS BECAUSE
Mexican lands in the West became part of the United States.
The New Mexico Territory
guiding question How did the Santa Fe Trail benefit the New Mexico Territory?
In the early 1800s, the land called New Mexico was a vast region between the Texas and California territories. It included all of the land that is now the states of New Mexico, Arizona, Nevada, and Utah and parts of Colorado and Wyoming. Native Americans had lived in the area for thousands of years. Spanish conquistadors, or soldiers, arrived in the late 1500s. They made the region part of Spain’s American colonies. In 1610 the Spanish founded the settlement of Santa Fe. Spanish missionaries soon followed the conquistadors into the area.
Mexico—including New Mexico—won its independence from Spain in 1821. Before that time, the Spanish had tried to keep Americans away from Santa Fe. They feared that Americans would want to take over the area. The new Mexican government, however, welcomed American traders. Mexico hoped trade would boost the economy.
William Becknell, the first American trader to reach Santa Fe, arrived in 1821. Becknell’s route came to be known as the Santa Fe Trail. It was a big improvement over the other trails that existed in the dry and rugged area at that time. As Becknell wrote: “I avoided the so much dreaded sand hills, where adventurers have frequently been forced to drink the blood of their mules, to allay [relieve! their thirst.”

Taking Notes; Describing__________
Ks you read, describe the achievements of each individual in a chart like this one.
	Achievements
William Secknell	
John C. Fremont	
Winfield Scott
Content Vocabulary
•	rancho
•	ranchero
J 0 Manifest Destiny
D READING PROGRESS CHECK
Describing How did William Becknell influence the American settlement of New Mexico?
California's Spanish Culture
guiding question How did the culture of California develop?

The Santa Fe Trail started near Independence, Missouri, which was then on the western edge of the United States. It crossed the prairies to the Arkansas River. It followed the river west toward the Rocky Mountains before turning south. The trail was mostly flat, and Becknell used wagons to transport his goods.
Other Americans soon followed Becknell. The Santa Fe Trail became a busy trade route. As trade with New Mexico increased, Americans began settling in the area. Some began to believe that acquiring New Mexico was part of the United States’s Manifest Destiny.
Spanish explorers and missionaries from Mexico settled California in the 1700s. Captain Gaspar de Portola and Father Junipero Serra (hoo»NIP*uh»roh SEHR«uh) began a chain of missions that eventually extended from San Diego to Sonoma.
The missions aimed to convert Native Americans to Christianity and the Spanish way of life. On mission lands, Native Americans grew crops, tended livestock, and worked at weaving and other crafts. American mountain man Jedediah Smith described the missions as “large farming and [cattle-ranching] establishments.”
BIOGRAPHY
John C. Fremont (1813-1890)
John C. Fremont was a mapmaker who helped explore and settle the West. He led his third expedition to California in 1845. The United States was close to war with Mexico because of the conflict over Texas. In June 1846, he encouraged a small group of Americans during the Bear Flag Revolt. Fremont later wrote that he saw their actions as "movements with the view of establishing a settled and stable government, which may give security to their persons and property."
After Mexico won independence from Spain in 1821, California became a Mexican state. Mexicans bought mission lands and set up huge ranches, or ranchos. Native Americans worked the land in return for food and shelter. Rancheros—ranch owners—treated Native Americans almost like slaves.
In the 1840s, more Americans reached California. John C. Fremont, an army officer, wrote of the region’s mild climate and vast natural resources. Americans began to talk about adding California to the Union. They argued that the nation would then be safely bordered by the Pacific Ocean rather than by a foreign country. Shippers also hoped to build seaports on the Pacific coast for trade with East Asia.
D READING PROGRESS CHECK
CRITICAL THINKING
Drawing Conclusions Based on Fremont's quotation, how do you think the Mexican government treated American settlers? Reading HELPDESK
Explaining Why did Americans want to make California part of the United States?
Conflict Begins
guidingquestion Why did war break out between the United States and Mexico?
President James K. Polk was determined to get the California and New Mexico territories from Mexico. After Mexico refused to sell the lands, Polk planned to gain them through war. To justify a
war,	Polk hoped to get Mexico to strike first.
Relations between the two countries were not friendly. The two nations disagreed about where the Texas-Mexico border
was.	The United States said that the Rio Grande formed the border. Mexico claimed that the border lay along the Nueces (nu«AY»sehs) River, 150 miles (241 km) farther north.
Polk sent a representative, John Slidell, to Mexico to propose a deal. Slidell could offer $30 million for California and New Mexico as long as Mexico accepted the Rio Grande as the Texas border. The United States would also pay what Mexico owed to American citizens. Mexican leaders refused to discuss the offer. They announced that they intended to reclaim Texas for Mexico.
To bring pressure, Polk ordered General Zachary Taylor to lead U.S. forces into the disputed area on the Rio Grande. To Mexican leaders, Taylor’s action was an invasion of their country. On April 25,1846, Mexican troops attacked Taylor’s forces. President Polk told Congress that Mexico had ‘ invaded our territory and shed American blood upon the American soil.” On May 13, Congress passed a declaration of war against Mexico.

rancho a ranch, especially the large estates set up by Mexicans in the American West ranchero a rancher, owner of a rancho
Academic Vocabulary ___________________
resource something that can be used for benefit, especially land, minerals, and water justify to provide a reason for
■12	Manifest Destiny
A
War Plan Polk planned to defeat Mexico by accomplishing three goals.
First, the United States would drive Mexican forces out of the disputed area between Texas and Mexico. Second, it would seize New Mexico and California. Finally, American forces would advance into Mexico and capture the capital, Mexico City.
By 1847, Zachary Taylor had accomplished the first goal. His army had captured all the important towns in the border area between Mexico and Texas. General Stephen Kearney made progress toward the second goal by marching his troops down the Santa Fe Trail. They captured New Mexico’s capital, Santa Fe, in 1846 after the Mexican governor fled. Kearney then turned toward California.
California Uprising
Even before war with Mexico officially began, American settlers in northern California had begun an uprising. They were encouraged by American general John C. Fremont. The settlers had little trouble overcoming the weak official Mexican presence in the territory. On June 14, 1846, the Americans declared California independent. They renamed it the Bear Flag Republic. The name came from the flag the rebels had made for their new nation.
SKILLS PRACTICE
Work with a partner. Discuss today's lesson.
GEOGRAPHY CONNECTION
War between the United States and Mexico broke out in 1846 near the Rio Grande. Polk's party, the Democrats, generally supported the war. Many Whigs did not, calling Polk's actions unnecessary and unjust. Northerners accused Democrats of waging war to gain territory for the spread of slavery.
LOCATION
Which battle was a Mexican victory? CRITICAL THINKING
Connections to
TODAY
The California Bear Flag
The state flag of California today is based on the bear flag created during the Bear Flag Revolt in 1846.
The Bear Flag Republic did not exist for long. Within a month, American warships arrived at the ports of San Francisco and San Diego to claim the republic for the United States.
Mexico still refused to surrender, even though it had lost New Mexico, California, and Texas. President Polk sent General Winfield Scott and his troops to attack Mexico City. They landed in the port of Veracruz and captured it after three weeks of
fighting. They still needed to travel 300 miles (483 km) to Mexico City, fighting Mexican troops along the way.
Finally, in September 1847, six months after Scott’s forces had landed in Veracruz, they captured Mexico’s capital. Polk’s plan for the war had succeeded.
CALIFORNIA REPUBLIC
Include rhis lesson's information in your Foldable®.


Florida
Texas
Utah
4*
Peace Terms
Defeated on February 2, 1848, Mexico’s leaders signed the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo (GWAH»duh»loop he»DAHL*goh). Mexico gave the United States more than 500,000 square miles (1,295,000 sq. km) of territory—what are now the states of California, Nevada, and Utah, as well as most of Arizona and New Mexico and parts of Colorado and Wyoming.
Mexico accepted the Rio Grande as its border with Texas. In return, the United States paid Mexico $15 million and assumed $3.25 million in debts Mexico owed American citizens.
With Oregon and the former Mexican territories under the American flag, the dream of Manifest Destiny had been realized. The question of whether the new lands should allow slavery, however, would lead the country toward another bloody conflict. Q READING PROGRESS CHECK
Identifying What territories did the United States gain through the U.S.-Mexican War?
LESSON 3 REVIEW
Review Vocabulary
1.	Using the following words, describe the settlements established by the Spanish and by Mexicans in California. 3oa
a. rancho b. ranchero
Answer the Guiding Questions
2.	Contrasting How was BecknelI's Santa Fe Trail an improvement over earlier routes? ha
3.	Explaining Why did Americans want to acquire California? ia
414 Manifest Destiny
4.	Explaining What were the sources of conflict between the United States and Mexico before they went to war? ia
5.	Explaining What were the effects ofthe U.S.-Mexican War for the United States? 60
EXPOSITORY WRITING
Why did President Polk want Congress to declare war on Mexico in 1846? In your response, consider the historical events that led up to the declaration of war. 6D |	networks
;	fhere's More Online!
'	gf BIOGRAPHY
j	Mariano G, Valiejo
i	Ef GAME Tic Tac Toe
gf GRAPHIC ORGANIZER
f	Roles in Ilk'West
gf PRIMARY SOURCE
Gold Rush Letter
gf SELF-CHECK QUIZ gf VIDEO
i __...............
Lesson 4
California and Utah
L QUESTION
How do new ideas change the way people live? >2
it Matters because
PrfAS Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills
1A Identify the major eras and events in U.S. history through 1877, including colonization, revolution, drafting of the Declaration of Independence, creation and ratification ofthe Constitution, religious revivals such as the Second Great Awakening, early republic, the Age of Jackson, westward expansion, reform movements, sectionalism, Civil War, and Reconstruction, and describe their causes and effects.
6B Explain the political, economic, and social roots of Manifest Destiny.
6D Explain the causes and effects of the U.S.-Mexican War and their impact on the United States.
7C Analyze the impact of slavery on different sections of the United States.
10C Analyze the effects of physical and human geographic factors on major historical and contemporary events in the United States.
j 11B Describe the positive and negative < consequences of human modification of the 2 physical environment of the United States.
11C Describe how different immigrant s |	groups interacted with the environment in the
United States during the 17th, 18th, and 19th 51	centuries.
23A Identify selected racial, ethnic,
I § and religious groups that settled in the I?	United States and explain their reasons for
3=	immigration.
Through the treaty ending the war with Mexico, the United States controlled Texas, California, and what was then the New Mexico Territory.
California Gold Rush
guiding question Howdid the discovery of gold help California?
When gold was discovered at Sutter’s Mill in 1848, people from all over the world traveled to California in search of riches. Those who arrived in 1849 were called forty-niners. As one official reported, “The farmers have thrown aside their plows, the lawyers their briefs, the doctors their pills, the priests their prayer books, and all are now digging gold.” Some people arrived by sea. Others traveled on the Oregon Trail or the Santa Fe Trail.
Americans made up about 80 percent of the forty-niners. Others came from Mexico, South America, Europe, and Australia. About 300 men arrived from China, the first large group of Asian immigrants to settle in the United States. Although some eventually returned to China, others remained and established California’s Chinese American community.
The Californios
The Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo ended the war with Mexico and made Californios—Mexicans living in California—citizens ofthe United States. The treaty also guaranteed them their lands.
Wing HELPDESK

Taking Notes: Describing __________________
As you read, take notes in a chart like this one. Describe what each person or group did and what their roles were in the settlement of California and Utah.
Forty-Niners	Role
Mormons	Role
Drigham Young	Role
Content Vocabulary
•	forty-niner
•	boomtown
•	vigilante
Lesson 4 415
A few forty-niners became rich from their work on the hillsides and streams of California, but most gained little or nothing.
Reading HELPDESK
The Land Law of 1851, however, established a group of reviewers who examined the Californios’ land rights.
When a new settler claimed land that was held by a Californio, the two parties would go to court. There, it was the Californio who had to prove his or her ownership of the land. Some Californios were able to prove their claims. Many others lost their cases and their land.
The Life of a Forty-Niner
As people rushed to a new area to look for gold, they built new communities. Towns and small cities appeared almost overnight. One site on the Yuba River had only two houses in September 1849. A year later, a miner arrived to find a bustling town of 1,000 people “with a large number of hotels, stores, groceries, bakeries, and... gambling houses.”
Cities also flourished during the Gold Rush. As ships arrived daily with gold seekers, San Francisco became a boomtown, growing quickly from a tiny village to a city of about 20,000 people.
Most forty-niners had no experience in mining. Whenever they heard that gold had been discovered at a particular site, they rushed to it and attacked the hillsides with pickaxes and shovels. They spent hours bent over streambeds, “panning” for gold dust and nuggets. Panning involved gently swirling water and gravel in a pan in order to remove dirt and, perhaps, reveal a small speck of gold.

forty-niner a fortune-seeker who came to California during the Gold Rush boomtown a fast-growing community
I
416 Manifest Destiny
I
The California Gold Rush more than doubled the world’s ■ supply of gold. For all their hard work, however, very few I forty-niners achieved lasting wealth. Most found little or no I gold. Many of those who did find gold lost their riches through I gambling or wild spending. I
Boomtown merchants, however, made huge profits. They could I charge whatever they liked for food and other essential items because there were no other stores nearby that sold these products.
I
For example, an immigrant named Levi Strauss sold the miners | sturdy pants made of denim. His “Levi’s” made him rich. Gold Rush Society
‘ Mining camps contained men of all backgrounds but few women. Lonely and suffering hardships, many men spent their free hours drinking, gambling, and fighting. Mining towns had no police or prisons. As a result, citizens known as vigilantes (vih»juh«LAN»teez) formed committees to protect themselves. Vigilantes took the law into their own hands and acted as police, judge, jury, and sometimes executioner.
Economic and Political Progress
The Gold Rush had lasting effects on California. Agriculture, shipping, and trade grew to meet the demand for food and other goods. Many people who had arrived looking for gold stayed to farm or run a business.
Rapid growth brought the need for better government. In 1849, Californians applied for statehood and wrote a constitution. The constitution’s ban on slavery, however, caused a crisis in Congress. Southern states opposed California’s admission.
Congress eventually worked out a compromise by which California was admitted as a free state in 1850.
D READING PROGRESS CHECK
Identifying Cause and Effect How did the California Gold Rush lead to the expansion of cities?
A
Religious Refuge in Utah guiding question Why did the Mormons settle in Utah?
1 While the Gold Rush was transforming California, change was | also taking place in nearby Utah. There, Mormons, or members i of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, were building a 1 new community and fulfilling their vision of the godly life.
vigilante a person who acts as police, judge,	Academic Vocabulary--—
and jury without formal legal authority	constitution a list of laws
supporting a government
Mariano G. Vallejo (1808-1890)
Mariano G. Vallejo was born in Monterey, California, to Mexican parents. He served in the Mexican military, but he was often critical of the Mexican government. After California became part of the United States, he took part in the convention that wrote California's constitution. After statehood, Vallejo served in the state senate and acted as a leader of the state's Californio population. Still, like many other Californios, Vallejo wound up losing much of his California land.
CRITICAL THINKING
Speculating Why do you think Californios considered Vallejo to be a leader of their interests in California? Lesson 4 417
Activities A3
Directions: Write your answers using standard grammar, spelling, sentence structure, and punctuation.
© Use your fWWITfl to explore the Essential Questions.
EXPOSITORY WRITING
Use examples from the history ofTexas and the experiences of the Mormons to illustrate how geography, conflict, and new ideas change the way people live. 11B23C;23D
© Social Studies Skills
APPLYING ABSOLUTE CHRONOLOGY
Put the following events on a time line in chronological order: Texas becomes a state; the Adams-Om's Treaty, gold is discovered in California, the election of President James K. Polk, the battle of the Alamo, the Mormons reach the Great Salt Lake. ib; 30c © Thinking Like a Historian
predicting Imagine a large, uninhabited area in the Florida Panhandle. How would the environment change if Southern planters from other states came and settled there? Create a graphic organizer like the one below, and list the changes in the boxes provided. 300
© Visual Literacy
analyzing images This painting shows a group of Mormons on the Mormon Trail to Utah in the 1850s. How does this painting portray the Mormons? What kind of life does the painting suggest the Mormons will be living when they reach their destination? 29B
420 Manifest Destiny
Assessment
Directions: Write your answers using standard
and punctuation.
CHECKING FOR UNDERSTANDING
o How did the idea of Manifest Destiny help push the expansion of the United States into Oregon,
California, and the former Mexican territories? ia;6c
REVIEW THE GUIDING QUESTIONS
0 Explaining Why did so many Americans believe in Manifest Destiny? ia
0 Identifying What role did the Oregon issue play in the 1844 presidential election? ia
0 Explaining Why did planters from Virginia, Georgia, and the Carolinas resettle in Florida? ha
0 Describing What happened at the battle of the Alamo? Who were the leaders? 29b
0 Explaining How did President Polk plan to defeat Mexico? 6D
0 Identifying What were the terms of the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo? so
0 Analyzing What effect did the discovery of gold have on the population of California? ia;ioc
0 Describing Why did Southern states oppose the admission of California to the Union? How was the conflict resolved? 70
CRITICAL THINKING
© Explaining Why did Chinese immigrate to California in the late 1840s? 2ja
(D Identifying Cause and EffectWhy did tensions
develop between Mexico and American settlers in
Texas? How did these tensions lead to violent conflict? 60
grammar, spelling, sentence structure,
© Analyzing How did the Northwest Ordinance influence the government of Florida when it became an American territory? 6a
© Making Connections How did the belief in Manifest Destiny and the issue of Oregon help lead to the annexation ofTexas? 29b
© Identifying Bias Reread the quote from John O'Sullivan in the lesson feature. How does his use of the word"our" help you understand his position on Manifest Destiny?
© Comparing How did Congressional compromises lead to statehood for Texas and Florida? 7d
© Analyzing Why do you think the Santa Fe Trail begins near the Missouri River and at one point follows the Arkansas River? ioa
© Describing What happened to the soil of some
plantations in Virginia, Georgia, and the Carolinas? What caused the problem? What action did the planters take?
© Analyzing Why did Americans want to expand the nation to the Pacific Ocean? How might this expansion have contributed to a growing sense of unity and national identity? «c
© Describing People from the United States made up about 80 percent of those who went to California to dig for gold. Identify the countries and regions from which the other 20 percent emigrated. n<
© Identifying What action did Brigham Young and the Mormons take to escape religious conflict? 23c
© Hypothesizing Why do you think the Mormons were confident that they could prosper in the harsh terrain of the Great Salt Lake? What qualities helped them flourish? 29B
Need Extra Help?
IfYou've
Missed Question
r e 0	O	O	O	0	0	0	0	0		©	©	©	©	©	©	©	©	©	©	©
1,2,3,4	1	1	2	2	3	3	4	4	4	2	2	2		2	3	2	4	4	4	4
Review Lesson
421

1®5S|B

V-i; ?	, .	1862-1863
o
111

ji

frg.^
nt
fsburg
Wrightsville
ISIll
Frederick Baltimor
Westminster
Marylanc
New
Jersey

nassc p ^Junction J
Washing
I (Second Ba
Delav
Union advance Union retreat
■ Confederate advance <— -» Confederate retreat
$ Union victory
Confederate victory Inconclusive battle
GEOGRAPHY CONNECTION
Like the war in the West, the war in the East took place mostly in Confederate states. General Lee's attempts at invading the North failed.
PLACE
Which battle took place ---r
closest to the Union capital at Washington, D.C.?
CRITICAL THINKING
Making Generalizations What does this map suggest about the difficulty of invading enemy territory? Explain your answer. aajggga
Reading HELPDESK

-filch me
38°N
40 miles
Alb £	? J
.d
Monitor &m
fr. Monroe ilk
lOlllsBsfcl!
In 1862 Confederate forces enjoyed a string of impressive victories in Virginia, each over a different Union general. The Confederates turned back General George B. McClellan at the Seven Days’ Battle, General John Pope at the Second Battle of Bull Run, and General Ambrose Burnside at Fredericksburg. In May 1863, at Chancellorsville, Virginia, Lee’s army defeated a Union force twice its size. “My God, my God,” Lincoln said when he
-	learned of the defeat, What will the country say!” The mood in
the Union grew grim.
Lee Invades Maryland
Confederate president Jefferson Davis urged Lee to move his troops into western Maryland—Union territory. His goal was to move into Pennsylvania and to bring the war deeper into the Northern states. Though he knew McClellan was following him with a sizable force, Lee’s forces crossed into Maryland and began the invasion of Union territory.
Reading Strategy: Taking Notes _______________________________________
Taking notes about what you are reading can help you remember facts and prepare effectively for tests. As you read the section "War in the Eastern States," make a list of each battle, the date, the location, and which side won. 512 The Civil War
SKILLS PRACTICE____________________
Read text with a partner. Ask your partner for help if you do not know a word or if you do not understand something.
The Battle of Antietam
Once in Maryland, Lee split his army into four parts. To confuse McClellan, he ordered each part to move in a different direction Lee’s plan never had a chance to work. A Confederate officer lost his copy of the orders describing it. Two Union soldiers found the orders and brought them to McClellan.
McClellan did not attack immediately. This gave Lee time to gather his troops. On September 17, 1862, the two sides met at a place called Antietam (an.TEE.tum) near Sharpsburg, Maryland.
Antietam was a key victory for the Union. It was also the deadliest single day of fighting in the war. About 6,000 soldiers died. About 17,000 more suffered wounds. Because of the great losses, Lee retreated to Virginia after the battle. For the time being, his strategy of invading the North had failed.
Q READING PROGRESS CHECK
Explaining Why was it important for the Confederacy to defend Richmond?
The Emancipation Proclamation
guidingquestion What was the effect of the Emancipation Proclamation?
At first, Lincoln viewed the Civil War as a battle for the Union, not a fight against slavery. As the war went on, Lincoln changed the way he thought about the role of slavery in the war.
The Debate Over Ending Slavery
Lincoln hated slavery, yet he was reluctant to make the Civil War a battle to end it. Early in the war, Lincoln hesitated to move against slavery for fear of losing the border states. Even many white Northerners who disapproved of slavery were not eager to risk their lives to end it.
Meanwhile, abolitionists, including Frederick Douglass and newspaper editor Horace Greeley, urged Lincoln to make the war a fight to end slavery. The abolitionists described slavery as a moral wrong that needed to be abolished. They also pointed out that slavery was the root of the divisions between North and
. South. Finally, they argued that if Lincoln presented the war as a 1 fight to abolish slavery, Britain and France would be less wilhng j to support the South. Confederate hopes were increasingly linked - to this European support.
Emancipation Proclamation
the decree issued by President Lincoln freeing enslaved people in those parts of the Confederacy still in rebellion on January 1,1863
Robert E. Lee (1807-1870)
Robert Edward Lee came from a leading Virginia family. He attended West Point Academy and graduated second in his class in 1829. Lee was still in the United States Army and stationed in Texas in 1861 when that state seceded from the Union. He returned to Virginia. Soon after his return, Virginia voted to secede from the Union. Lee resigned from the U.S. Army and became commander of Virginia's military forces.
CRITICAL THINKING
Drawing Conclusions What factor apparently caused Lee to leave the United States Army? Explain your answer.

Lesson 2 513
Lincoln's Emancipation Proclamation sent a clear message to enslaved people and the Confederacy about the future of slavery.
PRIMARY SOURCE
A
Call for Emancipation The Constitution did not give Lincoln the power to end slavery, but it did give him the power to take property from an enemy in wartime. By law, enslaved people were considered property, On September 22, 1862, Lincoln announced that he would issue the Emancipation Proclamation (ih»mant«suh»PAY»shuhn prah»kluh»MAY*shuhn). This decree freed all enslaved people in areas that were “in rebellion against the United States” on January 1,1863.
The Emancipation Proclamation did not change the lives of all enslaved people overnight. For example, enslaved people living in the loyal border states remained in bondage. Others remained under the direct control of their holders in the South and would have to wait for a Union victory before gaining their freedom.
Yet the Emancipation Proclamation had a strong impact. With it, the government declared slavery to be wrong. It was clear that a Union victory would end slavery in the United States.
Include this lesson's information in your Foldable®
a I never in my life felt more certain that I am doing right than I do in signing this paper.... If my name ever goes into history it will be for this act, and my whole soul is in it. 99

\c
-Abraham Lincoln, 1863
READING PROGRESS CHECK
V
Explaining How did the Emancipation Proclamation change the focus of the war?
LESSON 2 REVIEW
Review Vocabulary
1.	Identify the significance ofthe following terms to the subject ofthe Civil War. 3oa
a. tributary b. ironclad c. casualty
Answer the Guiding Questions
2.	Analyzing Why was the outcome ofthe Battle of
Bull Run surprising to Northerners?
29B
3.	Explaining What was the outcome of the Battle of Antietam? sb
4.	Comparing Compare the effect ofthe Emancipation Proclamation on enslaved people in the Confederate states to its effect on enslaved persons in the border
States. 7B;8B
PERSUASIVE WRITING
Choose one of Douglass and Greeley's arguments for making abolition an aim ofthe war. Write a short paragraph expanding on the argument. 22B;29E P TEKS
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills ML 1A Identify the major eras and events in U.S. history through 1877, including colonization, revolution, drafting of the Declaration of Independence, creation and ratification of the Constitution, religious revivals such as the Second Great Awakening, early republic, the Age of Jackson, westward expansion, reform movements, sectionalism, Civil War, and Reconstruction, and describe their causes and effects.
5C Explain the origin and development of American political parties.
8A Explain the roles played by significant individuals during the Civil War, including Jefferson Davis, Ulysses S. Grant, Robert E.
Lee, and Abraham Lincoln, and heroes such as congressional Medal of Honor recipients William Carney and Philip Bazaar.
9D Identify the effects of legislative acts such as the Homestead Act, the Dawes Act, and the Morrill Act.
12A Identify economic differences among different regions ofthe United States.
12D Analyze the causes and effects of economic differences among different regions ofthe United States at selected times in U.S. history.
21A Identify different points of view of political parties and interest groups on important historical and contemporary issues. 23E Identify the political, social, and economic contributions of women to American society.
29D Identify points of view from the historical context surrounding an event and the frame of reference which influenced the participants.
Reading HELPDESK
It matters Because
Those who lived through the Civil War experienced many challenges and hardships.
A
Different Way of Life guiding question How did life change during the Civil War?
When the Civil War began, many young people left their homes to serve in the military. This meant leaving family and friends, and jobs or school.
Almost everyone who stayed home was touched in some way by the war. Only about half of the school-age children attended school because many had to stay home to help their families. Schools closed during the war in some areas, especially those near battles and skirmishes. Many schools and churches served instead as hospitals for the wounded.
Although the war affected everyone, life in the South changed most dramatically. Both armies spent the majority of their time on Southern soil. Because the fighting took place there, the South suffered the most destruction. Southerners who lived in the paths of marching armies lost their crops and sometimes their homes. Thousands of Southern civilians became refugees—people displaced by war.
Even those who lived outside the war zones suffered. As the war dragged on, many areas faced shortages of food and everyday supplies. Common household items became scarce.
Q RFAD8NG PROGRESS CHECK
Summarizing Why did many children stop going to school during the Civil War?
514 The Civil War
w

Taking Notes; Identifying
As you read, complete a diagram like this one to catalog the ways that women in the North and the South contributed to the war effort.
Content Vocabulary
•	habeas corpus
•	draft
•	bounty
Lesson 3 515
Frances Clayton was among as many as 400 women who disguised themselves as men to serve as Union or Confederate soldiers.
Reading HELPDESK
New Roles for Women
GUIDING QUESTION
What were the new roles for women in the Civil War? Against the advice of family and friends, Kate Cumming, a young woman from Mobile, Alabama, left home to begin a career as a nurse with the Confederate Army of the Mississippi. Cumming was one of the many women whose lives changed because of the Civil War.
In both the North and the South, women kept the farms and factories going. They ran offices, taught school, and kept government records. Women suffered the stress of having husbands away at war and the pain of losing family members. They struggled to keep their families together. With little money available, they cut back on expenses and went without many things they were used to.
Caring for the Wounded
In the Civil War, thousands of women on both sides served as nurses. The idea of women nurses on the battlefield was a relatively new one. Many doctors did not welcome them. They said that women were too delicate for the bloody work of wartime hospitals. Some men also felt it was improper for women to tend the bodies of men they did not know.
Strong-minded women disregarded these objections. Serving with the Union army, Mary Edwards Walker became the first female army surgeon and later received the Congressional Medal of Honor. Dorothea Dix helped persuade officials to let women work as nurses. She became the superintendent of nurses for the Union army and recruited large numbers of women to serve. Another Northerner, Clara Barton, became famous for her work helping wounded soldiers. In the South, Sally Tompkins set up a hospital for soldiers in Richmond, Virginia. Tompkins held the rank of captain in the Confederate army and was the only female officer in the Confederate forces.
The women who served in wartime hospitals came face to face with terrible brutality. After the Battle of Shiloh, Kate Cumming wrote, Nothing that I had ever heard or read had given me the faintest idea of the horrors witnessed here.”
Spying
Women on both sides served as spies. For example, Rose O’Neal Greenhow entertained Union leaders in Washington, D.C. From them, she gathered information about Union plans and passed it
Build Vocabulary: Related Words___________________ Reading Strategy: Finding the Main Idea
The word spy, which means "to watch secretly," is related	As you read "New Roles for Women," jot down the main idea
to the word espionage, which means "spying."	in each paragraph in your notebook. Usjng yQur w-te
a sentence that summarizes this section.
516 The Civil War
to the South. Greenhow eventually was caught and convicted of treason—the crime of betraying one’s country.
Harriet Tubman, a leading “conductor” on the Underground Railroad, also served as a spy and scout for the Union. In 1863 Tubman led a mission that freed many enslaved people and disrupted Southern supply lines.
Some women disguised themselves as men and became soldiers. Loreta Janeta Velazquez fought for the South at the First Battle of Bull Run and at the Battle of Shiloh. She later became a Confederate spy.
READING PROGRESS CHECK
Explaining Why did some people object to women working as nurses during the war?
The Captured and the Wounded
guidingquestion What were the conditions in hospitals and prison camps during the Civil War?
For many soldiers, battle could be a terrifying experience. For those with wounds or for those taken prisoner, the misery was just beginning.
In 1861 Dorothea Dix became superintendent of woman nurses for the Union army. Part of her job was to set up military hospitals like the brick building shown here. Dix served till the end of the war without pay.






US


•.A ,
Lesson 3 517
PRIMARY SOURCE
READING PROGRESS CHECK
Reading Strategy: Context Clues
Prisoners of War
Each side treated its enemy soldiers with a mixture of sympathy and hostility. At first the two sides exchanged prisoners. After this system broke down over issues such as Confederate treatment of African American prisoners, each side set up prison camps. A prisoner typically kept his blanket and a cup or canteen. These possessions were all he had during his imprisonment. Food shortages made the suffering worse. Volunteers distributed bread and soup to the wounded. In the prisons, though, there was little or nothing to eat.
Andersonville prison opened in Georgia in early 1864. It was built to hold 10,000 prisoners. By August, 33,000 crammed its grounds. The men slept in shallow holes dug in the ground. All they received to eat each day was a teaspoon of salt, three tablespoons of beans, and eight ounces of cornmeal. They drank and cooked with water from a stream that also served as a sewer. Almost 13,000 Union prisoners died there, mostly from disease.
The Union prison in Elmira, New York, was no better. Captured soldiers from the South suffered through the winter months without blankets and warm clothes. The hospital was located in a flooded basement. A pond within the compound served as both toilet and garbage dump. Almost one-quarter of all prisoners at Elmira died.
Field Hospitals
Surgeons set up hospitals near battlefields. There, with bullets and cannonballs flying by, they bandaged wounds and amputated limbs. Nurse Kate Cumming recalled:
M
We have to walk, and when we give the men anything kneel, in blood and water; but we think nothing of it. 99 —from Kate: The Journal of a Confederate Nurse
Disease was another medical threat. Crowded together in camps and drinking unclean water, many soldiers got sick. Disease spread quickly—and could be deadly. Some regiments lost half their men to illness before they ever went into battle.
Explaining Why were prison camps set up?
When you find an unknown word, look at surrounding text for clues to the meaning. Clues may be:
•	The word is defined immediately following its use.
•	A synonym or an antonym is used that explains the meaning.
•	Hints appear in the surrounding passage to help you figure out the meaning.
Doctors in the Civil War did not have many modern medicines. To prevent deadly infections, they often amputated wounded limbs with tools such as these.
Political and Change
guiding question What political and economic changes occurred during the Civil Wat?
In the South, many white people opposed the war. The fighting was costly, not just in terms oflives lost or damaged, but in food, material, and money. Everywhere, people suffered from shortages. Bread riots broke out throughout the South as hungry people took to the streets.
In Richmond, a group of mostly women and
children gathered peacefully to protest but soon started smashing shop windows and stealing food.
In the North, the Democratic Party was split down the middle. War Democrats supported the war while criticizing Lincoln’s handling of it. Peace Democrats argued for ending the fighting and reuniting the states. Most Peace Democrats came from Ohio, Illinois, and Indiana. Critics of the Peace Democrats called them Copperheads. A copperhead is a type of deadly snake. Rather than take offense, the Copperheads embraced this label by wearing pennies as badges on their clothing.
Northerners who opposed the war discouraged people from enlisting. A few even helped Confederate prisoners escape.
Opponents claimed that the Peace Democrats encouraged the South to keep fighting. T hey said the war dragged on because Confederates believed the Peace Democrats would eventually prevail in the North.
Jail Without Trial
As a way of dealing with war opponents in the North,
President Lincoln suspended habeas corpus (HAY«bee»uhs KAWR.puhs)—a legal process that helps ensure the government has a legal right to keep someone in jail. The Constitution says government can suspend habeas corpus, but only when in cases of rebellion or invasion, the public safety may require it.
With this act, Lincoln’s government was able to jail thousands of Northerners without putting them on trial. Some of these people were likely traitors to the Union. Others did nothing more than use their right of free speech to criticize the government.
In the South, President Davis also suspended habeas corpus. He, too, believed he needed to deal harshly with opponents ofthe war. Still, Davis’s action upset many loyal supporters.
Draft Laws
Both the North and the South had trouble getting troops to sign up. In 1862 the Confederate Congress passed a draft that required able-bodied white men between ages 18 and 35 to serve for three years.
Content Vocabulary_____________
habeas corpus a legal writ, or order, that guarantees a prisoner the right to be heard in court draft a system of selecting people for required military service
Lesson 3 519
Assessment (continued)
PRIMARYSOURCE
"I allude to the question of slavery. Opposition to its further extension ... is a deeply rooted determination ... in what we call the non-slave holding states.... How is it in the South? Can it he expected that they should expend in common their blood and their treasure in the acquisition of immense territory, and then willingly forego the right to carry thither [there] their slaves, and inhabit the conquered country .. . ? Sir, I know the feelings and opinions of the South ...."
—Senator Thomas Corwin, 1847, in a speech on the U.S.-Mexican War
© Interpreting Based on the excerpt, what does Senator Corwin expect Southern whites to do if the United States wins the Mexican War? 29A
© Drawing Inferences Do you think Corwin is for or against the war? Explain. 29B
EXTENDED RESPONSE
® Expository WritingWtie four separate reactions to the idea of Manifest Destiny, one from the perspective of each of these people: James K. Polk, General Santa Anna, a Native American of the Plains, and a mountain man. 290
STANDARDIZED TEST PRACTICE
DBQ
ANALYZING DOCUMENTS
PRIMARYSOURCE
"When I commune [discuss] with my own heart and ask myself whether I would choose to dwell here in this wild-looking country amongst the Saints [Mormons] surrounded by friends, though poor,... or dwell amongst the gentiles [in this context, non-Mormons] with all their wealth ... to be eternally mobbed, harassed, hunted, our best men murdered . .. give me the quiet wilderness and my family to associate with."
—William Clayton, a Mormon emigrant, 1847
© Analyzing Primary Sources What choice did William Clayton make? 29A
A.	to live in the wild country, even though he would be poor
B.	to gain wealth and good things
C.	to reject his faith
D.	to suffer persecution
© Drawing Conclusions What was his reason for that choice? 29B
F.
He wanted to become powerful in the church. G.
He looked forward to a life of adventure. H.
He wanted to live quietly with people of his own faith. I.
He wanted to become a saint. Need Extra Help?
If You've Missed Question	©	©	©	©
Review Lesson	3	3	1,2,3,4	4
422 Manifest Destiny
North and South
1820-1860
tENTIAL QUESTIONS • How does technology change the way people live? vdo people adapt to their environment? • Why do people make economic choices?
Ir,9 women worked in one of the many industries of the North—a mill in Massachusetts.
TheGr
"■anger Collection, NYC
networks
There's More Online about the North and South in the first half of the 1800s.
CHAPTER 15
Lesson 1
The Industrial North
Lesson 2
People of the North
Lesson 3
Southern Cotton Kingdom
Lesson 4
People of the South
The Story
Matters...
These women are like many other workers at the mills of Lowell, Massachusetts. They have come to earn wages and to live in the comfortable company town mill-owners have built. At Lowell, the women can earn good wages and enjoy the cultural offerings designed to help them grow into fine, upstanding members of society.
The women hear that other factories do less for their workers. Also, more and more immigrants are arriving each day. The immigrants are hungry—and willing to work longer hours for lower wages. Things are changing at Lowell.
Foldables
Goto the Foldables® library in the back of your book to make a Foldable® that will help you take notes while reading this chapter.
"People and Economy
3 of the Morth
y' People and Economy
of the South
423
Chapter 15
Place and Time: United States 1820 to i860
networks ef MAP Explore the . .. .	interactive version of
e's More Online!
this map on NETWORKS.
Ef TIMELINE Explore the interactive version ofthis time line on NETWORKS.
The United States is an expanding nation in 1840. Settlement has moved westward, and new cities and industries are emerging in the North and South.
Step Into the Place
MAP FOCUS
This is how the United States looked in 1840. Some areas were states, some were still territories, and some belonged to foreign nations. The 10 cities shown were the 10 largest cities at that time. REGIONS
In what regions ofthe country are all the organized states located? LOCATION
Where are the largest cities located? CRITICAL THINKING
Drawing Condusions What factors do you think helped these cities grow? 13O°W
PACIFIC OCEAN
30°,
0	200 miles
1--r-h-------1
0	200 km
Lambert Azimuthal Equal-Area projection

jQp/C
Qp
Q/Vc
12Q°W
50°W
60"W
Martin Van Buren
. L.	lames Polk Zachary Taylor Millard Fillmore Franklin Pierce James Buchanan




Step Into the Time
TIMELINE
Review the time line. Identify an event on the time line that might help explain the growing WORLD EVENTS
James Monroe
1817-1825
1824 U.S. and Russia settle Northwest coast land claims
John Q. Adams
1825-1829
Andrew Jackson
1829-1837
McCormick reaper is patented
1837-1841 Harrison

I
networks
There's More Online!
Ef BIOGRAPHY
John Deere
eT GAME Matching	£
Sf GRAPHIC ORGANIZER
Phases of Industrialization Ef MAP Major Railroads J860
Ef self-check quiz eT video

■£®«‘

Lesson 1
The Industrial North
1
I
riAL QUESTION How does technology change Hie way people live?
IT MATTERS BECAUSE
Industry and innovation expanded the North's economy and power.
TEKS
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills 14B Describe the characteristics and the benefits of the U.S. free enterprise system during the 18th and 19th centuries.
27B Analyze the impact of transportation and communication systems on the growth, development, and urbanization of the United States.
27C Analyze how technological innovations changed the way goods were manufactured and marketed, nationally and internationally. 27D Explain how technological innovations brought about economic growth such as how the factory system contributed to rapid industrialization and the Transcontinental Railroad led to the opening of the west.
28A Compare the effects of scientific discoveries and technological innovations that have influenced daily life in different periods in U.S. history.
Reading HELPDESK
Technology and Industry
guiding question How did technology and industry change during the 1800s?
The early years of the 1800s saw much innovation in industry and technology. The ways in which Americans worked, traveled, and communicated underwent great change. The new ways of living affected the whole nation, but their effects were most dramatic in the North.
Three Phases of Industrialization
Before industrialization, workers made most goods one item at a time, from start to finish. To make clothes, a woman might spin the thread, weave the cloth, then cut and sew the fabric. Industrialization changed that way of working.
The North’s industrialization took place in three phases. During the first phase, employers divided jobs into smaller steps. For example, one worker would spin thread—and nothing else. Another worker wove cloth. Each worker specialized in one step and became an expert in it. Two specialized workers could produce more cloth than if each worker did both tasks.
During the second phase of industrialization, entrepreneurs built factories to bring specialized workers together. This allowed the product to move quickly from one worker to the next.

Taking Notes: Identifying Cause and Effect
As you read, use a diagram like the one shown to describe the three phases of the development of industrialization in the North.
426 North and South
Development of Industrialization
Phase 5 I
Content Vocabulary
•	clipper ship
•	telegraph
•	Morse code
In the third phase, workers used machines to complete tasks. For example, machines called looms wove cloth using the power of flowing water. The machines worked much faster than any human could. The worker’s job changed from weaving to tending the machine.
Mass production of cloth began in New England in the mid-1800s. Then, Elias Howe invented the sewing machine in 1846. Workers could now make clothing in mass quantities by using machine-made fabrics and sewing machines.
Similar changes were transforming other industries and affecting the North’s economy. By 1860, the Northeast’s factories made at least two-thirds of the country’s manufactured goods. Changing Transportation
Improvements in transportation contributed to the success of the new American industries. Between 1800 and 1850, crews built thousands of miles of roads and canals. By connecting lakes and rivers, canals opened new shipping routes. In 1807 inventor Robert Fulton launched his first steamboat, the Clermont, on the Hudson River. Steamboats made fast upstream travel possible. They carried goods and passengers more cheaply and quickly along inland waterways than flatboats or sail-powered vessels did.
In the 1840s, builders began to widen and deepen canals to make space for steamboats. By 1860, about 3,000 steamboats traveled the country’s major
rivers and canals, as well as the Great Lakes.
This encouraged the growth of cities such as Cincinnati, Buffalo, and Chicago.
Sailing technology also improved in the 1840s. The new clipper ships featured tall sails and sleek hulls. They could sail 300 miles (483 km) per day, as fast as most steamships at that
time. Clipper ships got their name because they “clipped” time from long journeys. They swiftly and cheaply moved goods from the eastern United,
States to Asia and returl with cargoes of silk, and i and tea that were still fre
In 1851 the Flying Cloud, a famed clipper ship, sailed from New York City to San Francisco in 89 days.
z


clipper ship a ship with sleek hulls and tall sails that "clipped" time from long journeys
Academic Vocabulary
innovation
or invention
i new development
Lesson 1 427
Reading HELPDESK
J28
North and South The Railroads Arrive
The first railroads in the United States ran along short stretches of track that connected mines with nearby rivers. Horses pulled these early trains. The first steam-powered passenger locomotive began running in Britain in 1829.
A year later, Peter Cooper designed and built the first
American steam-powered locomotive. The Tom Thumb, as it was called, got off to a slow start. It actually lost a race staged against a horse-drawn train when its engine failed. Before long, however, engineers had improved the technology. By 1840, steam locomotives were pulling trains in the United States. In 1840 the United States had almost 3,000 miles (4,828 km) of railroad track. By 1860, the nations tracks totaled about 31,000 miles (49,890 km), mostly in the North and Midwest.
The new rail lines connected many cities. One line linked the cities of New York and Buffalo. Another connected Philadelphia and Pittsburgh. Railway builders connected these eastern lines to lines being built farther west in Ohio, Indiana, and Illinois.
By 1860, the nation’s railroads formed a network that united the Midwest and the East.
Moving Goods and People
) The impact of improved transportation was felt deeply in the ; western areas of the country. Before canals and railroads, farmers
sent their crops down the Mississippi River to New Orleans. From J there, goods sailed to the East Coast or to other countries. This
took a considerable amount of time and often caused goods to be more expensive.
i Railways and canals transformed trade in these regions. The | opening of the Erie Canal in 1825 and later the railroad networks | allowed grain, livestock, and dairy products to move directly
from the Midwest to the East. Improvements in transportation | provided benefits to both businesses and consumers. Farmers and j manufacturers could now move goods faster and more cheaply, j As a result, consumers could purchase those goods at lower prices | than in the past.

The railroads also played an important role in the settlement of the Midwest and the growth of its industry. Fast, affordable train travel brought people into Ohio, Indiana, and Illinois.
The populations of these states grew, as did urban railroad centers such as Chicago and Omaha. New towns and industries developed as more people moved into the area.

telegraph a device that used electric signals to send messages
Academic Vocabulary
transform to change significantly
Build Vocabulary: Multiple Meaning Words___________	_
The word engineer has many meanings. As a verb, it can mean to use science ai math to make certain complex products. As a noun, it often means someone w applies those skills—for example, someone who builds buildings or electrical systems. The word also refers to the people who operate and drive trains.
In 1863 construction began on a railroad to link the eastern and western United States. Two competing railroad companies began laying track from Sacramento, California, and Omaha, Nebraska. They met at Promontory Point, Utah, on May 10,1869, where the final spike linking the two tracks was driven. With the transcontinental railroad s completion, the American West was opened for settlement.
Progress With Problems
As more people moved more quickly along railways and waterways, the possibility of disaster also increased. The SS Central America was a 270-foot side-wheel steamer that carried passengers and cargo between New York and the Central American country of Panama. In September 1857, the ship was carrying a full load of passengers when it steamed into a hurricane. It sank off the coast of the Carolinas, and hundreds of people drowned.
In Pennsylvania, some 60 people were killed and more than 100 injured when two trains slammed head on into each other in July 1856. The Great Train Wreck of 1856 horrified the nation. Newspapers demanded that railroad companies improve their methods and equipment and make the safety of passengers their first concern.
Communications Breakthroughs
The growth of industry and the new pace of travel created a need for faster methods of communication. The telegraph (teh»luh»graf) a device that used electric signals to send messages filled that need.
SKILLS PRACTICE__________________
Discuss new words with a partner.
If the word reminds you of any past experience, tell your partner about the experience.
GEOGRAPHY CONNECTION
Railroads were important not only for transporting people across the country, but they also allowed goods to be shipped greater distances than ever before.
REGIONS
Which regions were least served by railroads in 1860? CRITICAL THINKING
Making Connections Looking at the map, you can see that most of the railroad mileage runs between eastern and western points. Why do you think that is?
Lesson 1 429
BIOGRAPHY
John Deere (1804-1886)
John Deere was born in Vermont. He trained as a blacksmith but found it difficult to make a living in his home state. He traveled to the state of Illinois in the 1830s.There he learned that farmers were having a difficult time plowing the region's rich but sticky soil with the rough iron plows ofthe day. Deere began making a polished steel plow that performed much better. Within 10 years, Deere was selling 1,000 plows per year. He was quoted as saying, "I will never put my name on a product that does not have in it the best that is in me."
CRITICAL THINKING
Drawing Condusions What can you conclude about how Deere's invention benefited his farmer customers?
Samuel Morse, an American inventor, developed a system for sending coded messages instantly along electrical wires. After Morse showed his system could send messages over a short distance, Congress gave him money to test the device over a wider area. Morse strung wires between Washington, D.C., and Baltimore, Maryland. On May 24, 1844, he was ready to tryout his system. A crowd of people watched as Morse tapped out the words “What hath God wrought” on his telegraph system. A few moments later, the operator in Baltimore sent the same message back in reply. Morse’s telegraph had worked!
Telegraph operators sent messages quickly by using Morse code. This code uses different arrangements of short and long signals—dots and dashes—to represent letters of the alphabet. Telegraph companies formed, and workers put up telegraph lines across the country. By 1852, there were about 23,000 miles (37,015 km) of telegraph lines in the United States.
The telegraph allowed information to be communicated in minutes rather than days. People could quickly learn about news and events from other areas of the United States. The telegraph also allowed businesses to become more efficient with production and shipping.
H READING PROGRESS CHECK
Explaining How was water transportation improved in the 1800s?
Farming Innovations
guidingquestion M/ftflf changes made agriculture more profitable in the 1830s?
In the early 1800s, few farmers were willing to settle in the treeless Great Plains west of Missouri, Iowa, and Minnesota. Even areas of mixed forest and prairie west of Ohio and Kentucky seemed too difficult for farming. Settlers worried that their old plows could not break the prairie’s matted sod. They also worried that the soil would not be fertile enough to support fields of crops.
Advancements in Agriculture
Three inventions ofthe 1830s helped farmers overcome difficulties in farming the land. As a result, settlement expanded throughout wider areas of the Midwest.
Reading HELPDESK

Morse code a system of dots and dashes that represent the alphabet
430 North and South
One of these inventions was the steel-tipped plow developed by John Deere in 1837. This allowed farmers to cut through the hard-packed prairie sod. Knowing that they would be able to farm the land on the prairies helped people make the decision to move west. Equally important to the transformation of farming were the mechanical reaper, which sped up the harvesting of wheat, and the thresher, which quickly separated the grain from the stalk. Each of these innovations reduced the labor required for farming.
McCormick's Reaper
Cyrus McCormick was the genius behind the invention ofthe mechanical reaper. Before this invention, farmers had harvested grain with handheld cutting tools. McCormick’s reaper greatly increased the amount of crop a farmer could harvest. Because farmers could harvest more wheat, they could plant more of it. Growing wheat became profitable. Raising wheat became and would remain the main economic activity on the Midwestern prairies.
New machines and the ease of access to railroads allowed farmers to plant more acres with cash crops. Midwestern farmers grew wheat and shipped it east by train and canal barge. Northeast and Middle Atlantic farmers increased their production of fruits and vegetables.
In spite of improvements in agriculture, the North was steadily becoming more industrial and urban. Agriculture in the region was still growing, but industry was growing faster.
O READING PROGRESS CHECK
Identifying What innovation sped up the harvesting of wheat?
FOLDABLES ■ Study Organizer
Include this lesson's information in your Foldable®

■ People and Econom ’ of the North
/
People and Econom ° of the South
7
LESSON 1 REVIEW
Review Vocabulary
1.	Use these two words in a sentence that shows their importance to American life in the early 1800s. 27B
a. telegraph b. Morse code
Answer the Guiding Questions
2.	Analyzing How did canals and railways affect manufacturing and trade in the United States by 1860? 27t
3.	Analyzing How did the invention of the telegraph impact communication in the United States? 27B
4.	Explaining How did technology make farming more profitable? 27c
5.	Describing Describe the characteristics and benefits ofthe free enterprise system in the North in the 1800s. mb
EXPOSITORY WRITING
Which one ofthe following individuals do you think created the invention with the greatest impact on the nation's economic growth and development? Explain why. 2s* •	Samuel Morse
•	John Deere
. Cyrus McCormick
Lesson 1 431
1
networks
There's More Online!	.
Ef CHART/GRAPH	F	j
• Immigration, 1820-1860	/OL
Ef graphic organizer	'
Growth of Cities	LeSSOH
Ef PRIMARYSOURCE Life in Lowell Ef SELF-CHECK QUIZ	Peof
Ef SLIDESHOW LewisHine
VIDEO

AOr ' .ii »i'8i
Lesson 2
People of the North
TIAL QUESTION
How do people adapt to their environment? It Matters Because
Industrialization in the North changed the way people lived and worked as well as where they lived and worked.
TEKS
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills 7B Compare the effects of political, economic, and social factors on slaves and free blacks.
12C Explain the reasons for the increase in factories and urbanization.
23A Identify selected racial, ethnic, and religious groups that settled in the United States and explain their reasons for immigration.
23B Explain the relationship between urbanization and conflicts resulting from differences in religion, social class, and political beliefs.
23E Identify the political, social, and economic contributions of women to American society.
24B Evaluate the impact of reform movements, including educational reform, temperance, the women's rights movement, prison reform, abolition, the labor reform movement, and care of the disabled.
27C Analyze how technological innovations changed the way goods were manufactured and marketed, nationally and internationally. 27D Explain how technological innovations brought about economic growth such as how the factory system contributed to rapid industrialization and the Transcontinental Railroad led to the opening of the west.
28B Identify examples of how industrialization changed life in the United States.
Reading HELPDESK
The Factories of the North
guidingquestion Why did many Americans push for reform in the workplace during this era?
The factory system played an important role in the nation’s economic growth. The factory system combined several steps of an item’s production under one roof. In the mid-1800s, machines took over more and more manufacturing tasks. These innovations changed the way goods were manufactured. The range of goods manufactured this way also increased. American factories began to turn out everything from fabric and clothing to shoes, watches, guns, sewing machines, and agricultural machinery. More goods were available at cheaper prices to a growing number of consumers, leading to economic growth.
Conditions for Factory Workers
Working conditions worsened as the factory system developed. Employees worked long hours. By 1840, the average workday was 11.4 hours. Longer days caused fatigue—and on-the-job accidents. Many factory machines had rapidly moving belts and other parts. These belts had no shields for protection, and many workers, especially children, suffered injuries from these belts. Belts were just one of the many hazards of factory work.
Employees often worked under harsh conditions. In the summer, factories were hot and stifling. The machines gave off heat, and there was no such thing as air-conditioning at that time. Likewise, in the winter workers were often cold because most factories had no heating.
No laws existed to control working conditions or protect workers. Factory owners were often more concerned about profits than about employees’ comfort and safety.
Child labor was also a serious problem. Children in factories often worked six days a week and 12 hours or more a day. The work was dangerous and hard. Young workers tended machines in mills and worked underground in coal mines. Reformers called for laws to regulate child labor, shorten work hours, and improve conditions. Many years passed before child labor regulations became law.
Workers7 Attempts to Organize
Workers tried various ways to gain better conditions in the workplace. By the 1830s, they began organizing into unions.
Skilled workers formed trade unions. These were groups of workers with the same trade, or skill. The idea was that by working together, union members would have more power than they would as individuals.
In New York City, skilled workers wanted to receive higher wages and limit their workday to 10 hours. Groups of skilled workers formed the General Trades Union of the City of New York. The workers staged a series of strikes in the mid-1830s. A strike is a refusal to work in order to put pressure on employers.
Going on strike was illegal in the early 1800s. In addition to the threat of losing their jobs, workers who went on strike faced punishment for breaking the law. In 1842 a Massachusetts court ruled that workers did have the right to strike. Workers would not receive other legal rights for many more years.
African Americans in the North
In the North, slavery had largely disappeared by the 1830s.
Still, racial prejudice (PREH.juh.dihs)—an unfair opinion of a group—and discrimination (dihs.krih.muh.NAY.shuhn) unfair treatment of a group—remained. Some discrimination was
1 political. For example, white men in New York no longer a to I own property in order to vote. Few African Americans enjoye S this right. Rhode Island and Pennsylvania passed laws to keep
African Americans from voting.
Connections to
TODAY
Child Labor Laws
In the United States today, federal laws place strict limits on the work children can do. The Fair Labor Standards Act limits the hours that a child under the age of 16 can work.
It also prohibits children from certain dangerous jobs, such as working in logging or operating a crane. States also have child labor laws, which are sometimes even more strict than federal law.
Manufacturers often hired children because they could pay children lower wages than adult workers.


Content Vocabulary
•	trade union
•	strike
•	prejudice
•	discrimination
•	famine
•	nativist
trade union group of workers with the same trade, or skill
strike a work stoppage by employees as a protest against an employer
prejudice an unfair opinion not based on facts
discrimination unfair treatment
Taking Notes: Identifying
As you read, use a diagram like the one here to list two reasons that cities grew.
432 North and South
Lesson 2 433
The women who worked at the Lowell mills communicated—and shared grievances—through a publication called the Lowell Offering. It included creative works on many topics, including the hardships facing factory workers.
Social discrimination also existed. Most communities in the North did not allow African Americans to attend public schools. Many communities also kept them from using other public services. African Americans often had to attend poor-quality schools and go to hospitals that were reserved only for them.
Discrimination had economic effects as well. In the business world, only a few African Americans found success. In New York City, Samuel Cornish and John B. Russwurm founded Freedom’s Journal, the first African American newspaper, in 1827. In 1845 Macon B. Allen became the first African American licensed, or given official authority, to practice law in the United States. Most African Americans, however, lived in poverty in the mid-1800s. Women Workers
Women also faced discrimination in the workplace. Employers often paid women half as much as they paid male workers. Men kept women from joining unions and wanted them kept out of the workplace.
In the 1830s and 1840s, some female workers tried to organize. Sarah G. Bagley, a weaver from Massachusetts, founded the Lowell Female Labor Reform Organization. In 1845 her group petitioned for a 10-hour workday. Because most of the workers were women, the legislature did not consider the petition. However, movements like this one paved the way for later movements to help working women. B REAPING PROGRESS CHECK
Listing What were some of the early attempts at work reform in the North?
The Growth of Cities
guidingquestion Wh at challenges did European immigrants face in Northern cities!
Industrialization had a big impact on cities. Factories were usually in urban areas. Because factories drew workers, Northern cities grew in size in the early 1800s.
Urban Populations Grow
Some major cities developed between 1820 and 1840 from Midwestern villages located along rivers. St. Louis sits on the banks of the Mississippi River just south of where that river meets the Illinois and Missouri Rivers. By the mid-1800s, steamboats from north and south lined up along the docks of St. Louis.
Reading HELPDESK
..... —-
famine an extreme shortage of food nativist a person opposed to immigration
434 North and South
Academic Vocabulary
community a group of people who live in the same area license to give official authority to do something
SKILLS PRACTICE______________
Work with a partner. Listen carefully while your partnef tells you about something that was taught in class. Summarize or retell what your partner has told you-
IMMIGRATION IN THE
MID-1800s SOURCES OF U.S. IMMIGRATION
1841-1860 Great Britain
16%
Allother
nations
13%
32-/o
39%
Germany
Ireland
Pittsburgh, Cincinnati, and Louisville also profited from their locations on waterways. These cities became centers of trade that linked Midwest farmers with cities of the Northeast.
Increased Immigration
Between the years 1840 and 1860, immigration to the United States grew sharply. The greatest number of immigrants came from Ireland. A plant disease, the potato blight, destroyed most of the Irish food supply in the 1840s. The people of Ireland faced famine, an extreme shortage of food. About 1.5 million of them left Ireland for the United States between 1846 and 1860. Many settled in Boston, New York City, and other Eastern cities.
The second largest group of immigrants in the United States between 1820 and 1860 came from Germany. Some sought work and opportunity. Others fled to escape political problems at home European immigrants brought languages, customs, religions, and traditions to their new country. Some of their ways of living
Immigrants came to the United States from different countries in the mid-1800s.
O INTERPRETING GRAPHS
What share of immigrants came from Great Britain and Ireland combined between 1841 and 1860?
O CRITICAL THINKING
Drawing Conclusions What can you conclude about Germany and Ireland during this time, based on this information?
changed American culture. Sometimes, however, their customs and religion also aroused conflict.

Immigrants Face Prejudice
In the 1830s and 1840s, some people began to resist immigration.
They were known as nativists (NAY*tih*vihsts). Nativists „
believed that immigration threatened the future of native
American-born—citizens. They often blamed immigrants for
problems in American society. Some accused immigrants of
bringing crime and disease to U.S. cities.
Many nativists were members of the working class. They
accused immigrants of taking jobs from workers who were real
Americans. They were also angry that immigrants often wou
work for lower wages.
Lesson 2 435
IMMIGRANTS AS A PERCENTAGE OF POPULATION
Immigration to the United States had a noticeable effect on the country's population.
USING MATH SKILLS
How much larger was the immigrant population as a share ofthe overall population in 1860 compared to 1820?
CRITICAL THINKING
Speculating How might a nativist react to this information?
1860
Source: Historical Census Browser, University of Virginia
*”*w
Include this lesson's information in your Foldable®.
People and Economy ° ■ of the North
/ People and Economy // of the South
The Know-Nothing Party
In 1849 nativists formed a new political party. Because party members often answered questions about their group with the statement “I know nothing,” the party came to be known as the Know-Nothing Party. The Know-Nothings called for stricter citizenship laws. In 1854 the Know-Nothings became known as the American Party. The party was strongest in the North, where most immigrants were located.
The Know-Nothings, like most native white Americans, were Protestants. In contrast, most Irish immigrants, and some German immigrants too, were Roman Catholics. The Know-Nothings disliked Catholics because they followed the teachings of the pope. They feared that the Catholic immigrants would be more loyal to the pope than to the leaders of the United States. □ READING PROGRESS CHECK
Identifying From which two countries did most immigrants come in the mid-1800s?
LESSON 2 REVIEW
Review Vocabulary
1.	Use these terms in a sentence that explains their meaning. 3oa
4. Categorizing What types of discrimination did African Americans in the North face in the
mid-1800S? 7B;29B
a. trade union b. strike
Answer the Guiding Questions
2.	Analyzing What changes did technology bring to manufacturing in the United States? 27c
3.	Explaining How did conditions for workers change as technology sped the development of the factory system? 27D;2ba;28b
5.	Explaining Why did economic and religious tensions arise between immigrants and native white Americans in Eastern cities? 23B
EXPOSITORY WRITING
In a short essay, explain how the locations of St Louis and Pittsburgh stimulated growth and urbanization. 12c 436 North and South
<
1
cotton Production
gf GRAPHIC ORGANIZER
The Southern Economy
Ef MAP Cotton Production, 18201860
Sf SELF-CHECK QUIZ Bf VIDEO
networks
There's More Online!
Sf BIOGRAPHY
Eiias Howe
Ef GAME Fill in the Blank gf GRAPH
Lesson 3
Southern Cotton Kingdom

P TEKS
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills 7B Compare the effects of political, economic, and social factors on slaves and free blacks.
7C Analyze the impact of slavery on different sections of the United States.
12A Identify economic differences among different regions of the United States.
12B Explain reasons for the development of the plantation system, the transatlantic slave trade, and the spread of slavery.
12D Analyze the causes and effects of economic differences among different regions of the United States at selected times in U.S. history.
27A Explain the effects of technological and scientific innovations such as the steamboat, the cotton gin, and interchangeable parts.
Reading HELPDESK
L QUESTION
Wffy do people make economic choices? It Matters Because
The demand for cotton deepened the white South's commitment to slavery and a slave-based economy.
Rise of the Cotton Kingdom
guidingquestion How were the economies ofthe South and North different?
In the early years of the United States, the South had an economy based almost entirely on farming, despite the fact that settlers had developed only a small part of the region. Most Southerners lived in the Upper South, an area along the Atlantic coast in Maryland, Virginia, and North Carolina. A few people had also settled in Georgia and South Carolina.
By 1850, the South had changed. Its population had spread inland to the Deep South. This region includes Georgia and South Carolina, as well as Alabama, Mississippi, Louisiana, and Texas. The economy of the South was thriving. That economy depended, however, on slavery. In fact, slavery grew stronger than ever in the South, while it all but disappeared in the North.
Cotton Is King
Southern planters grew mainly rice, indigo, and tobacco in colonial times. After the American Revolution, demand for these crops decreased. European mills now wanted Southern cotton.
Raising a cotton crop took a large amount of time and labor. After the harvest, workers had to carefully separate the plant’s sticky seeds from the cotton fibers.
Taking Notes; Identifying Cause and Effect
As you read, use a diagram like this one to show the reasons cotton production grew but industrial growth was slower in the South.
Content Vocabulary
•	productivity
•	domestic slave trade
Lesson 3 437
r'
Kansas,
Missouri \, . Illinois
. Indiana
Cotton Production 1820-1860

J/;	,
‘Oklahoma -
' .'.
flh
? z
; Qhioj^ 7>/.f "West /jZf^ rvirgin^.,:^,,,^ r Kentucky\>} ' s J
ATLANTIC
OCEAN



I...~1
Major cotton-producing areas 1820
I I
Major cotton-producing areas 1860 ---- Present day borders
200 miles


Guif of Mexico

GEOGRAPHY CONNECTION
Agriculture was very profitable in the South. By I860, much of the South was devoted to raising cotton.
REGIONS
In which region did cotton expand most, the Upper South or Deep South? CRITICAL THINKING
Making Connections How might the expansion of slavery in the Deep South affect slavery in the Upper South?
Reading HELPDESK
Albers Equal-Area projection
S\
Eli Whitney solved this problem with his invention of the cotton gin in 1793. Whitney’s gin quickly and easily removed seeds from cotton fibers. With a cotton gin, productivity (proh»duhk»TIH*vuh«tee)—the amount a worker can produce in a given time—shot up. The cotton gin helped workers process 50 times more cotton each day than they could by hand.
The use of the cotton gin had important consequences. It encouraged farmers to grow more cotton in more places. Because Southern planters relied on enslaved workers to plant and pick their cotton, the demand for slave labor increased. Slavery spread across a larger area of the South.
By 1860, the Deep South and Upper South remained agricultural, but each region concentrated on different crops. The Upper South grew more tobacco, hemp, wheat, and vegetables. The Deep South produced more cotton, as well as rice and sugarcane.
Because more workers were needed to produce cotton and sugar, the sale of enslaved Africans became a big business. Enslaved people in the Upper South were increasingly bought by slave traders who then sold them in the Deep South. This trade became known as the domestic slave trade.
P READING PROGRESS CHECK
Making Connections How did the economy of the Deep South depend on the Upper South?

productivity a measure of how much a worker can	Academic Vocabulary
produce with a given amount of time and effort
produce with a given amount of time and effort domestic slave trade the trade of enslaved people among states of the United States 438 North and South
process to prepare consequence a result
Southern Industry
guiding question Why did industry develop slowly in the South?
Industry developed more slowly in the South than in the North. Why was this so? One reason was the boom in cotton. Agriculture, especially cotton farming, produced great profits. Building new industry is costly. Planters would have had to sell enslaved people or land to raise the money to build factories. They chose instead to invest in profitable agriculture—including enslaved Africans.
In addition, the market for manufactured goods in the South was smaller than that in the North. Enslaved people, who made up a large share of the population, had no money to buy goods. This limited local market discouraged industries from developing.
For these reasons, some white Southerners simply did not want industry. One Texas politician, Louis Wigfall, summed up that Southern point of view:
PRIMARY SOURCE
W
We want no manufactures: we desire no trading, no mechanical or manufacturing classes. As long as we have our rice, our sugar, our tobacco and our cotton, we can command wealth to purchase all we want. 99
—quoted in Louis T. Wigfall, Southern Fire-Eater
INCREASES IN PRODUCTIVITY
New inventions helped increase worker productivity in the 1800s. Increased productivity meant farmers could grow more cotton to sell. By the mid-1800s, cotton made up more than one-half of U.S. exports.
Cotton's role in the economy of the South—and the nation—increased in the 1800s.
INTERPRETING GRAPHS
How did cotton's share of the U.S. export market change between 1800 and 1860?
CRITICAL THINKING
Identifying Cause and Effect How do you think increases in productivity affected the demand for enslaved labor? Explain.
COTTON PRODUCTION AS A PERCENTAGE OF U.S. EXPORTS
Elias Howe's sewing machine drove up worker productivity by enabling workers to make large amounts of clothing in a day.
1800
1820
r	
	32% ’
	J
1840
51.6%
1860
r k	1 57.5% t
	
Source: Historical Statistics of the United States
Include this lesson's information in your Foldable®.
SKILLS PRACTICE
List expressions you hear during class instruction and discussion. If the meaning of an expression cannot be determined from the words it contains, write the meaning beside the expression.
LESSON 3 REVIEW
Factories in the South
Because the South had fewer factories, it depended on the North for manufactured goods. Some Southern leaders thought the South’s dependence was too great. They wanted to develop more industry in the region. These leaders also argued that factories would improve the economy of the Upper South.
William Gregg of South Carolina shared this view. He opened his own textile factory. Georgias Augustin Clayton also went into textiles, opening a cotton mill. In Virginia, Joseph Reid Anderson made Tredegar Iron Works one of the nation’s leading iron producers. The Alabama Iron Works also included a sawmill for producing lumber. These industries, however, were not typical of the South.
Southern Transportation
In general, farmers and the few manufacturers of the South relied on natural waterways to transport their goods. Most towns were located on coasts or along rivers because canals were scarce and roads were poor.
Southern rail lines were short, local, and not linked together. The South had fewer railroads than the North. This caused Southern cities to grow more slowly than Northern cities, where railways were major routes of commerce and settlement. The rail networks in the North also gave Northern manufacturers an advantage over their Southern competitors. Lower shipping costs allowed Northerners to charge less for their goods. By I860, only about one-third of the nation’s rail lines lay within the South. This rail shortage would hurt the South in the years to come.
Q READING PROGRESS CHECK
Explaining How did the South's transportation system affect urbanization in the region?
_ TEKS
Review Vocabulary
1.	Use these two words in a sentence in a way that shows their meaning and relationship, job
a. productivity b. domestic slave trade
Answer the Guiding Questions
2.	Explaining In what ways did the invention ofthe cotton gin affect the distribution of enslaved people in the South? 27A
3.	Identifying Cause and Effect Why did
industry in the South develop more slowly than in the North? ud
4.	Analyzing How did slavery affect the development ofthe Southern economy? n
EXPOSITORY WRITING
Look again at the words of Texas politician Louis Wigfall, who said, "We want no manufactures." Add a second paragraph to this quotation that explains, in words you imagine Wigfall might use, why he opposes industry for the South. jod 440 North and South
•	American Slave! y As It Is
•	Han iet Jacobs
L
networks
There's More Online!
|gf BIOGRAPHY
HarrietTubman
Ef GRAPHIC ORGANIZER
Working on a Plantation
Ef PRIMARY SOURCES
eT SELF-CHECK QUIZ gf SLIDESHOW Songs of Freedom gf VIDEO

Pjflff Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills
7B Compare the effects of political, economic, and social factors on slaves and free blacks.
12D Analyze the causes and effects of economic differences among different regions of the United States at selected times in U.S. history.
23B Explain the relationship between urbanization and conflicts resulting from differences in religion, social class, and political beliefs.
23C Identify ways conflicts between people from various racial, ethnic, and religious groups were resolved.
D
Analyze the contributions of people of various racial, ethnic, and religious groups to our national identity. 23E Identify the political, social, and economic contributions of women to American society.
26A Describe developments in art, music, and literature that are unique to American culture such as the Hudson River School artists, John James Audubon, "Battle Hymn of the Republic," transcendentalism, and other cultural activities in the history of the United States.
27B Analyze the impact of transportation and communication systems on the growth, development, and urbanization of the United States.
iSs
Hi
Reading HELPDESK

Taking Notes: Describing
As you read, use a diagram like the one here to describe the work that was done on Southern plantations.
Lesson 4
People of the South
■o W ...am
/>■
QUESTION
How do peopleadaptto their environment? It Matters Because
Enslaved Africans faced many hardships but were able to establish family lives, religious beliefs, and a distinct culture.
Southern Agriculture
guidingquestion How were Southern farms different from Southern plantations?
Slavery was at the heart of the Southern economy, but that did not mean that every white person owned large numbers of enslaved people. White society in the South was complex and had many levels. Most white Southerners fit into one of four categories: yeomen, tenant farmer, rural poor, or plantation owner.
Small Farmers and the Rural Poor
Most white people in the South were yeomen (YOH«muhn), farmers who generally owned small farms of 50 to 200 acres (20-81 ha). These yeomen lived mostly in the Upper South and in the hilly areas of the Deep South. They did not practice plantation-style agriculture. They grew crops to use themselves and to trade with local merchants. Yeomen generally owned few or no enslaved African Americans.
Another group of Southern whites worked as tenant farmers. They rented land from property owners.
These classes of white Southerners made up the majority of the white population of the South. They lived in simple liomes_cottages or log cabins. The poorest of these groups lived in crude cabins.

Content Vocabulary_______________
•	yeoman	• slave codes
•	overseer	• Underground Railroad
•	spiritual	• literacy
Lesson 4 441
SOUTHERN POPULATION
1860 2%^
		
'	32(	Ko	1 4Q0/„	7% 1
	■	F
This picture shows the Legree Plantation, Capers Island, South Carolina.
African Americans MB Enslaved BM Free
Whites
I
Slaveholders I Not Slaveholders *Total population = 12 million Source: Geospatial and Statistical Data Center
In 1860 about 400,000 households in the South held enslaved workers. Nearly 4 million African Americans remained in slavery.
INTERPRETING GRAPHS
What percentage of the total Southern population was African American?
CRITICAL THINKING
Drawing Inferences Given the size of the African American population, how do you think white Southerners were able to control African Americans?
Reading HELPDESK
These rural poor were often stubborn and independent. Though they were looked down upon by many, they were proud of their ability to provide for their families.
A few free African Americans also held enslaved workers. Some free African Americans bought members of their own families to free them, although others worked their enslaved workers in the same manner as white Southern planters. Plantation Owners
The larger plantations covered several thousand acres. In addition to the land they owned, plantation owners measured their wealth by the number of enslaved people they had. In 1860 only about 4 percent of slaveholders held 20 or more enslaved workers.
Earning profit was the main goal for owners of large plantations. To make a profit, they needed to bring in more money than they spent to run their plantations.
Large plantations had fixed costs. These are operating costs that remain much the same year after year. For example, the cost of housing and feeding workers is a fixed cost. There is no easy way to reduce a fixed cost.
On the other hand, the price of cotton changed from season to season. A change in price often meant the difference between a successful year for a plantation and a bad one.

yeoman a farmer who owns a small farm
Reading in the Content Area: Circle Graphs
Circle graphs show how a whole is divided into parts. In the graph above, what is the whole being shown, and what is the largest share of that whole?
North and South
Plantation owners—who were almost always men—traveled often in order to ensure fair dealings with traders. Their wives often led difficult and lonely lives. They took charge of their households and supervised the work done in the other buildings. They watched over the enslaved domestic workers and sometimes tended to them when they became ill. Women also often kept the plantation’s financial records.
Keeping a plantation running involved many tasks. Some enslaved people cleaned the house, cooked, did laundry and sewing, and served meals. Others were trained as blacksmiths, carpenters, shoemakers, or weavers. Still others tended livestock. Most enslaved African Americans, however, were field hands.
They worked from sunrise to sunset to plant, tend, and harvest crops. An overseer (OH«vuhr«see»uhr), or plantation manager, supervised them.
Q READING PROGRESS CHECK
Identifying What group made up the largest number of whites in the South?
The Lives of Enslaved People
guidingquestion Howdid enslaved African Americans try to cope with their lack offreedom?
The social and economic realities of slavery made the life of most enslaved African Americans one of hardship and misery. They worked hard, earned no money, and had little hope of freedom. They lived with the threat that a slaveholder could sell them or members of their family without warning. In the face of these brutal conditions, enslaved African Americans tried to build stability. They kept up their family lives as best they could They developed a culture all their own that blended African and American elements. They came up with clever ways to resist slavery.
The punishments used against enslaved people included whipping, which could leave terrible scars.
Frican American Family Life
ie law did not recognize slave marriages. Still, enslaved ople did marry and raise families, which provided mfort and support. Uncertainty and danger, however, ire always present. There were no laws or customs that mid stop a slaveholder from breaking a family apart. If
daveholder chose to—or if the slaveholder died families uld be and often were separated.
overseer a plantation manager
Lesson 4 443
r Connections to
TODAY
American Music
From the rhythmic patterns and themes of work songs and spirituals arose a new musical form—the blues. The blues influenced later styles, including jazz, rock and roll, and rap.
Wynton Marsalis is a modern-day jazz musician whose music has its roots in work songs and spirituals.
In the face of this threat, enslaved people set up a network of relatives and friends. If an owner sold a father or mother, an aunt, an uncle, or a close friend stepped in to raise the children left behind. These networks were a source of strength in the lives of enslaved people. Large, close-knit extended families became an important part of African American culture.
African American Culture
In 1808 Congress banned the importation of enslaved persons. Slavery remained legal, but traders could no longer purchase enslaved people from other countries. Some illegal slave trading continued, but by 1860, almost all the enslaved people in the South had been born there.
Though most enslaved people were born in the United States, they tried to preserve African customs. They passed traditional African folk stories on to their children. They performed African music and dance.
Enslaved people also drew on African rhythms to create musical forms that were uniquely American. One form was the work song, or field holler. A worker led a rhythmic call-and-response song, which sometimes included shouts and moans. The beat set the tempo for their work in the fields.
African American Religion
Many enslaved African Americans followed traditional African religious beliefs and practices. Others, however, accepted the Christian religion that was dominant in the United States. Christianity became for enslaved people a religion of hope and resistance. Enslaved people prayed for their freedom. They expressed their beliefs in spirituals, African American religious folk songs. The spiritual below, for example, refers to the biblical story of Daniel, whom God saved from being eaten by lions:
PRIMARYSOURCE
M
Didn't my Lord deliver Daniel Deliver Daniel, deliver Daniel
Didn't my Lord deliver Daniel
An' why not-a every man. 99
—from "Didn't My Lord Deliver Daniel"
Reading HELPDESK
I
I
spiritual an African American religious Academic Vocabulary folksong	:	:------------—
legal permitted by law
444 North and South
Spirituals helped enslaved people express joy—but also sadness about their suffering here on Earth. Enslaved people also used spirituals as a way to communicate secretly among themselves.
Slave Codes
On large plantations, enslaved people might live in small communities such as this.
Enslaved people were also affected by political factors such as slave codes. Sometimes called black codes or Negro Laws, these were laws that controlled enslaved people in the Southern states.
One purpose of the codes was to prevent what white Southerners dreaded most—a slave rebellion. For this reason, slave codes prohibited enslaved people from gathering in large groups. The codes also required enslaved people to have written passes before leaving the slaveholder’s property.
The slave codes made teaching enslaved people to read or write a crime. White Southerners feared that an educated enslaved person might start a revolt. They thought an enslaved person who could not read and write was less likely to rebel.
Copper slave tags identified enslaved workers when they were away from their home plantation.
CRITICAL THINKING
Drawing Conclusions Why do you think enslaved Africans might need identification tags when they were away from their plantations? 5	Fighting Back
f Enslaved African Americans did sometimes rebel openly I against their owners. One who did was Nat Turner.
I
Turner, who had taught himself to read and 1 write, was a popular religious leader among the 5 enslaved people in his area. In 1831 he led a | group of followers on a brief, violent rampage in I Southampton County, Virginia. Turner and his s followers killed at least 55 whites. slave codes laws in a Southern state that	Academic Vocabulary
controlled enslaved people	brief short
Lesson 4 445
BIOGRAPHY
Harriet Tubman
(c. 1820-1913)
Harriet Tubman was born into slavery in Maryland. She escaped in 1849 and fled to Philadelphia. The following year Tubman returned to free her family. This began a career during which she made 19 trips to the slaveholding South and helped about 300 slaves escape to freedom. During the Civil War, Tubman helped the Union Army. In June 1863, she led a squad of African American soldiers on a South Carolina mission that led to the freeing of 800 enslaved African Americans. After the war, Tubman became an active women's suffragist and created the Home for the Aged in Auburn, New York. She died there in 1913.
CRITICAL THINKING
Drawing Conclusions Why do you think Tubman was willing to risk her own freedom to help free other enslaved African Americans? Reading HELPDESK

Two months after the uprising began, authorities captured and hanged Turner. Still, his rebellion terrified white Southerners. White mobs killed dozens of African Americans, many of whom had nothing to do with the rebellion. Whites also passed more severe slave codes, making life under slavery even harsher.
Armed revolts such as Turner’s were rare because enslaved African Americans realized they had little chance of winning. For the most part, enslaved people resisted slavery by working slowly or by pretending to be ill. Sometimes they might set fire to a plantation building or break tools. Such acts helped enslaved African Americans cope with their lack of freedom. Even if they were not free, they could strike back at the slaveholders. Escaping Slavery
Enslaved people also resisted by running away from their owners. Often their goal was to find relatives on other plantations. Sometimes they left to escape punishment.
Less often, enslaved African Americans tried to run away to freedom in the North. Getting to the North was very difficult. Among those who succeeded were Harriet Tubman and Frederick Douglass, two African American leaders.
Most who succeeded escaped from the Upper South. A runaway might receive aid from the Underground Railroad, a network of “safe houses” owned by people opposed to slavery.
Moses Grandy, who did escape, spoke about the hardships runaways faced:
PRIMARY SOURCE
M
They hide themselves during the day in the woods and swamps; at night they travel.... In these dangerous journeys they are guided by the north-star, for they only know that the land of freedom is in the north. 99 —from Narrative of the Life of Moses 6ronitf
The big danger, of course, was capture. Most runaways were caught and returned to their owners. The owners punished them severely, usually by whipping.
P REAPING PROGRESS CHECK
Explaining Why did the African American spirituals develop?
..........
Underground Railroad a system of cooperation	SKILLS PRACTICE
to aid and house enslaved people who had escaped literacy the ability to read and write
Report to your classmates about a social studies topic.
Use as many academic and social studies vocabulary words as you can in your speech.
North and South
Southern Cities
GUIDING question MTjflf changes did urbanization introduce in the South by the mid-1800s?
Though mostly agricultural, the South had several large cities by the mid-1800s, including Baltimore and New Orleans. The 10 largest cities in the South were either seaports or river ports. Cities located where the regions few railroads crossed paths also began to grow. These included Chattanooga, Montgomery, and Atlanta.
Free African Americans formed their own communities in Southern cities. They practiced trades and founded churches and other institutions, yet their rights were limited. Most states did not allow them to move from state to state. Free African Americans did not share equally in economic and political life.
In the early 1800s, there were no statewide public school systems in the South. People who could afford to do so sent their children to private schools. By the mid-1800s, however, education was growing. North Carolina and Kentucky set up and ran public schools.
The South lagged behind other parts of the country in literacy (LIH»tuh«ruh*see), the ability to read and write. One reason was that the South was thinly populated. A school would have had to serve a wide area, and many families were unwilling or unable to send children great distances to school. Many Southerners also believed education was a private matter.
D READING PROGRESS CHECK
Summarizing What was the status of free African Americans in the South?
Include this lesson's information in your Foldable®
\ People and Economy \° of the North
/ People and Economy 1/ °. of the Sooth
LESSON 4 REVIEW
Review Vocabulary
1.	Use the following words in a brief paragraph about slavery in the South. 3ob
a. overseer b. slave codes c. spiritual d. Underground Railroad
2.	Explain the significance of the following terms: 3ob
a. yeoman b. literacy
Answer the Guiding Questions
3.	Comparing How was the family structure of enslaved African Americans affected by slavery? 7B
4.	Comparing How did the culture of free African Americans in Southern cities differ from that of other African Americans in the South? 7B
EXPOSITORY WRITING
Enslaved people expressed their beliefs in the words and music of the spirituals. What shorter word is contained within spirituaP What connection do you see between the two words? 3oa Lesson 4 447
p in Activities
Directions: Write your answers using standard grammar, spelling, sentence structure, and punctuation.
O
Visual Literacy interpreting IMAGES Many Irish immigrants journeyed to the United States in the mid-1800s. Castle Garden was the processing facility for immigrants at that time.
According to this cartoon, how do the British feel about the migration? How do you know? 29D
WA N T E O
AMERICAN inTKE STEAMERS-
0 Use your	to explore the Essential Questions.
EXPOSITORY WRITING
Describe how improved transportation affected trade for farmers and manufacturers in the Midwest. Use examples from the chapter to help you organize your essay. 27B;27C
0 Social Studies Skills
CREATING GRAPHS
Use this chapter and outside sources to collect data about the population of one of the states in the United States between 1800 and 1860. Create a series of bar graphs showing the change. Write a paragraph explaining the information shown in the graphs. Share your findings with the class and ask questions to assess their understanding of the factors influencing the change. 29H;29i;29j 0 Thinking Like a Historian
IDENTIFYING CAUSE AND EFFECT
Use a diagram like this one to show and briefly describe the factors that encouraged growing settlement of the Midwest in the early and mid-1800s. Share your diagram with the class and ask questions to assess their understanding of these factors. 27d; 2ba Settlement of the Midwest
A UNCLE SAM (UNITED STATES) C JOHN BULL (BRITAIN) B IRISH IMMIGRANTS D BRITISH LION
Assessment
Directions. Write your answers using standard grammar, spelling, sentence structure, and punctuation.
CHECKING FOR UNDERSTANDING
0 What are some ways that the rise of industry contributed to a growing divide between the North and the South? 29B
REVIEW THE GUIDING QUESTIONS
0 Describing What happened in the third phase of industrialization in the North? 27c
0 Analyzing How did the transcontinental railroad help open the West for settlement? What effect did the growth of railroads have on the nation's urbanization? 27B
0 Evaluating What impact did reform movements have on child labor? 24B
0 Identifying Cause and Effect What effect did the rise of industry have on urban populations? 29B
0 Identifying What was the main reason that the Southern economy remained largely agricultural?
0 Explaining Why did the demand for enslaved labor increase after the invention of the cotton gin?	7B; 12B
0 Explaining What factors made possible the growth of Southern cities such as New Orleans, Chattanooga, and Montgomery? 12c
0 Explaining How were slave codes used to control enslaved people in the Southern states? 7B
CRITICAL THINKING
0 Identifying Cause and Effect How did John Deere's invention of the steel-tipped plow encourage settlement in the Midwest? 270; 29b
© Making Connections Why did the growth of industry create a need for faster methods of communication? How did the telegraph help meet this need? 27B
Need Extra Help?
IfYou've
Missed Question Review Lesson
0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0
1	1	2	2	3	3	3	4	1	1	1	1	2	2	3	3	3	4	4	4
© Analyzing Why did the mass production of goods and improvements in transportation lead to lower prices for consumers? i4B;27c
0 Identifying Cause and Effect How did the invention of the steam locomotive and the clipper ship change the way American goods were marketed internationally? 27c; 29B
0 Identifying Which two countries accounted for the highest immigration to the United States during the first half of the 1800s? What were their main reasons for immigrating? 23*
0 Contrasting In what ways were African Americans in the North treated unfairly? How did this discrimination differ from the effects of slavery in the South? 7B;29B
0 Making Connections How did the rise of industry in the North and in Europe encourage Southern planters to grow more cotton? 120
0 Predicting How do you think the South's having a less developed transportation system than the North affected the South in the years to come? 29B
© Explaining Why was the market for manufactured goods in the South smaller than that in the North? How did this affect the development of industry in the South? i2o
0 Analyzing Why were armed revolts rare among enslaved African Americans? What are some other ways that they resisted slavery? 23c
0 Speculating What do you think life was like for free African Americans in Southern cities? How were their rights limited? 23B
0 Evaluating Why were spirituals such an important part of the culture of enslaved African Americans?
26B
449
Assessment (continued)
SHORT RESPONSE
A
Southern newspaper publisher wrote the following in 1856. PRIMARYSOURCE
“Every Roman Catholic in the known world is under the absolute control of the Catholic Priesthood.... And it is ... this power of the Priesthood to control the Catholic community, and cause a vast multitude of ignorant foreigners to vote as a unit."
G.
Brownlow, Americanism Contrasted with Foreignism, Romanism, and Bogus Democracy © Interpreting What did the writer believe about Catholic immigrants to the United States?
29F
© Identifying Bias What did the writer find dangerous about Catholics supposedly being controlled by priests? 29B
EXTENDED RESPONSE
© Expository Writing In the 1840s, some Americans believed that the requirements for becoming a citizen of the United States should be changed. What conditions do you believe an immigrant should be required to meet today to become a citizen? Explain.
29E
STANDARDIZED TEST PRACTICE
ES3 ANALYZING DOCUMENTS
The following is an excerpt from a work contract from around 1830.
PRIMARYSOURCE
“We... agree to work for such wages per week, and prices by the job, as the Company may see fit to pay.... We also agree not to be engaged in any [labor union], whereby the work may be [delayed], or the company's interest in any work [harmed]."
—Cocheco Manufacturing Company
© Drawing Inferences]^ excerpt suggests that labor unions at this time 29b
A.	were not very active.	C. were a cause of worry for employers.
B.	did not have many members.	D. were not helpful to employees.
© Drawing ConclusionsWhtt does this contract suggest about the relationship between employees and employers in factories in the early 1800s? 29b
F.
The relationship was close. G.
Employers had deep respect for their workers. H.
There was conflict between workers and employers. I.
Employers were having trouble getting enough people to take their factory jobs. Need Extra Help?
IfYou've Missed Question	©	©	©	©	©
Review Lesson	2	2	2	2	2
450 North and South
The Spirit of Reform
1820-1860
networks
There's More Online about the issues that American reformers tackled in the mid-1800s.
IAL QUESTIONS
• Why do societies change? totes people to act? • How do new ideas change the way people live?

CHAPTER
Lesson 1
Social Reform
Lesson 2
The Abolitionists
16
Lesson 3
The Women's Movement

The Story
Matters...
Young Emily Dickinson excels at school, especially in Latin, science, and writing. Dickinson even takes the then-unusual step of attending college for a year, but she finds its strict rules unsuited to her creative energy.
As an adult, she spends less and less time in public. After the age of 40, she dresses only in white. She does not travel and chooses not to meet most visitors. She spends much of her time writing, eventually producing 1,800 brilliant gems of poetry. She is a literary pioneer— though few people at the time know it. Only 10 of her poems ever appear in print during her lifetime. Only in death is she recognized among the era's many women of achievement.
f,'
--	...	•	- 4 '
Wy Dickinson wasa&rilliant poet of the iT mid-1800s. ’
(2D20J8
0 .The Spirit of Reform
The Abolitionists
■ The Women's Movement
The i
Goto the Foldables® library in the back of your book to make a Foldable® that will help you take notes while reading this chapter.
451
CHAPTER 16
Place and Time: United States i820toi860
I
During this period, many men and women, including whites and African Americans, worked to abolish slavery. Other people wanted to reform laws and customs that limited women's choices and created harsh conditions for the poor and people with disabilities.

<0'7
Routes of the Underground Railroad <.i860
Step Into the Place
MAP FOCUS
One of the main reforms people sought in the mid-1800s was the abolition of slavery. Reformers also tried to help enslaved people escape to freedom in the North or outside the country. Some of the routes to freedom are noted on the map. LOCATION
On the map, locate the cities of Toledo, Cleveland, and Buffalo. Why do you think these cities became important points for people trying to escape slavery? 29C CRITICAL THINKING
Speculating Why do you think some enslaved people traveled to Canada instead of stopping when they reached a free Northern state?
PACIFIC
OCEAN
3q
N
12O°W
U0"W
I	1 Slaveholding regions
I
Non-slaveholding regions Underground Railroad route ---- 1860 boundary
MEXICO
Step Into the rime
TIMELINE
Look at the time line. Who was president when New York banned slavery? 29c networks ef MAP Explore the interactive version of
There s More Online! this map on NETWORKS.
ST TIMELINE
Explore the interactive version ofthis time line on NETWORKS. William Henry Harrison 1841
John Tyler
1841-1845
James Polk	Zachary Taylor Millard Fillmore Franklin Pierce James Buchanan
1845-1849	1849-1850	1850-1853	1853-1857	1857-1861
s1 Van Buren
>7-1841
networks
There's More Online!
eT IMAGE The American
School for the Deaf
Ef primary source
Lyman Beecher's Sermon
on Slavery
Ef SELF-CHECK QUIZ Ef VIDEO
Lesson 1
Social Reform
ITIAL QUESTION
Why do societies change? it matters Because
Developments in the early 1800s helped shape the social and cultural fabric of the United States.
THfS Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills
1A Identify the major eras and events in U.S. history through 1877, including colonization, revolution, drafting of the Declaration of Independence, creation and ratification of the Constitution, religious revivals such as the Second Great Awakening, early republic, the Age of Jackson, westward expansion, reform movements, sectionalism, Civil War, and Reconstruction, and describe their causes and effects.
22B Describe the contributions of significant political, social, and military leaders of the United States such as Frederick Douglass, John Paul Jones, James Monroe, Stonewall Jackson, Susan B. Anthony, and Elizabeth Cady Stanton. 24B Evaluate the impact of reform movements, including educational reform, temperance, the women's rights movement, prison reform, abolition, the labor reform movement, and care of the disabled.
25B Describe religious motivation for immigration and influence on social movements, including the impact of the first and second Great Awakenings.
26A Describe developments in art, music, and literature that are unique to American culture such as the Hudson River School artists, John James Audubon, "Battle Hymn of the Republic," transcendentalism, and other cultural activities in the history of the United States.
26C Analyze the relationship between fine arts and continuity and change in the American way of life.
Religion and Reform
guiding question What was the effect of the Second Great Awakening?
In the 1800s, some Americans began to fear that the country was becoming too secular, or not religious, and began a series of religious meetings called revivals. Reverend James B. Finley described an early nineteenth-century revival this way:
PRIMARYSOURCE
Reading HELPDESK
M
The noise was like the roar of Niagara [Falls]. The vast sea of human beings seemed to be agitated as if by a storm.... Some of the people were singing, others praying, some crying for mercy.... While witnessing these scenes, a peculiarly strange sensation, such as I had never felt before, came over me. My heart beat tumultuously [violently], my knees trembled, my lip quivered, and I felt as though I must fall to the ground. 99 —from Autobiography of Rev. James S. hnky
At this time, people traveled great distances to hear preachers speak and to pray, sing, weep, and shout. This wave of religious interest—known as the Second Great Awakening—stirred the nation.
Also at this time, a new spirit of reform took hold in the United States. This spirit brought changes to American religion, education, and literature. Some reformers sought to improve society by forming utopias (yu»TOH»pee»uhs)—communities
Taking Notes: Identifying_____________
As you read, use a diagram like this one to identify the reformers' contributions.
Reformer Contribution
Thomas Lus. Gallaudet |—	
Dorothea Ljs. Dix	|—	
Content Vocabulary____________
•	revival	• normal school
•	utopia	• civil disobedient
•	temperance
based on a vision of the perfect society. Most of these communities did not last. A few groups, such as the Mormons, did form lasting communities.
The Impact of Religion
Attending revivals often made men and women eager to reform their own lives and the world. Some people became involved in missionary work or social reform movements. Among those movements was the push to ban alcohol.
Connecticut minister Lyman Beecher was a leader of this movement. He wanted to protect society from “rum-selling, tippling folk, infidels, and ruff-scuff.” Beecher and other reformers called for temperance, or drinking little or no alcohol. They used lectures, pamphlets, and revival-style rallies to warn people of the dangers of liquor.
The temperance movement persuaded Maine and some other states to outlaw the manufacture and sale of alcohol. States later
repealed most of these laws.
Changing Education
Reformers also wanted to improve education. Most schools had little money, and many teachers lacked training. Some people opposed the idea of compulsory, or required, education.
Religious revivals could attract thousands of people for days of prayers and song.
CRITICAL THINKING
Analyzing Images Who are the people standing and sitting on the platform?
revival a religious meeting utopia a community based on a vision of the perfect society
temperance
drinking little or no alcohol Academic Vocabulary
lecture a speech meant to provide information, similar to what a teacher presents
Lesson 1 455
454 The Spirit of Reform
In addition, some groups faced barriers to schooling. Parents often kept girls at home. They thought someone who was likely to become a wife and mother did not need much education. Many schools also denied African Americans the right to attend.
Massachusetts lawyer Horace Mann was a leader of educational reform. He believed education was a key to wealth and economic opportunity for all. Partly because of his efforts, in 1839 Massachusetts founded the nations first state-supported normal school—a school for training high school graduates to become teachers. Other states soon adopted Mann’s reforms.
New colleges and universities opened their doors during the age of reform. Most of them admitted only white men, but other groups also began
winning access to higher education. Oberlin
College of Ohio, for example, was founded in
1833. The college admitted both women and
African Americans.
This picture shows students with hearing impairments receiving specialized instruction. The education of people with disabilities greatly advanced during the early and mid-1800s.
SKILLS PRACTICE________________
Write vocabulary words on cards. Draw pictures on the back to show what they mean.
Helping People with Disabilities
Reformers also focused on teaching people with disabilities. Thomas Gallaudet (ga»luh»DEHT) developed a method to teach those with hearing impairments. He opened the Hartford School for the Deaf in Connecticut in 1817. At that same
time, Samuel Gridley Howe was helping people with vision impairments. He printed books using an alphabet created by Louis Braille, which used raised letters a person could “read” with his or her fingers. Howe headed the Perkins Institute, a school for the visually impaired, in Boston.
Schoolteacher Dorothea Dix began visiting prisons in 1841. She found some prisoners chained to the walls with little or no clothing, often in unheated cells. Dix also learned that some inmates were guilty of no crime. Instead, they were suffering from mental illnesses. Dix made it her life’s work to educate the public about the poor conditions for prisoners and the mentally ill. Her efforts resulted in states improving prisons and mental facilities.
B READING PROGRESS CHECK
Describing How did Samuel Howe help people with vision impairments?
Reading HELPDESK

normal school a state-supported school for training high school graduates to become teachers
civil disobedience
the refusal to obey laws considered unjust
Academic Vocabulary _______________.
author a writer of books, articles, or other written works
456 The Spirit of Reform
Culture Changes
guiding question What type of American literature emerged in the 1820s?
Art and literature of the time reflected the changes in society and culture. American authors and artists developed their own style and explored American themes.
Writers such as Margaret Fuller, Ralph Waldo Emerson, and Henry David Thoreau stressed the relationship between humans and nature and the importance of the individual conscience. This literary movement was known as Transcendentalism. Emerson urged people to listen to the inner voice of conscience and to overcome prejudice. Thoreau practiced civil disobedience (dihs»oh»BEE»dee*uhns)—the refusal to obey laws considered unjust. For example, Thoreau went to jail in 1846 rather than pay a tax to support the U.S.-Mexican War, which he believed was fought to expand slavery.
In poetry, Henry Wadsworth Longfellow wrote narrative, or story, poems such as the Song of Hiawatha. Walt Whitman captured the new American spirit and confidence in his Leaves of Grass. Emily Dickinson wrote hundreds of simple, deeply personal poems, many of which celebrated the natural world.
American artists also explored American topics	KW
and developed a purely American style. Beginning in the 1820s, a group of landscape painters known as the Hudson River School focused on scenes of the Hudson River Valley. Printmakers Nathaniel Currier and James Merritt Ives created popular prints that celebrated holidays, sporting events, and rural life.
H READING PROGRESS CHECK
Explaining What themes did the Transcendentalists focus on
in their writings?
Foldables
[Study Organizer
Include this lesson's information in your Foldable®
.The Spirit of Reform
The Abolitionists
The Women's Movement
Ralph Waldo Emerson's house in Concord, Massachusetts, was a gathering place for many of the leaders of the Transcendentalist movement.
LESSON 1 REVIEW
'TAB,
Review Vocabulary
1.	Examine the three terms below. Then write a sentence or two explaining how these terms were related to each other during the period of social reform. 24b
a. revival b. utopia c. temperance
Answer the Guiding Questions
2.	Analyzing What was the relationship between the Second Great Awakening and the reform movements of the early 1800s? ia;2sb
3.	Describing How did the work of American authors reflect a unique American culture? 2«a
4.	Comparing and Contrasting How was the work of Dorothea Dix similar to that of Thomas Gallaudet? How was it different? 22b,-24b
PERSUASIVE WRITING
Create a brochure for the newly established Oberlin College to send to potential students. Explain why the college differs from others, and describe the advantages of this college experience. 3od Lesson 1 457
TCKS
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills 1A Identify the major eras and events in U.S. history through 1877, including colonization, revolution, drafting of the Declaration of Independence, creation and ratification of the Constitution, religious revivals such as the Second Great Awakening, early republic, the Age of Jackson, westward expansion, reform movements, sectionalism, Civil War, and Reconstruction, and describe their causes and effects.
4D Analyze the issues of the Constitutional Convention of 1787, including the Great Compromise and the Three-Fifths Compromise. 7D Identify the provisions and compare the effects of congressional conflicts and compromises prior to the Civil War, including the roles of John Quincy Adams, John C. Calhoun, Henry Clay, and Daniel Webster.
22B Describe the contributions of significant political, social, and military leaders of the United States such as Frederick Douglass, John Paul Jones, James Monroe, Stonewall Jackson, Susan B. Anthony, and Elizabeth Cady Stanton. 23E Identify the political, social, and economic contributions of women to American society.
24A Describe the historical development of the abolitionist movement.
Reading HELPDESK
IT MATTERS BECAUSE
The growing demands of abolitionists helped deepen the divide between North and South.
The Start of the Abolition Movement
guiding question How did Americans' attitudes toward slavery change?
Among the reformers of the early 1800s were abolitionists (a»buh«LIH«shuhn»ihsts), who sought the end of slavery. Though their voices were growing, their cause was not a new one.
The Early Movement
Even before the Revolution, some Americans had tried to limit or end slavery. Early antislavery societies generally believed slavery had to be ended gradually. First they wanted to stop the slave trade. Then they would phase out slavery itself. Supporters believed that ending slavery gradually would give the South’s economy time to adjust to the loss of enslaved labor.
At the Constitutional Convention in 1787, delegates debated slavery and its future. The delegates reached a compromise, allowing each state to decide whether to allow the practice.
By the early 1800s, the Northern states had ended slavery or adopted plans to gradually abolish it. Slavery continued in the South, however. In fact, the rise of the Cotton Kingdom increased the use of enslaved labor.
The reform movement of the early and mid-1800s gave new life to the antislavery cause. A growing number of Americans believed slavery was wrong and that the practice should end.
Taking Hates: Identifying______________________
As you read, use a diagram like this one to identify five abolitionists. Below each name, write a brief description of his or her role in the movement. 458 The Spirit of Reform
Abolitionists
Content Vocabulary
• abolitionist

Many wno leo tne antislavery movement came from the Quaker faith. In 1821 Benjamin Lundy, a Quaker, founded a newspaper in Ohio called the Genius of Universal Emancipation.
Its purpose was to spread the abolitionist message. “I heard the wail of the captive,” he wrote. “I felt his pang of distress, and the iron entered my soul.”
The Colonization Plan
There were many barriers to ending slavery. Many white Northerners still supported the practice. Even some white abolitionists worried about the effect free African Americans would have on society. They did not like the idea of hundreds of thousands of formerly enslaved people living in the United States.
In 1816 a group of influential whites formed the American Colonization Society. They planned to send free African Americans to Africa to start new lives. The society raised money to send free African Americans out of the country. Some went to the west coast of Africa, where the society acquired land for a colony. The first settlers arrived in Liberia (“place of freedom”) in 1822. In 1847 Liberia declared itself an independent republic.
The American Colonization Society did not stop the growth of slavery. It helped resettle only about 10,000 African Americans by the mid-1860s. Only a few African Americans wanted to go to Africa, while most wanted to be free in America.
Ri READING progress check
Expressing How did the American Colonization Society contribute to the antislavery movement?
24B Evaluate the impact of reform movements, including educational reform, temperance, the women's rights movement, prison reform, abolition, the labor reform movement, and care of the disabled.
29D Identify points of view from the historical context surrounding an event and the frame of reference which influenced the participants.
GEOGRAPHY CONNECTION
Thousands of African Americans settled in Liberia in the mid-1800s.
LOCATION
In what part of Africa is Liberia located? CRITICAL THINKING
Drawing Condusions What do you think made some Americans choose Liberia as a good site for relocating African Americans? abolitionist a person who sought to end slavery in the United States
Lesson 2 459
I
The Movement Builds Strength
GUIDING QUESTION
Why did the reform movement gain momentum? Ending slavery gradually and colonization remained the main goals of antislavery groups until the 1830s. At this time, abolitionists began arguing that enslaved African Americans should be freed immediately. Slavery became America’s most pressing social issue.
Making the Case Against Slavery
Massachusetts abolitionist William Lloyd Garrison had a great influence on the antislavery movement. In 1831 he started a newspaper called The Liberator.
Garrison was one of the first white abolitionists to call for an immediate end to slavery. He rejected a slow, gradual approach. In the first issue of The Liberator, he wrote, “I will be as harsh as truth, and as uncompromising as justice.... I will not retreat a single inch—AND I WILL BE HEARD.”
Garrison was heard. He attracted enough followers to start the New England Anti-Slavery Society in 1832 and the American Anti-Slavery Society the next year. By 1838, the groups Garrison started had more than 1,000 local branches.
Sarah and Angelina Grimke were two other early abolitionists. The sisters were born in South Carolina to a wealthy slaveholding family. They both moved to Philadelphia in 1832. While living in the North, the Grimke sisters spoke out for both abolition and womens rights.
To show their commitment to abolition, the Grimkes asked their mother to give them their family inheritance early. Instead of money or land, the sisters wanted several of the family’s enslaved workers. The sisters immediately freed them.
The Grimkes, along with Angelina’s husband, Theodore Weld, wrote American Slavery As It Is in 1839. This book collected firsthand stories of life under slavery. The book was one of the most powerful abolitionist publications of its time.
Harriet Beecher Stowe was another writer who made a major impact on public opinion. Her 1852 novel, Uncle Tom’s Cabin, became a wildly popular best-seller. The book portrayed slavery as a cruel and brutal system. Some people, however, strongly opposed the book and its message. Sale of Uncle Tom’s Cabin was banned in the South.
Reading HELPDESK

Reading Strategy: Sowmanz/ng
When you summarize a reading, you find the main idea of the passage and restate it in your own words. Read about the work of William Lloyd Garrison. On a separate sheet of paper, summarize the information in one or two sentences.
460 The Spirit of Reform
SKILLS PRACTICE
During class instruction or discussion, write any questions you have about what is being said. Ask for an explanation after the lesson.
While serving in the House of Representatives, former president John Quincy Adams battled slavery. Adams introduced constitutional amendments providing for the gradual abolition of slavery. Adams’s amendments did not pass.
African American Abolitionists
Free African Americans in the North especially supported the goal of abolition. Most lived in poverty in cities and had trouble getting good jobs and decent housing. They were often subject to violent attacks. Yet these African Americans were proud of their freedom. They sought to help those who remained enslaved.
African Americans helped organize and lead the American Anti-Slavery Society. They subscribed to The Liberator. They also did their own writing and publishing. In 1827 Samuel Cornish and John Russwurm started the country’s first African American newspaper, Freedom’s Journal.
Born free in North Carolina and settling in Boston, writer David Walker published a powerful pamphlet against slavery. He challenged African Americans to rebel and overthrow slavery.
He wrote, “America is more our country than it is the whites’— we have enriched it with our blood and tears.”
In 1830 free African American leaders held a convention in Philadelphia. Delegates met “to devise ways and means for the bettering of our condition.’’ They discussed starting an African American college and encouraging free African Americans to move to Canada.
Frederick Douglass speaks while disorder breaks out at this 1860 abolitionist meeting in Boston, Massachusetts.
CRITICAL THINKING
Drawing Conclusions Why do you think this abolitionist meeting in a Northern city became disorderly?
BIOGRAPHY
M

Sojourner Truth (1797-1883)
Sojourner Truth was a powerful voice for abolition. Truth worked with William Lloyd Garrison, Frederick Douglass, and others to bring about the end of slavery. She traveled throughout the North and spoke about her experiences in slavery. Sojourner Truth was also an active supporter of the women's rights movement.
CRITICAL THINKING
Making Connections Why do you think Sojourner Truth later became involved with the women's rights movement?
The Role of Frederick Douglass
Frederick Douglass is the best-known African American abolitionist. Born into slavery in Maryland, Douglass escaped in 1838. He settled first in Massachusetts.
As a runaway, Douglass faced the danger of capture and a return to slavery. Still, he joined the Massachusetts Anti-Slavery Society. He traveled widely to speak at abolitionist meetings. He even appeared at events in London and the West Indies. Douglass was a powerful speaker who often moved listeners to tears. He also edited the antislavery newspaper North Star.
Douglass made his home in the United States because he believed abolitionists must fight slavery at its source. He insisted that African Americans receive not just freedom but full equality with whites as well. In 1847 friends helped Douglass buy his freedom from the slaveholder from whom he had fled in Maryland. Sojourner Truth
“I was born a slave in Ulster County, New York,” Isabella Baumfree began when she told her story to audiences. After a childhood and youth filled with hardship, she escaped in 1826. Then, she officially gained her freedom in 1827 when New York banned slavery. Baumfree later settled in New York City with her two youngest children. In 1843 Baumfree chose a new name, Sojourner Truth—Sojourner because she “was to travel up an’ down the land, showin’ the people their sins” and Truth because she “was to declare the truth to the people.”
The Underground Railroad
Abolitionists sometimes risked prison and death to help African Americans escape slavery. They helped create a network of escape routes from the South to the North called the Underground Railroad.
Underground Railroad “passengers”—that is, escaping African Americans—traveled by night, often on foot. The North Star guided them in the direction of freedom. During the day they rested at stations —barns, basements, and attics—until the next night. The railroad s conductors” were whites and African Americans who guided the runaways to freedom in the northern United States or Canada. Harriet Tubman was the most famous conductor.
The Underground Railroad helped as many as 100,000 enslaved people escape. It gave hope to many more.
Q READING PROGRESS CHECK
TJF7
Reading HELPDESK
Identifying What were the "stations" on the Underground Railroad?
Build Vocabulary; Origins of Sayings
"Underground Railroad" is a metaphor. A metaphor describes one thing by calling it something else. Readers imagine a train track that is literally underground. This helps them understand that the Underground Railroad was a method for moving people that was not visible to the public. 462	The Spirit of Reform
Academic Vocabulary
route a line of travel
Reaction to the Abolitionists
guiding question Who opposed the abolition of slavery?
Abolitionists stirred strong reactions. Most white Southerners believed abolition threatened their way of life, which required enslaved labor.
Even in the North, only a minority of white people supported abolition. Many white Northerners worried that freed African Americans would never blend into American society. Others feared that abolitionists could begin a war between the North and the South.
Opposition to abolitionism sometimes led to violence. In Philadelphia a bloody race riot followed the burning of an antislavery group’s headquarters. Police had to jail William Lloyd Garrison to protect him from a Boston mob.
Elijah Lovejoy in Illinois was not so lucky. Angry whites invaded his antislavery newspaper offices and wrecked his presses three times. Three times Lovejoy installed new presses. The fourth time the mob attacked, it set fire to the building. When Lovejoy came out of the blazing building, someone shot and killed him.
The White South Reacts
White Southerners fought abolitionism with arguments in defense of slavery. They claimed that slavery was necessary to the Southern economy and had allowed Southern whites to reach a high level of culture. As anti-abolitionist Senator James Henry Hammond said in an 1858 speech to Congress: In all social systems there must be a class to do the menial duties, to perform the drudgery of life... . Such a class you must have, or you would not have that other class which leads progress, civilization, and refinement.”
The John Rankin House, located along the Ohio River, was a station stop on the Underground Railroad. The Reverend John Rankin, along with his wife and children, assisted hundreds escaping from slavery.
Academic Vocabulary
medical relating to medicine and help given to people who are sick or injured
, ; Social Re-form
[ o The Abolitionists
:Tbe Womens Movement
Include this lesson's information in your Foldable®
L ,The Spirit of Reform.
In 1837 a mob attacked and killed newspaper editor Elijah Lovejoy.
CRITICAL THINKING
Summarizing Why did anti-abolitionists attack Elijah Lovejoy?
White Southerners also argued that they treated enslaved people well. They claimed that Northern workers were worse off than enslaved workers because they worked in factories for long hours at low wages. Also, Northern workers had to pay for their own goods and services from their small earnings, while enslaved African Americans received food, clothing, and medical care.
Other defenses of slavery were based on racism. Many whites believed that African Americans were better off under white care than on their own.
The conflict between pro-slavery and antislavery groups continued to mount. At the same time, a new women’s rights movement was growing.
Q READING PROGRESS CHECK
Identifying Points of View How did many Southerners defend the institution of slavery?
LESSON 2 REVIEW
Review Vocabulary
1. Use the term abolitionist in a sentence about the mid-1800s. m
4. Comparing and Contrasting How did
Northerners and Southerners view abolition differently? 290
Answer the Guiding Questions
2.	Identifying Points of View What concern about ending slavery did the American Colonization Society seek to address? 290
3.	Describing How did free African Americans help the abolitionist movement gain strength? 2«
464 The Spirit of Reform
NARRATIVE WRITING
Take the role of a conductor on the Underground Railroad. Write an explanation for why you are willing to help African Americans escape from slavery to freedom. 290 fl
networks
re 's More Online!
□	BIOGRAPHIES
*	Mary Lyon
< Maria MilcheH
GAME
Identification GRAPHIC ORGANIZER
V.'C-meo Rights Leaders
TIMELINE
Opportunity and •	Ji'.eveinent foi Women
SELF-CHECK QUIZ
□	VIDEO

[«'*
Id.....,
4


Lesson 3
The Women's Movement
L QUESTION
How do new ideas change the way people live? P TEKS
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills 1A Identify the major eras and events in U.S. history through 1877, including colonization, revolution, drafting of the Declaration of Independence, creation and ratification of the Constitution, religious revivals such as the Second Great Awakening, early republic, the Age of Jackson, westward expansion,
?	reform movements, sectionalism, Civil War,
|	and Reconstruction, and describe their causes
s	and effects.
22B Describe the contributions of significant political, social, and military leaders of the
5 United States such as Frederick Douglass, John 5	Paul Jones, James Monroe, Stonewall Jackson,
z.	Susan B. Anthony, and Elizabeth Cady Stanton.
S 23D
Analyze the contributions of people of 5	various racial, ethnic, and religious groups to
(	our national identity.
E- 23E
Identify the political, social, and 3 economic contributions of women to >	American society.
I 24B
Evaluate the impact of reform s	movements, including educational reform,
t,	temperance, the women's rights movement,
s prison reform, abolition, the labor reform -	movement, and care of the disabled.
It matters Because
Women began the long quest for expanded rights, including the right to vote, in the mid-1800s.
Reform for Women
guiding question What did women doto win equal rights?
For women such as Lucretia Mott, causes such as abolition and women’s rights were linked. Like many other women reformers, Mott was a Quaker. Quaker women enjoyed an unusual degree of equality in their communities. Mott was actively involved in helping runaway enslaved workers. She organized the Philadelphia Female Anti-Slavery Society. At an antislavery convention in London, Mott met Elizabeth Cady Stanton. The two found they also shared an interest in women’s rights.
The Seneca Falls Convention
In July 1848, Stanton and Mott helped organize the first women’s rights convention in Seneca Falls, New York. About 300 people, including 40 men, attended.
A highlight of the convention was debate over a Declaration of Sentiments and Resolutions. These resolutions called for an end to laws that discriminated against women. They also demanded that women be allowed to enter the all-male world of trades, professions, and businesses. The most controversial issue, however, was the call for woman suffrage, or the right to vote in elections.
Reading HELPDESK


Taking Notes: Summarizing
As you read, use a diagram like this one to summarize the contributions each individual made to the women's movement.
Content Vocabulary
•	suffrage
•	coeducation
Lesson 3 465
OPPORTUNITY AND ACHIEVEMENT FOR WOMEN
1837 Mary Lyon establishes Mount Holyoke Female Seminary
1844 Female textile workers in Massachusetts form labor association'
’ 1833 Oberlin College admits
women and African Americans
1848 First women's rights convention held in Seneca Falls, New York'
* 1847 Maria Mitchell, first professional female astronomer, discovers orbit of new con
Ik
j	185	0	k
■BB		J
In the mid-1800s, women began to argue for—and earn—their own rights and an equal place in society.
IDENTIFYING
Which items on the time line reflect growing opportunities for women to learn and gain skills? CRITICAL THINKING
Analyzing Which items on the time line suggest women were using their education to achieve great things?
Elizabeth Cady Stanton insisted the resolutions include a demand for woman suffrage. Some delegates worried that the idea was too radical. Mott told her friend, “Lizzie, thee will make us ridiculous.” Standing with Stanton, Frederick Douglass argued powerfully for women’s right to vote. After a heated debate, the convention voted to include in their declaration the demand for woman suffrage in the United States.
The Seneca Falls Declaration
The first women’s rights convention called for women’s equality and for their right to vote, to speak publicly, and to run for office. The convention issued a Declaration of Sentiments and Resolutions modeled on the Declaration of Independence. Just as Thomas Jefferson had in 1776, women announced the need for revolutionary change based on a claim of basic rights:
PRIMARY SOURCE
Reading HELPDESK
& When, in the course of human events, it becomes necessary for one portion of the family of man to assume among the people of the earth a position different from that which they have hitherto [before] occupied, but one to which the laws of nature and of nature s God entitle them, a decent respect to the opinions of mankind requires that thi should declare the causes that impel them to such a course.»
In this passage, two important words—“and women”—are added to Thomas Jefferson’s famous phrase:
^6 We hold these truths to be self-evident: that all men and women are created equal; that they are endowed by their Creator with certain inalienable rights; that among thes are life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness.... 99

suffrage the right to vote
SKILLS PRACTICE
466 The Spirit of Reform
Before you explain something, think about the important and interesting details. Use as many of these details as you can.
The women’s declaration called for an end to laws that discriminated against women. It demanded that women be free to enter the all-male world of trades, professions, and businesses.
ii The history of mankind is a history of repeated injuries and [wrongful takings of power] on the part of man toward woman, having in direct object the establishment of an absolute tyranny over her. To prove this, let facts be submitted to a candid world.
Now, in view of this entire [withholding of rights] of one-half the people of this country, their social and religious degradation,—in view of the unjust laws above mentioned, and because women do feel themselves aggrieved, oppressed, and fraudulently deprived of their most sacred rights, we insist that they have immediate admission to all the rights and privileges which belong to them as citizens of the United States. 99
—Seneca Falls Convention Declaration of Sentiments
The Women's Movement Grows
The Seneca Falls Convention helped launch a wider movement.
In the years to come, reformers held several national conventions, with the first taking place in Worcester, Massachusetts, in 1850.
Both male and female reformers joined the cause.
Among the movement’s leaders was Susan B. Anthony, the daughter of a Quaker abolitionist. She called for equal pay and college training for women, and coeducation (coh»eh»juh»KAY«shuhn)—the teaching of males and females together. Anthony also organized the country’s first womens temperance association, the Daughters of Temperance. Anthony met Elizabeth Cady Stanton at a temperance meeting in 1851.
They became lifelong friends and partners
in the struggle for women’s rights and
suffrage-	J	«©?
Opportunities for women increased	'"■&
greatly in the late 1800s. Beginning with Wyoming in 1890, several states granted woman suffrage. Yet not until 1920 and the Nineteenth Amendment to the Constitution did women gain the right to vote everywhere.
B READING PROGRESS CHECK
Evaluating What did the Seneca Falls Convention
do to help the women's movement grow?
coeducation the teaching of males and
females together
A
Elizabeth Cady Stanton (left), seen here with Susan B. Anthony, was an organizer of the Seneca Falls Convention.
Women Make Gains
guiding question In what areas did women make progress in achieving equality?
Pioneers in women’s education began to call for more opportunity. Early champions such as Catharine Beecher believed that women should be educated for their traditional roles in life. The Milwaukee College for Women used Beecher’s ideas “to train women to be healthful, intelligent, and successful wives, mothers, and housekeepers.”
Other people thought that women could be trained to be capable teachers and to fill other professional roles. These pioneers broke down the barriers to female education and helped other women do the same.
Maria Mitchell was the first woman to work as a professional astronomer.
"It seems to me that the needle is the chain of woman.... Emancipate her from the 'stitch, stitch, stitch/... and she would have time for studies which would engross as the needle never can."
CRITICAL THINKING
Paraphrasing Restate the quote from Mitchell above using your own words. One of these pioneers, Emma Willard, educated herself in subjects considered suitable only for males, such as science and mathematics. In 1821 Willard set up the Troy Female Seminary in upstate New York. Willard’s seminary taught mathematics, history, geography, and physics, as well as the usual homemaking subjects.
Mary Lyon, after working as a teacher for 20 years, began raising funds to open a women’s college. She established Mount Holyoke Female Seminary in Massachusetts in 1837, modeling its curriculum on that of nearby Amherst College. Lyon became the school’s first principal, believing that “the great secret... is female education.”

Mount Holyoke Female Seminary in South Hadley, Massachusetts, was the first women's college in the United States.
CRITICAL THINKING
Analyzing Primary Sources What do you think Lyon meant when she referred to women's education as "the great secret"? Reading HELPDESK
Academic Vocabulary____________________
capable skillful
ministry the job of a religious leader
468	The Spirit of Reform
Marriage and the Family
Prior to the mid-1800s, women had few rights. They depended on men for support. Anything a woman owned became the property of her husband if she married. She had few options if she was in an unhappy or abusive relationship.
During the mid- to late-1800s, women made some gains in marriage and property laws. New York, Pennsylvania,
Indiana, Wisconsin, Mississippi, and the new state of California recognized the right of married women to own property.
Some states passed laws allowing divorced women to share guardianship of their children with their former husbands.
Indiana was the first of several states that allowed women to seek divorce if their husbands abused alcohol.
Breaking Barriers
In the 1800s, women had few career choices. They could become elementary school teachers—often at lower wages than a male teacher received. Jobs in professions dominated by men were even more difficult. Women had to struggle to become doctors or work in the ministry. Some strong-minded women succeeded.
Elizabeth Blackwell tried and failed repeatedly to get into medical school. Finally accepted by Geneva College in New York, Blackwell graduated first in her class and achieved fame as a doctor.
Maria Mitchell was another groundbreaking woman. She was educated by her father and, in 1847, became the first person to discover a comet with a telescope. The next year, she became the first woman elected to the American Academy of Arts and Sciences. In 1865 Mitchell joined the faculty of Vassar College.
Women’s gains in the 1800s were remarkable but far from complete. Women remained limited by social customs and expectations. In fact, women had just begun the long struggle to achieve their goal of equality.
D READING PROGRESS CHECK
Describing What gains did women make in the field of education?
r Connections to
TODAY
Women’s Colleges
Mount Holyoke is one of the Seven Sisters—a group of outstanding colleges founded to educate women. Today, Mount Holyoke and several of the Seven Sisters still provide a woman-only educational experience. Some of the Seven Sisters now admit men.
Foldables
[Study Organizer]
Include this lesson's information in your Foldable®.
o ,The Spirit of Refprrn
O t Social Reform
0 : The Abolitionists______
o , The Women's Movement
LESSON 3 REVIEW
Review Vocabulary
1.	Explain ways that suffrage and coeducation could offer women in the 1800s new ways to participate in society. 3oa
Answer the Guiding Questions
2.	Describing What contributions did Susan B. Anthony and Elizabeth Cady Stanton make to American society? 23E
3.	Evaluating How did the rights of married women improve in the 1800s? ia
PERSUASIVE WRITING
You are a woman who attended the Seneca Falls Convention. What arguments might you use to support suffrage? Write a paragraph explaining why women should have the right to vote. 29d;29e
Lesson 3 469
...................................... . /
Narrative of the Life of Frederick Douglass, an American Slave
Frederick Douglass (c. 1818-1895) was born and raised in slavery in Maryland. One of his owners broke the law by teaching him to read and write. Douglass escaped from slavery in 1838 and made his way to freedom in the North. There he began to speak against slavery.
This passage comes from the first chapter of
Frederick Douglass’s autobiography. He wrote the autobiography because many people doubted his story. They had heard him speak against slavery and thought he spoke too well to have once been enslaved. Douglass decided to tell his life story as a way to quiet these critics.
Frederick Douglass escaped a life of slavery to become a leading abolitionist.




eft-
4	- k.;;-
470	The Spiritof Reform -
PRIMARYSOURCE
UI was born in Tuckahoe, near Hillsborough, and about twelve miles from Easton, in Talbot County, Maryland. I have no accurate knowledge of my age, never having seen any authentic record containing it. By far the larger part of the slaves know as little of their ages as horses know of theirs, and it is the wish of most masters within my knowledge to keep their slaves thus ignorant. I do not remember to have ever met a slave who could tell of his birthday. They seldom come nearer to it than planting-time, harvest-time, cherry-time, spring-time, or fall-time. A want of information concerning my own was a source of unhappiness to me even during childhood. The white children could tell their ages. I could not tell why I ought to be deprived of the same privilege.
I was not allowed to make any inquiries of my master concerning it.... The nearest estimate I can give makes me now between twenty-seven and twenty-eight years of age. I come to this, from hearing my master say, some time during 1835,1 was about seventeen years old....
My mother and I were separated when I was but an infant—before I knew her as my mother. It is a common custom, in the part of Maryland from which I ran away, to part children from their mothers at a very early age. Frequently, before the child has reached its twelfth month, its mother is taken from it, and hired out on some farm a considerable distance off, and the child is placed under the care of an old woman, too old for field labor. For what this separation is done, I do not know, unless it be to hinder the development of the child's affection toward its mother, and to blunt and destroy the natural affection of the mother for the child. This is the inevitable result.
Literary Element
First-Person Point of View occurs when a story's narrator tells his or her own experiences. First-person narrators use the pronouns /, me, and we. These narrators tell readers a lot about their own experience but very little about the experiences of other people or characters in their stories. As you read, think about what you learn because Douglass tells his own story—and what you don't learn.
Vocabulary
hinder
to prevent
tidings
news
I never saw my mother, to know her as such, more than four or five times in my life; and each of these times was very short in duration, and at night. She was hired by a Mr. Stewart, who lived about twelve miles from my home. She made her journeys to see me in the night, traveling the whole distance on foot, after the performance of her day's work. She was a field hand, and a whipping is the penalty of not being in the field at sunrise.... I do not recollect of ever seeing my mother by the light of day....
Death soon ended what little [relationship] we could have while she lived, and with
it her hardships and suffering. She died when I was about seven years old.... I was not allowed to be present during her illness, at her death, or burial.... Never having enjoyed, to any considerable extent, her soothing presence, her tender and watchful care,
I received the tidings of her death with much the same emotions I should have probably felt at the death of a stranger. M
Analyzing Literature DBQ
0 Stating How old was Frederick Douglass when he wrote this narrative?
0 Citing Text Evidence How does Douglass feel about his age? Explain. 290
0 Drawing Inferences How does Douglass feel about his mother and her death? Explain. 29B
Lesson 3 471
^1
Activities
Directions: Write your answers using standard grammar, spelling, sentence structure, and punctuation.
© Use your faavHfl'S to explore the Essential Questions.
EXPOSITORY WRITING
Take on the role of a mid-1800s reformer and explain your goals for American society. Write an essay in which you describe the changes you hope to achieve and the challenges you face in getting people to change their ideas over time. 290 © Social Studies Skill
synthesizing Review the chapter for information about the reasons that people opposed abolition, temperance, and women's rights. Then select a current problem or injustice that you feel deeply about. Use the information from the chapter to draw conclusions about who in society today might be opposed to your cause and why. 29E
© Thinking Like a Historian
CREATING DIAGRAMS
Review the events related to the Second Great Awakening. Create a diagram like the one to the right to show some changes that resulted from this period of reform. Add additional spokes if you need to. Then explain the role that religion had in promoting these reforms. ia; 2jd © Visual Literacy
INTERPRETING IMAGES
This picture is called The Hunter's Shanty in theAdirondacks, by Currier and Ives. Describe the subject ofthis image. What kind of feeling or mood do you think the artists are trying to create? Is it an appealing image? Explain. 29B Second Great Awakening
472 The Spirit of Reform
Assessment
Directions: Write your answers using standard grammar,
CHECKING FOR UNDERSTANDING
o Explain the role each of the following individuals played in the reform movement. 22B
A.
Lyman Beecher D. William Lloyd Garrison B.
Horace Mann E. Susan B. Anthony C.
Dorothea Dix REVIEW THE GUIDING QUESTIONS
0 Describing What concern led to the rise of religious revivals and the Second Great Awakening? ia
0 Describing How did the Hudson River School contribute to American culture? 2«a
0 Describing What contributions did Frederick Douglass make to the abolitionist movement? 24b
0 Drawing Inferences John Quincy Adams's efforts to abolish slavery were denounced by many members of Congress. Why do you think this was so? 7D
0 Identifying What rights did the delegates to the Seneca Falls Convention advocate for women? 24b
0 Describing How did Emma Willard and Mary Lyon help improve women's education? 24b
CRITICAL THINKING
0 Analyzing Why did Henry David Thoreau refuse to pay a tax? How was his refusal an example of civil disobedience? 290
0 Interpreting In his antislavery pamphlet, David Walker wrote that "America is more our country than it is the whites'—we have enriched it with our blood and tears."What does he mean by this claim? 290
0 Evaluating Why do you think delegates to the Seneca Falls Convention modeled their declaration on the Declaration of Independence? ia,-23e
spelling, sentence structure, and punctuation.
0 Evaluating Evaluate the success of the educational reform movement and its impact on education in the United States. 24B
0 Making Connections Why is it not surprising that Lucretia Mott and Elizabeth Cady Stanton met at an antislavery convention? What did the antislavery movement have in common with the movement for women's rights? 23E
(0 Describing How was the Underground Railroad related to the movement to end slavery, and how did it help enslaved persons? 24b
© Comparing How did reformers use education to help people with disabilities and to create better conditions for prisoners? 24b
(0 Speculating Why do you think most African Americans rejected the plan of the American Colonization Society?
(0 Evaluating How might the Second Great Awakening have helped create the temperance movement?
23D;24B
(0 Identifying Bias In an 1858 speech to Congress, Senator James Henry Hammond said: "In all social systems there must be a class to do the menial duties, to perform the drudgery of life.... Such a class you must have, or you would not have that other class which leads progress, civilization, and refinement." Does Hammond show bias in his speech? Provide evidence to support your view. 29F
<0 Evaluating the Validity of Sources Reread the feature in the chapter. The introduction notes that Frederick Douglass wrote his autobiography to quiet his critics. Why did some people criticize Douglass? How would you describe Douglass's tone in the autobiography? Is it emotional or calm? Based on what you know and read about Douglass'life, do you believe his autobiography is accurate? 29G
Need Extra Help?
IfYou've
Missed Question
r * 0	O	O	O	0	0	0	0	0	©	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0
1,2,3	1	1	2	2	3	3	1	2	3	1	3	2	1	2	1	2	3
473
ASSGSSnWnt (continued)
DBQ
SHORT RESPONSE
This statement reflected the goals of the temperance movement.
PRIMARY SOURCE
"We hold these truths to be self-evident; that all men are created temperate [without the need to drink alcohol]; that they are endowed by their Creator with certain natural and innocent desires; that among these are the appetite for cold water and the pursuit of happiness!”
—from Manifesto of the Washington Total Abstinence Societies, 1841
© Making Connections Which American document does this passage imitate? How can you tell? 29A
© Hypothesizing Why do you think the writers chose this style? Explain. 29a,-29b
EXTENDED RESPONSE
© Expository Writing Write a short essay that describes the roots, goals, and accomplishments of the social reform, education reform, and women's rights movements. Explain the similarities and differences. Give an example of a change each movement achieved that affects your life today, ia
STANDARDIZED TEST PRACTICE
ANALYZING DOCUMENTS
Horace Mann wrote this excerpt in an 1848 report.
DBQ
PRIMARY SOURCE
"According to the European theory, men are divided [at birth] into classes,— some to toil and earn, others to seize and enjoy. According to the Massachusetts theory, all are to have an equal chance for earning, and equal security in the enjoyment of what they earn.... Education, then, beyond all other devices of human origin, is the great equalizer of the conditions of men.”
—from "Report No. 12 of the Massachusetts School Board" © A/w/yri/nj According to Mann, which describes the European theory? 290
A.
People in Europe are better than others. C. Opportunity is determined at birth. B.
Everyone has an equal chance. D. Massachusetts has good laws. © Identifying Cause and Effect According to Mann, what factor has the greatest influence on one's opportunity for earning and enjoyment? 29B
F.	education	h. social class at birth
G.	job security	I. where a person was born
Need Extra Help?
IfYou've Missed Question	©	©	©	©	©
Review Lesson	1	1	1,2,3	1	1
k
474 The Spirit of Reform
Toward Civil War
40-1861
QUESTION • Why does conflict develop?

all

■81
H

5W»
■I



IL
lillll
networks
There's More Online about the people and events that led the nation into civil war.
CHAPTER
17
Lesson 1
The Search for Compromise
Lesson 2
Challenges to Slavery
Lesson 3
Secession and War

«■■■
■III
■
js
The Story
Matters...
His is a complicated story that raises many questions about slavery and freedom. Dred Scott was born into slavery in Virginia. He has been taken against his will to live in many places—including places where slavery is illegal. Now Scott is wondering: Did his time in "free" territory turn him into a free man? He decides to take his question to a court for a judge to decide.
Other people wonder if Scott—an enslaved African American—even has the right to go to court.
The answers to these questions are of great interest to the people of the United States. Emotions run high as the debate over slavery rages.
Foldables
toed Scott was at the center of o controversial Supreme Court tilling in the 1850s.
Go to the Foldables® library in the back of your book to make a Foldable® that will help you take notes while reading this chapter.
Toward the Civil War
\The SearchW ChallenqesW Secession \ \ for \\ to | and ICompromiselj Slavery S War
^GrangerCollection \YC
475
CHAPTER 17
Place and Time: United States i840toi86i
networks eT MAP Explore the interactive version of
More Online!
this map on NETWORKS.
Ef TIMELINE Explore the interactive version ofthis time line on NETWORKS.
The divide between North and South, which had been deepening for decades, split wide following the election of 1860. States of the South decided they must break away from the Union and form their own nation.
Step Into the Place
MAP FOCUS
The map shows the states that seceded from the Union. REGIONS
To which side did the states in the far West belong? 29C LOCATION
Describe the location of the Union slave states relative to the other Union states and the seceding states. 29C 3	CRITICALTHINKING
Speculating How do you think the location of the Union slave states affected their decision not to secede?
William Henry	John Tyler
Harrison 1841	1841 1845
id^am^ert Azimuthal Equal-Area projection
<xhury Taylor	Millard Fillmore
; - bSSO	1850 1853
1854 Congress passes the Kansas-Nebraska Act
Franklin Pierce	n c
1853-1857	J857	t
Supreme Court
s-	\	makes Dred
I S I
Scott decision James Buchanan
1857-1861
Abraham Lincoln
1861-1865
135,080 SETS, 270,000 ¥011IMES SOW.
TOWS CABIN
fob SALE HEBE
- t curra, * aw •” —..................•
I
The EreatestBookof the Age. | Unde Tom's Cabin. The book played a powerful role in an increasingly emotional debate over slavery in the 1850s.
Step Into the Time
TIMELINE
Look at the time line. Which world event suggests that other nations were also debating the issue 
WORLD EVENTS
James Polk
1845-1849
1846 Congress establishes the Smithsonian Institution

1861
|L\	Civil War
” I	begins
I I
1
1
networks j
There's More Online!
Ef GAME Concentration
Ef graphic organizer |
The Kansas-Nebraska Act J
Ef maps
•	The Compromise of 1850 and Kansas-Nebraska Act, 1854
•	New Territories of the United States, 1848
Ef self-check quiz
& VIDEO
/'Hr *


The Search for Compromise
IT MATTERS BECAUSE
The decision whether to allow slavery in new territories was a heated issue that divided the nation.
TEKS
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills 1A Identify the major eras and events in U.S. history through 1877, including colonization, revolution, drafting of the Declaration of Independence, creation and ratification of the Constitution, religious revivals such as the Second Great Awakening, early republic, the Age of Jackson, westward expansion, reform movements, sectionalism, Civil War, and Reconstruction, and describe their causes and effects.
5C Explain the origin and development of American political parties.
6D Explain the causes and effects of the U.S.-Mexican War and their impact on the United States.
7C Analyze the impact of slavery on different sections of the United States.
7D Identify the provisions and compare the effects of congressional conflicts and compromises prior to the Civil War, including the roles of John Quincy Adams, John C. Calhoun, Henry Clay, and Daniel Webster.
8B Explain the causes of the Civil War, including sectionalism, states'rights, and slavery, and significant events of the Civil War, including the firing on Fort Sumter; the battles of Antietam, Gettysburg, and Vicksburg; the announcement of the Emancipation Proclamation; Lee's surrender at Appomattox Court House; and the assassination of Abraham Lincoln.
20C Analyze reasons for and the impact of selected examples of civil disobedience in U.S. history such as the Boston Tea Party and Henry David Thoreau's refusal to pay a tax.
Political Conflict Over Slavery
guiding question What political compromises were made because of slavery?
The question of slavery had long fueled debate in the United States. Each time this debate flared, the nation’s leaders struck some form of compromise.
For example, in 1820 the Missouri Compromise preserved the balance between slave and free states in the Senate. It also brought about a temporary stop in the debate over slavery.
New Territory Brings New Debates
In the 1840s, the debate over slavery in new territories erupted again. In 1844 the Democrats nominated James K. Polk of Tennessee for president and called for the annexation of Texas at the earliest possible time. After Polk’s election, Texas was admitted to the Union in December 1845.
Texas’s entry into the Union angered the Mexican government. Matters worsened when the two countries disputed the boundary between Texas and Mexico. At the same time, support was growing in the South for taking over California and New Mexico. President Polk tried to buy these territories from the Mexican government, but failed. All these issues helped lead to the U.S.-Mexican War.
Reading HELPDESK

Taking Notes: Describing_______________
As you read, use a diagram like the one shown to note reactions to the Kansas-Nebraska Act. Explain the reasons for these reactions.
478 Toward Civil War
Kansas-Nebraska Act
zzz
Anti slavery:
Pro-slavery:
Content Vocabulary
•	fugitive
•	secede
•	border ruffian
s
• civil war


Ilf
UNITED'
res
PACIFIC r OCEAN
ATLANTIC
OCEAN
iliiiiiiiii
GEOGRAPHY CONNECTION
The territory of the United States expanded in the mid-1800s.
LOCATION
How might location play a part in whether New Mexico and California became slave or free states? CRITICAL THINKING
Explaining How does this map help explain the growing divide over slavery in the United States?
300 miles
I---1—Hr
0	300 km
Albers Equal-Area projection 110* W
MEXICO
*;i,! ■’
Gulf of Mexico




Differing Views
The issue of new lands that might be gained from the war with Mexico led the country into a new era of sectionalism. Soon after the war with Mexico had begun, Representative David Wilmot of Pennsylvania introduced the Wilmot Proviso, which would ban slavery in any lands the United States might acquire from Mexico.
Southerners protested. They wanted the new territories to remain open to slavery. Senator John C. Calhoun of South Carolina offered another idea, saying that neither Congress nor any territorial government could ban slavery from a territory or regulate it.
Neither bill passed, but both caused heated debate. By the 1848 presidential election, the United States had taken California and New Mexico from Mexico but took no action on slavery in those territories.
In 1848 the Whigs picked General Zachary Taylor as their presidential candidate. The Democrats chose Senator Lewis Cass of Michigan. Both candidates ignored the slavery issue, which angered some voters.
Those who opposed any territorial expansion of slavery left their parties and formed the Free-Soil Party. Its slogan was Free Soil, Free Speech, Free Labor, and Free Men. The party chose former president Martin Van Buren as its candidate. Taylor won, but the Free-Soil Party gained several seats in Congress.
ftcademit Vocabulary
regulate to control
21A Identify different points of view of political parties and interest groups on important historical and contemporary issues.
21C Summarize a historical event in which compromise resulted in a peaceful resolution.
24A Describe the historical development of the abolitionist movement.
SKILLS PRACTICE________________________
Work with a partner. Take turns asking one another questions about what was taught in class. Answer one another's questions.
Lesson 1 479

James Michael Newell painted this mural, The Underground Railroad, in the post office of Dolgeville, New York, in 1940.
CRITICAL THINKING
Analyzing Visuals What methods does the painter use to show the danger and difficulties facing the runaway family? Reading HELPDESK
’ ................... -
fugitive a person who is running away from legal authority
secede to officially leave an organization
A
New Compromise Concerned over growing abolitionism, Southerners wanted a strong national fugitive (FYOO»juh»tihv), or runaway, slave law. Such a law would require every state to return runaway slaves.
In 1849 California applied to become a state—without slavery.
If California became a free state, however, slave states would be outvoted in the Senate. Even worse, antislavery groups wanted to ban slavery in Washington, D.C. Southerners talked about seceding (seh»SEED»ihng) from, or leaving, the Union.
In 1850 Senator Henry Clay of Kentucky suggested a compromise. California would be a free state, but other new territories would have no limits on slavery. In addition, the slave trade, but not slavery itself, would be illegal in Washington, D.C. Clay also pushed for a stronger fugitive slave law.	,
A heated debate took place in Congress. Senator Calhoun | opposed Clay’s plan. Senator Daniel Webster supported it. Then | President Taylor, who was against Clay’s plan, died unexpectedly, j Vice President Millard Fillmore, who favored the plan, became 1 president.	\
Senator Stephen A. Douglas of Illinois solved the problem. * He divided Clay’s plan into parts, each to be voted on separately. j Fillmore had several Whigs abstain, or not vote, on the parts they j opposed. In the end, Congress passed the Compromise of 1850.	-
Academic Vocabulary_______ SKILLS PRACTICE_____________
network an interconnected system	As you read, list the words you do not know.
Then ask for help with the words.
[oward Civil War
The Fugitive Slave Act
Part of the Compromise of 1850 was the Fugitive Slave Act Anyone who helped a fugitive could be fined or imprisoned.
Some Northerners refused to obey the new law. In his 1849 essay “Civil Disobedience,” Henry David Thoreau wrote that if the law “requires you to be the agent [cause] of injustice to another, then I say, break the law.” Northern juries refused to convict people accused of breaking the new law. People gave money to buy freedom for enslaved people. Free African Americans and whites formed a network, or interconnected system, called the Underground Railroad to help runaways find their way to freedom. Democrat Franklin Pierce became president in 1853.
He intended to enforce the Fugitive Slave Act.
Dreading progress check
Explaining Who formed the Free-Soil Party and why?
The Kansas-Nebraska Act
guiding question What was the Kansas-Nebraska Act?
In 1854 Senator Stephen A. Douglas of Illinois introduced a bill to settle the issue of slavery in the territories. It organized the region west of Missouri and Iowa as the territories of Kansas and Nebraska. Both were north of 36°30’ N latitude, the line that limited slavery. Before the law, they would have been free, giving the free states more votes in the Senate and angering the South.
Douglas hoped to make his plan acceptable to both the North and South. He proposed repealing the Missouri Compromise and letting the voters in each territory vote on whether to allow slavery. He called his proposal “popular sovereignty.
> - Z7'



GEOGRAPHY CONNECTION
As the United States grew, so did the debate over slaveholding.
PLACE
Which territories did not allow slavery in 1854? CRITICAL THINKING
Analyzing Which side in the slavery debate lost territory because of the Kansas-Nebraska Act in 1854? <■	- v x
The Compromise of 1850
The Kansas-Nebraska Act 1854
- c

:/c
Uta
Terriia
rMex
'N'
ATLANTIC
OCEAN
PACIFIC
OCEAN
Tern
MEXICO o
600 miles
f 600 km »
Albert Equal-Area projectiorT
r .
□□ Free states |	] Slave states
□□ Indian territory
|	| Territory open
to slaveholding
H
Territory closed to slaveholding oraskal
qtory
Kansas
. MEXICO o
600 miles
0	600 km
Equal-Area projection
V4
ATLANTIC
OCEAN

481
border ruffian an armed pro-slavery supporter who crossed the border from Missouri to vote in Kansas
civil war a conflict between citizens of the same country
Include this lesson's
information in your
Foldable®.
| °	Joy/ard the Civil War
\The Searcb\\ Challenqesv Secession \
\ for \ to \	and '
iCompromisea Slavery | War
This idea, which is central to the American system of government, means that the people are the source of all government power. Douglass popular sovereignty came to mean a particular method for deciding the question of slavery in a place.
Northerners protested. The plan allowed slavery in areas that had been free for years. Southerners supported the bill. They expected Kansas to be settled mostly by slaveholders from Missouri. They would, of course, vote to keep slavery legal. With some support from Northern Democrats and the backing of President Pierce, the Kansas-Nebraska Act passed in 1854. Conflict in Kansas
Supporters of both sides rushed to Kansas. Armed pro-slavery supporters known as border ruffians (BOHR«duhr RUH»fee»uhns) crossed the border from Missouri just to vote. When elections took place, only about 1,500 voters lived in Kansas, but more than 6,000 people voted. The pro-slavery group won.
Kansas established laws supporting slavery. Slavery opponents refused to accept the laws. They armed themselves, held their own elections, and adopted a constitution banning slavery. By January 1856, Kansas had two rival governments.
In May 1856, slavery supporters attacked the town of Lawrence, an antislavery stronghold. When John Brown, a fervent abolitionist, heard of the attack, he vowed to “strike terror” against the foes of abolition. Brown led an attack that killed five supporters of slavery. Newspapers wrote about “Bleeding Kansas” and “the Civil War in Kansas.” A civil war is war between citizens of the same country. In October 1856, federal troops arrived to stop the bloodshed.
H READING PROGRESS CHECK
Identifying Cause and Effect What events led to "Bleeding Kansas"?
LESSON 1 REVIEW
Review Vocabulary
1.	Explain the significance of the following terms, joa a. fugitive b. secede
2.	Use the following terms in a short paragraph about Kansas in the 1850s. 7c
a. border ruffians b. civil war
Answer the Guiding Questions
3.	Identifying What were the provisions of the Compromise of 1850 as proposed by Henry Clay? io
482 Toward Civil War
4.	Analyzing How did Stephen Douglas persuade Congress to pass the Compromise of 1850? 21c
5.	Identifying What were the provisions of the Kansas-Nebraska Act? 7c;?d
6.	Analyzing Why did some Northerners defy the Fugitive Slave Act? 7c;2«c
EXPOSITORY WRITING
In a paragraph, describe the causes of increased sectional tension in the 1840s. ia j	networks
■	There's More Online!
gf BIOGRAPHY
;	Abraham LuKoin
GAME
Fill in Hi' ‘ikiiik gf GRAPHIC ORGANIZER
l	Political Patties • ’ ■> 1856
Lesson 2
MAP
The Elm bun of 1856 [?f PRIMARYSOURCE
A
Plea fm i apt.im iohn Brown Challenges to Slavery
l?f SELF-CHECK QUIZ
L QUESTION
Whydoes conflict develop? 
It Matters Because
TEKS
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills 1A Identify the major eras and events in U.S. history through 1877, including colonization, revolution, drafting of the Declaration of Independence, creation and ratification of the Constitution, religious revivals such as the Second Great Awakening, early republic, the Age of Jackson, westward expansion, reform movements, sectionalism, Civil War, and Reconstruction, and describe their causes and effects.
5C Explain the origin and development of American political parties.
7C Analyze the impact of slavery on different sections of the United States.
8B Explain the causes of the Civil War, including sectionalism, states' rights, and slavery, and significant events of the Civil War, including the firing on Fort Sumter; the battles of Antietam, Gettysburg, and Vicksburg; the announcement of the Emancipation Proclamation; Lee's surrender at Appomattox Court House; and the assassination of Abraham Lincoln.
18C Evaluate the impact of selected landmark Supreme Court decisions, including Dred Scott v. Sandford, on life in the United States.
21A Identify different points of view of political parties and interest groups on important historical and contemporary issues. 24A Describe the historical development of the abolitionist movement.
29D Identify points of view from the historical context surrounding an event and the frame of reference which influenced the participants.
/Ls feelings over slavery intensified, the chance for compromise disappeared.
Birth of the Republican Party
guidingquestion How did a new political party affect the challenges to slavery?
After the Kansas-Nebraska Act, the Democratic Party began to divide along sectional lines. Northern Democrats left the party. Differing views over slavery also split the Whig Party.
The 1854 Congressional Elections
Antislavery Whigs and Democrats joined with Free-Soilers to form the Republican Party. One of the party’s major goals was the banning of slavery in new territories. In 1854 the Republicans chose candidates to challenge the pro-slavery Whigs and Democrats in state and congressional elections.
The Republicans quickly showed strength in the North. In the election, they won control of the House of Representatives and several state governments. Unlike the Republicans, almost three-fourths of the Democratic candidates from free states lost in 1854.
In contrast, Republican candidates received almost no support in the South. At the same time, the Democrats, having lost members in the North, were becoming a largely Southern party. This division would be even more apparent in the presidential
Content Vocabulary
•	arsenal
•	martyr
Lesson 2 483
THE ELECTION OF
1856 45.32%
1,832,955
Buchanan (Democrat) Fremont (Republican) Fillmore (Whig-American)
Numbers on map show electoral votes per state.
People living in u.x territories coma not vote in presidential elections.
REGIONS
In which region was Fremont most successful? Which states in that region did he notwin? CRITICAL THINKING
Drawing Conclusions A landslide is an overwhelming victory. Do you think Buchanan's victory was a landslide? Why or why not?
The Presidential Election of 1856
The Whig Party, torn apart over slavery, did not offer a candidate in 1856. Republicans chose Californian John C. Fremont, a famed western explorer. The party platform called for free territories. Its campaign slogan was “Free soil, Free speech, and Fremont.”
The Democratic Party nominated James Buchanan of Pennsylvania. He was a diplomat and former member of Congress. Buchanan tried to appeal to Southern whites. The Democratic Party endorsed the idea of popular sovereignty.
The American Party, or Know-Nothings, grew quickly between 1853 and 1856 by attacking immigrants. The party nominated former president Millard Fillmore as its candidate. Yet this party was also divided over the issue of the Kansas-Nebraska Act. When the Know-Nothings refused to call for a repeal of the act, many Northern supporters left the party.
The vote in 1856 was divided along rigid sectional lines. Buchanan took all the Southern states except Maryland. Fremont won 11 of the 16 free states but did not get any electoral votes from south of the Mason-Dixon Line. With 174 electoral votes compared to 114 for Fremont and 8 for Fillmore, Buchanan won. a READING PROGRESS CHECK
Reading HELPDESK
Explaining Why did the Republican Party form?


Reading Strategy: Context Clues______________________
When you find an unknown word, look at surrounding text for dues to the meaning. Clues to the meaning of the unknown word may be:
484 Toward Civil War
a definition: The word is defined immediately following its use. a synonym: A word or expression that has the same meaning as another word or expression. (For example, huge, big, and enormous are synonyms.) inference: Hints are given to help you figure out the meaning.
Dred Scott v. Sandford
guiding question Why was the Dred Scott case important?
I
i
Dred Scott was an enslaved African American bought by a doctor in Missouri, a slave state. In the 1830s, the doctor moved with Scott to Illinois, a free state, then to the Wisconsin Territory. The Northwest Ordinance of 1787 banned slavery there. Later the doctor returned with Scott to Missouri.
In 1846 antislavery lawyers helped Scott sue for his freedom. Scott claimed he should be free since he had lived in areas where slavery was illegal. Eleven years later, the case reached the Supreme Court. At issue was Scott’s status, but the case also gave the Court a chance to make a landmark ruling on the issue of slavery.
The Court Rules
In 1857 Chief Justice Roger B. Taney (TAW*nee) delivered the Court’s opinion: Dred Scott was still enslaved. The Court ruled that African Americans, enslaved or free, were not citizens. Therefore, Scott had no right to bring a lawsuit. Taney wrote that living on free soil did not make Scott free. An enslaved person was property. The Fifth Amendment prohibited the taking of property without “due process.”
Finally, Taney wrote that Congress had no power to ban slavery. The Missouri Compromise, which
Many newspapers announced the Dred Scott decision on their front pages. Scott is pictured at bottom left, next to a picture of his wife.
CRITICAL THINKING
Analyzing Images Do these images present a positive view of Scott? Explain your answer. had banned slavery north of 36°30’ N latitude, was unconstitutional, and so was popular sovereignty. Not even voters could ban slavery because it would mean taking someone’s property. In effect, Taney said that the Constitution protected slavery.
Reaction to the Decision
The Court’s decision upheld what many white Southerners believed: Nothing could legally stop slavery. It ruled that limiting the spread of slavery, the Republicans’ main issue, was unconstitutional.
Republicans and other antislavery groups were outraged. They called the decision “a wicked and false judgment” and “the greatest crime” ever committed in the nation’s courts.
B reading progress check
Explaining Why was the Dred Scott decision controversial?
jgdemit Vocabulary
dgid firm and inflexible
Lesson 2 485
i
i
I
i
1
BIOGRAPHY
Abraham Lincoln (1809-1865)
Just a few years before becoming a national leader, Lincoln was relatively unknown. From a poor rural family, Lincoln knew the importance of education to success. As a young man, he had mostly taught himself and in time became a lawyer. Lincoln was intensely opposed to slavery. He served in the Illinois state legislature and the U. S. Congress. In 1858, he ran for the Senate against Stephen A. Douglas. Although Lincoln lost the election, he gained national attention as a leading Northern voice against slavery.
CRITICAL THINKING
Speculating Why do you think Lincoln won fame in spite of losing the race for the Senate?
Lincoln and Douglas
guiding QUESTION How did Abraham Lincoln and Stephen A. Douglas play a role in the challenges to slavery?
The Illinois Senate race of 1858 was the center of national attention. The contest pitted the current senator, Democrat Stephen A. Douglas, against a rising star in the Republican Party, named Abraham Lincoln.
People considered Douglas a possible candidate for president in the 1860 election. Lincoln, far less known outside of his state, challenged Douglas to a series of debates. Douglas reluctantly agreed.
The Lincoln-Douglas Debates
Lincoln and Douglas debated seven times. The face-offs took place in Illinois cities and villages during August, September, and October of 1858. Thousands of spectators came to the debates. Newspapers provided wide coverage. The main topic, or subject of discussion, was slavery.
During the debate at Freeport, Lincoln pressed Douglas about his views on popular sovereignty. Lincoln asked whether the people of a territory could legally exclude slavery before becoming a state.
Douglas replied that voters could exclude slavery by refusing to pass laws that protected the rights of slaveholders. Douglass response, which became known as the Freeport Doctrine, satisfied antislavery followers, but it cost Douglas support in the South.
Douglas claimed that Lincoln wanted African Americans to be fully equal to whites. Lincoln denied this. Still, Lincoln insisted that African Americans should enjoy rights and freedoms:
PRIMARY SOURCE
& But in the right to eat the bread... which his own hand earns, [an African American] is my equal and the equal of [Senator] Douglas, and the equal of every living man.
—Abraham Lincoln, August 21,1858
The real issue, Lincoln said, was “between the men who think slavery a wrong and those who do not think it wrong. The Republican Party think it wrong.”
Reading HELPDESK

Academic Vocabulary
topic a subject of discussion
SKILLS PRACTICE
Retell part of a lesson to a group of classmates. Use pictures to support important points and explain how the picture supports the text.
486 Toward Civil War

St


.x
Following the debates, Douglas won a narrow victory in the election. Lincoln lost but did not come away empty-handed. He gained a national reputation as a man of clear thinking who could argue with force and persuasion.
John Brown and Harpers Ferry
After the 1858 election, Southerners felt threatened by Republicans. Then, an act of violence added to their fears.
On October 16, 1859, the abolitionist John Brown led a group on a raid on Harpers Ferry, Virginia. His target was a federal arsenal (AHRSmuhl), a storage site for weapons. Brown hoped to arm enslaved African Americans and start a revolt against slaveholders. Abolitionists had paid for the raid.
The Lincoln-Douglas debates have been described as "the most famous war of words in history."
CRITICAL THINKING
Analyzing Visuals How does the artist of this picture portray the audience of the debate?
« Now if . I should forfeit my life for the furtherance of the ends of justice and MINGLE MY BLOOD... with the blood of millions in this slave country whose rights are disregar e by wicked, cruel, and unjust enactments—I submit; so LET IT BE DONE.
_	r -__■fr/'V 4*1
-John Brown's statement to the Virginia Court

arsenal a place to store weapons and Military equipment
Lesson 2 487
r
Colonel Robert E. Lee and federal troops crushed Brown's raid. More than half of Brown's group, including two of his sons, died in the fighting. Lee's troops captured Brown and his surviving men.
CRITICAL THINKING
Analyzing Primary Sources Why do you think Brown's raid was so controversial in the United States of the late 1850s?
martyr a person who dies for a cause
Foldables
Study Organizer
Include this lesson's information in your Foldable®.
Toward the Civil War
\The Searchu ChallengesSecession \ for « to u and sCompromisJ Slavery i War
LESSON 2 REVIEW
Review Vocabulary
1.	Use the word arsenal in a sentence about Harpers Ferry. 3oa;3ob
2.	Explain the meaning of martyr as it relates to John Brown. 3oa
Answer the Guiding Questions
3.	Explaining What issue led to the formation of the Republican Party, and what stand did the party take on the issue? sc;2ia
Local citizens and federal troops defeated Brown’s raid.
Tried and convicted of treason and murder, Brown received a death sentence. His hanging shook the North. Some antislavery Northerners rejected Brown’s use of violence. Others saw him as a martyr (MAHR*tuhr)—a person who dies for a cause.
John Brown’s death rallied abolitionists. When white Southerners learned of Brown’s abolitionist ties, their fears of a great Northern conspiracy against them were confirmed. The nation was on the brink of disaster.
Q READING PROGRESS CHECK
Identifying Why did John Brown raid the arsenal at Harpers Ferry?
4.	Evaluating What was the impact of the Dred Scott decision? ia; isc
5.	Describing How did reactions to the Dred Scott decision increase sectional tensions? iajk
6.	Drawing Inferences Why do you think the raid on Harpers Ferry by just a few men was so threatening to Southerners? 29b
PERSUASIVE WRITING
Imagine you live at the time of John Brown's raid on Harpers Ferry. Write a letter to the editor of a local paper expressing your feelings about his methods. 488 Toward Civil War
networks
/here's More Online!
Ef GAME Tk Lh Toe gf GRAPHIC ORGANIZER
ZAg..

MAP
Si’it'diiK] SlJtes 1860 1861 Ef political cartoon
Lesson 3
thi' Union
Ef SELF-CHECK QUIZ
Secession and War
IAL QUESTION
Wftydoesconflict develop? It Matters Because
When Abraham Lincoln was elected president, the Southern states decided to break away from the Union.
TEKS
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills 1A Identify the major eras and events in U.S. history through 1877, including colonization, revolution, drafting of the Declaration of Independence, creation and ratification of the Constitution, religious revivals such as the Second Great Awakening, early republic, the Age of Jackson, westward expansion, reform movements, sectionalism, Civil War, and Reconstruction, and describe their causes and effects.
7C Analyze the impact of slavery on different sections of the United States.
8A Explain the roles played by significant individuals during the Civil War, including Jefferson Davis, Ulysses S. Grant, Robert E.
Lee, and Abraham Lincoln, and heroes such as congressional Medal of Honor recipients William Carney and Philip Bazaar.
8B Explain the causes of the Civil War, including sectionalism, states' rights, and slavery, and significant events of the Civil War, including the firing on Fort Sumter; the battles of Antietam, Gettysburg, and Vicksburg; the announcement of the Emancipation Proclamation; Lee's surrender at Appomattox Court House; and the assassination of Abraham Lincoln.
8C Analyze Abraham Lincoln's ideas about liberty, equality, union, and government as contained in his first and second inaugural addresses and the Gettysburg Address and contrast them with the ideas contained in Jefferson Davis's inaugural address.
The 1860 Election
G u ID i N G Q u E st i o N What was the importance of the election of 1860?
In the presidential election of 1860, the big question was whether the Union would continue to exist. Sectionalism divided the nation more than ever.
The issue of slavery split the Democratic Party. Northern Democrats supported popular sovereignty. They nominated Stephen Douglas. Southern Democrats vowed to uphold slavery. Their candidate was John C. Breckinridge.
Moderates from the North and South formed the Constitutional Union Party. The Constitutional Unionists took no position on slavery. They chose John Bell as their candidate.
The Republicans nominated Abraham Lincoln. They wanted to leave slavery alone where it existed—but also to ban it in the territories. Still, white Southerners feared that a Republican victory would promote slave revolts as well as interfere with slavery.
With the Democrats divided, Lincoln won a clear majority of electoral votes. Voting followed sectional lines. Lincoln’s name did not even appear on the ballot in most Southern states. He won every Northern state, however. In effect, the more populous North outvoted the South.
Wng HELPDESK
Taking Notes: Sequencing______
As you read, list the major events on a time line like the one shown.
Content Vocabulary
•	secession
•	states' rights
Lesson 3 489
10A Locate places and regions of importance in the United States during the 17th, 18th, and 19th centuries.
17B Explain constitutional issues arising over the issue of states'rights, including the Nullification Crisis and the Civil War.
Some Southerners wore ribbons like this to show their support for secession from the Union. The ribbons carried slogans, such as this one used in the American Revolution— "Liberty or Death."
CRITICAL THINKING
Analyzing Why do you think secessionists used the same slogans as those used in the Revolutionary War?
Looking for Compromise
The Republicans had promised not to stop slavery where it already existed. Yet white Southerners did not trust the Republicans to protect their rights. On December 20,1860, South Carolina voted to secede from the Union.
In other Southern states, leaders debated the question of secession, or withdrawal from the Union. Meanwhile, members of Congress tried to find ways to prevent it. Senator John Crittenden of Kentucky suggested a series of amendments to the Constitution. They included a protection for slavery south of 36°30’ N latitude—the line set by the Missouri Compromise—in all territories “now held or hereafter acquired.”
Republicans rejected, or refused to accept, Crittenden’s idea. They had just won an election by promising to stop slavery’s spread into any territories. “Now we are told ...” Lincoln wrote, “the government shall be broken up unless we surrender to those we have beaten.”
Leaders in the South also rejected the plan. “We spit upon every plan to compromise,” exclaimed one Southern leader. “No human power can save the Union,” wrote another.
The Confederacy Established
By February 1861, Texas, Louisiana, Mississippi, Alabama, Florida, and Georgia had joined South Carolina and seceded. Delegates from these states met to form a new nation. Calling themselves the Confederate States of America, they chose Jefferson Davis as their president.
Southerners used states' rights to justify secession. Each state, they argued, had voluntarily chosen to enter the Union. They defined the Constitution as a contract among the independent states. They believed the national government had broken the contract by refusing to enforce the Fugitive Slave Act and by denying Southern states equal rights in the territories. As a result, Southerners argued, the states had a right to leave the Union. The Public Reacts to Secession
Not all white Southerners welcomed secession. Church bells rang, and some people celebrated in the streets. To other Southerners, the idea of secession was alarming. Virginian Robert E. Lee expressed concern about the future. “I only see that a fearful calamity is upon us,” he wrote.
Reading HELPDESK
secession withdrawal
states' rights the idea that states should have all powers that the Constitution does not give to the federal government or forbid to the states
Academic Vocabulary_____________
reject to refuse to accept justify to provide an explanation for
490 Toward Civil War
Some Northerners approved of the Southern secession. If the Union could survive only by giving in to slavery, they declared, then let the Union be destroyed. Still, most Northerners believed that the Union had to be preserved. As Lincoln put it, the issue was “whether in a free government the minority have the right to break up the government whenever they choose.”
Lincoln Takes Over
As always, several months passed between the November election and the start of the new president’s term. Buchanan would remain in office until March 4, 1861. In December 1860, Buchanan sent a message to Congress. He said that the Southern states had no right to secede from the Union. He added that he had no power to stop them from doing so.
As Lincoln prepared for his inauguration, people throughout the United States wondered what he would say and do. They wondered, too, what would happen in Virginia, North Carolina, Kentucky, Tennessee, Missouri, Delaware, Maryland, and Arkansas. These slave states had not yet seceded, but their decisions were not final. If the United States used force against the Confederates, the remaining slave states also might secede.
GEOGRAPHY CONNECTION
Some slaveholding states and territories did not secede from the Union.
LOCATION
Which states seceded before the attack on Fort Sumter? Which seceded after the attack on Fort Sumter? CRITICAL THINKING
Speculating Which side controlled more territory, and how might the answer affect a military conflict between the two sides?
This cartoon was created in 1861, just before the Civil War began. At that time, secession was breaking apart the United States.
INTERPRETING
What do the men in the cartoon represent? CRITICAL THINKING
Drawing Conclusions What do you think the cartoonist is predicting will happen because of the men's action?
In his Inaugural Address, Lincoln spoke to the seceding states directly. He said that he could not allow secession and that “the Union of these States is perpetual [forever].” He vowed to hold federal property in the South, including a number of forts and military installations, and to enforce the laws of the United States. At the same time, Lincoln pleaded with the South:
PRIMARY SOURCE
M
In your hands, my dissatisfied fellow countrymen, and not in mine, is the momentous issue of civil war. The Government will not assail you. You can have no conflict without being yourselves the aggressors.... ... We are not enemies, but friends. We must not be enemies. Though passion may have strained, it must not break our bonds of affection. 99
—Abraham Lincoln, First Inaugural Address
0
s
Dreading progress check	I
Explaining What was John Crittenden's proposal to save the Union?
r
Reading HELPDESK


Build Vocabulary: Word Parts
The suffix -ist on the word cartoonist tells you that a cartoonist is a person. The same is true of the words pianist (a person who plays the piano) and essayist (a person who writes essays). Can you think of other examples with the suffix -istl
SKILLS PRACTICE
Look for words you know on labels of things. Think about what the words mean.
I
492 Toward Civil War
Fighting at Fort Sumter
guiding question What did the attack on Fort Sumter signify?
The day after taking office, Lincoln received a message from the commander of Fort Sumter, a U.S. fort on an island guarding Charleston Harbor. The message warned that the fort was low on supplies and the Confederates demanded its surrender.
Lincoln responded in a message to Governor Francis Pickens of South Carolina that he was sending an unarmed group to the fort with supplies. He promised Union forces would not “throw in men, arms, or ammunition” unless they were fired upon.
Jefferson Davis ordered his forces to attack Fort Sumter before the Union supplies could arrive. Confederate guns opened fire on April 12, 1861. Union captain Abner Doubleday witnessed the attack from inside the fort:
PRIMARYSOURCE
«Showers of balls... and shells poured into the fort in one incessant stream, causing great flakes of masonry to fall in all directions. 99
—quoted in Fort Sumter
Meanwhile, high seas kept Union ships from reaching the fort. Facing a hopeless situation, the Union surrendered the fort on April 14. Despite heavy bombardment, no one had died.
With the loss of Fort Sumter, Lincoln decided he had to act. He issued a call for troops. Volunteers quickly signed up. In reaction to Lincolns call, Virginia, North Carolina, Tennessee, and Arkansas voted to join the Confederacy. The Civil War had begun.
B READING PROGRESS CHECK
Explaining Why did Lincoln decide not to send armed troops to Fort Sumter?
Include this lesson's information in your Foldable®.
Toward the Civil V/qr,. ,,
The Search\\ Challenges’ll Secession For	to	\l	and
ICompromisel Slavery I	War
LESSON 3 REVIEW
Review Vocabulary
!• Use the word secession in a sentence about Texas. 30B
2.	Explain the meaning of states' rights as it relates to the U.S. Constitution. 3oa
Answer the Guiding Questions
3.	Describing What did South Carolina do after Lincoln won the election of 1860? Why? ia
Explaining What was the impact of the attack on Fort Sumter? sb
5.	Drawing Conclusions What was President Lincoln's priority when he took office in March 1861? 29b
6.	Analyzing How did disagreements over the constitutional issue of states' rights increase sectional tensions? ia;sb;i7b
DESCRIPTIVE WRITING
Write a brief newspaper article about the attack on Fort Sumter that describes the battle in an objective way, without bias for one side or the other. SB Lesson 3 493
I-
What DoYou
Think?
Did the South Have the Right to Secede?
When Abraham Lincoln began his first term as president on March 4,1861, seven Southern states had already voted to secede from the Union and formed the Confederate States of America.
The Confederacy’s president, Jefferson Davis, had taken office earlier, on February 18,1861. Each man’s inaugural address presented a different view on whether a state has the right to secede.
primary source
Yes
JEFFERSON DAVIS
« Our present position... illustrates the American idea that government rests upon the consent of the governed, and that it is the right of the people to alter or abolish a government whenever it becomes destructive of the ends for which it was established. The declared purpose of the compact of Union from which we have withdrawn was to 'establish justice, insure domestic tranquility, to provide for the common defence, to promote the general welfare, and to secure the blessings of liberty for ourselves and our posterity'; and when in the judgment of the sovereign States now comprising this Confederacy it [no longer meets] the purposes for which it was ordained, and ceased to answer the ends for which it was established, a peaceful appeal to the ballot box declared that, so far as they are concerned, the government created by that compact should cease to exist. In this they merely asserted a right which the Declaration of Independence of July 4,1776, defined to be inalienable. W —Jefferson Davis
Jefferson Davis's inauguration took place at the capitol in Montgomery, Alabama.
Abraham Lincoln's inauguration took place at the United States capitol in Washington, D.C.
I ['tOTf'i.jj
r IB
nuuwsmma
ordain
to establish
administer
to manage, direct
ABRAHAM LINCOLN ,
M
The [president] derives all his authority from the people, and they have referred not harmed, not damaged none upon him to fix terms for the separation of the States. The people themselves can do this if also they choose, but the executive as such has nothing to do with it. His duty is to administer the present government as it
came to his hands and to transmit it unimpaired by him to his successor....
What Do You Think? DBQ
... The mystic chords of memory, stretching from every
battlefield and patriot grave to every living heart and
hearthstone all over this broad land, will yet swell the
chorus of the Union, when again touched, as surely they
will be, by the better angels of our nature. W
—Abraham Lincoln
o Contrasting What are Abraham Lincoln's and Jefferson Davis's positions on the nature of the union of states and government? sc
© Drawing Inferences What issue seems most important to Lincoln? To Davis? 2«b
o Evaluating In your opinion, which of the two makes the more powerful appeal to emotions? Explain your answer in a short essay. 300
Lesson 3 495
Activities
Directions: Write your answers using standard grammar, spelling, sentence structure, and punctuation.
O
Use your fto explore the Essential Question. EXPOSITORY WRITING
Make a list of five important events you read about in this chapter. Select the two events you think did the most to increase the conflict between the North and South. Write an essay in which you explain how these events led to war. ia © Social Studies Skills
identifying PROBLEMS AND SOLUTIONS Working with a small group, think of a controversial issue that is a source of disagreement among the public today. Use the database at Congress.gov to research recent bills proposed to deal with the issue. Organize the proposed bills in a chart that explains the main provisions of each bill and evaluates whether each would be an effective
solution.
29A;29C;29E
© Thinking Like a Historian
CREATING charts Create a chart that identifies the provisions of congressional conflicts and compromises before the Civil War and compares their effects. Include the roles played by John C. Calhoun, Henry Clay, and Daniel Webster. 70
© Visual Literacy
interpreting images Study this campaign poster produced by the Free-Soil Party for the presidential election of 1848. How does the design communicate a sense of balance and unity? What symbols does it use? Do you think the poster is effective? 3od
W"
fURf. SO’b. FTIKk tABOh.. mi’R


'MS.
(l^The Granger Collection, NYC
496 Toward Civil War
Assessment Jjp
Directions: Write your answers using standard grammar, and punctuation.
CHECKING FOR UNDERSTANDING
0 Explain the role each of the following individuals played as the United States drew closer to civil war
7D;8B;18(
A.
Henry Clay B.
Stephen Douglas C.
Dred Scott D.
John Brown E.
Jefferson Davis REVIEW THE GUIDING QUESTIONS
0 Identifying What was the Fugitive Slave Act? io, 7d
0 Analyzing How was"the Civil War in Kansas"related to the dispute over the westward expansion of slavery?
0 Explaining How did the presidential election of 1856 reflect a growing sectional divide in the United States? ia;sb
0 Explaining Why did the Supreme Court rule against Dred Scott? isc
0 Identifying What compromise did John Crittenden propose to avoid secession? 7c
0 Explaining Why does the attack on Fort Sumter mark the beginning of the Civil War? ia
CRITICAL THINKING
0 Analyzing Some Northerners responded to the Fugitive Slave Act with acts of civil disobedience.
Do you think they should have been punished for breaking the law? Explain your response. 20c
0 Identifying Problems and Solutions How did the
compromise Henry Clay proposed in 1850 address the concerns of Southerners? 70
spelling, sentence structure,
© Analyzing Why were Northerners opposed to the idea of popular sovereignty? 290
(0 Evaluating What was the impact of the Dred Scott decision on life in the United States? Consider how different groups reacted to the decision, isc
© Speculating How do you think Henry David Thoreau would have responded to the raid on Harpers Ferry? Was the raid an act of civil disobedience? 29D
© Analyzing In his debates with Douglas, Lincoln argued that"in the right to eat the bread... which his own hand earns, [an African American] is... the equal of every living man."What does he mean by this claim? 290
© Contrasting Reread the Inaugural Addresses given by Lincoln and Davis in the feature. How do their visions of liberty and equality differ from one another? «c;29b
© Analyzing What issue divided the Democratic Party in the election of 1860? How did this division benefit Lincoln? 21A
© Analyzing In his Inaugural Address, Lincoln said that "The mystic chords of memory... will yet swell the chorus of the Union."To what memory does he refer?
8C
© Applying Relative Chronologylhmk about these three significant eras: Westward Expansion, Reform, and Sectionalism. List each of the events below in the correct era according to chronology, ib
Compromise of 1850 Second Great Awakening Dred Scott decision "Fifty-Four Forty or Fight"
Seneca Falls Convention Texas declares independence
Need Extra Help?
497
i
Assessment (continued)
SHORT RESPONSE
Erastus D. Ladd described voters from Missouri crossing the border to vote in an 1855 election in Kansas.
PRIM ARY SOURCE
"[T]hey claimed to have a legal right to vote in the Territory [Kansas], and that they were residents by virtue of their being then in the Territory. They said they were free to confess that they came from Missouri; that they lived in Missouri, and voted as Missourians."
—Report of the Special Committee Appointed to Investigate the Troubles in Kansas, 1856
© Interpreting Did Ladd think the actions of these voters were legal? Explain your answer, n © Drawing InferencesWhaX is Ladd suggesting about the elections in Kansas? ?c;29B
EXTENDED RESPONSE
© Narrative Writinglake the role of an African American living in the United States in the 1850s. Write a journal entry expressing your thoughts after the Dred Scott decision was issued. 290
STANDARDIZED TEST PRACTICE
Em analyzing documents
© Interpreting Maps According to the map, in 1861 Kentucky and Missouri were both ioa,-29c
0
A.
Confederate states. B.
Union free states. C.
Union territories. D.
Union slave states. © Making Generalizations What generalization can you make about the Union slave states? 29B,-29c
F.
They share a border with free states to the north. G.
They all border the Mississippi River. H.
They are all in New England. I.
They are farther south than Alabama. Need Extra Help?
I ) Union Territories I Union free state Union slave state
Slave state seceding before Fort Sumter, April 1861 Slave state seceding after Fort Sumter, April 1861
- Boundary between Union and Confederacy




If You've Missed Question	©	©	©	©	©
Review Lesson	1	1	2	3	3
498 Toward Civil War
The Civil War

61-1865
QUESTION
Why does conflict develop? 

networks
There's More Online about the Civil War.
CHAPTER
Lesson 1
The Two Sides
18
Lesson 2
Early Years of the War
Lesson 3
Life During the Civil War
Lesson 4
The Strain of War
Lesson 5
The War's Final Stages


Abraham Lincoln was president during Me nation's gre
^ibrarv of t'C(,a,esi
The Story
Matters...
In November 1860, voters elect a self-educated lawyer from Illinois named Abraham Lincoln to be president of the United States. Even before Lincoln is inaugurated, South Carolina and six other Southern states secede from the Union. As he waits to take office, Lincoln sees the nation he is to lead spiral downward toward civil war.
Lincoln does not give up. He believes "[a] house divided against itself cannot stand," and he guides the nation until it is once again united.
Foldables
Go to the Foldables® library in the back of your book to make a Foldable® that will help you take notes while reading this chapter.


%
499
H
CHAPTER 18
Place and Time: United States i86i to 1865
In December 1860, South Carolina announced that it was seceding from the United States. Within a few months, six other states had followed South Carolina out of the Union. After the battle at Fort Sumter, a total of 11 Southern states joined together in the Confederate States of America.
I
Step Into the Place
MAP FOCUS
In 1861 soldiers fired the first shots of the Civil War. Armies of the Confederacy and the Union did battle in locations all across the country. LOCATION
On this map, which Union states have Civil War battle sites? 29c
PLACE
What clue can you find on the map that might explain why so many battles took place in Virginia?
29C
CRITICAL THINKING
Drawing Conclusions Why do you think most of the battles of the Civil War took place in the Confederate states? 29B
I	1 Union states
II
Union territories 1	1 Confederate states
Major Civil War battle site
---1------
300 km
300 miles
___l


Lambert Azimuthal Equal-Area projection
Step Into the Time
TIMELINE
Look at the time line. For how many years after the Emancipation Proclamation did the Civil War continue? 29c Abraham Lincoln
1861-1865
WORLD EVENTS



networks Ef MAP Explore the interactive version of
i.'ore Online!	this map on
NETWORKS.
Ef TIME LINE Explore the interactive version ofthis time line on NETWORKS.
k1
networks
There's More Online!
Ef CHART Army Salaries
GRAPH
Resources in the North and South
Ef graphic organizer
Comparing North and South
Ef SLIDESHOWS
•	Army Organization
•	Civil War Casualties
Ef self-check quiz Ef video
Union Confederacy

wuw
kJ
Lesson 1
{J™
TEKS
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills 1A Identify the major eras and events in U.S. history through 1877, including colonization, revolution, drafting of the Declaration of Independence, creation and ratification of the Constitution, religious revivals such as the Second Great Awakening, early republic, the Age of Jackson, westward expansion, reform movements, sectionalism, Civil War, and Reconstruction, and describe their causes and effects.
1C Explain the significance of the following dates: 1607, founding of Jamestown; 1620, arrival of the Pilgrims and signing of the Mayflower Compact; 1776, adoption of the Declaration of Independence; 1787, writing of the U.S. Constitution; 1803, Louisiana Purchase; and 1861-1865, Civil War.
8A Explain the roles played by significant individuals during the Civil War, including Jefferson Davis, Ulysses S. Grant, Robert E.
Lee, and Abraham Lincoln, and heroes such as congressional Medal of Honor recipients William Carney and Philip Bazaar.
8B Explain the causes of the Civil War, including sectionalism, states'rights, and slavery, and significant events of the Civil War, including the firing on Fort Sumter; the battles of Antietam, Gettysburg, and Vicksburg; the announcement of the Emancipation Proclamation; Lee's surrender at Appomattox Court House; and the assassination of Abraham Lincoln.
1OA Locate places and regions of importance in the United States during the 17th, 18th, and 19th centuries.
Reading HELPDESK
!INM
m pins
$6 STMIPOfor
K4
VTiTl PIT f - * i - v
The Two Sides
QUESTION
Why does conflict develop? 
,'x-\ *
«	i I X
IT MATTERS BECAUSE
Both the North and the South had strengths and weaknesses that helped determine their military strategies.
Two Very Different
guidingquestion What were the goals and strategies of the North and the South?
The Civil War, which lasted from 1861 to 1865, profoundly changed the nation. The war divided many families. Neither side imagined, however, that the four years of fighting would lead to so much suffering. By the end of the war, more than 600,000 Americans had lost their lives. Many thousands more were wounded in battle.
Division in the Border States
For most states, choosing sides in the Civil War was easy. The border states of Delaware, Maryland, Kentucky, and Missouri, however, were bitterly divided. Slavery existed in all four states, though it was generally not as widespread as in the Confederate states. All four of these states had close ties to the North and the South.
The border states were vital to the strategy of the Union. Missouri could control parts of the Mississippi River and major routes to the West. Kentucky controlled the Ohio River. Delaware was close to the key Union city of Philadelphia. Maryland, perhaps the most important of the border states, was close to Richmond, the Confederate capital. Most significantly,
Taking Notes: Comparing and Contrasting
As you read, note the differences and similarities between the North and the South in a Venn diagram like this one.
.502
Content Vocabulary
•	border state
•	enlist
Washington, D.C., lay within the state. If Maryland seceded, the North’s capital would be surrounded.
President Lincoln worked tirelessly to keep the four border states in the Union. In September 1861, he wrote:
PRIMARY SOURCE
ii I think to lose Kentucky is nearly the same as to lose the whole game.... We would as well consent to separation at once, including the surrender of this capitol. 99
—from Abraham Lincoln: His Speeches and Writings
22A Analyze the leadership qualities of elected and appointed leaders of the United States such as George Washington, John Marshall, and Abraham Lincoln.
22B Describe the contributions of significant political, social, and military leaders of the United States such as Frederick Douglass, John Paul Jones, James Monroe, Stonewall Jackson, Susan B. Anthony, and Elizabeth Cady Stanton.
29D Identify points of view from the historical context surrounding an event and the frame of reference which influenced the participants.
In the end, Lincoln was successful. Still, many border state residents supported the Confederacy. The president had to work hard to restrain these opponents of the war.
Strengths and Weaknesses
When the war began, each side had advantages and disadvantages compared to the other. How each side used its strengths and weaknesses would determine the war’s outcome.
The North had a larger population and more resources than the South. The South had other advantages, such as excellent military leaders and a strong fighting spirit. Also, because most of the war was fought in the South, the Confederacy knew the land and had the will to defend it.
The Goals of War
Each side had different goals in fighting the Civil War. The
Confederacy wanted to be an independent nation. To do this, it
did not have to invade the North or destroy the Union army. It
just needed to fight hard enough and long enough to convince	i
Northerners that the war was not worth its cost.
THE FIGHTING FORCES
1861-1865
50 Soldiers = 1 Platoon
2	Platoons = 1 Company
10 Companies = 1 Regiment 4-5 Regiments=1 Brigade 4-5 Brigades = 1 Division
3	Divisions = 1 Corps
Both the Union and Confederate armies were organized in roughly the same way.
O USING MATH SKILLS
About how many times larger was the Union army than the Confederate army?
CRITICAL THINKING
Hypothesizing Why do you think the armed forces were divided into units?
border state a state on the border between Acadcwi^^	----------
the North and South: Delaware, Maryland,	strategy a careful plan or method
Kentucky, and Missouri
Lesson 1 503
RESOURCES IN THE NORTH AND SOUTH
The North and South went into the war with very different strengths and weaknesses.		100 80
SUMMARIZING
How 1X1 I 60 would you summarize the status	UJ	
ofthe North and South at the	1X1	40
start of the war?	Qu	
CRITICAL THINKING
20 Comparing In what areas did		0
the North have the greatest		
advantage over the South?		
Population Railroad Number of Exports Manufactured Mileage Farms	Goods
Source: U.S. Census Bureau, Historical Statistics of the United States
In contrast, the North wanted to restore the Union. In President Lincoln’s view, states had no constitutional right to secede from the Union. Its forces had to invade the South and force the breakaway states to give up their quest for independence. Although slavery was an underlying cause of the war, Lincoln’s original aim was not to end slavery. He wrote in 1862:
PRIMARY SOURCE
Reading HELPDESK
M
If I could save the Union without freeing any slave I would do it, and if I could save it by freeing all the slaves I would do it; and if I could save it by freeing some and leaving others alone I would also do that. 99 —from Abraham Lincoln: His Speeches and Writer
Confederate Strategies
The basic strategy of Confederate president Jefferson Davis was to conduct a defensive war. This meant that it would hold as much territory as possible. Southerners felt that if they showed determination to be independent, Northerners would tire of the war.
The South also tried to win the support of Great Britain and France, whose economies suffered when the war disrupted the export of Southern cotton. Southerners hoped the British and French might pressure the North to end the war.
Union Strategies
The North’s war plan came from General Winfield Scott, hero of the war with Mexico. He knew that the North would have to defeat the South completely.

enlist to formally join a military force
Academic Vocabulary_____________
contrast to compare with respect to differences
,504 The Civil War
Reading in the Content Area: BarGroP^
Bar graphs are often used to compare and contrast information about two groups. The large bars and different colors make them easy to read and Interpret.
To do this, Scott proposed the so-called Anaconda Plan, which took its name from a type of snake that squeezes its prey to death. First, the Union would blockade, or close, Southern ports. This strategy would keep supplies from reaching the Confederacy and prevent the South from exporting its cotton crop. Second, the North would seek to gain control of the Mississippi River.
This would split the Confederacy in two and cut Southern supply lines. Another goal of the Union forces was the capture of Richmond, Virginia—the Confederate capital.
READING PROGRESS CHECK
Explaining Why did the South use a defensive strategy?
Americans Against Americans
guidingquestion IV/iot was war like for the soldiers ofthe North and the South?
The Civil War was more than a war between the states. It turned brother against brother and neighbor against neighbor. Kentucky senator John Crittenden had two sons who became generals.
One fought for the Confederacy, the other for the Union. Even President Lincoln’s wife, Mary Todd Lincoln, had relatives in the Confederate army.
Men of all ages rushed to enlist (ihn«LIHST) in, or join, the Union or Confederate army.	*
Some did so out of patriotism. Others thought
they would be called cowards if they did not
serve. Still others were looking for excitement.
The sister of William Stone of Louisiana wrote
that her brother was eager
Though they fought bitterly, the two sides in the Civil War shared close bonds. Often families had soldiers on each side of the conflict.
PRIMARYSOURCE

>i to be off to Virginia [to join the Confederate army]. He so fears hat the fighting will be over before he can get there. 99
—from Brokenburn: The Journal of Kate Stone
Though the average Civil War soldier was in lis mid-20s, many recruits on both sides were lardly adults. Tens of thousands of soldiers were inder 18. Some were younger than 14. To get nto the army, many teenagers ran away from tome or lied about their ages.
Although teenage boys were accepted into service, one group of men was not allowed to ight in the early days of the war. The Union •efused at first to let free African Americans :nlist. Union leaders worried that white troops wuld not accept African American soldiers.



Site;


mmSmSw
si, PHM
$6 MhltolAUlP W $4 STIT1 PM f« SWfill IM $3so iraWnsrcwTiB
*^55\b» fc «ATWggJF»« '«»
A SOLDIER'S PAY
---7 --
BRUM fiORDS!
S»-ACTWEYOWK MEN WANTED
rcgruitxng station, ZBnOMMMMNBST
i cam“Vi5™3“
Although many volunteered to serve, soldiers in both the Union and Confederate armies received monthly pay. Compare their pay rates to those in later wars.
DESCRIBING
What happens to a soldier's pay as he or she moves up in rank? CRITICAL THINKING
Making Connections Name some items you could buy today with a Civil War private's monthly salary.
Include this lesson's information in your Foldable®
	%	
		
		
	_2	'ft*
		
Reading HELPDESK

Private	*$B	$50
$14	$66
$17	$78
$85	$1,203-1,543.20

$261	$1,854-2,339.10
$138
$486
*Until 1864, African Americans in the Civil War were paid only $7 per month Source: Bureau of Economic Analysis; Princeton Review; www.militaryfactory.com
To get more men to enlist, Union recruiters put up posters offering a sign-up bonus, or bounty.
Later in the war, the Union army changed this policy. The Confederacy refused to consider having African Americans fight until the war’s final, desperate days. They did not want to give enslaved people weapons.
High Hopes
When the war began, each side expected a quick victory. Northerners could not imagine the Confederates holding out for long against the Union’s greater resources. Confederates believed the North could never subdue the fighting spirit of the South. Both sides were wrong. In the end, the war lasted far longer than most Americans could have guessed.
Who Were the Soldiers?
Soldiers came from every region of the country and all walks of life. Most came from farms. Almost half of the North’s troops and more than 60 percent of the South’s had owned or worked on farms.
By the summer of 1861, the Confederate army had about 112,000 soldiers. They were sometimes called Rebels. The Union had about 187,000 soldiers, also known as Yankees. By the end of the war, about 900,000 men had fought for the Confederacy and about 2.1 million men had borne arms for the Union. The Union army included just under 200,000 African Americans. About 10,000 Mexican Americans served in the war.
Reading Strategy: Finding the Main Idea
SKILLS PRACTICE
Suppose you do not understand something you read. Look for a picture that helps explain it.
Paragraphs and sections have main ideas and details that support that main idea. Make an outline of the section "A Soldier's Life" by writing down the main idea and listing the supporting details under it.
506 The Civil War
A
Soldier's Life Soldiers of the North and the South described what they saw and how they felt in letters to family and friends. Many wrote about their boredom, discomfort, sickness, fear, and horror.
Most of the time the soldiers lived in camps. Camp life had its pleasant moments of songs, stories, letters from home, and baseball games. At other times, a soldier’s life was a dull routine of drills, bad food, marches, and rain.
Between battles, soldiers on both sides sometimes forgot they were enemies. A private described his wartime experiences:
PRIMARYSOURCE
U A
part of Co [company] K and some of the enemy came together and stacked arms and talked for a long time. Our men cooked coffee and treated them and [afterward]... each one took up his position again and they began to fire at each other again, but not as hard as before. 99 —from The Life of Billy Yank
The Horrors of War
In spite of fleeting moments of calm, the reality of war was always close by. Thousands of casualties overwhelmed medical facilities. After the Battle of Shiloh, the wounded lay in the rain for more than 24 hours waiting for treatment. A soldier recalled, “Many had died there, and others were in the last agonies as we passed. Their groans and cries were heartrending.”
Faced with these terrible realities, many men deserted. About 1 of every 11 Union soldiers and 1 of every 8 Confederates ran away because of fear, hunger, or sickness.
Q READING PROGRESS CHECK
Comparing and Contrasting How did the expectations of the war compare with the reality for both sides?
Then
The picture above shows a Union artillery unit during the Civil War. The photograph below shows a U.S. artillery unit in Iraq in 2010.
Now
CRITICAL THINKING
Comparing and Contrasting How is the artillery that soldiers used during the Civil War like the artillery used today? How is it different?
LESSON 1 REVIEW
Review Vocabulary
1.	Use the following terms in sentences about the Civil War to demonstrate your understanding of the terms. 3o*;job
a. border state b. enlist
Answer the Guiding Questions
2.	Contrasting How was the North's strategy different from the South's? 29b
3.	Comparing and Contrasting Compare and contrast attitudes in the Union and the Confederacy about enlisting African American soldiers. 2»d
4.	Evaluating What was the goal of the Anaconda Plan?
EXPOSITORY WRITING
Consider the crisis President Lincoln faced when he took office in 1861. In a paragraph, evaluate his leadership in responding to the situation. 22A;3od Lesson 1 507
SIMIUITV
sb pay per mouth
M S1W1
Ml I* HIMlffl W $150 PHUifflraMSSXP «OARO * HATIOMSjFOt *«•
BRIiB GMRBS!
A SOLDIER'S PAY
ARMY SALARIES (MONTHLY)
Civil War
World War II 1942
Vietnam War 1965
Iraq War 2007
$50
^Private
fSergeant	$17	$78
$85	$1,203-1,543.20
$261	$1,854-2,339.10
*Until 1864, African Americans in the Civil War were paid only $7 per month Source: Bureau of Economic Analysis; Princeton Review; www.militaryfactory.com
To get more men to enlist, Union recruiters put up posters offering a sign-up bonus, or bounty.
Although many volunteered to serve, soldiers in both the Union and Confederate armies received monthly pay. Compare their pay rates to those in later wars.
Cl DESCRIBING What happens to a soldier's pay as he or she moves up in rank?
CRITICAL THINKING
Making Connections Name some items you could buy today with a Civil War private's monthly salary.
Include this lesson's information in your Foldable®


-V4
<-
%
&
Later in the war, the Union army changed this policy. The Confederacy refused to consider having African Americans fight until the war’s final, desperate days. They did not want to give enslaved people weapons.
High Hopes
When the war began, each side expected a quick victory. Northerners could not imagine the Confederates holding out for long against the Union’s greater resources. Confederates believed the North could never subdue the fighting spirit of the South. Both sides were wrong. In the end, the war lasted far longer than most Americans could have guessed.
Who Were the Soldiers?
Soldiers came from every region of the country and all walks of life. Most came from farms. Almost half of the North’s troops and more than 60 percent of the South’s had owned or worked on farms.
By the summer of 1861, the Confederate army had about 112,000 soldiers. They were sometimes called Rebels. The Union had about 187,000 soldiers, also known as Yankees. By the end of the war, about 900,000 men had fought for the Confederacy and about 2.1 million men had borne arms for the Union. The Union army included just under 200,000 African Americans. About 10,000 Mexican Americans served in the war.
Reading HELPDESK

Reading Strategy: Finding the Main Idea
Paragraphs and sections have main ideas and details that support that main idea. Make an outline ofthe section "A Soldier's Life" by writing down the main idea and listing the supporting details under it.
506 The Civil War
SKILLS PRACTICE
_________________ Suppose you do not understand something you read. Look for a picture that helps explain it.
A
Soldier's Life Soldiers of the North and the South described what they saw and how they felt in letters to family and friends. Many wrote about their boredom, discomfort, sickness, fear, and horror.
Most of the time the soldiers lived in camps. Camp life had its pleasant moments of songs, stories, letters from home, and baseball games. At other times, a soldier’s life was a dull routine of drills, bad food, marches, and rain.
Between battles, soldiers on both sides sometimes forgot they were enemies. A private described his wartime experiences:
The picture above shows a Union artillery unit during the Civil War. The photograph below shows a U.S. artillery unit in Iraq in 2010.
PRIMARYSOURCE
K part of Co [company] K and some of the enemy came together and stacked arms and talked for a long time. Our men cooked coffee and treated them and [afterward]... each one took up his position again and they began to fire at each other again, but not as hard as before. 99
—from The Life of Billy Yank
The Horrors of War
In spite of fleeting moments of calm, the reality of war was always close by. Thousands of casualties overwhelmed medical facilities. After the Battle of Shiloh, the wounded lay in the rain for more than 24 hours waiting for treatment. A soldier recalled, “Many had died there, and others were in the last agonies as we passed. Their groans and cries were heartrending.”
Faced with these terrible realities, many men deserted. About 1 of every 11 Union soldiers and 1 of every 8 Confederates ran away because of fear, hunger, or sickness.
Q READING PROGRESS CHECK
CRITICAL THINKING
Comparing and Contrasting How is the artillery that soldiers used during the Civil War like the artillery used today? How is it different?
Comparing and Contrasting How did the expectations ofthe war compare with the reality for both sides?
LESSON 1 REVIEW
Review Vocabulary
1.	Use the following terms in sentences about the Civil War to demonstrate your understanding of the terms. joa;3ob
a. border state b. enlist
Answer the Guiding Questions
2.	Contrasting How was the North's strategy different from the South's? 29b
3. Comparing and Contrasting Compare and contrast attitudes in the Union and the Confederacy about enlisting African American soldiers. 2»d
4.	Evaluating What was the goal of the Anaconda Plan?
EXPOSITORY WRITING
Consider the crisis President Lincoln faced when he took office in 1861. In a paragraph, evaluate his leadership in responding to the situation. 22*300 Lesson 1 507
networks
There's More Online!
Sf BIOGRAPHY
Robert E. Lee
gf GAME Fill in the Blank
GRAPHIC ORGANIZER
Civil War Battles
MAPS
* War in the West ■ * War in the East
PRIMARY SOURCE
Virginia and Monitor
sf SELF-CHECK QUIZ
Ef SLIDE SHOW The Battle of Antietam



VIDEO

TEKS
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills 8A Explain the roles played by significant individuals during the Civil War, including Jefferson Davis, Ulysses S. Grant, Robert E.
Lee, and Abraham Lincoln, and heroes such as congressional Medal of Honor recipients William Carney and Philip Bazaar.
8B Explain the causes of the Civil War, including sectionalism, states'rights, and slavery, and significant events of the Civil War, including the firing on Fort Sumter; the battles of Antietam, Gettysburg, and Vicksburg; the announcement of the Emancipation Proclamation; Lee's surrender at Appomattox Court House; and the assassination of Abraham Lincoln.
10C Analyze the effects of physical and human geographic factors on major historical and contemporary events in the United States. 22A Analyze the leadership qualities of elected and appointed leaders of the United States such as George Washington, John Marshall, and Abraham Lincoln.
22B Describe the contributions of significant political, social, and military leaders of the United States such as Frederick Douglass, John Paul Jones, James Monroe, Stonewall Jackson, Susan B. Anthony, and Elizabeth Cady Stanton. 27A Explain the effects of technological and scientific innovations such as the steamboat, the cotton gin, and interchangeable parts.
Reading HELPDESK
Taking Notes: Sequencing
As you read about the early Civil War battles, them on a time line, and take notes on what happened during each of them.
508 The Civil War
Lesson 2
Early Years of the War
riAL QUESTION Why does conflict develop?
IT MATTERS BECAUSE
Neither side gained a strong advantage during the war's early years.
War on Land and at Sea
guiding question Whatwastheoutcomeofthefirstmajorbattleofthewar?
While the Union and the Confederacy mobilized their armies, the Union navy began operations against the South. In April 1861, President Lincoln announced a blockade of all Confederate ports. The stage was set for fighting at sea as well as on land.
First Battle of Bull Run
Tension mounted in the summer of 1861, leading to the first major battle of the Civil War. On July 21, about 30,000 Union troops commanded by General Irvin McDowell attacked a smaller Confederate force led by General P.G.T. Beauregard.
The fighting took place in northern Virginia, near a small river called Bull Run. Hundreds of spectators from Washington, D.C., watched the battle from a few miles away.
Both sides lacked battle experience. At first, the Yankees drove the Confederates back. Then the Rebels rallied, inspired by General Thomas Jackson. Another Confederate general noted that Jackson was holding his position “like a stone wall.” This earned him the nickname “Stonewall” Jackson. The Confederates then unleashed a savage counterattack that broke the Union lines. As they retreated, Union troops ran into civilians fleeing in panic.
1861 1862 1862
note
Content Vocabulary
•	tributary • Emancipation
•	ironclad Proclamation
•	casualty

The loss shocked Northerners, who now realized that the war could be long and difficult. President Lincoln named a new general, George B. McClellan, to head the Union army in the East-called the Army of the Potomac—and to train the troops.
Although dismayed over Bull Run, President Lincoln was also determined. He put out a call for more army volunteers. He signed two bills requesting thousands to serve in the infantry, cavalry, and navy for up to three years. In addition, victories in the West would soon give a boost to Northern spirits and also increase enlistment.
Control of the West
In the West, the major Union goal was to control the Mississippi River and its tributaries (TRIH.byuh.tehr.eez), the smaller rivers that fed it. With control of the river, Union ships could prevent Louisiana, Arkansas, and Texas from supplying the eastern Confederacy. Union gunboats and troops would also be able to use the rivers to move into the heart of the South.
The battle for the rivers began in February 1862. Union forces captured Fort Henry on the Tennessee River. Naval commander Andrew Foote and army general Ulysses S. Grant led the assault. Soon afterward, Grant and Foote moved against Fort Donelson on the Cumberland River. The Confederates realized they had no chance of saving the fort. They asked Grant what terms he would give them to surrender. Grant replied, “No terms except an unconditional and immediate surrender can be accepted.” “Unconditional Surrender” Grant became the North’s new hero.
A
Battle Between Ironclads The Union blockade of Confederate ports posed a real threat to the Confederacy. Southerners hoped to break it with a secret weapon—the Merrimack. The Merrimack was a damaged frigate that had been abandoned by the Union. The Confederates rebuilt the wooden ship and covered it with iron. They renamed their new ironclad (EYE»uhrn«klad) the Virginia.
On March 8, 1862, the Virginia attacked Union ships in the Chesapeake Bay. Union shells just bounced off its sides. Some Union leaders feared the Virginia would destroy the Union navy, steam up the Potomac River, and bombard Washington, D.C.
By this time, however, the North had an ironclad of its own. The Monitor rushed southward to face the Virginia. On Marc the two ironclads met in battle. Neither ship won, but the stirring clash raised spirits in both the North and the Sout
To create the Virginia, the Confederate navy took what remained of a burned Union warship, covered it in iron, and equipped it with 10 guns. On its bow they placed an iron ram so the ship could steer into another ship and puncture its hull.
tributary astreamorsmaller riverthatfeeds	flcadeniicyoMbulary---------
into a larger river	abandon to leave behind or give up
ironclad a warship equipped with iron
plating for protection
Lesson 2 509
Just two months after their March 1862 battle, the crew ofthe Virginia (on the right) destroyed their ship rather than let it fall into Union hands. The Monitor sank in a storm in December 1862.
CRITICAL THINKING
Analyzing Visuals Why do you think neither ship was able to seriously damage the other?
The Battle of Shiloh
Meanwhile, in the West, General Grant and about 40,000 troops headed south toward Corinth, Mississippi, a major railroad junction. In early April 1862, the Union army camped at Pittsburg Landing, 20 miles (32 km) from Corinth, near Shiloh Church. Additional Union forces joined Grant from Nashville.
Confederate leaders decided to strike before more troops arrived to reinforce the Union. Early on the morning of April 6, Generals Albert Sidney Johnston and P.G.T. Beauregard led Confederate forces in a surprise attack. The battle lasted two days. It was a narrow victory for the Union, but the losses were enormous. Together, the two armies suffered more than 23,000 casualties (KA*zhuhl»teez)—people killed, wounded, captured, or missing.
After Shiloh, Union troops laid siege to Corinth, forcing the Confederates to withdraw. The Union army occupied the town on May 30. Memphis, Tennessee, fell to Union forces on June 6. The North seemed well on its way to controlling the Mississippi River.
Reading HELPDESK
^^^ casualty a soldier who is killed, wounded, captured, or missing in battle
Capturing New Orleans
A few weeks after Shiloh, the North won another key victory. On April 25, 1862, Union naval forces under David Farragut captured New Orleans, Louisiana, the largest city in the South. Farragut,	|
who was of Spanish descent, grew up in the South but remained	\
loyal to the Union. The capture of New Orleans meant that the
Academic Vocabulary
reinforce to make stronger
510 The Civil War
Confederacy could no longer use the Mississippi River to carry its goods to sea. The city’s fall also left the Confederate stronghold of Vicksburg, Mississippi, as the only major obstacle to the Union’s strategy in the West.
B READING PROGRESS CHECK
Explaining How did the loss of New Orleans affect the Confederacy?
War in the Eastern States
GUIDING question How did the Union respond to important defeats in the East in 1862?
While the two sides fought for control of Tennessee and the Mississippi River, the Union was trying to capture the Confederate capital at Richmond, Virginia. Close to the Union, Richmond was vulnerable to attack. Confederate armies fought hard to defend it. Confederate forces in the East enjoyed much more success than their western counterparts.
Confederate Victories
Southern victories in the East were largely the result of the leadership of Robert E. Lee and Stonewall Jackson. The two generals knew the terrain and could move forces quickly. They were also expert at inspiring troops. As a result, Confederate forces managed to defeat much larger Union forces.
Z

GEOGRAPHY CONNECTION
Gaining control of the West was a key part ofthe Union's war strategy.
PLACE
Where did the South win battles in the West? CRITICAL THINKING
Drawing Infentices What important cities remained for the North to capture after 1863? 1

-Mr,
Z:
War in the West 1862-1863
IO
Si
IncE
tsville





r I Union states LJ Confederate states ,
Union victory	r
JJjt Confederate victory

I
Misso Bizi
-'<■ fij ft-Xe-

Indian
Territory
Red R.
Mississippi
WiZZzzf/fZ
...w®
z, z I
■- <4TZZZ;
t ■ A’
•oallaZZM^,
Kdabargl May-July 1863.
Port Hi May-July 1863
Z j'lr-
K-
Baton
•a*
Ne
’iZ.
ontgomeryf
Oil
Houston*
Gulf of Mexico 0
^Galveston Oct. 4,1862
90 W
0	200 kml
Albers Equal-Area projecQ
85°W
200 miles
-J






/
95°W
!l
1/
A
Northern newspaper ran this cartoon in 1863. It shows Lady Liberty warding off an attack of the Peace Democrats, or Copperheads. CRITICAL THINKING
Identifying Points of View What does this cartoon suggest about the artist's view of Copperheads? Explain your answer.
THE COITERIIEAD PARTY.----IX FAVOR OF A VIGOROUS PROSECUTION
PEACE!
Later that included men from ages 17 to 50. Some exceptions were allowed. A man with money could hire a substitute to serve for him. Later, a man with 20 or more enslaved people did not have to serve. At first, the North offered a bounty (BAUN«tee), or a sum of money, to encourage volunteers. In March 1863, it also passed a draft. Men aged 20 to 45 had to register. As in the South, a man could avoid the draft by hiring a substitute or paying $300. Many workers earned less than $500 a year and could not afford these options.
People in several Northern cities rioted to protest the draft.
The New York City draft riots in July 1863 were the worst. As the first names were drawn, rioters attacked government and military buildings. Then mobs turned their attacks against African Americans. Many white workers had opposed the Emancipation Proclamation, fearing freed African Americans would take their jobs. After four days, more than 100 people were dead. Federal troops finally stopped the riots.
SKILLS PRACTICE______________
As you read, turn the subheadings into questions. Look for the answers and write them in your notes.
War and the Economy
[Foldables8
[Study Organizer
Include this lesson's information in your Foldable®
Reading HELPDESK
bounty a reward or payment
The war strained the economies of the North and the South. However, the North, with its greater resources, was better able to cope with the costs of the war. The two sides had three ways of , paying for the war. First, they borrowed money. Second, they passed | new taxes, including income taxes. Third, they printed money. 1 Northern bills became known as greenbacks because of their color, j
In the North, industry profited from the war effort. It made guns, j ammunition, shoes, and uniforms. Farmers prospered, too. They sold « their crops to feed the troops. Because goods were in high demand, j prices went up. This inflation caused hardship for working people. 5
Visual Vocabulary
greenback
paper money issued by the United States government
Academic Vocabulary,
substitute an alternate or replacement




520 The Civil War
The white South felt the economic strain even more sharply than the North. Many of the battles of the Civil War took place on Confederate soil, destroying farmland and railroad lines. The Union naval blockade prevented the shipping of trade goods.
Vital materials could not reach the Confederacy. Salt was in such short supply that women scraped the floors of smokehouses to recover it. Food shortages led to riots in Atlanta, Richmond, and other cities. The South also suffered much worse inflation. As early as 1862, citizens were begging Confederate leaders for help. Positive Changes
To honor service in the war, President Lincoln created the Medal of Honor in 1861. It is awarded to members of the armed forces for acts of bravery. Jacob Parrott, a 19-year-old private, was the first to receive the Medal. Surgeon Mary Edwards Walker was the only woman to receive the Medal during the Civil War. Sergeant William Harvey Carney, an African American, was awarded the Medal for his role during the attack on Fort Wagner, South Carolina. More than 3,400 people have received the Medal of Honor.
Then, in 1862, Lincoln signed two laws that encouraged population growth and educational opportunity. The Homestead Act allowed individuals to claim, for a small fee, up to 160 acres of land on the Great Plains. The homesteader could receive title to the land after living and making improvements on the land for five years. Through the Morrill Act of 1862, the federal government gave huge land grants to states to establish colleges. These new educational institutions—which included the colleges that are now Texas A&M University and the historically African American Prairie View A&M University—greatly expanded access to higher education in the United States.
H READING PROGRESS CHECK
Comparing and Contrasting How did the war affect the economies of the North and the South?
Analyzing and Interpreting Information
Inflation, a rise in prices, hurts people by reducing the buying power of money. The graph below shows that with just 3.5 percent inflation, the buying power of $1,000 drops sharply. In 20 years, the $1,000 will have about half its original buying power.
INFLATION GRAPH
Purchasing power of $1,000 at 3.5 percent inflation
«=> Purchasing power of $1,000 with no inflation
Ub...................iimm...........tiwi.rwwii.Jr
LESSON 3 REVIEW
Review Vocabulary
1.	Use each of these terms in a complete sentence that explains the term's meaning. joa;3ob
a. habeas corpus b. draft c. bounty
Answer the Guiding Questions
2.	Identifying In what ways did women contribute to the war effort? 23E
3.	Differentiating How did the Civil War affect the economies of the North and the South? ia
4.	Comparing What challenges and threats did prisoners and wounded soldiers face? ia
5.	Summarizing Who were the Copperheads? What was their position on fighting the war? 21A
PERSUASIVE WRITING
President Lincoln and President Davis suspended habeas corpus to deal with opponents of the war. Do you think suspending civil liberties such as the freedom of speech is sometimes justified? Write a short essay in which you state and defend your position. 8a;23e;jod
3 521
t
Across Five Aprils
by Irene Hunt
Irene Hunt (1907-2001) was born in Pontiac, Illinois, more than 40 years after the Civil War ended. Her father died when she was seven years old. Hunt graduated from the University of Illinois in 1939.
She taught French and English in Illinois public schools until she retired to write full-time in 1969. She wrote many books for young people and won a Newbery Medal for her second novel,
Up a Road Slowly. Hunt died in 2001.
First published in 1965, Across Five Aprils was Irene Hunt’s first novel. It is the story of Jethro Creighton, a nine-year-old boy living in Indiana during the Civil War. In this excerpt, he and his mother are at home when a letter arrives from one of Jethro’s older brothers, who is fighting for the Union.
miss yore good cookin Ma. You tell Jeth that hein a soljer aint so much.))
—from Irene Hunt’s Across Five Aprils
h Union soldier might wear a cap like this.
In February 1862, Brigadier General Ulysses S. Grant demanded and received unconditional surrender of Confederate Fort Donelson on the Cumberland River.

U
Finally one day Ed Turner brought them a letter from Tom. Ed looked pinched with cold after his long drive, but he wouldn't stop for coffee. 'A fam'ly needs to be alone when one of these letters comes/ he said in answer to Ellen's invitation. 'I'd be pleased if you'd let me know what the boy has to say—later on when Matt has the time to drop over.'
Jenny had gone with her father to see about some stock, and Jethro was alone in the cabin with his mother. When Ed Turner was gone, she handed the letter to Jethro.
'My hands is shakin', Son,' she said. They were, indeed, but both she and the boy knew that the real reason she was forced to hand the letter over was the fact that she could not read.
The envelope was crumpled and stained, the letter written in pencil in a round, childish hand. It was probably among the first three or four letters that young Tom had ever written.
Vocabulary
stock
livestock
Derefokes:
I take pencle in hand to let you no that Eb and me is alright.
I expect you no by now how we took Fort Henry down here. Mebby I oughtnt say we took it becus it was the ironclads that done it. Old admiral Foote had what it took and he give the rebs a dressin down but some of his iron-dads got hit hard. A boy I no was on the Essex and he was burned so bad he dide when that boat got nocked out of the fite.
Us boys didn't do much fitin at Fort Henry but at Donelson I can tell you we made up fer it. We had done a foolish thing on our way to Donelson and I will rite you about it. When we was marchin tord the fort the weather was like a hot april day back home. We was feelin set-up about Fort Henry and when some of the boys got tard of carryin hevey blanket rolls they jest up and throwed em away. Then more and more of us acted like crazy fools and we throwed away hevey cotes and things to
make our lodes a littel liter. As soon as we got to Donelson the wether turned cold as Billy Sideways and some of the boys that was sick or bad hurt they froze to deth in the snow. Things was awful bad with so many kilt and others froze. I felt sick when Hooked at them and so I am, not so proud about Donelson as mebby I ought to be. I miss yore good cookin Ma. You tell Jeth that hein a soljer aint so much.
dressin down
(incorrect spelling of "dressing down") a serious punishment or scolding
Literary Element
Dialect refers to the language, speech patterns, spelling, grammar, and sounds used by people from a particular area or from a particular social or economic group. As you read, note the ways Irene Hunt uses dialect to reveal information about her characters. If you have trouble following the dialect, try reading the text aloud.
Analyzing Literature DBQ
yrstruley Tom »
0 Drawing Inferences Based on the excerpt, what was life like for soldiers during the war? 26b
0 Analyzing What does the dialect used in Tom's letter reveal about him? Use examples from the text to support your answer. 26b
0 Evaluating Consider what you know about the author's childhood and about the Civil War. Do you think the description of life during the Civil War for both soldiers and families is valid? Why or why not? 26b 
1
networks
There's More Online!
& BIOGRAPHY
"Stonewall" Jackson eT GAME Crossword Puzzle
GRAPHIC ORGANIZER
Union and Confederate Victories
eT MAP The Battle of Gettysburg,
Day 3
Ef primary source
Recruiting African American Soldiers
eT self-check quiz eT video

I


■'-AM

TEKS
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills 1A Identify the major eras and events in U.S. history through 1877, including colonization, revolution, drafting of the Declaration of Independence, creation and ratification of the Constitution, religious revivals such as the Second Great Awakening, early republic, the Age of Jackson, westward expansion, reform movements, sectionalism, Civil War, and Reconstruction, and describe their causes and effects.
8A Explain the roles played by significant individuals during the Civil War, including Jefferson Davis, Ulysses S. Grant, Robert E.
Lee, and Abraham Lincoln, and heroes such as congressional Medal of Honor recipients William Carney and Philip Bazaar.
8B Explain the causes of the Civil War, including sectionalism, states'rights, and slavery, and significant events of the Civil War, including the firing on Fort Sumter; the battles of Antietam, Gettysburg, and Vicksburg; the announcement of the Emancipation Proclamation; Lee's surrender at Appomattox Court House; and the assassination of Abraham Lincoln.
8C Analyze Abraham Lincoln's ideas about liberty, equality, union, and government as contained in his first and second inaugural addresses and the Gettysburg Address and contrast them with the ideas contained in Jefferson Davis's inaugural address.
22A Analyze the leadership qualities of elected and appointed leaders of the United States such as George Washington, John Marshall, and Abraham Lincoln.
Reading HELPDESK

Taking Notes: Categorizing
As you read, use a chart like this one to keep track of who won which battles.
524 The Civil War
Lesson 4
The Strain of War
IAL QUESTION
Why does conflict develop? It matters because
Union victories at Gettysburg and Vicksburg marked a turning point in the war.
Southern Victories
guiding question What factors contributed to the early success ofthe Confederate forces!
The military leadership of Generals Robert E. Lee and Stonewall Jackson was a key factor in the Confederates’ military success in the East. With their knowledge of the land and ability to inspire troops, these two generals often defeated larger Union forces.
The Battle of Fredericksburg
After Antietam, Robert E. Lee moved his army out of Maryland into Virginia. This encouraged the newly named Union commander, General Ambrose Burnside, to march his troops toward the Confederate capital at Richmond. Lee intercepted the Union army near Fredericksburg. Lee’s forces dug trenches in hills south of the town. This gave them the advantage of higher ground from which to fight. On December 13, 1862, Union forces attacked. Lee’s entrenched (ihn.TREHNCHT) troops drove them back with heavy losses. Devastated, Burnside resigned. Victory at Chancellorsville
In May 1863, Lee met Union forces led by General Joseph Hooker in the Battle of Chancellorsville. General Lee again showed daring and a brilliant command of tactics. Although Hooker had

Union Victories	Confederate Victories
	
	
	
Content Vocabulary
•	entrench
•	flank
twice as many men, Lee divided his forces. Some Confederate troops confronted the main Union force. Others under the leadership of Stonewall Jackson secretly marched to a spot at the far end of the Union line. The risky plan worked perfectly. Jackson’s army surprised the Union force with a crushing attack on its flank (FLANGK), or side. Lee struck from the front.
Caught between the two Confederate forces, Hooker eventually withdrew his men.
The Confederate victory came at a high cost. In the confusion of battle, Confederate soldiers fired on and wounded Stonewall Jackson by mistake. Surgeons amputated Jackson’s arm, prompting Lee to say, “He has lost his left arm, and I have lost my right.” Worse, Jackson developed pneumonia. After a week of suffering, he died. His death cost the South one of its great leaders. It also affected the morale of its army and its citizens.
Problems With Union Leadership
In contrast, Union leadership in the East disappointed the president. In less than a year, a frustrated Lincoln saw three different generals try and fail to lead the Union to victory.
The first, Major General George McClellan, commanded the Union forces at the Battle of Antietam in March 1862. Although he was expert at preparing for battle, he was overly careful and slow to act. Said Lincoln, “If McClellan doesn’t want to use the army, I’d like to borrow it for a while.” The last straw came when, after victory at Antietam, McClellan failed to obey Lincoln’s order to follow the retreating Confederate troops and destroy them.
Lincoln pushed his next commander, General Ambrose Burnside, to take aggressive action. Burnside quickly lost the president’s favor after his crushing loss at Fredericksburg.
Next, Lincoln appointed Major General Joseph Hooker, who had often been critical of other generals. Hooker s attitude matched the president’s. “May God have mercy on General Lee, for I will have none,” he declared. Despite Hooker s confidence, Lee’s much smaller army crushed Hooker s forces at Chancellorsville. Hooker soon resigned.
Lincoln’s next commander needed to prove himself quickly. Major General George Meade took command three days before one of the war’s great battles, at Gettysburg, Pennsylvania.
D READING PROGRESS CHECK
Explaining Why was Lincoln frustrated with the Union generals?
BIOGRAPHY
Thomas Jonathan "Stonewall" Jackson (1824-1863)
Thomas Jackson was born in Virginia. At the age of 18, he moved north to attend the military academy at West Point. He went on to a short and unremarkable career in the United States Army. During the 1850s, he taught at the Virginia Military Institute. At that time, he showed more interest in art than in war.
When the Civil War started, Jackson was not widely known in the military. That changed at the First Battle of Bull Run, when Jackson won his nickname "Stonewall." By 1863 he had become one of the Confederacy's top leaders.
CRITICAL THINKING
Describing How did Jackson contribute to Confederate victories in the war?
22B Describe the contributions of significant political, social, and military leaders of the United States such as Frederick Douglass, John Paul Jones, James Monroe, Stonewall Jackson, Susan B. Anthony, and Elizabeth Cady Stanton.
entrench to place within a trench, or ditch, for defense; to place in a strong defensive position flank the side or edge of a military formation
Build Vocabulary: Metaphor............... .........................
Entrench is often used metaphorically to refer to ideas that are firmly held and cannot be easily changed. Here's an example: "Thanks to my parents, the belief that I would succeed as long as I studied hard became entrenched in my mind."
Lesson 4 525
Connections to
TODAY
African American Soldiers
Beginning with the Revolutionary War, African Americans have had a long history of serving with distinction in the U.S. military. When the draft ended in 1973, African American enrollment in the armed forces increased. Today, African Americans make up about 17 percent of the active forces and 15 percent of the Reserves and National Guard.
IMCO
ToAnnsI TtWWL
NOW OR NEVER
feWOlKE!
wlgmToi®’-
li-
-•=r. - —
African Americans in the Civil War
GUIDINGQUESTION
What role did African Americans play in military efforts? At first, both the North and the South barred African Americans from serving in their armies. As time passed, the North relaxed its rules.
Excluded in the South
Even though African Americans made up more than 30 percent of the smaller Southern population, Confederate leaders would not allow them to enlist. Only in the last days of the war, when defeat drew near, did they consider it. Confederate leaders feared that, once armed, African American soldiers would attack their fellow troops or even begin a general revolt.
Enlisted in the North
At first, President Lincoln resisted calls to enlist African Americans in the Union army. He feared that such a policy would be unpopular in the border states.
By 1862, though, it was clear that the North needed more soldiers in order to defeat the Confederacy. Many African Americans were eager to fight. As a result, Congress decided to reverse past policy and allow the formation of all-African American regiments.
These new Union soldiers were in a tough position. Many white Union regiments doubted their fighting ability. Others resented them. Many Southern troops also especially hated the Union’s African American soldiers. They often focused their fiercest fire on African American regiments.
Despite this, African Americans joined. By the end of the war, they made up about 10 percent of the Union army. Some were freed people from the North. Others had fled enslavement in the South. These men fought hard and effectively, too. As one white Union officer wrote about an all-African American Kansas regiment:
PRIMARYSOURCE

The Union army actively recruited African Americans through posters like this.
Reading HELPDESK
Academic Vocabulary
reverse to go in the opposite direction
526 The Civil War
& They make better soldiers in every respect than any troops I have ever had under my command.»
—Union general James fi. BW
The 54th Massachusetts
The best-known African American regiment was the 54th Massachusetts. Founded in 1863, the 54th was under the command of Colonel Robert Gould Shaw, who came from a Boston abolitionist family. Later that year, the 54th served on the front lines in an assault on Fort Wagner in South Carolina. Confederate gunfire caused nearly 300 casualties in the 54th alone, including Colonel Shaw. Though the Union could not capture the fort, the 54th became famous for the courage and sacrifice of its members. It would also serve with distinction in other battles, such as the Battle of Olustee in Florida.
H READING PROGRESS CHECK
Identifying Cause and Effect Why did Lincoln hesitate to enlist African Americans?
The Tide Turns
guidingquestion Howwasthe Battle of Gettysburg a turning point in the war?
In spring of 1863, the Confederates had the upper hand.
Their victory at Chancellorsville ruined Union plans to attack Richmond. Lee was emboldened. He decided to take the war once more into the North, hoping to impress France and Britain.
The Confederate strategy was similar to that of the colonies in the Revolutionary War. Though far outnumbered, the colonies won the support of France—and the war. Now, France and Britain missed the goods, especially cotton, that Southern planters had once supplied. If the Confederates appeared to be winning, those nations might help their cause.
Lesson 4 527
GEOGRAPHY CONNECTION
After two days of heavy fighting at Gettysburg, the Confederates mounted a heavy attack on the Union tines.
LOCATION
Where did the Confederates concentrate their attack? CRITICAL THINKING
Drawing Conclusions What about the Union position as shown on this map might have given Union forces an advantage? The Battle of Getty! Day 3
zl®
General /5 Lee y
11
Pickett's Charge



Cemeter Ml
Cub

w-
1 mile
1 km
Aibersffiuol-Area projection
Reading HELPDESK

528 The Civil War
Academic Vocabulary
encounter to meet; to come face-to-face with
/
1
I
General'
Meade

Confederate troops Union troops
Confederate troop movements
The Battle of Gettysburg
In July 1863, a small town in southern Pennsylvania became the site of one of the most decisive battles in the Civil War. Gettysburg was not a capital, a key port, or the location of a fort. It was almost an accident that such serious fighting took place there.
The Confederates entered the town looking for supplies. General Lee hoped to avoid fighting in a landscape he did not know well. It was there, however, that he encountered the enemy. When Lee’s troops crawled out of Gettysburg four grueling days later, they had suffered 25,000 casualties. The Union—the victor—lost 23,000.
The battle started at 7:30 a.m. on July 1. Outnumbered Union troops retreated to a section of high ground called Cemetery Ridge. Reinforcements arrived for both sides. On the second day of fighting, Southern generals tried to drive Union forces from hills named Big Round Top and Little Round Top. In furious
fighting, Union forces under General George Meade held their positions.
SKILLS PRACTICE_________________________________
Before reading your text, look for bold-faced terms. Find
their definitions in the selection or the glossary. Then use a thesaurus to find other meanings for the words.
The next day, Lee ordered an attack designed to “create a panic and virtually destroy the [Union] army.” First, the Confederates fired nearly 140 cannons at the Union lines. Then, General George Pickett led thousands of Confederate troops in an attack on the Union’s position at Cemetery Ridge. Putting themselves directly in the line of fire, they advanced across open land in what came to be remembered as Pickett’s Charge.
At first, it seemed that Pickett’s Charge might work. The Confederates broke the first line of Union defense. In the end, however, half of those who started the attack lay dead or wounded on the ground. Lee later wrote, “The army did all it could. I fear I required of it impossibilities.”
Gettysburg ended the Confederates’ hope of gaining help from Britain and France. The South had hoped to receive two ironclads from the British and use them to sweep Union shipping from the Atlantic. However, in October 1863, the British government decided not to release the ships.
The Battle of Vicksburg
On July 4, the day that Lee retreated from Gettysburg, the Confederacy suffered another major blow. The important river city of Vicksburg, Mississippi, fell under the control of Union troops led by Ulysses S. Grant.
Grant had first attacked Vicksburg in April. His army surrounded the 30,000 Confederate troops there. In May, Grant began a siege of the town, preventing food and supplies from reaching the Confederates. Union gunships on the river supported Grant’s 77,000 troops by firing thousands of shells into the city.
This painting shows Union forces fighting their way to the Confederate lines at Vicksburg, Mississippi, in May 1863.
CRITICAL THINKING
Analyzing Visuals Do you think this painting was meant for a Union audience or a Confederate audience? Explain your answer.
The siege lasted 47 days. There were more than 9,000 Confederate and 10,000 Union casualties, and many soldiers died of disease or starvation. Despite heavy losses of soldiers, fewer than 20 citizens of Vicksburg were killed in the long siege.
A few days after Vicksburg fell, the Confederacy lost Port Hudson in Louisiana, its last stronghold on the Mississippi River. The Union had split the South in two. Arkansas, Louisiana, and Texas were now cut off. The tide of the Civil War had turned.
Lincoln's Address at Gettysburg
On November 19,1863, officials and citizens gathered to dedicate the Soldiers’ National Cemetery at Gettysburg. At the ceremony, former governor of Massachusetts Edward Everett delivered a two-hour speech. After him, President Abraham Lincoln spoke for about two minutes. In 272 words, Lincoln honored the soldiers and their cause, and stated his vision for the country.
PRIMARYSOURCE
M
Four score and seven years ago our fathers brought forth on this continent a new nation, conceived in liberty and dedicated to the proposition that all 'men are created equal.'... These dead shall not have died in vain.... Government ofthe people, by the people, for the people shall not perish from the earth. » —from the Gettysburg Address
Include this lesson's information in your Foldable®.



Reactions to Lincoln’s Gettysburg Address were mixed. Everett, along with the New York Times, Chicago Tribune, and Springfield (Mass.) Republican, thought the speech was a success. It remains one of the most enduring and powerful speeches in American history.
H READING PROGRESS CHECK
Summarizing How did the events at Vicksburg change the tide ofthe war?
LESSON 4 REVIEW
Review Vocabulary
1.	Use each of the following terms in a sentence about the Civil War. 3oa;3ob
a. entrench b. flank
Answer the Guiding Questions
2.	Explaining Why was the Battle of Chancellorsville important? ia
3.	Drawing Inferences Why do you think some leaders called for African Americans to be allowed to fight in the Civil War? 29b
4.	Explaining Why was Gettysburg a turning point for the South? bb
NARRATIVE WRITING
You are a soldier who fought at Gettysburg. Write a letter to a loved one at home, describing the battle scene, how you felt, and what the outcome was. 290 530 The Civil War
r........"........
networks
There s More Online!
gf BIOGRAPHY
UhseAGhun
gf CHART
Thvlost of U.S. Wars gf GAME f i'lnt'iHiat H'n
gf GRAPH A mei h ,m War s;
1	R,Ut!dk,Uhs
gf GRAPHIC ORGANIZER
: ,■ n’ I -■.id!hij b' !hr Ind of War
g Sf MAP 111. hu.il B.mirs
Lesson 5
The War's Final Stages
AL QUESTION
W/iy does conflict develop?
gf SELF CHECK QUIZ gf SLIDESHOW Hi.fHunud &f VIDEO
It Matters Because
With each side determined to win, the bloodiest months ofthe Civil War were still to come.
The Union Closes In
Prfff Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills
1A Identify the major eras and events in U.S. history through 1877, including colonization, revolution, drafting of the Declaration of Independence, creation and ratification of the Constitution, religious revivals such as the Second Great Awakening, early republic, the Age of Jackson, westward expansion, reform movements, sectionalism, Civil War, and Reconstruction, and describe their causes and effects.
8A Explain the roles played by significant individuals during the Civil War, including Jefferson Davis, Ulysses S. Grant, Robert E.
Lee, and Abraham Lincoln, and heroes such as congressional Medal of Honor recipients William Carney and Philip Bazaar.
8B Explain the causes of the Civil War, including sectionalism, states' rights, and slavery, and significant events of the Civil War, including the firing on Fort Sumter; the battles of Antietam, Gettysburg, and Vicksburg; the announcement of the Emancipation Proclamation; Lee's surrender at Appomattox Court House; and the assassination of Abraham Lincoln.
16B Describe the impact of 19th-century amendments, including the 13th, 14th, and 15th amendments, on life in the United States. 22A Analyze the leadership gualities of elected and appointed leaders of the United States such as George Washington, John Marshall, and Abraham Lincoln.
guidingquestion IV/iflf events occurred at the end ofthe war?
By 1864 Union forces had the South surrounded. Union ships blocked the Confederate coast, reducing the trade goods getting out and supplies getting in. The Union also controlled the Mississippi River, cutting off the western Confederate states from those in the East. The South seemed ready to fall—if the Union could come up with the right plan of attack. General Grant would be the one to draw up such a plan.
General Grant Takes Charge
Ulysses S. Grant had been only an average student. He failed as a farmer and in business. Yet he became a brilliant soldier. He led Union troops to victory at Shiloh and Vicksburg and at another key battle in Chattanooga, Tennessee. In March 1864, President Lincoln put General Grant in charge of all the Union armies.
President Lincoln liked that Grant was a man of action. Now in charge, Grant wasted little time coming up with a plan to finish the war. He would deliver killing blows from all sides. His armies would move on to Richmond, the Confederate capital. At the same time, General William Tecumseh Sherman would lead attacks across the Deep South.
Heading HELPDESK

Taking Notes: Identifying Cause and Effect
As you read, keep track ofthe chain of events that led to the end ofthe Civil War using a diagram like this one.
Content Vocabulary
•	resistance
•	total war
Lesson 5 531
BIOGRAPHY
Ulysses S. Grant (1822-1885) j
1
Ulysses S. Grant was born and raised in Georgetown, Ohio. As a young man, his father pressured him to attend the U.S. Military Academy at j West Point. Grant was not interested in military service, but he went 1 because it was his only chance at ] further education. Yet Grant became	j
a fearless soldier and an expert rider at a time when soldiers rode horses in battle. Grant's military strategy • seemed ruthless at times, but he j said, "I have never advocated [war] except as a means of peace."	?
CRITICAL THINKING |
Analyzing What do you think Grant	|
meant in the quotation?	|
26A Describe developments in art, music, and literature that are unique to American culture such as the Hudson River School artists, John James Audubon, "Battle Hymn of the Republic," transcendentalism, and other cultural activities in the history of the United States.
26B Identify examples of American art, music, and literature that reflect society in different eras. 29D Identify points of view from the historical context surrounding an event and the frame of reference which influenced the participants.
Grant soon put his strategy into action. In May and June of 1864, Grant’s army confronted Lee’s smaller force in a series of three battles near Richmond, Virginia. These were the Battles of the Wilderness, Spotsylvania Court House, and Cold Harbor. At each battle, Confederate lines held at first, but Grant quickly renewed the attack. “Whatever happens, there will be no turning back,” Grant promised Lincoln. He was determined to march southward, attacking Lee’s forces relentlessly and in spite of heavy losses until the Confederacy surrendered.
Grant Moves South Toward Richmond
The Wilderness was a densely wooded area about halfway between Washington, D.C., and Richmond, Virginia. Here, on May 5,1864, the six bloodiest weeks of the war began. For two days, Union and Confederate forces struggled among a tangle of trees through which they could hardly see. A Union private said, “It was a blind and bloody hunt to the death.”
At the Battle of the Wilderness, Lee had only about 60,000 men, while Grant had more than 100,000. Both sides suffered huge casualties. Grant, who lost 17,000 men, cried in his tent at the end of the second day. Meanwhile, brushfires raged through the forest. The fires burned alive 200 wounded men. On the morning of the third day, with no clear winner, Grant moved his forces south toward Richmond.
The next battles took place at nearby Spotsylvania Court House and at Cold Harbor. On June 2, the night before the third battle began, a Union general observed that men were “writing their names and home addresses on slips of paper and pinning them to the backs of their coats” to help people identify their bodies. The war seemed hopeless. Grant, however, was determined. He explained to the White House, “I propose to fight it out on this line, if it takes all summer.”
In a space of 30 days, Grant lost 50,000 of his troops. His critics in the North called him a “butcher.” Lincoln, however, stood by his general. “I can’t spare this man,” Lincoln is reported to have said. “He fights.” As he fought, the Confederates were also losing men—losses their smaller army could not survive.
Siege at Petersburg
Grant made steady progress. He next arrived at Petersburg, a railroad center vital to the Confederate movement of troops and supplies. If Grant could take Petersburg, Richmond would be
Academic Vocabulary
SKILLS PRACTICE
series events that occur one after the other	Write key words during class lessons. After the
lesson, work with a partner to write sentences about how the words were used.
1
Reading HELPDESK
532 The Civil War
GEOGRAPHY CONNECTION
During the final year of the war, Union troops moved through the heart of the Confederacy.
LOCATION
Where did Sherman's March to the Sea begin and end? cut off from the rest of the Confederacy. Grant laid siege. The Confederates defended the city, but they could not break the Union’s grip. Trains brought food and more troops to the Union side. The Confederates could get neither. Determined, they refused to give up.
Sherman in Georgia
Meanwhile, William Tecumseh Sherman headed for Georgia.
In early July, his troops circled Atlanta. There they faced the brilliant Confederate general John Hood. Hood’s forces put up major resistance (rih*ZIHS«tuhnts). Sherman laid siege, finally forcing Hood to abandon the city on September 1. Among white Southerners, the mood became desperate as the prospect of defeat became more certain. Mary Chesnut, a South Carolinian who kept a diary throughout the war, wrote, “There is no hope, but we will try to have no fear.”
CRITICAL THINKING
Analyzing Visuals What information on the map helps explain why Sherman was able to cause such destruction on his March to the Sea? SKILLS PRACTICE
resistance the refusal to give in
Write new vocabulary words on cards. Review your cards often until you can read the words quickly on sight.
Lesson 5 533
David Farragut led the U.S. Navy to some of its greatest victories in the Civil War.
!
Farragut Blockades Mobile Bay
The highest-ranking officer in the Union navy was David Farragut. The son of a Spanish military man, Farragut had joined the navy when he was only 12 years old. In August 1864, he led a fleet of 18 ships through a narrow channel into Mobile Bay in Alabama. His mission was to gain control of the bay. Faced with stiff resistance, Farragut prepared for battle. To make sure he had a good view, he climbed high into the ship’s rigging and had himself tied in place.
The Confederates had forts on both sides of the channel, and they had mined the water with torpedoes. Unwilling to
back down, Farragut shouted his famous order: “Damn the torpedoes, full speed ahead!” The mission succeeded in blocking the last Southern port east of the Mississippi.
The Election of 1864
In the North, opposition to the war grew stronger through much of 1864. It seemed unlikely that Lincoln could win reelection in November. His loss could mean an end to the war and recognition of the Confederacy as an independent country. White Southerners clung to this hope.
After Union troops captured Atlanta and blocked Mobile Bay, however, weary Northerners began to believe again that victory was possible. In November, President Lincoln won a second term. He took 55 percent of the popular vote and 212 to 21 electoral votes over the Democratic candidate, General George B. McClellan.
Many interpreted Lincoln’s reelection as a clear sign from the voters: They wanted a permanent end to slavery. On January 31, 1865, Congress passed the Thirteenth Amendment, which banned slavery in the United States.
READING PROGRESS CHECK
Explaining In the early part of 1864, why did it seem unlikely that Lincoln would be reelected?
' ............'
total war a strategy of bringing war to the entire society, not just the military
The War Ends
GUIDINGQUESTION
What is total war? From the beginning of the war, a goal of the Union was to capture the Confederate capital at Richmond. Petersburg had been the last roadblock in Grant’s path. After a nine-month siege, Grant o finally drove Lee’s army out of that city. Jefferson Davis knew that j Richmond was doomed.
Academic Vocabulary
interpret to find meaning in something
Reading HELPDESK
534 The Civil War
Sherman's March to the Sea
Still, the Confederacy fought on. The Union was determined to break the South’s will to continue the fight. To break this will, Sherman burned much of the city of Atlanta in November 1864. Sherman then had his troops march across Georgia toward the Atlantic, burning cities and crops as they went. This trail of destruction is known as Sherman’s March to the Sea.
Sherman continued his march through the Carolinas to join Grant’s forces near Richmond. Union troops took food, tore up railroad lines and fields, and killed livestock. General Sherman’s march was part of a strategy called total war. Total war involves targeting not only the enemy’s army, but also its land and people. Sherman hoped that by bringing the horrors of the war to the Southern population, he could help end the war.
White Southerners were outraged by Sherman’s march. Thousands of African Americans, however, left their plantations to follow the protection of his army. For them, the March to the Sea was a march to freedom.
Richmond Falls
Meanwhile, Grant continued the siege of Petersburg. Lee and his troops defended the town, but sickness, casualties, and desertion weakened them. On April 2, 1865, the Confederate lines broke and Lee withdrew.
Word of Lee’s retreat soon reached the Confederate president. As the Union army marched toward Richmond, Davis and his cabinet prepared to leave. They gathered documents and ordered that bridges and weapons useful to the enemy be burned. Then they fled the city. An observer wrote:
When the Union army marched into the Confederate capital after the 11-month siege, they found the city in ruins and still burning.
PRIMARYSOURCE
The trains came and went, wagons, vehicles, and horsemen rumbled and dashed to and fro.... As night came on... rioting and robbing took place. M
—from Battles and Leaders ofthe Civil War
The armory, with its stores of ammunition, exploded. Boom after boom rang through the city, and fires raged out of control.
On April 3, President Lincoln visited the captured town of Petersburg. Later, Lincoln confided to naval officer David Porter, “Thank God I have lived to see this. It seems to me that I have been dreaming a horrid nightmare for four years, and now the nightmare is gone.”
President Lincoln, his son Tad, and a group of military officials arrived in Richmond on April 4 to tour the fallen Confederate capital. As Lincoln walked through the streets, joyful African Americans followed singing, laughing, an reaching out to touch the president.
Lesson 5 535
AMERICAN WARS: BATTLE DEATHS
Global War on Terror Mexican War
Revolutionary War Korean War
Vietnam War
World War I
World War II
Civil War
107,000
407,000
700,000
Number of American Deaths
*As of 2/1/2011
The Civil War was by far the most costly war in terms of lives lost of any conflict in American history.
USING MATH SKILLS
How many more Americans died in the Civil War than in the second-most- costly war?
CRITICAL THINKING
Analyzing What makes the Civil War different from the other wars in this graph, besides the higher number of war dead?
When one man knelt down to thank him, Lincoln told him, “Don’t kneel to me. You must kneel to God only, and thank Him for your freedom.”
At the home of Confederate president Davis, Lincoln sat wearily for a while on a chair in the president’s office. After visiting two prisons for Confederate prisoners, Lincoln replied to a question about what to do with captured Confederates: “If I were in your place, I’d let ‘em up easy, let ‘em up easy.”
As a child, Dallas Tucker witnessed the arrival of Union troops in his hometown of Richmond, Virginia. He later recalled:
PRIMARY SOURCE
M [There was] a tremendous shock, which rocked the house and rattled the windows. At first we thought it was an earthquake, but very soon concluded... it must be an explosion of some kind.... It was, in fact, the blowing up of the government powder magazine just beyond the city limits.... Richmond was on fire.... In sheer despair, warehouse after warehouse was thrown open, and the gathered crowd of hungry, despairing people were told to go in and help themselves.
... Just as I reached the Washington Monument, I [saw] the troops entering [Capital] Square.... It was then only a few minutes later... that I saw the United States flag appear on the flag-pole above, where the Stars and Bars [the Confederate flag] had floated for years. 99
—Reverend Dallas Tucker, writing in the Richmond Dispatch, February 3,1!


Build Vocabulary: Word Origins
The word compassion was first used in the fourteenth century. Its origin is a compound word from Latin: compati. The prefix com means "with," and the rootpati means "suffer" or "bear."
536 The Civil War
Reading HELPDESK
A
Meeting at Appomattox Court House The formal end of the war came on April 9, 1865. Two days earlier, Grant had asked Lee to surrender, writing, “The result of last week must convince you of the hopelessness of further resistance. At first, Lee had believed he must fight on. Then, the Union captured the train carrying food to his starving troops and completely surrounded his army. Lee knew it was over.
Grant met Lee in the courthouse of Appomattox, Virginia. Grant offered his terms: Lees officers could keep their small firearms, and any soldier with a horse could keep it. Grant also gave 25,000 rations to feed Lees troops. Americas deadliest war had ended.
Throughout the war, music was important to both sides. The song “The Battle Hymn of the Republic,” which referenced biblical support for the Union cause as a war for human liberty, became the Union’s battle cry. “Dixie,” written by Daniel Decatur Emmett, was the song adopted by the Confederacy. It is said that Lincoln asked “Dixie” to be played after General Lee surrendered to Union forces.
The Toll of War
More American lives were lost in the Civil War than in any other conflict in American history. The war cost billions of dollars and left many Southern cities and farms in ruins.
The North’s victory saved the Union. The war also made clear that the national government was more powerful than the states. Finally, the war freed millions of African Americans. As you will read, however, the end of slavery left unsettled many of the problems that newly freed African Americans were to face.
Many questions remained. No one yet knew how to bring the Southern states back into the Union, nor what the status of African Americans would be in Southern society. Americans would struggle to answer these questions in the years ahead an era known as Reconstruction.
Q READING PROGRESS CHECK
Explaining Why did General Lee finally surrender?
Nearly 4 million people served in the military forces during the Civil War.
Include this lesson's information in your Foldable®
%
3>

H $

LESSON 5 REVIEW
Review Vocabulary
1.	How did total war affect civilians of the Confederacy? joa
Answer the Guiding Questions
2.	Explaining How did events on the battlefield affect Lincoln's reelection? 29B
3.	Identifying Cause and Effect Why did Sherman burn and destroy the South's land? 29B
4.	Evaluating Why did the war leave the U.S. government stronger than ever before? ia
NARRATIVE WRITING
You are a reporter covering Lee's army at the time of his surrender. Write a brief article describing the events surrounding his meeting with Grant, sb Lesson 5 537
Activities A3
Directions: Write your answers using standard grammar, spelling, sentence structure, and punctuation.
© Use your	to explore the Essential Question.
EXPOSITORY writing Write a short essay that identifies the political, economic, and social contributions civilian men and women made to the war effort. Include references to the North and the South. 23E;3od
© Social Studies Skills
EVALUATING
Assume the point of view of an adviser to President Lincoln. Write an argument describing the political, economic, and social factors that favor the enlistment of African Americans in the Union cause. 290300 © Thinking Like a Historian
EXPLAINING
In an essay, explain the significance ofthe years 1861-1865 in the history of the United States. Describe both the causes and effects ofthe Civil War. ia; ic; 300 © Visual Literacy
interpreting images Look at the political cartoon and read the caption. What do the men on either side of Lincoln represent? What are the"two difficulties"the president faces?	290
538 The Civil War
Assessment
Directions: Write your answers using standard grammar, spelling, sentence structure, and punctuation.
CHECKING FOR UNDERSTANDING
o Identify the contributions of and explain the roles played by eac^h of die following individuals during the Civil War:
A.	'	Abraham Lincoln	E.	Mary Edwards Walker
B.
Jefferson Davis F. Rose O'Neal Greenhow C.
Stonewall Jackson G. William Harvey Carney D.
Ulysses S. Grant H. Robert E. Lee REVIEW THE GUIDING QUESTIONS
0 Comparing Which states were the border states? What
did they have in common with the Confederate states?
29B
0 Explaining What was Confederate president Jefferson Davis's basic strategy during the war? sa
0 Explaining According to Lincoln, for what constitutional principle did the Union fight the Civil War? sa
0 Explaining Why did Lincoln issue a call for more volunteers after the First Battle of Bull Run? sa
© Analyzing Why was control ofthe Mississippi River an important goal of the Union strategy in the West? ik
© Evaluating Why did abolitionists urge Lincoln to make the war a fight against slavery? Do you think their reasons were effective? 29B
© Speculating How do you think the announcement ofthe Emancipation Proclamation affected the way Southerners thought about the war? 290
© Identifying Cause and Effect How did the war affect the Democratic Party in the North? What new political positions emerged? sc,-2ia
© Evaluating Was Lincoln's decision to suspend habeas corpus during the war justified? Explain your response.
© Contrasting Why did the war strain the economy ofthe South more than that of the North? ua
© Identifying What is the significance ofthe Morrill Act of 1862? 9D
0 Identifying What new innovation did the Confederacy use to threaten the Union blockade of Southern ports? 27A
0 Contrasting Why did the war affect life in the South more than in the North? 29B
0 Identifying How did women contribute to the war effort in the North and the South? sa
0 Explaining Where is Vicksburg? Why was its capture by Union forces significant?	sb; ioa; 10c
(£) Explaining Why was the Battle of Gettysburg a turning point in the war? sb
® Describing What did the Thirteenth Amendment accomplish? How is that related to the causes ofthe Civil War? ub
© Explaining What happened at Appomattox Court House in April 1865? ba;8b
CRITICAL THINKING
© Contrasting What were the strengths and weaknesses of the North and the South when the war began? Which side do you think had the greater advantage? 29B
© Identifying How did the Homestead Act encourage settlement of the Great Plains? 90
© Evaluating the Validity of Sources In Tom's letter in Across Five Aprils, he describes the fighting at Fort Henry. Tom writes that the Union was victorious, Admiral Foote was a Union leader, and ironclad ships were involved in the battle. Research to find two valid sources about the Battle of Fort Henry. Explain whether the sources corroborate, or support, Tom's version of the battle.	29G
© Describing What basic sentiment is expressed in "The Battle Hymn ofthe Republic"? Why do you think the song was important to Union soldiers? 26a;26b Analyzing In his Gettysburg Address, Lincoln said that the war was fought so that "Government ofthe people, by the people, for the people shall not perish from the earth." How does this statement reflect his ideas about equality, liberty, and unity? k
$ Drawing Inferences What leadership qualities do you think Lincoln valued in General Grant? ba;22a Evaluating Do you think General Sherman was justified in pursuing a strategy of total war? Why, or why not? 29B
539
Assessment icon^d)
SHORT RESPONSE
PRIMARYSOURCE
"All knew that this interest [slavery] was somehow the cause of the war.... Fondly do we hope, fervently do we pray, that this mighty scourge of war may speedily pass away. Yet, if God wills that it continue until all the wealth piled by the bondsmen's two hundred and fifty years of unrequited toil shall be sunk, and until every drop of blood drawn with the lash shall be paid by another drawn with the sword, as was said three thousand years ago, so still it must be said 'the judgments of the Lord are true and righteous altogether.
—Abraham Lincoln's Second Inaugural Address, March 4,1865
© Using Context Clues Who are the bondsmen? 3oa
© Analyzing Based on the excerpt, did Lincoln view the war as a fight for liberty and equality? Explain, sc
EXTENDED RESPONSE
© Expository WritingWfte an essay explaining the causes of the Civil War, including states' rights and slavery, and how the war settled those issues. i*;8b,-3od
STANDARDIZED TEST PRACTICE
DBQ
ANALYZING DOCUMENTS
Frederick Douglass led the movement to allow African American men to enlist in the Union armed forces.
PRIMARYSOURCE
"Once let the black man get upon his person the brass letters U.S.... and a musket on his shoulder and bullets in his pocket, and there is no power on earth that can deny that he has earned the right to citizenship."
—quoted in James M. McPherson, Battle Cry of Freedom
© Describing According to Douglass, why is it important that African Americans be enlisted as soldiers? 22B
A.
He believes they would enjoy having a uniform to wear. B.
He believes that it will earn African Americans the right to citizenship. C.
He thinks that only African Americans can free enslaved people. D.
Serving in the army will give them the experience to fight slaveholders. 0 Drawing Inferences From this excerpt, you can infer that Douglass believes that African Americans 22B
F. have not earned the right to citizenship.	Need Extra Help?
6. must fight to prove themselves worthy of citizenship.	IfYou've	©	©	©	©	$
H. will prove to be an unstoppable force in battle.	Missed Question					
1. already deserve citizenship.	Review Lesson	4	4	1-5	4	4,
540 The Civil War
The Reconstruction Era
1865-1896
ESSENTIAL QUESTION*
How do new ideas change the way people live ^5	; ?



IE
• - ‘i vi^
f
-	r‘«v* '•s?-
• '	*-'K iV-•■ - x
..v.l'fe-''.•;••'&
v-^' -"V: ■
7\'^h'V-.-x ':• a Me



r, j.


,'WH'’"'	*■••- '■: . job
Frederick Douglass had done as much as anyone in winning freedom for African Americans. Formerly enslaved, Douglass became a powerful voice for the abolitionist cause. Now, he is looking forward to the rebuilding of the nation. He says, "Whether the tremendous war so heroically fought and so victoriously ended shall pass into history a miserable failure... must be determined one way or another by the present session of Congress." In this chapter, you will read about Congress's response to Douglass's challenge.
KgWmiH Go to the Foldables* UW*"**liS* library in the back of your book to make a Foldable® that will help you take notes while reading this chapter.
Frederick Douglass was a leading voice for African American righty
J‘ h M&
'Bettmann.'Corhis	: s .i
	What was	What was happening m the South?	Positive and Ce9at,Veen^es
			
			
%>St~			
CHAPTER 19
Place and Time: United States i865toi877
After the Civil War, the federal government faced the task of putting the nation back together. -Af the same time, the nation continued to grow and confront a variety of challenges all across the continent.
Step Into the Place
MAP FOCUS
The federal government admitted Southern states back into the Union, and the nation sought to establish control of the West. PLACE
Which former Confederate state was the first to rejoin the Union? HUMAN-ENVIRONMENT INTERACTION
Which states and territories are likely to be impacted by completion of the transcontinental railroad? Explain your answer. 27D CRITICAL THINKING
Drawing Inferences Why do you think different states reentered the Union at different times?
1
netw@rks I
There's More Online!
eT GAME True/False
GRAPHIC ORGANIZER
Reconstruction Plans
Ef slideshows
*	Lincoln's Funeral Procession
•	Reconstruction in the South
Ef self-check quiz Ef video
Lesson 1

W
Planning Reconstruction
IENTIAL QUESTION
How do new ideas change the way people live? TEKS
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills 1A Identify the major eras and events in U.S. history through 1877, including colonization, revolution, drafting of the Declaration of Independence, creation and ratification of the Constitution, religious revivals such as the Second Great Awakening, early republic, the Age of Jackson, westward expansion, reform movements, sectionalism, Civil War, and Reconstruction, and describe their causes and effects.
8B Explain the causes of the Civil War, including sectionalism, states'rights, and slavery, and significant events of the Civil War, including the firing on Fort Sumter; the battles of Antietam, Gettysburg, and Vicksburg; the announcement of the Emancipation Proclamation; Lee's surrender at Appomattox Court House; and the assassination of Abraham Lincoln.
9A Evaluate legislative reform programs of the Radical Reconstruction Congress and reconstructed state governments.
9C Explain the economic, political, and social problems during Reconstruction and evaluate their impact on different groups.
16B Describe the impact of 19th-century amendments, including the 13th, 14th, and 15th amendments, on life in the United States. 22B Describe the contributions of significant political, social, and military leaders of the United States such as Frederick Douglass, John Paul Jones, James Monroe, Stonewall Jackson, Susan B. Anthony, and Elizabeth Cady Stanton.
Reading HELPDESK
It Matters because
Plans for Reconstruction after the Civil War proved difficult and divisive.
The Reconstruction Debate
guidingquestion Why did leaders disagree about the South's rejoining the Union?
The Confederate states tried and failed to break away from the United States. Now, they had to rejoin that Union. In addition, the war left the South’s economy and society in ruins. It would take much effort to restore the states that had experienced so much destruction during the war.
Reconstruction (ree»kuhn«STRUHK»shuhn) was the era from 1865 to 1877 during which the former Confederate states were rebuilt and readmitted to the Union. The president and members of Congress had different ideas about how to accomplish these tasks. The debate over Reconstruction led to bitter conflict in the years following the Civil War.
Lincoln's Ten Percent Plan
President Lincoln offered the first plan for bringing Southern states back into the Union. In December 1863, while the Civil War still raged, Lincoln presented his ideas. Lincoln’s plan required voters in each Southern state to take an oath of loyalty to the Union. When 10 percent of the voters in a state had taken the oath, the state could form a new state government. The state would also be required to adopt a new constitution that banned
11
Taking Notes: Summarizing
Using a graphic organizer like the one shown here, write short summaries of the Reconstruction plans proposed by Abraham Lincoln, the Radical Republicans, and Andrew Johnson.
544 The Reconstruction Era
Lincoln I
I
Reconstruction Radicals
Johnson
Content Vocabulary
•	Reconstruction
•	amnesty
I
I
slavery. Once a state had met these conditions, it could send representatives to Congress. Lincoln’s proposal was known as the Ten Percent Plan.
Lincoln did not want to punish the South after the war ended. He believed that punishment would accomplish little and would slow the nation s healing from the war. Lincoln wanted to see white Southerners who supported the Union take charge of their state governments. He offered amnesty (AM.nuh.stee)— forgiveness for any crimes committed—to those who would swear loyalty to the Union. Only Confederate leaders would not be offered amnesty.
In 1864, three states—Louisiana, Arkansas, and Tennessee— set up new governments under Lincoln’s plan. Congress, however, was not willing to accept the new states. It refused to seat their senators and representatives.
The Radical Republicans
Some members of Congress thought Lincoln’s plan went too easy on the South. A group of Republican representatives favored a more radical approach to Reconstruction. This group was known as the Radical Republicans, or the Radicals. Radical leader Thaddeus Stevens said that Southern institutions “must be broken up and relaid, or all our blood and treasure have been spent in vain.” The Radicals were powerful. The Republican Party controlled Congress, and the Radicals had much influence in the party. Congress could—and did—vote to deny seats to any state that sought to reenter the Union under Lincoln’s plan.
The city of Richmond, Virginia, shown here, was the capital of the Confederacy and an industrial center.
CRITICAL THINKING
Identifying Cause and Effect What challenges do you think this type of destruction presented to the economy of Virginia? Reconstruction the period of rebuilding the South and readmitting Southern states into the Union amnesty the granting of a pardon to a large number
Academic Vocabulary radical extreme
of persons
Lesson 1 545


Acting on his sympathies for the Confederacy, John Wilkes Booth assassinated President Lincoln on April 14,1865. Lincoln had had less than a week to celebrate the Union victory.
CRITICAL THINKING
Analyzing Visuals How does the artist use actions of the people in this picture to create a mood? Explain your answer.
,X*
f
In July 1864, Congress passed its plan for Reconstruction.
The Wade-Davis Bill stated that to rejoin the Union, a state must meet three requirements. First, a majority of the state’s white male adults had to pledge loyalty to the Union. Second, only white males who swore they had not fought against the Union could vote for delegates to a state constitutional convention. Third, all new state constitutions had to ban slavery. The bill also barred former Confederates from holding public office.
Lincoln objected to the harshness of this plan. Lincoln wanted new state governments to be quickly established and the rebuilding of the South to get underway. Because Congress was about to end its session, he was able to “pocket veto” the bill: He refused to sign it, and the bill died after Congress adjourned. Still, the Wade-Davis Bill made President Lincoln realize that he would have to compromise with the Radicals.
Founding the Freedmen's Bureau
In March 1865, Lincoln and Congress together created the Freedmen’s Bureau. Its main purpose was to help African Americans adjust to life after slavery. The Freedmen’s Bureau provided food, clothing, and medical care to poor Southerners, especially those freed from slavery. It set up schools, some staffed with teachers from the North. The bureau helped some people get their own land to farm or find work for fair pay.
H READING PROGRESS CHECK
Listing What were the three requirements for rejoining the Union, as stated in the Wade-Davis Bill?

Reading HELPDESK
Academic Vocabulary adjust to become more suited to new conditions
SKILLS PRACTICE
During class lessons, listen for main ideas to put in your notes. Write main ideas and list supporting details below them.
546 The Reconstruction Era
Johnson's Reconstruction Plan
guidingquestion How did Lincoln's assassination change the plans for the South to
rejoin the Union!
Events took a dramatic turn on the night of April 14, 1865. As the president enjoyed a play at Ford’s Theatre in Washington,
D.C., actor and Confederate sympathizer John Wilkes Booth shot Lincoln in the head. Hours later, Lincoln died.
News of the president’s assassination swept across the nation. African Americans mourned the death of the man who helped bring an end to slavery. White Northerners grieved for the president who had restored the Union.
Vice President Andrew Johnson became president. Although he was a Southerner, Johnson had supported the Union during the Civil War. Johnson had his own ideas about rebuilding the South. His Reconstruction plan gave amnesty to most Southerners who swore loyalty to the Union. However, high-ranking Confederates could receive pardons only by appealing to the president. This part of his plan was meant to humiliate Confederate leaders. He believed that they had tricked other Southerners into secession. Johnson also opposed equal rights for African Americans. “White men alone must manage the South,” he stated.
President Johnson’s plan did require that Southern states outlaw slavery before they could rejoin the Union. They also had to ratify the Thirteenth Amendment to the Constitution. Passed by Congress in January 1865, the Thirteenth Amendment abolished slavery in the United States. By the end of 1865, all former Confederate states except Texas had set up new governments under Johnson s plan. These newly reformed states were now ready to rejoin the Union.
D READING PROGRESS CHECK
Specifying What did the Thirteenth Amendment accomplish?
In his Second Inaugural Address, President Lincoln said: “With malice toward none, with charity for all, with firmness in the right as God gives us to see the right, let us strive on to finish the work we are in, to bind up the nation’s wounds.” Lincoln wanted the South to be treated with compassion. Explain how Reconstruction might have been different if Lincoln had not been assassinated.
Include this lesson's information in your Foldable®
	What was happening in the North?	What was happening in the South?	Positive and ! Negative Consequences
"K			
			
. %>St~			
LESSON 1 REVIEW
Review Vocabulary
1.	Explain the meaning of the term Reconstruction, joa
2.	Use the word amnesty in a sentence. 3oa
Answer the Guiding Questions
3.	Describing Why was it necessary to have a period of "reconstruction" after the Civil War? ia
4.	Explaining How did Lincoln's assassination at the end of the Civil War affect the debate over Reconstruction? sb
5.	Evaluating As expressed in the Wade-Davis Bill, what did the Radical Republicans hope to accomplish through their plan for Reconstruction? IA* 9A; 21A
DESCRIPTIVE WRITING
You have been hired by the newly formed Freedmen's Bureau to promote the new organization. Write a brief description of the bureau, its work, and why it is important to the future of free African Americans and the nation
30D
Lesson 1 547
...................
networks
There's More Online!
&	CHART/GRAPH
Radical Republicans ef GAME Tic Tac Toe Ef graphic organizer
The Fourteenth and
Fifteenth Amendments
ef MAP Reconstruction
Military Districts
Lesson 2
The Radicals Take Control
TEKS
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills 1A Identify the major eras and events in U.S. history through 1877, including colonization, revolution, drafting of the Declaration of Independence, creation and ratification of the Constitution, religious revivals such as the Second Great Awakening, early republic, the Age of Jackson, westward expansion, reform movements, sectionalism, Civil War, and Reconstruction, and describe their causes
NTIAL QUESTION
How do new ideas change the way people live? IT MATTERS BECAUSE
Reconstruction under the Radical Republicans advocated rights for

African Americans and harsh treatment of former Confederates.
Protecting African Americans' Rights
guidingquestion Howdid Congress attempt to assist African Americans in the South?
and effects.
9A Evaluate legislative reform programs of the Radical Reconstruction Congress and reconstructed state governments.
9C Explain the economic, political, and social problems during Reconstruction and evaluate their impact on different groups.
16B Describe the impact of 19th-century amendments, including the 13th, 14th, and 15th amendments, on life in the United States. 21A Identify different points of view of political parties and interest groups on important historical and contemporary issues.
In 1865 former Confederate states began creating new governments based on President Johnsons plan. These states elected leaders to again represent them in the Congress. When the new senators and representatives arrived in Washington, D.C., Congress would not seat them. The Radical Republicans were not willing to readmit the Southern states on Johnsons easy terms. Radicals were determined to make the former Confederacy’s return to the Union difficult for the white South.
Reading HELPDESK
Black Codes and Civil Rights
Events in the South strengthened the Radicals’ determination.
By early 1866, legislatures in the Southern states had passed laws called black codes. These laws were designed to limit the freedoms of the newly freed African Americans. Some black codes made it illegal for African Americans to own or rent farms. The laws also made it easy for white employers to take advantage of African American workers. Some black codes allowed officials to fine or even arrest African Americans who did not have jobs. To freed


Taking Notes: Identifying Cause and Effect
As you read, take notes on the impact of the Fourteenth and Fifteenth Amendments on African Americans. Use a diagram like the one shown here to organize your notes. 548 The Reconstruction Era
Fourteenth Lk Amendment [-3/	
Fifteenth LX Amendment i—|Z	
Content Vocabulary
•	black codes
•	override
•	impeach
men and women and their supporters, life under the black codes was little better than slavery.
At the same time, Congress tried to protect the rights of the South’s African Americans. In 1866 it passed a bill that gave the Freedmen’s Bureau new powers. The Bureau could now set up special courts to try persons charged with violating African Americans rights. African Americans could sit on the juries in these courts and judge accused white Southerners.
To combat the black codes, Radical Republicans pushed the Civil Rights Act of 1866 through Congress. This law gave the federal government power to get involved in state affairs to protect African Americans’ rights. It also granted citizenship to African Americans. This act was meant to counter the Supreme Court decision in the 1857 case Dred Scotty. Sandford. The Supreme Court had ruled that African Americans were not citizens.
President Johnson vetoed both bills. He claimed that the federal government was exceeding its authority. Johnson also argued that both bills were unconstitutional. He reasoned that they had been passed by a Congress that did not include representatives from all the states. By raising this issue, he was warning that he would veto any law passed by a Congress in which the South was not represented.
Republicans in Congress were able to override, or defeat, both vetoes, and the bills became law. Radical Republicans began to see that Congress and Johnson would not be able to work together on Reconstruction. They gave up hope of compromising with the president and began to create their own plan for dealing with the South.
The Fourteenth Amendment
Congress did worry that the courts might overturn the Civil Rights Act. It proposed another amendment to the Constitution, which the states ratified in 1868. The Thirteenth Amendment had ended slavery. The Fourteenth Amendment took the next step by stating that:
MUMAKY SOURCE
« All persons born or naturalized in the United States, and subject to the jurisdiction thereof, are citizens of the United States and of the State wherein they reside. J*
___the Fourteenth Amendment
black codes laws passed in the South just after the Civil War aimed at :ontrolling freed men and women, and allowing plantation owners to ta e idvantage of African American workers
override to reject or defeat something that has already been decided
Radical Republicans such as Charles Sumner of Massachusetts were determined not only to rebuild the South but also to remake Southern society.
Lesson 2 549
Connections to
TODAY
The Fourteenth Amendment
The Fourteenth Amendment aimed to preserve the rights of formerly enslaved people. Today it protects the rights of all Americans from abuse by state governments. Before the Fourteenth Amendment, the Bill of Rights applied only to actions of the federal government. For example, the First Amendment prevented the federal government, but not state governments, from denying freedom of religion. Over time, the Supreme Court has used the Fourteenth Amendment to apply the Bill of Rights to actions of state governments too.
This language protected the citizenship extended to African Americans by the Civil Rights Act of 1866. It guaranteed that citizenship could not later be taken away by passing another law. The amendment made it clear that if a state barred any adult male citizen from voting, that state could lose some representation in Congress.
Another part of the Fourteenth Amendment said that no state could take a person’s life, liberty, or property “without due process of law.” It stated that every person was entitled to “equal protection of the laws.” It also excluded former Confederate leaders from holding any national or state office unless Congress had pardoned them.
Some people considered amending the Constitution to protect African Americans to be an extreme measure. Increasing violence toward African Americans across the South convinced moderate Republicans that an amendment was necessary. Congress required that the Southern states ratify the Fourteenth Amendment as another condition of rejoining the Union. Because most refused to do so at first, the amendment’s ratification was delayed until 1868.
D READING PROGRESS CHECK
White mobs killed nearly 50 African Americans and burned their homes, churches, and schools in Memphis, Tennessee, in May 1866. Reactions to such violence helped Republicans win an overwhelming victory in the 1866 elections.
CRITICAL THINKING
Making Connections Why would such violent acts have helped Republicans win elections?
Reading HELPDESK

Academic Vocabulary
exclude to prevent from being involved in something
550 The Reconstruction Era
Defining Identify two key features of the Civil Rights Act of 1866.
SKILLS PRACTICE
When you are speaking, think about how the ideas connect. Choose connecting words to show cause, comparison, contrast, sequence, or other connections.
GEOGRAPHY CONNECTION
Congress divided the former Confederacy into five military districts. A Union general was put in charge of each district. Ihe dates on the map indicate each state's reentry into the Union.
PLACE
Which former Confederate state was not part of a military district? CRITICAL THINKING
Drawing Inferences Why would Union generals have been put in charge of the districts?
Radical Republicans in Charge
guidingquestion What elements were included in the Radical Republicans'idea of Reconstruction?
President Johnson campaigned against the Radical Republicans in the congressional elections of 1866. He attacked the Fourteenth Amendment and made it a major issue in the campaign. Many Northerners disliked Johnson’s tone. Some feared the clashes between whites and African Americans that were taking place in the South. Voters rejected Johnson’s views, and the Republicans won an overwhelming majority in Congress. This meant that Johnson could no longer prevent them from overriding his vetoes. A period known as Radical Reconstruction began.
The Reconstruction Acts
By 1867, 10 of the former Confederate states had not ratified the Fourteenth Amendment. In response, Congress passed the First Reconstruction Act. This law required that those states form new governments. Only Tennessee, which had ratified the amendment, kept its government and rejoined the Union.
The act divided the 10 defiant states into 5 military districts. Each district would be governed by an army general until new state governments were formed. Former Confederate leaders were banned from serving in these new governments. Each state also had to submit a new state constitution to Congress for approval. Finally, the act guaranteed African American men the right to vote in state elections. The Second Reconstruction Act empowered the army to register voters in each district and to help organize state constitutional conventions.
Lesson 2 551
Serjeant-at-^rms.
This ticket entitled the holder to attend the impeachment trial of President Johnson.
CRITICAL THINKING
Speculating Why might Johnson's conviction and removal have weakened the office of president?
Reading HELPDESK
impeach to formally charge a public official with misconduct in office

ow wa laaraaa
Many white Southerners refused to take part in the elections for constitutional conventions and new state governments. Thousands of newly registered African Americans did cast ballots. These developments favored the Republicans, who took control of Southern state governments. By 1868, Alabama, Arkansas, Florida, Georgia, Louisiana, North Carolina, and South Carolina had set up new governments, ratified the Fourteenth Amendment, and rejoined the Union. By 1870, the remaining three states—Mississippi, Virginia, and Texas—had also been readmitted.
Impeaching the President
The Constitution makes the president the commander in chief of the military. This gave President Johnson control over the military governors created by the First Reconstruction Act.
Because Johnson strongly opposed the Reconstruction Acts, Congress passed a series of laws to limit his power. One of these laws was the Tenure of Office Act. This law stated that the president could not remove government officials, including members of his own cabinet, without the Senate’s approval. Congress wanted to protect Secretary of War Edwin Stanton. Stanton was the cabinet official in charge of the military and a supporter of Radical Reconstruction.
Tensions between Johnson and the Radical Republicans continued to grow. In August 1867, while Congress was not in session, Johnson suspended Stanton—temporarily stopped him from working.
When the Senate met again, it refused to approve the suspension. Johnson then fired Stanton. Thus he deliberately violated the Tenure of Office Act. Johnson also appointed people the Radical Republicans opposed to command some of the military districts in the South.
The House of Representatives voted to impeach (ihm»PEECH) President Johnson—that is, formally charge him with wrongdoing. In 1868 the case went to the Senate for a trial. The trial lasted almost three months. Johnson’s defenders claimed that the president had exercised his right to challenge laws he considered unconstitutional. They argued that the House had impeached Johnson for political reasons. Johnson’s critics said that Congress had supreme power to make the laws and that Johnson’s use of the veto interfered with that power.
Academic Vocabulary
suspend to stop temporarily
The Senate did not get the two-thirds majority it needed to convict President Johnson. Some moderate Republicans supported the president, arguing that he should not be removed from office for political reasons. As a result, Johnson remained president until Lincoln s second term ended in 1869. During that time, President Johnson did little to interfere with Congress’s Reconstruction plans.
The Fifteenth Amendment
Most Southern states had rejoined the Union by the time the presidential election of 1868 drew near. Most Americans hoped that the turbulent period of Reconstruction was over. The Republican Party nominated Civil War hero Ulysses S. Grant. Supported by African American voters, Grant beat out the Democratic candidate, New York governor Horatio Seymour.
The election results showed that voters still supported Radical Reconstruction.
In 1869 Congress proposed the Fifteenth Amendment. This guaranteed that state and federal governments could not deny the right to vote to any male citizen because of “race, color, or previous condition of servitude.” Frederick Douglass, who vocally supported the Radical Republicans, traveled throughout the country to speak on behalf of the amendment.
When the states ratified the Fifteenth Amendment in 1870, Republicans thought their job was largely done. They believed that they had succeeded in giving African American men the right to vote. They also thought the power of the vote would allow African Americans to better protect themselves against unfair treatment by white people. Both beliefs would prove to be too optimistic.
D READING PROGRESS CHECK
Describing How did Frederick Douglass contribute to the passage of the Fifteenth Amendment?
Include this lesson's information in your Foldable®
	What was happening in the North?	What was happening in the South?	Positive and Consequences
Ae_			
			
			
LESSON 2 REVIEW
Review Vocabulary
1.	Define each of the following terms, and then use each term in a sentence. joa; job
a. suspend b. impeach c. override
Answer the Guiding Questions
2.	Explaining What threats did African Americans face in the South, and what measures did Congress take to deal with these threats? ia;9a;<>c
3.	Evaluating What measures did the Radical Republicans take to make Reconstruction a period of major social change in the South? »c
PERSUASIVE WRITING
Assume the role of President Andrew Johnson. Write a short speech to give at your trial, explaining why senators should not convict you of wrongdoing. 3<m Lesson 2 553
1
networks
There's More Online!
CHARTS/GRAPHS
•	Illiteracy Rates
•	African Americans in
Congress
eT GAME Fill in the Blank Ef graphic organizer
Improvements in Education
sf SELF-CHECK QUIZ Ef VIDEO

Ki'lRS '"JE®

Lesson 3
The South During Reconstruction
iTIAL QUESTION How do new ideas change the way people live?
TEKS
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills 1A Identify the major eras and events in U.S. history through 1877, including colonization, revolution, drafting of the Declaration of Independence, creation and ratification of the Constitution, religious revivals such as the Second Great Awakening, early republic, the Age of Jackson, westward expansion, reform movements, sectionalism, Civil War, and Reconstruction, and describe their causes and effects.
9A Evaluate legislative reform programs of the Radical Reconstruction Congress and reconstructed state governments.
9B Evaluate the impact of the election of Hiram Rhodes Revels.
9C Explain the economic, political, and social problems during Reconstruction and evaluate their impact on different groups.
24B Evaluate the impact of reform movements, including educational reform, temperance, the women's rights movement, prison reform, abolition, the labor reform movement, and care of the disabled.

Reading HELPDESK
Taking Notes: Classifying
IT MATTERS BECAUSE
Reconstruction brought significant—but not necessarily lasting-change to the South.
Republicans in Charge
guidingquestion How were African Americans discouraged from participating in civic life in the South?
Republicans controlled Southern politics during the Reconstruction period. They were supported by African Americans, some white Southerners, and white newcomers from the North.
African Americans in Government
Though they had fewer rights than white Southerners, African Americans played important roles as voters and as elected officials. For a short time, African Americans held the majority in the lower house of the South Carolina legislature. Overall, the number of African Americans holding top positions in most Southern states during Reconstruction was small, and they did not control any state government. At the national level, 16 African Americans served in the House of Representatives and 2 served in the Senate between 1869 and 1880. The first African American senator, Hiram Revels, had recruited African Americans for the Union Army and served as a chaplain in a Mississippi regiment. He remained there after the war and was elected to the Senate in 1870, leading the way for other African Americans to follow.
As you read, use a diagram like the one shown here to describe improvements in the education of African Americans in the South during Reconstruction.
554 The Reconstruction Era
/'improvements'''^. Education_________/
Content Vocabulary
•	scalawag
•	corruption
•	integrate
■ sharecropping
At the center of this picture of leading Reconstruction politicians is Frederick Douglass. Beside him are Hiram Revels (right), who in 1870 became the first African American elected to the United States Senate, and Blanche K. Bruce, who became the first African American to serve a full term in the Senate.
CRITICAL THINKING
Evaluating Why do you think Douglass appears at the center of this picture?
Scalawags and Carpetbaggers
Some Southern whites supported the Republican Party. These were often pro-Union business leaders and farmers who had not owned enslaved people. Former Confederates who held resentment against those who had been pro-Union called these people scalawags (SKA*lih*wagz), a term meaning “scoundrel” or “worthless rascal.”
Republicans also had the support of many Northern whites who moved to the South after the war. White Southerners called these Northerners carpetbaggers. The term referred to cheap suitcases made of carpet fabric. White Southerners were suspicious of the Northerners’ intentions. Some carpetbaggers were dishonest people looking to take advantage of the South’s difficulties, but most were not. Many sincerely wanted to help rebuild the South.
White Southerners accused Reconstruction governments of corruption (kuh«RUHP»shuhn)—dishonest or illegal actions.
While some officials did make money illegally, there is no evidence that corruption in the South was greater than in the North. Many Southerners were upset by the reforms Republican governments instituted. New schools and improved infrastructure cost money, and state governments raised property taxes to get that money. Many property owners lost their land, causing hardship and resentment.
scalawag the name given by former Confederates to	Build Vocabulary? Word Origins_
Southern whites who supported Republican	Today the term carpetbagger is used to criticize
Reconstruction of the South	candidates who run for office in a place where
corruption dishonest or illegal actions	they have not lived for long.
Lesson 3 555


fife
rife,
all
. J5£_Z±-



1
This picture shows a school for African American children in Charleston, South Carolina.
SKILLS PRACTICE
Ask questions when you do not understand something during a lesson. Use the words you know well and also some new ones.
Resistance to Reconstruction
Life during Reconstruction was difficult for African Americans. Most Southern whites did not want African Americans to have more rights. White landowners often refused to rent land to freed people. Store owners refused them credit. Many employers would not hire them. Many of the jobs available to African Americans were those that whites were unwilling to do.
Secret societies such as the Ku Klux Kian used fear and violence to deny rights to freed men and women. Disguised in white sheets and hoods, Kian members threatened, beat, and killed thousands of African Americans and the whites who supported them. Kian members burned African American homes, schools, and churches. Many Democrats, plantation owners, and other white Southerners supported the Kian. Some saw violence as a way to oppose Republican rule.
In 1870 and 1871, Congress passed several laws to try to stop the growing Kian violence. These laws were not always effective. White Southerners often refused to testify against those who attacked African Americans and their white supporters.
READING PROGRESS CHECK
Explaining Why did many Southerners resent scalawags and carpetbaggers?
Reading HELPDESK
integrate to unite, or to blend into a united whole sharecropping a system of farming in which a farmer works land for an owner who provides equipment and seeds and receives a share of the crop
556 The Reconstruction Era
Academic Vocabulary
credit a loan, or the ability to pay for a good or service at a future time rather than at the time of purchase academy a school or college for special training



Education and Farming
guidingquestion What were some improvements and some limitations for African Americans?
During the early days of Reconstruction, African Americans built their own schools. Many Northerners came south to teach. In the 1870s, Reconstruction governments created public schools for both races. Soon about 50 percent of white children and 40 percent of African American children attended school in the South.
African Americans also made gains in higher education. Northerners set up academies in the South. These academies grew into a network of colleges and universities for African Americans.
African American and white students usually went to different schools. Few states had laws requiring schools to be integrated (IHN»tuh*grayt»uhd). Schools that were integrated had both white and African American students. Often, integration laws were not enforced.
In addition to education, freed people wanted farmland.
Having their own land would enable them to support their families. Some African Americans bought land with the help of the Freedmen’s Bank. Many freed people—along with many whites—had no choice but to farm land owned by someone else.
In the sharecropping (SHEHR«krah»peeng) system, landowners rented land to sharecroppers, or farmers. Sharecroppers gave a percentage of their crops to the landowner. Landowners often demanded an unfairly large percentage that left sharecroppers with almost nothing to support themselves. For many, sharecropping was little better than slavery.
H READING PROGRESS CHECK
Explaining How did the sharecropping system work?
LESSON 3 REVIEW
Foldables
I
Study Organizer Include this lesson's information in your Foldable®.
	What was happening in the North?	What was happening in the South?	Positive and Consequences
			
			
			
Review Vocabulary
1.	Use each of the following terms in a sentence that
illustrates the meaning of the term. 3<>a	5,
a. integrate b. sharecropping
Answer the Guiding Questions
2.	Explaining In what ways was life during Reconstruction difficult for African Americans?«
3.	Evaluating How did education improve under the reconstructed state governments? 9a;24b
Explaining Why did the sharecropping system arise after the Civil War? ia; 9c
EXPOSITORY WRITING
Charlotte Forten was an African American who moved from the North to teach freed children in South Carolina. Of her students, she wrote, "The long, dark night of the Past, with all its sorrows and its fears, was forgotten; and for the Future—the eyes of these freed children see no clouds in it." Write an explanation of what you think Forten meant. 29b Lesson 3 557
networks
There's More Online!
CHART
Industry in the New South Ef GRAPHIC ORGANIZER
The New South eT MAP Election of 1876
Ef primary source
:	Sharecropper Contract
Ef self-check quiz
sf SLIDESHOW
Southern Textile Industry
Ef video
Lesson 4
The Post-Reconstruction Era
IAL QUESTION
How do new ideas change the way people live? IT MATTERS BECAUSE
After Reconstruction, a "New South" emerged, but African Americans steadily lost freedoms.

TEKS
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills 1A Identify the major eras and events in U.S. history through 1877, including colonization, revolution, drafting of the Declaration of Independence, creation and ratification of the Constitution, religious revivals such as the Second Great Awakening, early republic, the Age of Jackson, westward expansion, reform movements, sectionalism, Civil War, and Reconstruction, and describe their causes and effects.
9C Explain the economic, political, and social problems during Reconstruction and evaluate their impact on different groups.
12A Identify economic differences among different regions of the United States.
12D Analyze the causes and effects of economic differences among different regions of the United States at selected times in U.S. history.
16B Describe the impact of 19th-century amendments, including the 13th, 14th, and 15th amendments, on life in the United States. 21A Identify different points of view of political parties and interest groups on important historical and contemporary issues. 22B Describe the contributions of significant political, social, and military leaders of the United States such as Frederick Douglass, John Paul Jones, James Monroe, Stonewall Jackson, Susan B. Anthony, and Elizabeth Cady Stanton. 23C Identify ways conflicts between people from various racial, ethnic, and religious groups were resolved.
Reading HELPDESK
Reconstruction Ends
guidingquestion How did Democrats regain control of Southern governments?
As a general, Ulysses S. Grant had led the North to victory in the Civil War. His reputation as a war hero carried him into the White House in the election of 1868 and to reelection in 1872. Unfortunately, Grant had little experience in politics.
Scandal and corruption plagued Grants presidency. In addition, a severe economic depression began during his second term. A crisis arose when the powerful banking firm of Jay Cooke and Company declared bankruptcy. This triggered a wave of fear known as the Panic of 1873. It set off a depression that lasted much of the decade.
The depression and the scandals in the Grant administration hurt the Republican Party. In the 1874 congressional elections, the Democrats won back control of the House of Representatives. Democrats also made gains in the Senate. These changes cost the Radical Republicans much of their power.
Meanwhile, Southern Democrats worked hard to regain control of their state governments. They got help from groups	i
such as the Ku Klux Kian, which terrorized African Americans	|
and other Republican voters. The Democrats who came to power j in the South called themselves “redeemers.” They claimed to have i redeemed, or saved, their states from “black Republican” rule. ;

Taking Hotest Summarizing
As you read, use a diagram like this one to summarize the main ideas about the New South.
Content Vocabulary_________
•	poll tax	• segregation
•	literacy test	• lynching
•	grandfather clause
558 The Reconstruction Era
WASH, i TERR.
MONTANA TERR.
FidahoJ JTERR. WYO.
TERR.
J UTAH I
f TERR. DAKOTA,
TERR.
ARIZ. I NEW . TERR. MEXICO|
TERR.
In this election, parties disputed the electoral vote in four states. The number of disputed votes was large enough to affect the outcome of the election and who would be the next president.
ELECTION OF
1876 NH 5 VT5
ELECTORAL VOTE TOTAL:
POPULAR VOTE TOTAL:
8,402,329 0.97%-
81,737
48.04%“
4,036,572
■ 50.99% 4,284,020
I
Hayes (Republican) I
Tilden (Democrat) Peter Cooper (Greenback)
Territories
I
Disputed Electoral Vote Note: 20 disputed electoral votes were awarded to Hayes by Congressional Commission.
IDENTIFYING
In which states were the results of the election disputed? CRITICAL THINKING
Analyzing What does the voting pattern suggest about support for Reconstruction in the North?

The Election of 1876
Republicans attempted to keep control of the White House by choosing Ohio governor Rutherford B. Hayes as their candidate for president in 1876. Hayes held moderate views on Reconstruction. Republicans hoped he would appeal to voters in both the North and the South.
Hayes ran against Democrat Samuel Tilden, the governor of New York, in a very close election. Neither got a majority of the electoral votes, mainly because of confusing election returns from three Southern states. These states—Florida, South Carolina, and Louisiana—were still under Republican rule. Republicans insisted that many voters in these states favored Hayes, but their votes had not been counted. Congress named a commission to decide which candidate should receive the disputed electoral votes. The commission recommended giving them all to Hayes. Doing this would make Hayes president by one electoral vote.
Connections to
TODAY
The Election of 2000
A voting dispute in Florida also affected the 2000 presidential election. An extremely close vote count led to a bitter dispute between Republican George W. Bush and Democrat A1 Gore over whether and how to recount the ballots. The dispute kept either party from gaining enough electoral votes to win the election. This time, a U.S. Supreme Court ruling helped make Bush the winner and president.
Academic Vocabulary
commission a group of officials chosen for a specific responsibility
Lesson 4 559
the rest of the nineteenth century, though industry in the region made dramatic gains.
USING MATH SKILLS
About how many more manufacturing establishments did Florida have in 1900 than in 1860?
CRITICAL THINKING
Analyzing Which two Southern states experienced the greatest growth in manufacturing between 1860 and 1900? Explain.
23,525	60,371
* Number of manufacturing establishments
Reading HELPDESK
poll tax a tax a person must pay in order to vote
To ensure that Congress accepted this outcome, Republicans made many promises to the Democrats. One of these was a pledge to withdraw the troops who had been stationed in the South since the end of the Civil War. Shortly after Hayes took office in 1877, the last troops left the South.
Rise of the "New South"
By the 1880s, forward-looking Southerners were convinced that their region must develop an industrial economy. They argued that the South had lost the Civil War because its industry did not match the North’s. Atlanta newspaper editor Henry Grady headed a group that urged Southerners to “out-Yankee the Yankees” and build a “New South.” This “New South” would have industries based on the region’s coal, iron, tobacco, cotton, and lumber resources. Southerners would create this new economy by embracing a spirit of hard work and regional pride.
Southern industry made great gains in the 1880s. Textile mills sprang up across the region. The American Tobacco Company, developed largely by James Duke of North Carolina, came to control nearly all the tobacco manufacturing in the country. By 1890, the South produced nearly 20 percent of the nation’s iron
ftcajemic Vocabulary	SKILLS PRACTICE__________
outcome the effect or result of an Before you answer questions, think about action or event	the words you know. Choose your words
before you speak.
560 The Reconstruction Era
and steel. Much of the industry was in Alabama, near deposits of iron ore. In Florida, port cities Jacksonville and Pensacola prospered because of strong demand for lumber and other products.
The South possessed a cheap and reliable supply of labor. A railroad-building boom also helped development. By 1870, the railroad system, destroyed by the war, was nearly rebuilt. Between 1880 and 1890, track mileage more than doubled.
The New South's Rural Economy
In spite of these gains, the South did not develop an industrial economy as strong as the North’s. Agriculture remained the South’s main economic activity.
Supporters of the New South hoped to promote small, profitable farms that grew a variety of crops instead of relying on cotton. A different economy emerged, however. Many landowners held on to their large estates. When estates were divided, much of the land went to sharecropping and tenant farming. Neither of these activities was profitable.
Debt also caused problems. Poor farmers used credit to buy supplies. Merchants who provided credit also charged high prices, and farmers’ debts rose. To repay debts, farmers turned to cash crops. As in the past, the
main cash crop was cotton. Higher cotton production	" ?
drove cotton prices down. Lower prices led farmers to plant even more cotton. The growth of sharecropping and the heavy reliance on a single cash crop helped prevent improvements in the conditions of Southern farmers.
Q READING PROGRESS CHECK
Describing Why did Southern industry grow in the late 1800s?
By 1880, a third of the South's farmers were sharecroppers or tenant farmers. Sharecropping and tenant farming were agricultural systems that trapped generations of Southerners in poverty.
A
Divided Society guiding question Why did freedom for African Americans become a distant dream after
Reconstruction ended?
As Reconstruction ended, African Americans dreams for justice faded. Laws passed by the redeemer governments denied Southern African Americans many of their newly won rig ts.
Voting Restrictions
The Fifteenth Amendment barred a state from denying someone ! the right to vote because of race. White Southern leaders found 1 ways to get around the amendment. One way was by requiring | a poll tax, a fee required for voting. Many African Americans e could not afford to pay the tax, so they could not vote.
Lesson 4 561
CM
J
Wlife LMMKAnuirw* |Y*ou ‘’“M'fflfe
s,Mnt m onit^W
•W /
Another means of denying voting rights was the literacy test (LIH.tuh.ruh.see TEHST). This approach required potential voters to read and explain difficult parts of state constitutions or the federal Constitution. Because most Southern African Americans had little education, literacy tests prevented many from voting.
Both poll taxes and literacy tests also kept some whites from voting. To prevent this, some states passed grandfather clauses (GRAND*fah«thuhr KLAHZ»ihz). These laws allowed people to vote if their fathers or grandfathers had voted before Reconstruction. Because African Americans could not vote at that time, they were excluded. Such laws and the constant threat of violence caused African American voting to decline sharply.
After Reconstruction, Southern leaders used a variety of means to prevent African Americans from exercising their right to vote.
Jim Crow Laws
By the late 1800s, segregation had also become common across the South. Segregation (seh«grih*GAY»shuhn) is the separation of the races. Southern states passed so-called Jim Crow laws that required African Americans and whites to be separated in almost every public place. In 1896 the Supreme Court upheld segregation laws in Plessy v. Ferguson. The case involved a Louisiana law that required separate sections on trains for African Americans and whites. The Court ruled that segregation was legal as long as African Americans had access to public places equal to those of whites.
In practice, the separate facilities for African Americans were far from equal. Southern states spent much more money on schools and other facilities for whites than on those for African Americans. Still, this “separate but equal” doctrine gave legal support to segregation for more than 50 years.
Violence against African Americans also rose. One form of violence was lynching (LIHN»cheeng), in which angry mobs killed people by hanging them. Some African Americans were lynched because they were suspected of crimes. Others were lynched because they did not act as whites thought they should.
Reading HELPDESK
''Ir7
literacy test a method used to prevent African Americans from voting by requiring prospective voters to read and write at a specified level 562 The Reconstruction Era
grandfather clause a device that allowed persons to vote if their fathers or grandfathers had voted before Reconstruction began
seg regat ion the separation or isolation of a race, class, or group
lynching putting to death by the illegal action of a mob
Exodusters and Buffalo Soldiers
Formerly enslaved people began to leave the South during Reconstruction. They called themselves “Exodusters.” This name came from the biblical book of Exodus, which describes the Israelites’ escape from slavery in Egypt.
During the exodus of the 1870s, more than 20,000 African Americans migrated to Kansas. They hoped their journey would take them far from the poverty that they experienced in the South. Other African Americans escaped the South by becoming soldiers. They served in segregated army units and fought in the western Indian Wars from 1867 until 1896. According to legend, the men were called “buffalo soldiers” by the Apache and Cheyenne. The soldiers adopted the name as a sign of honor and respect. Units of buffalo soldiers answered the nation’s call to arms not only in the West, but also in Cuba, the Philippines, Hawaii, and Mexico.
Reconstruction's Impact
Reconstruction was a success in some ways and a failure in others. It helped the South rebuild its economy. Yet much of the South remained agricultural and economically poor. African Americans gained greater equality and shared power in government, but their advances did not last. In the words of the great African American writer and civil rights leader W.E.B. Du Bois, “The slave went free; stood a brief moment in the sun; then moved back again toward slavery.” The seeds of freedom and equality had been planted. Yet African Americans would struggle to gain their full rights for many decades to come.
D READING PROGRESS CHECK
Explaining What were Jim Crow laws? Include this lesson's information in your Foldable®.
	What was happening in the North?	What was happening in the South?	Positive and Consequences
			
			
			
Review Vocabulary
1. Explain the meaning of these terms by using them	Republican Party? z»b
in a sentence. 3oa a. literacy test b. poll tax
2. What was the purpose of grandfather clauses? 9c
Answer the Guiding Questions
3. Describing In what ways was the economy of the New South different from—and similar to	the
economy of the South before the Civil War? 12A
4. Summarizing How did Democrats regain control of Southern governments from the
5. Explaining Why did freedom for African Americans become a distant dream after Reconstruction ended? 1*
EXPOSITORY WRITING
Use the chart on Southern industry to organize and compose an essay assessing economic development during the Reconstruction era. 29c Lesson 4 563
Activities A3
Directions: Write your answers using standard grammar, spelling, sentence structure, and punctuation.
© Use your EB323t0 exPl°re t*,e Essential Question.
EXPOSITORY WRITING
Would Reconstruction have taken a different course if Lincoln had not been assassinated? Write an essay to explain your answer. 29E; 300 © Social Studies Skills
INTERPRETING TIME LINES
Using the time line in Place and Time on pages 542-543, organize the key events of Reconstruction according to who was president at the time events occurred. Write an essay summarizing the events of each presidency. 29c © Thinking Like a Historian
INTERPRETING REPORTS
Use the Internet to locate the text of the Freedmen's Bureau report entitled "Laws in Relation to Freedmen." Select three laws listed and explain how they restricted the rights of African Americans. ia; 29a; 29c © Visual Literacy
INTERPRETING IMAGES
The caption of this drawing reads "Selling a freedman to pay his fine." What does the drawing suggest about the conditions of life for freedmen during Reconstruction? 564 The Reconstruction Era
Assessment
Directions: Write your answers using standard grammar, spelling, sentence structure and punctuation.
CHECKING FOR UNDERSTANDING
0 Identify the contributions of and explain the roles played by each of the following individuals during
Reconstruction: 9b,-22b
A.
Thaddeus Stevens B.
Andrew Johnson C.
Edwin Stanton D.
Hiram Revels E.
Ulysses S. Grant F.
Rutherford B. Hayes G.
James Duke H.
W.E.B.DuBois REVIEW THE GUIDING QUESTIONS
© Listing In his Ten Percent Plan, what requirements did Lincoln propose for Southern states to rejoin the Union?" ia
0 Describing How did the Freedmen's Bureau help African Americans adjust to life after slavery? <n
O
Explaining Why did Congress pass the Civil Rights Act of 1866? 9c 0 Describing What role did Edwin Stanton play in the attempt to impeach President Johnson? 9c
0 Defining Why were Northern whites who moved to the South after the war called carpetbaggers? 9c
0 Identifying What gains did African Americans make in education during Reconstruction? 9c,-24B
0 Explaining How did the Panic of 1873 help Democrats regain control of Southern governments? 9c
0 Explaining What were some ways white Southerners used to prevent African Americans from voting? ia
CRITICAL THINKING
© Contrasting How did Lincoln's approach to Reconstruction differ from the approach of the Radical Republicans? ia
© Speculating Why do you think President Johnson opposed equal rights for African Americans but his plan for Reconstruction required states to outlaw slavery? 9c,-29d
© Explaining How did Radical Republicans manage to take control of Southern state governments? 9t
© Evaluating How successful was President Johnson at implementing his vision for Reconstruction? 22A
© Describing Describe the rights granted to African Americans in the Thirteenth, Fourteenth, and Fifteenth Amendments, ub
© Explaining Why did members of the Ku Klux Kian disguise themselves in white sheets and hoods? 9c
© Drawing Conclusions Why do you think the sharecropping system amounted to little more than slavery for many farmers? 9c
© Explaining Why did supporters of the New South promote an agricultural model based on smaller farms? What problems did they face? 9c; 120
© Evaluating Evaluate the overall success or failure of Reconstruction at improving the lives of African Americans in the South, ia
© Analyzing The buffalo soldiers got their name as a sign of honor and respect. How did the buffalo soldiers express their patriotism? 230

Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills Standards
A
Guide For Students and Parents Welcome to United States History since Reconstruction and United States History Since 1877. This course completes the two-year study of American History that you began in Grade 8. The content of the high school course focuses on the political, economic, and social events that have shaped modern America. You will be viewing and interpreting the period from various perspectives, including historical, geographic, political, economic, and cultural. Together, these perspectives can help you understand how the past has led to our present and to appreciate your role in shaping our future.
You will also examine how our nation’s founding documents—the Declaration of Independence, the U.S. Constitution, and the Bill of Rights—protect individual rights. These documents also express the nation’s principles of government. Among these are popular sovereignty (government is based on the consent, or agreement, of the people) and limited government (government can do only what the people allow it to do). You will also investigate how the founding documents guarantee the economic freedoms we enjoy today.
Texas State Capitol, Austin
The Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills (TEKS) for Social Studies
On the following pages, you will find the TEKS. These are the concepts and skills that you should learn and be able to demonstrate as you take the course. You may want to preview the TEKS with your parents or caregivers. Many of the names and terms may be unfamiliar to you at first, but you and your parents or caregivers can design a plan to help you gain proficiency. You may also choose to review these TEKS from time to time during the course of your study.
History
The student understands the principles included in the Celebrate Freedom Week program. The student is expected to:
A analyze and evaluate the text, intent, meaning, and importance of the Declaration of Independence and the U.S. Constitution, including the Bill of Rights, and identify the full text of the first three paragraphs of the Declaration of Independence.
B analyze and evaluate the application of these founding principles to historical events in U.S. history.
C explain the contributions ofthe Founding Fathers such as Benjamin Rush, John Hancock, John Jay, John Witherspoon, John Peter Muhlenberg, Charles Carroll, and Jonathan Trumbull Sr.
2	The student understands traditional historical points of reference in
U.S. history from 1877 to the present. The student is expected to:
A identify the major characteristics that define a historical era.
B identify the major eras in U.S. history from 1877 to the present and describe their defining characteristics.
C apply absolute and relative chronology through the sequencing of significant individuals, events, and time periods.
D explain the significance ofthe following years as turning points: 1898 (Spanish-American War), 1914-1918 (World War I), 1929 (the Great Depression begins), 1939-1945 (World War II), 1957 (Sputnik launch ignites U.S.-Soviet space race), 1968-1969 (Martin Luther King Jr. assassination and U.S. lands on the moon), 1991 (Cold War ends), 2001 (terrorist attacks on World Trade Center and the Pentagon), and 2008 (election of first black president, Barack Obama).
Texas Star, State Fair of Texas
3	The student understands the political, economic, and social changes in the United States from 1877 to 1898. The student is expected to:
A analyze political issues such as Indian policies, the growth of political machines, civil service reform, and the beginnings of Populism.
B analyze economic issues such as industrialization, the growth of railroads, the growth of labor unions, farm issues, the cattle industry boom, the rise of entrepreneurship, free enterprise, and the pros and cons of big business.
C analyze social issues affecting women, minorities, children, immigrants, urbanization, the Social Gospel, and philanthropy of industrialists.
D describe the optimism ofthe many immigrants who sought a better life in America.
xxxiii

4	The student understands the emergence of the United States as a world power between 1898 and 1920. The student is expected to:
A explain why significant events, policies, and individuals such as the Spanish-American War, U.S. expansionism, Henry Cabot Lodge, Alfred Thayer Mahan, Theodore Roosevelt, Sanford B. Dole, and missionaries moved the United States into the position of a world power.
B evaluate American expansionism, including acquisitions such as Guam, Hawaii, the Philippines, and Puerto Rico.
C identify the causes of World War I and reasons for U.S. entry.
D understand the contributions of the American Expeditionary Forces (AEF) led by General John J. Pershing.
E analyze the impact of significant technological innovations in World War I such as machine guns, airplanes, tanks, poison gas, and trench warfare that resulted in the stalemate on the Western Front.
F analyze major issues such as isolationism and neutrality raised by U.S. involvement in World War I, Woodrow Wilson’s Fourteen Points, and the Treaty of Versailles.
▼ Mission in Son Antonio G analyze significant events such as the Battle of Argonne Forest.
5	The student understands the effects of reform and third-party movements in the early 20th century. The student is expected to:
A evaluate the impact of Progressive Era reforms, including initiative, referendum, recall, and the passage of the 16th, 17th, 18th, and 19th amendments.
B evaluate the impact of muckrakers and reform leaders such as Upton Sinclair, Susan B. Anthony, Ida B. Wells, and W. E. B. DuBois on American society.
C evaluate the impact of third parties, including the Populist and Progressive parties.
6	The student understands significant events, social issues, and individuals of the 1920s. The student is expected to:
A analyze causes and effects of events and social issues such as
immigration, Social Darwinism, eugenics, race relations, nativism, the Red Scare, Prohibition, and the changing role of women.
B analyze the impact of significant individuals such as Clarence Darrow, William Jennings Bryan, Henry Ford, Glenn Curtiss, Marcus Garvey, and Charles A. Lindbergh.
The student understands the domestic and international impact of U.S. participation in World War II. The student is expected to:
A identify reasons for U.S. involvement in World War II, including Italian, German, and Japanese dictatorships and their aggression, especially the attack on Pearl Harbor.
B evaluate the domestic and international leadership of Franklin D. Roosevelt and Harry Truman during World War II, including the U.S. relationship with its allies and domestic industry’s rapid mobilization for the war effort.
C analyze the function ofthe U.S. Office of War Information.
D analyze major issues of World War II, including the Holocaust; the internment of German, Italian, and Japanese Americans and Executive Order 9066; and the development of conventional and atomic weapons.
E analyze major military events of World War II, including the Battle of Midway, the U.S. military advancement through the Pacific Islands, the Bataan Death March, the invasion of Normandy, fighting the war on multiple fronts, and the liberation of concentration camps.
F evaluate the military contributions of leaders during World War II, including Omar Bradley, Dwight Eisenhower, Douglas MacArthur, Chester A. Nimitz, George Marshall, and George Patton.
G explain the home front and how American patriotism inspired exceptional actions by citizens and military personnel, including high levels of military enlistment; volunteerism; the purchase of war bonds; Victory Gardens; the bravery and contributions ofthe Tuskegee Airmen, the Flying Tigers, and the Navajo Code Talkers; and opportunities and obstacles for women and ethnic minorities.
8	The student understands the impact of significant national and international decisions and conflicts in the Cold War on the United States. The student is expected to:
A describe U.S. responses to Soviet aggression after World War II, including the Truman Doctrine, the Marshall Plan, the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, the Berlin airlift, and John F. Kennedy’s role in the Cuban Missile Crisis.
B describe how Cold War tensions were intensified by the arms race, the space race, McCarthyism, and the House Un-American Activities Committee (HUAC), the findings of which were confirmed by the Venona Papers.
C explain reasons and outcomes for U.S. involvement in the Korean War and its relationship to the containment policy.
D explain reasons and outcomes for U.S. involvement in foreign countries and their relationship to the Domino Theory, including the Vietnam War.
E analyze the major issues and events of the Vietnam War such as the Tet Offensive, the escalation of forces, Vietnamization, and the fall of Saigon.
F describe the responses to the Vietnam War such as the draft, the 26th Amendment, the role ofthe media, the credibility gap, the silent majority, and the anti-war movement.
▼ Hot Springs Canyon, U.S.-Mexico border


9	The student understands the impact of the American civil rights movement. The student is expected to:
A trace the historical development of the civil rights movement in the 19th, 20th, and 21st centuries, including the 13th, 14th, 15th, and 19th amendments.
B describe the roles of political organizations that promoted civil rights, including ones from African American, Chicano, American Indian, women’s, and other civil rights movements.
C identify the roles of significant leaders who supported various rights movements, including Martin Luther King Jr., Cesar Chavez, Rosa Parks, Hector P. Garcia, and Betty Friedan.
D compare and contrast the approach taken by some civil rights groups such as the Black Panthers with the nonviolent approach of Martin Luther King Jr.
E discuss the impact of the writings of Martin Luther King Jr. such as his “I Have a Dream” speech and “Letter from Birmingham Jail” on the civil rights movement.
F describe presidential actions and congressional votes to address minority rights in the United States, including desegregation of the armed forces, the Civil Rights acts of 1957 and 1964, and the Voting Rights Act of 1965.
G describe the role of individuals such as governors George Wallace, Orval Faubus, and Lester Maddox and groups, including the Congressional bloc of southern Democrats, that sought to maintain the status quo.
H evaluate changes and events in the United States that have resulted from the civil rights movement, including increased participation of minorities in the political process.
I describe how litigation such as the landmark cases of Brown v. Board of Education, Mendez v. Westminster, Hernandez v. Texas, Delgado v. Bastrop I.S.D., Edgewood I.S.D. v. Kirby, and Sweatt v. Painter played a role in protecting the rights of the minority during the civil rights movement.
Texas Bluebonnets
10	The student understands the impact of political, economic, and social factors in the U.S. role in the world from the 1970s through 1990. The student is expected to:
A describe Richard M. Nixon’s leadership in the normalization of relations with China and the policy of detente.
B describe Ronald Reagan’s leadership in domestic and international policies, including Reaganomics and Peace Through Strength.
C compare the impact of energy on the American way of life over time.
D describe U.S. involvement in the Middle East such as support for Israel, the Camp David Accords, the Iran-Contra Affair, Marines in Lebanon, and the Iran Hostage Crisis.
E describe the causes and key organizations and individuals of the conservative resurgence of the 1980s and 1990s, including Phyllis Schlafly, the Contract with America, the Heritage Foundation, the Moral Majority, and the National Rifle Association.
F describe significant societal issues of this time period.
11	The student understands the emerging political, economic, and social issues of the United States from the 1990s into the 21st century. The student is expected to:
A describe U.S. involvement in world affairs, including the end of the Cold War, the Persian Gulf War, the Balkans Crisis, 9/11, and the global War on Terror.
B identify'significant social and political advocacy organizations, leaders, and issues across the political spectrum.
C evaluate efforts by global organizations to undermine U.S. sovereignty through the use of treaties.
D analyze the impact of third parties on presidential elections.
E discuss the historical significance of the 2008 presidential election.
F discuss the solvency of long-term entitlement programs such as Social

XXXIX
Geography
12	The student understands the impact of geographic factors on major events. The student is expected to:
A analyze the impact of physical and human geographic factors on the settlement of the Great Plains, the Klondike Gold Rush, the Panama Canal, the Dust Bowl, and the levee failure in New Orleans after Hurricane Katrina.
B identify and explain reasons for changes in political boundaries such as those resulting from statehood and international conflicts.
13	The student understands the causes and effects of migration and immigration on American society. The student is expected to:
A analyze the causes and effects of changing demographic patterns resulting from migration within the United States, including western expansion, rural to urban, the Great Migration, and the Rust Belt to the Sun Belt.
B analyze the causes and effects of changing demographic patterns resulting from legal and illegal immigration to the United States.
14	The student understands the relationship between population growth and modernization on the physical environment. The student is expected to:
A identify the effects of population growth and distribution on the physical environment.
Apollo moon rocket, Johnson Space Center
B identify the roles of governmental entities and private citizens in managing the environment such as the establishment of the National Park System, the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), and the Endangered Species Act.
C understand the effects of governmental actions on individuals,
industries, and communities, including the impact on Fifth Amendment property rights.
Economics
15	The student understands domestic and foreign issues related to U.S. economic growth from the 1870s to 1920. The student is expected to:
A describe how the economic impact of the Transcontinental Railroad and the Homestead Act contributed to the close of the frontier in the late 19th century.
B describe the changing relationship between the federal government and private business, including the costs and benefits of laissez-faire, anti-trust acts, the Interstate Commerce Act, and the Pure Food and Drug Act.
C explain how foreign policies affected economic issues such as the Chinese Exclusion Act of 1882, the Open Door Policy, Dollar Diplomacy, and immigration quotas.
D describe the economic effects of international military conflicts, including the Spanish-American War and World War I, on the United States.
E describe the emergence of monetary policy in the United States, including the Federal Reserve Act of 1913 and the shifting trend from a gold standard to fiat money.
16	The student understands significant economic developments between
World War I and World War II. The student is expected to:
A analyze causes of economic growth and prosperity in the 1920s, including Warren Harding’s Return to Normalcy, reduced taxes, and increased production efficiencies.
B identify the causes of the Great Depression, including the impact of tariffs on world trade, stock market speculation, bank failures, and the monetary policy of the Federal Reserve System.
C analyze the effects of the Great Depression on the U.S. economy and society such as widespread unemployment and deportation and repatriation of people of European and Mexican heritage and others.
D compare the New Deal policies and its opponents’ approaches to resolving the economic effects of the Great Depression.
E describe how various New Deal agencies and programs, including the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the Securities and Exchange Commission, and the Social Security Administration, continue to affect the lives of U.S. citizens.
Riverwalk, San Antonio
17	The student understands the economic effects of World War II and the
Cold War. The student is expected to:
A describe the economic effects of World War II on the home front such as the end of the Great Depression, rationing, and increased opportunity for women and minority employment.
B identify the causes of prosperity in the 1950s, including the Baby Boom and the impact of the Gl Bill (Servicemen’s Readjustment Act of 1944), and the effects of prosperity in the 1950s such as increased consumption and the growth of agriculture and business.
C describe the economic impact of defense spending on the business cycle and education priorities from 1945 to the 1990s.
D identify actions of government and the private sector such as the Great Society, affirmative action, and Title IX to create economic opportunities for citizens and analyze the unintended consequences of each.
E describe the dynamic relationship between U.S. international trade policies and the U.S. free enterprise system such as the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) oil embargo, the General Agreement of Tariffs and Trade (GATT), and the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA).
18	The student understands the economic effects of increased worldwide interdependence as the United States enters the 21st century. The student is expected to:
A discuss the role of American entrepreneurs such as Bill Gates, Sam Walton, Estee Lauder, Robert Johnson, Lionel Sosa, and millions of small business entrepreneurs who achieved the American dream.
B identify the impact of international events, multinational corporations, government policies, and individuals on the 21st century economy.
Government
19	The student understands changes over time in the role of government.
The student is expected to:
A evaluate the impact of New Deal legislation on the historical roles of state and federal government.
B explain constitutional issues raised by federal government policy changes during times of significant events, including World War I, the Great Depression, World War II, the 1960s, and 9/11.
C describe the effects of political scandals, including Teapot Dome, Watergate, and Bill Clinton’s impeachment, on the views of U.S. citizens concerning trust in the federal government and its leaders.
D discuss the role of contemporary government legislation in the private and public sectors such as the Community Reinvestment Act of 1977, USA PATRIOT Act of 2001, and the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009.
E evaluate the pros and cons of U.S. participation in international organizations and treaties.
20	The student understands the changing relationships among the three branches of the federal government. The student is expected to:
A describe the impact of events such as the Gulf of Tonkin Resolution and the War Powers Act on the relationship between the legislative and executive branches of government.
B evaluate the impact of relationships among the legislative, executive, and judicial branches of government, including Franklin D. Roosevelt’s attempt to increase the number of U.S. Supreme Court justices and the presidential election of 2000.
21	The student understands the impact of constitutional issues on
American society. The student is expected to:
A analyze the effects of landmark U.S. Supreme Court decisions,
including Brown v. Board of Education, and other U.S. Supreme Court decisions such as Plessy v. Ferguson, Hernandez v. Texas, Tinker v.
Des Moines, Wisconsin v. Yoder, and White v. Regester.
B discuss historical reasons why the constitution has been amended.
C evaluate constitutional change in terms of strict construction versus judicial interpretation.
Citizenship
22	The student understands the concept of American exceptionalism. The student is expected to:
A discuss Alexis de Tocqueville’s five values crucial to America’s success as a constitutional republic: liberty, egalitarianism, individualism, populism, and laissez-faire.
B describe how the American values identified by Alexis de Tocqueville are different and unique from those of other nations.
C describe U.S. citizens as people from numerous places throughout the world who hold a common bond in standing for certain self-evident truths.
xlv
23	The student understands efforts to expand the democratic process.
The student is expected to:
A identify and analyze methods of expanding the right to participate in the democratic process, including lobbying, non violent protesting, litigation, and amendments to the U.S. Constitution.
B evaluate various means of achieving equality of political rights,
including the 19th, 24th, and 26th amendments and congressional acts such as the American Indian Citizenship Act of 1924.
C explain how participation in the democratic process reflects our national ethos, patriotism, and civic responsibility as well as our progress to build a “more perfect union”.
24	The student understands the importance of effective leadership in a constitutional republic. The student is expected to:
A describe qualities of effective leadership.
B evaluate the contributions of significant political and social leaders in the United States such as Andrew Carnegie, Thurgood Marshall, Billy Graham, Barry Goldwater, Sandra Day O’Connor, and Hillary Clinton.
Culture
25	The student understands the relationship between the arts and the times during which they were created. The student is expected to:
A describe how the characteristics and issues in U.S. history have been reflected in various genres of art, music, film, and literature.
B describe both the positive and negative impacts of significant examples of cultural movements in art, music, and literature such as Tin Pan Alley, the Harlem Renaissance, the Beat Generation, rock and roll, the Chicano Mural Movement, and country and western music on American society.
C identify the impact of popular American culture on the rest of the world over time.
D analyze the global diffusion of American culture through the entertainment industry via various media.
▼ Pedernales River in Texas
26	The student understands how people from various groups contribute to our national identity. The student is expected to:
A explain actions taken by people to expand economic opportunities and political rights, including those for racial, ethnic, and religious minorities as well as women, in American society.
B discuss the Americanization movement to assimilate immigrants and American Indians into American culture.
C explain how the contributions of people of various racial, ethnic, gender, and religious groups shape American culture.
D identify the political, social, and economic contributions of women such as Frances Willard, Jane Addams, Eleanor Roosevelt, Dolores Huerta, Sonia Sotomayor, and Oprah Winfrey to American society.
E discuss the meaning and historical significance of the mottos “E Pluribus Unum” and “In God We Trust”.
F discuss the importance of congressional Medal of Honor recipients, including individuals of all races and genders such as Vernon J. Baker, Alvin York, and Roy Benavidez.
Science, Technology, and Society
27	The student understands the impact of science, technology, and the free enterprise system on the economic development of the United States. The student is expected to:
A explain the effects of scientific discoveries and technological innovations such as electric power, telephone and satellite communications, petroleum-based products, steel production, and computers on the economic development of the United States.
B explain how specific needs result in scientific discoveries and technological innovations in agriculture, the military, and medicine, including vaccines.
C understand the impact of technological and management innovations and their applications in the workplace and the resulting productivity enhancements for business and labor such as assembly line manufacturing, time-study analysis, robotics, computer management, and just-in-time inventory management.
28	The student understands the influence of scientific discoveries, technological innovations, and the free enterprise system on the standard of living in the United States. The student is expected to:
A analyze how scientific discoveries, technological innovations, and the application of these by the free enterprise system, including those in transportation and communication, improve the standard of living in the United States.
B explain how space technology and exploration improve the quality of life.
C understand how the free enterprise system drives technological innovation and its application in the marketplace such as cell phones, inexpensive personal computers, and global positioning products.
Social Studies Skills
29	The student applies critical-thinking skills to organize and use information acquired from a variety of valid sources, including electronic technology. The student is expected to:
A use a variety of both primary and secondary valid sources to acquire information and to analyze and answer historical questions.
B analyze information by sequencing, categorizing, identifying cause-and-effect relationships, comparing and contrasting, finding the main idea, summarizing, making generalizations, making predictions, drawing inferences, and drawing conclusions.
C understand how historians interpret the past (historiography) and how their interpretations of history may change over time.
D use the process of historical inquiry to research, interpret, and use multiple types of sources of evidence.
E evaluate the validity of a source based on language, corroboration with other sources, and information about the author, including points of view, frames of reference, and historical context.
F identify bias in written, oral, and visual material.
G identify and support with historical evidence a point of view on a social studies issue or event.
H use appropriate skills to analyze and interpret social studies
information such as maps, graphs, presentations, speeches, lectures, and political cartoons
xlviii
30	The student communicates in written, oral, and visual forms. The student is expected to:
A create written, oral, and visual presentations of social studies information.
B use correct social studies terminology to explain historical concepts.
C use different forms of media to convey information, including written to visual and statistical to written or visual, using available computer software as appropriate.
31	The student uses geographic tools to collect, analyze, and interpret data. The student is expected to:
A create thematic maps, graphs, and charts representing various aspects of the United States.
B pose and answer questions about geographic distributions and patterns shown on maps, graphs, charts, and available databases.
32	The student uses problem-solving and decision-making skills, working independently and with others, in a variety of settings. The student is expected to:
A use a problem-solving process to identify a problem, gather information, list and consider options, consider advantages and disadvantages, choose and implement a solution, and evaluate the effectiveness of the solution.
B use a decision-making process to identify a situation that requires a decision, gather information, identify options, predict consequences, and take action to implement a decision.
▼ 0/7 derrick, West Texas
HUNT
NETWORKS CONTAINS A WEALTH OF INFORMATION. '
THE TRICK IS TO KNOW WHERE TO LOOK TO ACCESS THE INFORMATION IN THE BOOK IF YOU COMPLETE THIS SCAVENGER HUNT EXERCISE WITH YOUR TEACHERS OR PARENTS, YOU WILL SEE HOW THE TEXTBOOK IS ORGANIZED AND HOW TO GET THE MOST OUT OF YOUR READING AND STUDY TIME. LET'S GET STARTED!
1
How many chapters and how many lessons are in this book?
2
Where do you find the glossary and the index? What is the difference between them?
Where can ' you find primary sources in the textbook?
4
If you want to quickly find all the maps, charts, and graphs about World War I, where do you look?
PHOTOS: (t)DEA/A DAGLI ORTI/DeAgostini Picture Library/Getty Images,
s
How can you find information about civil rights activist Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.?
L
Where can you find a graphic organizer that lists the causes of the Great Depression f discussed in Chapter 9? 7
Where and how do you find the ' content vocabulary for Chapter 15, Lesson 3?
B
What are the online resources listed for Chapter 12, Lesson 4?
fYou want to read the Declaration of Independence. How will you find it?
10
What time period does Chapter 8 cover? How do you know?
E",e
1
Zreating a Nation
eginnings to 1877
ouphri	The Americas,
Place andTiltie* Beginnings to 1877
The arrival of the Europeans in the Americas set in motion a series of complex interactions between peoples and environments. These interactions, called the Columbian Exchange, permanently altered the world's ecosystem and changed nearly every culture around the world. The effects of this exchange still shape the world today.
Step Into the Place
Read the quotes and look at the information presented on the map.
DBQ
Analyzing Historical Documents How did the arrival of Europeans affect both Native American and European cultures?
PRIMARY SOURCE
“ This land is very populous, and full of inhabitants, and of numberless rivers, [and] animals: few [of which] resemble ours.... [T]hey have no horses nor mules... nor any kind of sheep or oxen: but so numerous are the other animals which they have.... The soil is very pleasant and fruitful.... The fruits are so many that they are numberless and entirely different from ours.»
—Amerigo Vespucci, from The First Four Voyages of Amerigo Vespucci, 1505
PRIMARY SOURCE
“ While the Spaniards were in Tlaxcala, a great plague broke out here in Tenochtitlan.... Sores erupted on our faces, our breasts, our bellies; we were covered with agonizing sores from head to foot. The illness was so dreadful that no one could walk or move.
A great many died from this plague, and many others died of hunger. They could not get up to search for food, and everyone else was too sick to care for them, so they starved to death in their beds.w
—an Aztec observer, from The Broken Spears: The Aztec Account of the Conquest of Mexico, 1959
PHOTOS: left page (c)Portrait of Amerigo Vespucci (1452-1512) (oil on canvas) - Titian (TizianoVecelli) (c.1488-1576) (after)/© National Library of Australia - Canberra - Australia/The Bridgeman Art Library, (horses)CORBIS, (peppers)C Squared Studios/Getty Images; right page (pig)Getty Images, (skull and crossbones)Library of Congress, (citrus)lngram Publishing/Alamy, (grains)Brand X Pictures/PunchStock, (sugarcane)Burke Triolo Productions/Getty Images, (cattle)Alan and Sandy Carey/Getty Images, (honeybees)IT Stock Free/Alamy, (bananas)Stockdisc/PunchStock, (coffee) PhotoAlto/Getty Images, (potatoes)C Squared Studios/Getty Images, (corn) Stockdisc/PunchStock, (beans)CORBIS, (pumpkin)Siede Preis/Getty Images, (peanuts)lmage Source Pink/Getty Images, (cocoa)lconotec/Alamy, (tobacco)Creativ Studio Heinemann/Getty Images, (tomatoes)lngram Publishing/Alamy; TEXT: The Broken Spears: The Aztec Account of the Conquest of Mexico by Miguel Leon-Portilla. Copyright © 1962,1990 by Miguel Leon-Portilla Copyright. Reprinted by Permission of Beacon Press, Boston.
Step Into the lime
Drawing Conclusions Choose the event from the time line that you think had the most
1492 Christopher Columbus reaches the Americas
1519 Hernan Cortes begins Spanish invasion ofthe Aztec Empire

Whldlil
C*Cl Horses allowed some Native Americans to become nomadic hunters.
Horses:
i

Jamestown in Virginia

(■Peppers s?

SSL -f .
networks
MAP
Explore the interactive version of this map on Networks. There's More Online!
TIMELINE
Explore the interactive version ofthe time line on Networks. 
r-X >
j X.- 7s
The Columbian Exchange
'4




Native Americans introduced Europeans to new crops such as corn, cocoa, and tomatoes. Europeans introduced Native Americans to various grains, fruits, and other foods. Europeans also became familiar with Native American inventions such as canoes, moccasins, and toboggans. When Europeans arrived in North America, however, they brought with them infectious diseases to which the Native Americans had no resistance.
Peanuts
popular in Europe and greatly changed the cuisine of Italy.
iwn»



IB

1765 Parliament passes the Stamp Act, triggering protests throughout the colonies
U.S.
Constitution is drafted Sugarcane planters brought millions of enslaved Africans to the Americas.

&
K,


Potatoes increased northern Europe's population and changed Ireland's diet.
1850 Compromise of 1850 1861 Fort Sumter is 1865 Lee surrenders 1803 Louisiana Purchase is adopted in an attempt to bombarded by Confederate to Grant; Abraham	1877 Compromise of
doubles size of the nation ease sectional tensions	forces; the Civil War begins Lincoln is assassinated 1877 ends Reconstruction
N*



networks
There's More Online!
Sf BIOGRAPHY John Locke
Bf BIOGRAPHY Marquis de Lafayette
Sf BIOGRAPHY Roger Williams
eT MAP Revolutionary War Battles
eT MAP Native American Cultures
gf video The Founding of America
sf INTERACTIVE SELF-CHECK QUIZ
Reading HELPDESK
Academic Vocabulary
•	eventually • enforce
Content Vocabulary
•	conquistador
•	joint-stock company
•	indentured servant
•	committee of correspondence
TAKING NOTES:
Key Ideas and Details
Organizing As you reyad about the colonization of America, use a graphic organizer similar to the one below to indicate ways in which the colonists defied British rule.
Colonists’ Acts of Defiance
o:
LESSON 1	.
Origins of the American Nation
at characteristics define a society?
? • How should societies settle disputes?
It Matters Because
A number of civilizations flourished in the Americas before Europeans looking for trade routes colonized the region. Escalating tensions over British control of the colonies resulted in a revolt against British rule.


TEKS
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills 1A analyze and evaluate the text, intent, meaning, and importance of the Declaration of Independence and the U.S. Constitution, including the Bill of Rights, and identify the full text of the first three paragraphs of the Declaration of Independence
continued on the next page
Pre-Columbian America
guide ng question How did geography influence the ways Native A merican cultures developed?
No one knows exactly when the first people arrived in America.
Recent research suggests that they may have arrived between 15,000 and 30,000 years ago. In time, Native Americans learned how to raise crops. This shift led to the first permanent villages and to new building methods. Societies became more complex, and civilizations arose, marked by advanced knowledge of trade, government, the arts, science, and language.
Early Civilizations
Anthropologists think the first American civilization arose between 1500 b.c. and 1200 b.c. among the Olmec. They lived in Mesoamerica, the region that today includes central and southern Mexico and Central America. Later, the Maya and the Aztec also developed civilizations in Mesoamerica, building impressive temples and pyramids and establishing trade networks.
After a.d. 300, the Hohokam and the Anasazi began growing crops in North Americas dry Southwest by building elaborate irrigation systems. People in the Eastern Woodlands were developing their own cultures. The Hopewell built geometric earthworks that served as ceremonial centers, observatories, and burial places. By a.d. 900, the Mississippian people had built Cahokia, one of the largest early American cities.
Native Americans of North America
By the 1500s, Native Americans had established an array of cultures suited to their environments. In the Eastern Woodlands, most Native Americans combined hunting and fishing with farming.
I
1
I
!
i
!
I

1
o
I
s
4
In the Southeast, many Native Americans built wooden stockades around their villages for protection. Southwestern peoples farmed corn, beans, and cotton. By the 1500s, the Apache and the Navajo had come to the Southwest.
The Navajo settled in farming villages, but many of the Apache remained nomadic hunters. Hunting also sustained the Sioux and other peoples of the western Great Plains.
The Pacific Northwest was home to fishing peoples. In what is today central California, groups such as the Porno trapped small game and gathered acorns. In the Far North region from Alaska to Greenland, the Inuit and the Aleut hunted sea mammals, polar bears, and caribou.
B READING PROGRESS CHECK
Explaining In what different ways did Native American cultures provide food for themselves?
(continued from p. 4)
TEKS
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills 1C explain the contributions ofthe Founding Fathers such as Benjamin Rush, John Hancock, John Jay,
John Witherspoon, John Peter Muhlenberg, Charles Carroll, and Jonathan Trumbull Sr.
Early Modern Europe
guiding question What ideas and inventions encouraged Europeans to begin overseas exploration?
As the people of Europe emerged from the Middle Ages, they wanted to find a quick trade route to Asia, the source of many luxury goods. Rulers of Portugal, Spain, France, and England wanted to find a water route to Asia that would bypass the Italian and Arab merchants and traders who controlled trade in the eastern Mediterranean.
Renaissance and Reformation
In Western Europe, an intellectual revolution—the Renaissance—was underway. The arts flowered amid a rebirth of interest in ancient Greek and Roman culture. Europeans rediscovered the works of ancient thinkers and began reading the works of Arab scholars. A renewed commitment to reason helped trigger a scientific revolution. Inventions such as the astrolabe and the compass made sea travel easier.
The caravel was ideal for exploration. These small ships ranged from 70 to 90 feet (23 to 27 m) long, were highly maneuverable, and very fast. Their smaller size enabled them to sail along shallow coastlines and explore up rivers much farther than other ships.
CRITICAL THINKING
Determining Cause and Effect Why might the development ofthe caravel have encouraged European exploration?

— Analyzing-----
Primary Sources
The Defeat of the Aztec
A thing like a ball of stone comes out of its entrails: it comes out shooting sparks and raining fire.... If it is aimed against a tree, it shatters the tree into splinters. This is a most unnatural sight, as if the tree had exploded from within.
They dress in iron.... Their deer carry them on their back wherever they wish to go. These deer, our lord, are as tall as the roof of a house. M
—from The Broken Spears: The Aztec Account of the Conquest of Mexico, 1959
DBQ
IDENTIFYING
What do you think the Aztec are seeing for the first time?
conquistador Spanish for "conqueror;" the men who led the expeditions to conquer the Americas
Religious changes were taking place as well. In 1517 the German monk Martin Luther called for the reform of the Catholic Church, launching the Protestant Reformation. New churches emerged in Germany and England, including a burgeoning movement known as Puritanism. Puritans hoped to “purify” the new Church of England, but faced challenges after King James I became the English monarch in 1603.
Overseas Exploration Begins
Portugal took the lead in searching for a sea route around Africa to Asia in the early 1400s. Later, Spain funded an expedition by Italian sea captain Christopher Columbus to sail west across the Atlantic. In August 1492, Columbus and his crew left Spain and landed two months later on an island in the Caribbean. Columbus’s news that he had reached
land on the other side of the Atlantic triggered a wave
of European exploration. Soon people realized that Columbus had not reached Asia but instead a continent they did not know. They named the new continent America in honor of Amerigo Vespucci, who explored
the South American coastline for Portugal.
P REAPING PROGRESS CHECK
Summarizing What drove some European rulers to send explorers in search of a water route to Asia?
The Spanish and French Establish Colonies
guiding question Why did Spain and France establish colonies in the Americas?
After sailing west from Spain, Columbus reached the Bahamas in October 1492. He then headed farther into the Caribbean, searching for gold. At about that time, Spain and Portugal both claimed control over the Atlantic route to Asia. The Treaty of Tordesillas resolved the rivalry in 1494, and recognized Spain’s claim to most of the Americas.
New Spain
In 1519a Spaniard named Hernan Cortes sailed from Cuba to explore the Yucatan Peninsula. He had heard reports of vast riches in that region and set sail with an army seeking glory and gold. After conquering the peninsula, Cortes, his troops, and Tlaxcalan warriors (enemies of the Aztec) destroyed the Aztec city of Tenochtitlan in 1521. On its ruins, the Spanish built Mexico City, which became the capital of the colony of New Spain. Cortes then sent several expeditions to conquer the surrounding regions. The men who led these expeditions became known as conquistadors, or “conquerors.” Deadly diseases brought by the Spanish killed many native peoples and severely weakened their ability to resist the invaders. The Spanish soon controlled a territory stretching from Florida to California and into South America.
New France
France began exploring eastern North America, funding trips by Jacques Cartier and Giovanni da Verrazano in the early 1500s. In 1602 French king Henry IV authorized a group of French merchants to establish a colony in what is now Canada. They hired Samuel de Champlain to help them. In 1608 Champlain founded Quebec, the eventual capital of New France. The backers of the colony sought fur, and Frenchmen began a brisk trade with Native Americans. In the late 1600s, France began expanding the colony. Explorers Louis Jolliet and Jacques Marquette reached the Mississippi River,
1%; 1990 bv Miaiiol I eon Portill.i (opyriqht. ficprintcd by Pcrinis'-
6
PHOTO:
Portrait of Anne Hutchinson (1591-1643), American School, (20th century)/Schlesinger Library, Radcliffe Institute, Harvard University/The Bridgeman Art Library and Rene-Robert Cavelier de La Salle followed it to the Gulf of Mexico. La Salle named the newly claimed region Louisiana for King Louis XIV. The French went on to found Biloxi, Mobile, and New Orleans.
a READING PROGRESS CHECK
Contrasting How did Spanish and French relations with native peoples differ?
Settling the Thirteen Colonies
guiding question Forwhat reasons were the thirteen colonies founded?
Soon after Columbus made his historic voyage, England began exploring the eastern part of North America, sending John Cabot on expeditions in 1497 and 1498. It was not until the 1600s, however, that England succeeded in establishing colonies in North America.
Jamestown
English business and government leaders saw colonies as sources of raw materials and as markets for English goods. In 1607 they established Jamestown, the first lasting English settlement, in Virginia. The settlement was funded by a joint-stock company—a group of private investors who supported major projects to gain profits. The Jamestown settlers overcame early troubles with the help of a group of local Native Americans known as the Powhatan Confederacy, and eventually prospered by growing tobacco.
Encouraged by the Virginia Company, more than 4,500 settlers immigrated to Virginia by 1622. Alarmed Native Americans attacked Jamestown. An English court blamed the company’s policies for the settlers’ deaths and revoked its charter. Virginia then became a royal colony.
The New England Colonies
Not all settlers came for economic gain. Some Puritans had decided the Church of England was too corrupt to be reformed. They were called Separatists. In 1620 a group of Separatists, later known as the Pilgrims, set sail from England on the Mayflower to escape persecution for their religious beliefs.
The Pilgrims finally settled near what is now Plymouth, Massachusetts. The colonists drew up the Mayflower Compact, a plan for self-government. Ten years later, facing increasing persecution in England, another group of Puritans arrived in Massachusetts Bay with a charter for their new colony. They founded several towns, including Boston.
Before long, Puritan efforts in Massachusetts to suppress other religious beliefs led to the formation of Rhode Island and Connecticut. Dissenter Roger Williams founded the town of Providence. Anne Hutchinson and others banished from Massachusetts settled in the area and eventually joined their towns to become the single colony of Rhode Island and Providence Plantations. Religious freedom became a key part of the colony’s charter. Reverend Thomas Hooker and his congregation moved to the Connecticut River valley and founded the town of Hartford, marking the beginning of the colony of Connecticut, which adopted America’s first democratic constitution in 1639. The territory north of Massachusetts was divided into Maine and New Hampshire, but claimed by Massachusetts. In 1679 New Hampshire became a royal colony. Maine remained part of Massachusetts.
The Middle Colonies
In 1609 Henry Hudson, a navigator hired by Dutch merchants, had discovered what is now the Hudson River valley in New York. The Dutch called the region New Netherland and established their main settlement of New Amsterdam on
Anne Hutchinson (1591-1643)
Anne Hutchinson arrived in Boston in 1634. There, she held meetings with other women to discuss sermons, express her own beliefs, and evaluate the ministers. Hutchinson stirred up controversy with her views on how salvation could be obtained. She was tried for sedition and banished by the Massachusetts General Court in 1637. Hutchinson, her family, and some followers settled in what is today Rhode Island. She later moved to Long Island, where she was killed in an attack by Native Americans.
CRITICALTHINKING
Identifying Central Ideas Why was Anne Hutchinson banished from Massachusetts?
joint-stock company
a form of business organization in which many investors pool funds to raise large amounts of money for large projects
eventually at an unspecified time or day; in the end
Creating a Nation 7

GEOGRAPHY CONNECTION
The introduction of enslaved Africans to the American Colonies was part of the broader Atlantic Slave trade.
THE WORLD IN SPATIALTERMS
What sub-region ofthe Americas was the destination for most enslaved peoples? PLACES AND REGIONS
What area of North America held the largest numbers of enslaved people? indentured servant an
individual who contracted to work for a colonist for a specified number of years in exchange for transportation to the colonies, food, clothing, and shelter
Manhattan Island. Charles II seized New Netherland from the Dutch and granted the land to his brother, the Duke of York. Much of the land was renamed New York. The rest became New Jersey, a colony that offered greater land grants, religious freedom, and political rights. In 1681 William Penn, wanting to help his fellow Quakers escape persecution in England, created the colony of Pennsylvania south of New York. The “lower counties” became Delaware.
The Southern Colonies
Farther south, tobacco helped Virginia thrive. Its neighbor colony, Maryland, was a proprietary colony that began in the 1630s to provide a refuge for Catholics who faced persecution in England.
In 1663 King Charles II gave eight friends a vast tract of land named Carolina. This region developed into two distinct areas: North Carolina, with scattered tobacco farms, and South Carolina, where a larger number of settlers established the community of Charles Towne (Charleston), exported deerskins, and grew rice. With a charter from King George II, James Oglethorpe founded Georgia as a place for English debtors to begin a new life.
Most colonists relied on agriculture for their livelihoods. Often, poor English people came to America as indentured servants who agreed to work for four or more years in return for ship’s passage and basic needs. Large Southern landowners also relied on the labor of enslaved Africans.
B READING PROGRESS CHECK
Drawing Conclusions What is the historical importance ofthe Mayflower Compact?
8
The American Revolution
guidingquestion Why did the colonists fight a war for independence against Great Britain?
The American colonies experienced rapid population growth. In time, colonists revolted against what they saw as oppressive British rule. They established a new, independent government for themselves.
New Ideas Influence the Colonists
During the 1600s and 1700s, philosophers of the Age of Enlightenment stressed the use of reason and logic to understand natural laws. Enlightenment writer John Locke attempted to use reason to discover natural laws that applied to politics and society. He argued that governments existed because the people who were governed allowed them to exist: “For no government can have a right to obedience from a people who have not freely consented to it; which they can never be supposed to do, till... they are put in a full state of liberty to choose their government.” Lockes ideas influenced Thomas Jefferson and other colonists.
Also in the 1700s, some Americans renewed their Christian faith in what became known as the Great Awakening. The new ideas of Baptists, Presbyterians, and Methodists won many converts. Along with the Enlightenment, this movement emphasized an individualism that inclined American colonists toward political independence.
The Growing Rift With Britain
In the 1750s, Great Britain and France began fighting for control of North America. Both countries relied on Native Americans as allies, and the war became known as the French and Indian War. The British victory in the war left Britain with steep debts and new territories to govern and defend.
Many British leaders thought that the colonies should share in these costs. The American colonists, however, did not like the policies Britain adopted to solve its financial problems.
The Proclamation of 1763 tried to halt colonial expansion into Native American lands west of the Appalachians. King George III wanted to avoid another costly war with the Native Americans, but the colonists, who wanted access to the Ohio River valley, were enraged.
"No Taxation Without Representation" Colonists had been smuggling goods without paying customs duties, so Britain tightened customs and introduced unpopular taxes such as the Sugar Act and the Stamp Act— the first direct tax Britain had levied on the colonists. In October 1765, representatives from nine colonies issued the Declaration of Rights and Grievances, arguing that only representatives elected by the colonists—not Parliament—had the right to tax them. “No taxation without representation” became a popular catchphrase. Colonists boycotted British goods, and Britain repealed the Stamp Act in 1766. In 1767 the Townshend Acts put new customs duties on key British imports and enforced rules against smuggling. Colonial anger turned to violence in 1770, resulting in the Boston Massacre on March 5. Eventually Britain repealed the Townshend Acts.
The resumption of smuggling soon led to strife. Colonists created committees of correspondence to communicate with one another about British activities. In 1773 colonists dumped hundreds of cases of tea off British ships in a protest called the Boston Tea Party. Outraged, Parliament passed the Coercive Acts to punish the colonists for their defiance and the Quebec Act, which extended the boundaries of what was then the Province of Quebec to include much of what is now Ohio, Michigan, Indiana, Wisconsin, and Illinois. Together these laws came to be known as the Intolerable Acts.
enforce to urge or carry out using force
committee of correspondence a
committee organized in each colony to communicate with the other colonies about British activities
Creating a Notion 9
This lithograph, titled The Destruction of Tea at Boston Harbor, was created by engravers Currier & Ives in 1846.
CRITICALTHINKING
Interpreting What was the significance ofthe Boston Tea Party being a physical demonstration? Declaring Independence Opposition to British policies continued to rise. Fifty-five colonial delegates met at the First Continental Congress in Philadelphia on September 5, 1774. Soon after gathering, they learned that Britain had suspended the Massachusetts Assembly. The Congress responded by approving a plan to boycott British goods.
In the meantime, the suspended Massachusetts Assembly gathered secretly to create a new Massachusetts Provincial Congress and a Committee of Public Safety. They selected John Hancock to be President of the Committee and gave him the power to call up the militia, in effect making Hancock a rival governor to General Gage, whom the British had put in control of Massachusetts. In April 1775, Gage decided to seize control of the militias weapons and supplies that were stored in Concord. As the British troops marched past the town of Lexington on their way to Concord, fighting broke out between the Minutemen militia and the British troops. The first shots of the revolutionary war had been fired.
Three weeks later, as fighting continued in Massachusetts, the Second Continental Congress gathered in Philadelphia. The appointed George Washington to command a new Continental Army made up of the colonial militias. Battles took place in Boston, near Norfolk, Virginia, in North Carolina, and outside Charleston, South Carolina. By July 1776, the Congress had decided the time had come to declare independence and appointed a committee to draft a declaration. The first draft of the Declaration of Independence was written by Thomas Jefferson, then edited and revised by others on the committee including John Adams, Benjamin Franklin, Roger Sherman and Robert Livingston. On July 4, 1776, the Continental Congress issued the Declaration of Independence.
John Hancock was the first person to sign, followed by 55 other representatives from the colonies. Among the signers were Thomas Jefferson,
10
Roger Sherman, John Adams, and Benjamin Franklin. Others included Benjamin Rush who had helped organize the Sons of Liberty in Pennsylvania, and assisted Tom Paine in writing Common Sense; John Witherspoon from New Jersey, who went on to help draft the Articles of Confederation, and Charles Carroll, the sole Catholic signer of the Declaration, and one of the leaders of opposition to Britain in Maryland. With the signing of the Declaration, the thirteen colonies had now become the United States of America and the American Revolution had begun.
The War for Independence
The Continental Army could not match the British army in size, funding, or experience.
It was fighting on home ground, however, and used unconventional tactics.
The British enjoyed early victories, but the American win at Saratoga in 1777 was a turning point in the war. Morale improved, and the French signed a military alliance with the United States and recognized the new nation’s independence.
American troops controlled the frontier, but the British won victories in the South. In 1780 Patriot forces regained
control in the South after the Battle of Kings Mountain. The last major battle of the war was fought at Yorktown, Virginia. Trapped by Washingtons forces and the French navy, General Charles Cornwallis and approximately 8,000 British troops surrendered on October 19, 1781.
Parliament then voted to end the war. Peace talks began in early April 1782, and the Treaty of Paris was signed on September 3, 1783. With the Revolutionary War over, a new nation began to take shape.
H READING PROGRESS CHECK
Identifying What factors helped the American colonists win their independence?
GEOGRAPHY CONNECTION
r Sept. 1777: Howe b	American forces
captured Philadelphia ||	British forces
	American victory
	British victory
	□ Fort
In March 1777, General John Burgoyne proposed a three-pronged attack to isolate New England from the other American states.
THE WORLD IN SPATIAL TERMS
What are two colonial victories that occurred in New Jersey? THE USES OF GEOGRAPHY
How did General Howe make his attack on the United States?
LESSON 1 REVIEW
Reviewing Vocabulary
1.	Explaining What was the purpose of committees of correspondence?
Using Your Notes
2.	Summarizing Use the notes you completed during the lesson to summarize ways that the colonists resisted British rule. 1A, 1C
Answering the Guiding Questions
3.	Identifying How did geography influence the ways Native American cultures developed?
4.	Analyzing What ideas and inventions encouraged Europeans to begin overseas exploration?
5.	Explaining Why did Spain and France establish colonies in the Americas?
6.	Identifying For what reasons were the thirteen colonies founded?
7.	Determining Cause and Effect Why did the colonists fight a war for independence against Great Britain? 1A
Writing Activity
ARGUMENT
Take on the role of a Patriot trying to convince other colonists to support independence from Great Britain. Write a speech in which you explain why independence is the right choice. 1A
Creating a Nation 11
? r	r p }~‘

. V,
TEKS 1C, 29A, 29B
Boston: Hotbed of
Revolution The growing dispute between colonists and British authorities centered on the extent of Parliament’s power over the colonies, particularly the power to levy taxes. Boston was a center of protest against British policies. When, on the night of March 5, 1770, British soldiers fired into a crowd, killing or injuring 11 people, colonists were quick to declare the event a “massacre,’" even though exactly what occurred is debatable.
POLITICAL ESSAY,
1767 From what has been said, I think this uncontrovertible conclusion may be deduced, that when a ruling state obliges a dependent state to take certain commodities from her alone, it is implied in the nature of that obligation; is essentially requisite to give it the least degree of justice; and is inseparably united with it, in order to preserve any share of freedom to the dependent state; that those commodities should never be loaded with duties, FOR THE SOLE PURPOSE OF LEVYING MONEY ON THE DEPENDENT STATE.
Upon the whole the single question is, whether the parliament can legally impose duties to be paid by the people of these colonies only, FOR THE SOLE PURPOSE OF RAISING A REVENUE, on commodities, which she obliges us to take from her alone, or, in other words, whether the parliament can legally take money out of our pockets without our consent.
—John Dickinson, "Letter From a Farmer in
Pennsylvania to the Inhabitants of the British Colonies," Pennsylvania Gazette,
December 10,1767
VOCABULARY
indulgence
allowing oneself the pleasure of having or doing something
palliate
to find excuses for
stipulates
demanding or insisting on something as part of an agreement
mode
a particular operating arrangement or condition
uncontrovertible
indsiputable
requisite
necessary to reach a goal or achieve a purpose
opprobrious
expressing very strong disapproval
conciliating
to gain the goodwill or favor of
provocation
the act of provoking
clamorous
strong and active protest or demand
successively
following each other without interruption
The Boston Massacre took place on March 5,1770. wWhen the smoke cleared, five were dead and colonists were angrier than ever.
12
POLITICAL ESSAY,
1774 LETTER, 1770
To suppose, that by sending out a colony, the nation established an independent power; that when, by indulgence and favour, emigrants are become rich, they shall not contribute to their own defence, but at their own pleasure; and that they shall not be included, like millions of their fellow subjects, in the general system of representation; involves such an accumulation of absurdity, as nothing but the show of patriotism could palliate.
He that accepts protection, stipulates obedience. We have always protected the Americans; we may therefore subject them to government.
The less is included in the greater. That power which can take away life, may seize upon property. The parliament may enact, for America, a law of capital punishment; it may therefore establish a mode and proportion of taxation.
—Samuel Johnson, The Patriot
“[T]he Mob proceeded to a [Sjentinel posted upon the Custom House and Attacked him.... Captain Preston ... hearing the [Sjentinel was ir Danger of being Murdered, he detached a sergeant and twelve men to relieve him.... Thi: Party as well as the [Sjentinel was immediately attacked. Some [colonists] throwing Bricks, Stones, Pieces of Ice and Snow-Balls at them, whilst others advanced up to their Bayonets, and endeavored to close with them, to use theii Bludgeons and Clubs; calling out... by the most Opprobrious Language.
Captain Preston [used] every conciliating Method to perswade [the mob] to retire peaceably.... All he could say had no Effect, and one ofthe Soldiers, receiving a violent Blow, instantly fired ... and the Mob ... attacked with greater Violence.... The Soldiers at length perceiving their Lives in Danger, and hearing the Word Fire all round them, three or four of them fired one after another, and again three more in the ... Confusion....
Some have sworn Captain Preston gave Orders to fire; others who were near, that the Soldiers fired without Orders from the Provocation they received.”
—Thomas Gage, commander in chief of c British North American soldiers, explainin the events of March 5,177
[23 Analyzing Historical Documents
1.	Paraphrasing Using your own words, explain each narrator’s argument over taxes.
2.	Argument Do you agree with the patriot or the farmer? Write an essay defending your point of view.
3.	Explaining According to Commander Thomas Gage, why did Captain Preston and his men go to the Custom House?
4.	Differentiating On what specifics of the event did Captain Preston’s officers disagree? Provide evidence from Gage’s letter to support your answer.
5.	Using Context Clues How does Gage use language to help make the case for his men?
6.	Predicting Consequence The paper’s account of the event claims Preston yelled “Damn you, Fire, be the consequence what it will!” How does this fact help or hurt the British cause?
r r—■. s'™-, r—• f~~-: i J i - '
TEKS 1A, 1C, 29A, 29B
l/IZhen the
Declaring Independence
Declaration of Independence was written in
1776, with very few exceptions, the people of the world were governed by monarchs, emperors, and absolute rulers. There had been very little development in political ideas since Roman times that discussed the relationship between the individual and the government.
A reexamination of government began in the Renaissance, and by the time ofthe Enlightenment in the 18th century many new ideas had emerged. Those ideas culminated in the American Declaration of Independence.
THE DECLARATION OF INDEPENDENCE,
1776 The text of the Declaration of Independence has four parts. The first part is the preamble, which explains why it is being issued. The second part explains the idea of natural rights, and uses that idea to explain the legal justification for declaring independence. The third part, the list of grievances, charges the British with violating the rights ofthe colonies and gives examples. The fourth part is the resolution, where the colonies officially declare their independence.
The Declaration was written by Thomas Jefferson with the help of Benjamin Franklin and John Adams. It was then revised by Congress before being issued. The document draws on the new political theories ofthe Enlightenment. It summarizes these ideas when it states that people are endowed with unalienable rights. This was a revolutionary idea. It means that rights do not come from the government. People have rights no matter what their government says, no matter what laws it passes, and the government cannot take them away.
Second, the Declaration argues that the only reason people create government is to protect their rights. The only legitimate or just powers a government has are the powers it gets from
VOCABULARY
endowed
provided, or born with
unalienable
cannot be taken away or given away
divests
gives up, or takes off
arbitrary
based on a person’s opinion or preference, not following the rules
levying
imposing taxes or duties
the “consent ofthe governed.” In other words, government exists to serve the people and when it fails to protect people’s rights, the people have a right to overthrow it.
The Declaration of Independence is very important. It marks the birth ofthe United States, the first modern democratic republic. Its ideas and values have influenced people in other nations, and have helped to transform governments and societies around the world.
THE SECOND TREATISE OF GOVERNMENT,
1689 The political ideas behind the Declaration came from many sources, including Enlightenment writers and classical thinkers such as Aristotle and Cicero. But the greatest influence on American thinking was probably the 17th century English philosopher John Locke, who wrote “Two Treatises of Government” shortly after the English Parliament removed King James II from power and asked William and Mary to become the new monarchs of England:
Men being, as has been said, by Nature, all free, equal and independent, no one can be put out of this Estate, and subjected to the Political Power of another, without his own Consent. The only way whereby any one divests himself of his Natural Liberty and puts on the bounds of Civil Society is by agreeing with other Men to Joyn and unite into a Community, for their comfortable, safe, and
14

peaceable living one amongst another, in a secure Enjoyment of their properties....
Governments are dissolved from within ... when such a single Person or Prince sets up his own Arbitrary Will in place ofthe Laws, which are the Will ofthe Society, declared by the Legislative.... Secondly, when the Prince hinders the legislative from ... acting freely, pursuant to those ends, for which it was Constituted ... Thirdly, When by the Arbitrary Power ofthe Prince, the Electors, or ways of Election are altered, without the Consent, and contrary to the common Interest ofthe People.
... In these and the like Cases, when the Government is dissolved, the People are at liberty to provide for themselves, by erecting a new Legislative, differing from the other, by the change of Persons, or Form, or both as they shall find it most for their safety and good.
THE ENGLISH BILL OF RIGHTS,
1789 The Declaration of Independence contains 18 charges against the king. This list of grievances were patterned after several documents, but the most influential was the English Bill of Rights issued by the English Parliament in 1689:
By assuming and exercising a power of dispensing with and suspending of laws and the execution of laws without consent of parliament.... By levying money for and to the use ofthe crown by pretence of prerogative for other time and in other manner than the same was granted by parliament.
[•223 Analyzing Historical Documents
1.	Evaluating Intent Summarize the purpose ofthe Declaration of Independence.
2.	Analyzing Meaning According to John Locke, who gives government its authority? What does the Declaration of Independence say is the source of government’s power?
3.	Analyzing Text What basic rights does the Declaration of Independence identify as belonging to all people? How do they differ from the rights Locke mentions?
By raising and keeping a standing army within this kingdom in time of peace without consent of parliament and quartering soldiers contrary to law....
By violating the freedom of election of members to serve in parliament....
And excessive bail hath been required of persons committed in criminal cases to elude the benefit ofthe laws made for the liberty of the subjects. And excessive fines have been imposed. And illegal and cruel punishments inflicted...
And thereupon the said lords spiritual and temporal and commons ... declare that the pretended power of suspending of laws or the execution of laws by regal authority without consent of parliament is illegal.
That levying money for or to the use ofthe crown ... without grant of parliament for longer time or in other manner than the same is or shall be granted is illegal.
That it is the right ofthe subjects to petition the king and all commitments and protections for such petitioning are illegal.
That the raising or keeping a standing army within the kingdom in time of peace unless it be with consent of parliament is against law....
That election of members of parliament ought to be free.... That excessive bail ought not to be required nor excessive fines imposed nor cruel and unusual punishments inflicted....
The said lords ... do resolve that William and Mary, prince and princess of Orange, be declared king and queen of England....”
4.	Comparing and Contrasting What are the similarities between the complaints in the English Bill of Rights and the Declaration of Independence? What are the differences?
5.	Explaining What do all three documents agree is the most likely reason people’s rights will be threatened? Which branch of government do all three documents imply is the source of the people’s power?
15
In Congress, July 4,1776. The unanimous Declaration of the thirteen united States
The Preamble The Declaration of Independence has four parts. The Preamble explains why the Continental Congress drew up the Declaration.
impel: force
Natural Rights The second part, the Declaration of Natural Rights, states that people have certain basic rights and that government should protect those rights. John Locke's ideas strongly influenced this part. In 1690 Locke wrote that government was based on the consent of the people and that people had the right to rebel > if the government did not uphold their , right to life, liberty, and property.
endowed: provided
of America,
[Preamble]
When in the Course of human events, it becomes necessary for one people to dissolve the political bands which have connected them with another, and to assume among the Powers of the earth, the separate and equal station to which the Laws of Nature and of Nature’s God entitle them, a decent respect to the opinions of mankind requires that they should declare the causes which impel them to the separation.
[Declaration of Natural Rights]
We hold these truths to be self-evident, that all men are created equal, that they are endowed by their Creator with certain unalienable Rights, that among these are Life, Liberty, and the pursuit of Happiness.
That to secure these rights, Governments are instituted among Men, deriving their just powers from the consent of the governed,
That whenever any Form of Government becomes destructive of these ends, it is the Right of the People to alter or to abolish it, and to institute new Government, laying its foundation on such principles and organizing its powers in such form, as to them shall seem most likely to effect their Safety and Happiness. Prudence, indeed, will dictate that Governments long established should not be changed for light and transient causes; and accordingly all experience hath shown, that mankind are more disposed to suffer, while
16
evils are sufferable, than to right themselves by abolishing the forms to which they are accustomed. But when a long train of abuses and usurpations, pursuing invariably the same Object evinces a design to reduce them under absolute Despotism, it is their right, it is their duty, to throw off such Government, and to provide new Guards for their future security.
[List of Grievances]
Such has been the patient sufferance of these Colonies; and such is now the necessity which constrains them to alter their former Systems of Government. The history of the present King of Great Britain is a history of repeated injuries and usurpations, all having in direct object the establishment of an absolute Tyranny over these States. To prove this, let Facts be submitted to a candid world.
He has refused his Assent to Laws, the most wholesome and necessary for the public good.
He has forbidden his Governors to pass Laws of immediate and pressing importance, unless suspended in their operation till his Assent should be obtained; and when so suspended, he has utterly neglected to attend to them.
He has refused to pass other Laws for the accommodation of large districts of people, unless those people would relinquish the right of Representation in the Legislature, a right inestimable to them and formidable to tyrants only.
He has called together legislative bodies at places unusual, uncomfortable, and distant from the depository of their
despotism: unlimited power
What It Means
List of Grievances The third part ofthe Declaration is a list ofthe colonists' complaints against the British government. Notice that King George III is singled out for blame.
usurpations: unjust uses of power
relinquish: give up inestimable: priceless
▼ Declaration of Independence by John Trumbull depicts the presentation ofthe Declaration of Independence to John Hancock (seated right), president ofthe Continental Congress.


PHOTO:
Francis G. Mayer/Corbis Art/Corbis Creating a Nation 17
annihilation: destruction
convulsions: violent disturbances
Naturalization of Foreigners: process by which foreign-born persons become citizens
tenure: term
quartering: lodging
render: make
Public Records, for the sole purpose of fatiguing them into compliance with his measures.
He has dissolved Representative Houses repeatedly, for opposing with manly firmness his invasions on the rights of the people.
He has refused for a long time, after such dissolutions, to cause others to be elected; whereby the Legislative Powers, incapable of Annihilation, have returned to the People at large for their exercise; the State remaining in the mean time exposed to all the dangers of invasion from without, and convulsions within.
He has endeavoured to prevent the population of these States; for that purpose obstructing the Laws for Naturalization of Foreigners; refusing to pass others to encourage their migrations hither, and raising the conditions of new Appropriations of Lands.
He has obstructed the Administration of Justice, by refusing his Assent to Laws for establishing Judiciary Powers.
He has made Judges dependent on his Will alone, for the tenure of their offices, and the amount and payment of their salaries.
He has erected a multitude of New Offices, and sent hither swarms of Officers to harass our people, and eat out their substance.
He has kept among us, in times of peace, Standing Armies without the Consent of our legislature.
He has affected to render the Military independent of and superior to the Civil Power.
He has combined with others to subject us to a jurisdiction foreign to our constitution, and unacknowledged by our laws; giving his Assent to their acts of pretended legislation:
For quartering large bodies of troops among us:
For protecting them, by a mock Trial, from Punishment for any Murders which they should commit on the Inhabitants of these States:
For cutting off our Trade with all parts of the world:
For imposing taxes on us without our Consent:
For depriving us in many cases, of the benefits of Trial by Jury:
For transporting us beyond Seas to be tried for pretended offences:
For abolishing the free System of English Laws in a neighbouring Province, establishing therein an Arbitrary government, and enlarging its Boundaries so as to render it at once an example and fit instrument for introducing the same absolute rule into these Colonies:
For taking away our Charters, abolishing our most valuable Laws, and altering fundamentally the Forms of our Governments:
18
For suspending our own Legislature, and declaring themselves invested with Power to legislate for us in all cases whatsoever.
He has abdicated Government here, by declaring us out of his Protection and waging War against us.
He has plundered our seas, ravaged our Coasts, burnt our towns, and destroyed the lives of our people.
He is at this time transporting large armies of foreign mercenaries to compleat the works of death, desolation and tyranny, already begun with circumstances of Cruelty & perfidy scarcely paralleled in the most barbarous ages, and totally unworthy the Head of a civilized nation.
He has constrained our fellow Citizens taken Captive on the high Seas to bear Arms against their Country, to become the executioners of their friends and Brethren, or to fall themselves by their Hands.
He has excited domestic insurrections amongst us, and has endeavoured to bring on the inhabitants of our frontiers, the merciless Indian Savages, whose known rule of warfare, is an undistinguished destruction of all ages, sexes and conditions.
In every stage of these Oppressions We have Petitioned for Redress in the most humble terms: Our repeated Petitions have been answered only by repeated injury. A Prince, whose character is thus marked by every act which may define a Tyrant, is unfit to be the ruler of a free People.
Nor have We been wanting in attention to our British brethren. We have warned them from time to time of attempts by their legislature to extend an unwarrantable jurisdiction over us. We have reminded them of the circumstances of our emigration and settlement here. We have appealed to their native justice and magnanimity, and we have conjured them by the ties of our common kindred to disavow these usurpations, which, would inevitably interrupt our connections and correspondence. They too have been deaf to the voice of justice and of consanguinity. We must, therefore, acquiesce in the necessity, which denounces our Separation, and hold them, as we hold the rest of mankind, Enemies in War, in Peace Friends.
abdicated: given up
perfidy: violation of trust
insurrections: rebellions
petitioned for redress:
asked formally for a correction of wrongs
unwarrantable jurisdiction:
unjustified authority
consanguinity: originating from the same ancestor
[Resolution of Independence by the United States]
We, therefore, the Representatives of the united States of America, in General Congress, Assembled, appealing to the Supreme Judge of the world for the rectitude of our intentions, do, in the Name, and by Authority of the good People of these Colonies, solemnly publish and declare,
What It Means
Resolution of Independence The
final section declares that the colonies are "Free and Independent States" with the full power to make war, to form alliances, and to trade with other countries.
rectitude: rightness
Creating a Nation 19
That these United Colonies are, and of Right ought to be Free and Independent States; that they are Absolved from all Allegiance to the British Crown, and that all political connection between them and the State of Great Britain, is and ought to be totally dissolved; and that as Free and Independent States, they have full Power to levy War, conclude Peace, contract Alliances, establish Commerce, and to do all other Acts and Things which Independent States may of right do.
And for the support of this Declaration, with a firm reliance on the Protection of Divine Providence, we mutually pledge to each other our Lives, our Fortunes and our sacred Honor.
gners ofthe Declaration
le signers, as representatives ofthe nerican people, declared the ilonies independent from Great itain. Most members signed the )cument on August 2,1776.
John Hancock President from Massachusetts
Georgia
Button Gwinnett Lyman Hall George Walton
North Carolina
William Hooper Joseph Hewes John Penn
South Carolina
Edward Rutledge Thomas Heyward, Jr. Thomas Lynch, Jr. Arthur Middleton
Maryland
Samuel Chase William Paca Thomas Stone Charles Carroll
of Carrollton
Virginia
George Wythe Richard Henry Lee Thomas Jefferson Benjamin Harrison Thomas Nelson, Jr. Francis Lightfoot Lee Carter Braxton
Pennsylvania
Robert Morris Benjamin Rush Benjamin Franklin John Morton George Clymer James Smith George Taylor James Wilson George Ross
Delaware
Caesar Rodney George Read Thomas McKean
New York
William Floyd Philip Livingston Francis Lewis Lewis Morris
New Jersey
Richard Stockton John Witherspoon Francis Hopkinson John Hart Abraham Clark
New Hampshire
Josiah Bartlett William Whipple Matthew Thornton
Massachusetts
Samuel Adams John Adams Robert Treat Paine Elbridge Gerry
Rhode Island
Stephen Hopkins William Ellery
Connecticut
Samuel Huntington William Williams Oliver Wolcott Roger Sherman
Academic Vocabulary
cteristia define a society? hould societies settle disputes?
it Matters Because
Soon after the American Revolution, political problems prompted Congress to seek revisions to the Articles of Confederation. In response, the Constitution was drafted and the emergence of a new federal government—and political parties—began.
• framework • revenue
Content Vocabulary
Establishing the American Republic
•	separation of powers	j
•	enumerated powers	j
•	implied powers
TAKING NOTES:
j Key Ideas and Details	j
Comparing and Contrasting As	|
you read the lesson, use a graphic	j
organizer like the one below to	]
compare and contrast the Articles of	|
Confederation and the Constitution.	I
> Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills j
1A analyze and evaluate the text, intent,
meaning, and importance ofthe
Declaration of Independence and the U.S. I
Constitution, including the Bill of Rights,	I
and identify the full text of the first three	]
paragraphs of the Declaration of	|
Independence
continued on the next page
guidingquestion How did the constitutions created during the Revolutionary War attempt to limit the power of government and protect the rights of citizens?
The leaders who created the United States of America knew that they were creating something new. They made a deliberate choice to replace royal rule with a republic. In a republic, power is held by citizens who are entitled to vote. Elected officials are responsible to the citizens and must govern according to laws or a constitution. Political Ideas of the New Nation
In an ideal republic, all citizens are equal under the law, regardless of their wealth or social class. These ideas contradicted traditional practices that restricted the rights of many people on the basis of their race, class, or gender. Despite these contradictions, republican ideas began to change American society. By the end of the Revolution, each state had drawn up its own written constitution. Many, based on the models of Massachusetts and Virginia, called for separate branches of government, two-house legislatures, and a list of rights guaranteed to citizens.
The Articles of Confederation
Initially adopted in 1777 during the Revolution, the Articles of Confederation were ratified in 1781, formally establishing the framework for a central national government. The Articles loosely unified the states under a single governing body, the Congress. There were no separate branches of government, and Congress had only limited powers. After fighting to free themselves from British rule, the states did not want a new government that might become tyrannical.
si
Creating a Notion ;
framework basic structure	Under the Articles, each state had one vote in Congress. Congress’s power,
however, was limited. It could negotiate with other nations, raise armies, and declare war, but had no authority to regulate trade or impose taxes. Congress could not raise enough money to pay its debts or expenses.
P READING PROGRESS CHECK
Describing How did the republic established by the United States differ from Britain's government?
(continued from p. 21)
TCKS
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills 1B analyze and evaluate the application of these founding principles to historical events in U.S. history
Delegates at the Constitutional Convention in Philadelphia, 1787 ► CRITICALTHiNKING
1	Making Inferences Why do you
think Benjamin Franklin is pictured in the middle of this painting?
2	Describing How does the artist portray Washington's role at
the convention?
The U.S. Constitution
guiding question What are the key compromises and provisions incorporated in the US. Constitution?
The young United States faced several political and economic problems after the end of the American Revolution. Many American leaders believed that the new nation would not survive without a strong national government and that the Articles of Confederation had to be revised.
In May 1787, 55 of the most distinguished leaders in the United States met in Philadelphia to discuss weaknesses in the Articles of Confederation. They soon decided that a new form of government was needed. All the delegates supported a national government with the power to levy taxes and make laws that would be binding upon the states. The delegates also accepted the idea of dividing the government into executive, legislative, and judicial branches. Debate and Compromise
Debate arose about how each state should be represented in the legislative branch. The larger states insisted that representation be based on population; smaller states wanted each state to have an equal vote. The convention appointed a special committee to find a compromise. Benjamin Franklin warned the delegates that if they failed to agree, they would “become a reproach and a by-word down to future ages. And what is worse, mankind may hereafter, from this unfortunate instance, despair of establishing governments by human wisdom, and leave it to chance, war, and conquest.”
Roger Sherman of Connecticut suggested the basis of the committee s solution. The legislature would be divided into two houses. In the House of Representatives, the number of a state’s representatives would depend on its population. In the Senate, each state would have equal representation. Voters in each state would elect the members of the House of Representatives, but the state legislatures would choose the senators. This proposal came to be known as the Connecticut Compromise, or the Great Compromise.
PHOTO:
Library of Congress, Prints & Photographs Division [LC-USZC4-4097] The Connecticut Compromise sparked a fresh controversy: whether to count enslaved people when determining how many representatives each state would have in the House of Representatives. Southern delegates wanted to count enslaved people. Northern delegates objected, pointing out that enslaved people could not vote. The matter was settled by the Three-Fifths Compromise. Every five enslaved persons would count as three free persons for determining both representation and taxation. In another compromise, the delegates dealt with the power of Congress to regulate trade, agreeing that the new Congress could not tax exports. They also agreed that it could not ban the slave trade until 1808.
Framework of Government
Next, the delegates focused on the details of the new government. The government was based on the principle of popular sovereignty, or rule by the people. It created a representative system of government in which elected officials speak for the people. To strengthen the central government but still preserve the rights of the states, the Constitution describes a system known as federalism. Under federalism, power is divided between the national and state governments.
The Constitution also provides for a separation of powers by dividing power between three branches of government: the legislative branch, which makes laws; the executive branch, which implements and enforces the laws, among other duties; and the judicial branch, which interprets federal laws and renders judgment in cases involving those laws. A system of checks and balances prevents any one of the three branches from becoming too powerful. Each branch has some ability to limit the power of the other two.
The success of the Constitutional Convention in creating a government that reflected the country’s many viewpoints was, in Washington’s words, “little short of a miracle.” The convention, John Adams declared, was “the greatest single effort of national deliberation that the world has ever seen.” Ratification and the Bill of Rights
On September 28, 1787, Congress voted to submit the Constitution to the states. Each state would hold a convention to ratify, or approve, it. Nine states had to vote to approve the Constitution for it to go into effect. As soon as Americans learned about the new Constitution, they began to argue over whether it should be ratified. The debate took place in state legislatures, in mass meetings, in the columns of newspapers, and in everyday conversations.
Supporters of the Constitution called themselves Federalists. They emphasized that the Constitution would create a federal system, with power divided between a central government and state governments. They hoped the name would remind Americans who feared a central government that the states would retain many of their powers.
Opponents to the Constitution were called Anti-Federalists, a somewhat misleading name, as they were not truly against federalism. They accepted the need for a national government. The real issue, as far as they were concerned, was whether the national government or the state governments would be supreme.
The Federalists’ arguments for ratification were summarized in The Federalist—a collection of 85 essays written by James Madison, Alexander Hamilton, and John Jay. The three men published most of the essays in New York newspapers in late 1787 and early 1788. To this day The Federalist remains a valuable resource for understanding how the Constitution was supposed to work and what the Framers wanted to achieve.
James Madison , (1751-1836)
Although many individuals ' contributed to the framing ofthe \ U.S. Constitution, James Madison \ proposed the Virginia Plan, which
defined a separation of powers between the legislative, executive, and judicial branches. He was a leader in the First United States Congress and was responsible for
[ the first 10 amendments ofthe i; Constitution, known as the Bill of
Rights. In 1808 he was elected the fourth president ofthe United States.
f _____
CRITICAL THINKING
Drawing Conclusions Why do you
think it is important to have a : separation of powers?
L„.------------.....
separation of powers
government principle in which power is divided among different branches
Creating a Nation 23
The Federalists knew, however, that the most important votes still lay ahead. The large states of Massachusetts, Virginia, and New York might vote either way. In Massachusetts, opponents of the Constitution included Massachusetts Governor John Hancock and Samuel Adams. Adams refused to support the new constitution unless Federalists gave him a guarantee “that the said Constitution be never construed to authorize Congress to infringe the just liberty of the press, or the rights of conscience; or to prevent the people of the United States .. . from keeping their own arms;... or to subject the people to unreasonable searches and seizures of their persons, papers or possessions.”
The Federalists moved quickly to meet these objections. They promised to attach a bill of rights to the Constitution once it was ratified. They also agreed to support an amendment that would reserve for the states all powers not given to the federal government. In the end, the promise to add a bill of rights won the vote for ratification in both Massachusetts and Virginia. In New York, Alexander Hamilton and John Jay worked hard to build support. When it became clear the Constitution would go into effect, New York voted by a narrow margin to ratify it as well. Elections for Congress and the new office of president were held in 1788, and in March 1789, the new United States Senate and House of Representatives met for the very first time. George Washington was elected the first president under the new Constitution.
With the new government in effect, one of the very first tasks of the new Congress was to pass the Bill of Rights as promised. James Madison, one of the leaders in Congress, made the Bill of Rights a top priority. He hoped it would demonstrate the good faith of federal leaders and build support for the new government.
In drafting the Bill of Rights, Madison relied heavily on the Virginia Declaration of Rights issued in 1776 and the Virginia Statute for Religious Freedom that Thomas Jefferson had written in 1786. In late September 1789, Congress agreed on 12 constitutional amendments. They were then sent to the states for ratification, but only 10 were approved. These 10 went into effect and are generally referred to as the Bill of Rights. The first eight protect the rights of individuals against actions of the federal government. The last two set limits on the powers of the new national government. The Ninth Amendment states that the people have other rights not listed. The Tenth Amendment states that any powers not specifically given to the federal government are reserved for the states.
IB READING PROGRESS CHECK
Explaining Why did the Anti-Federalists oppose the ratification of the Constitution?
The Rise of Political Parties
guiding question Why did political parties emerge in the new republic, and what were the consequences?
George Washington served as the first president under the new Constitution. Congress created three executive departments and organized the judicial branch. Washington appointed the heads of the executive departments, including Thomas Jefferson as secretary of state and Alexander Hamilton as secretary of the treasury.
Jefferson and Hamilton
One of the new government’s most pressing concerns involved the national debt. Hamilton proposed a plan to pay off the debt and to create a national bank to manage the country’s finances. Jefferson, James Madison, and others
4
opposed the plan, arguing that Congress could not establish a bank because it was not among the federal government s enumerated powers specifically listed in the Constitution. Hamilton disagreed, stating that the bank was among the implied powers—not explicitly listed in the Constitution but necessary for the government to do its job. Hamilton eventually won approval for his program, and the Bank of the United States was established in 1791.
That same year, Congress enacted a tax on whiskey, to bring in much-needed revenue. The tax infuriated many. Some western Pennsylvania farmers resisted tax collectors and destroyed the whiskey stills of those who paid the tax. In August 1794, Washington sent nearly 13,000 troops to put down what was called the Whiskey Rebellion.
The debate over Hamilton’s financial program divided Congress into rival political parties. The Federalists supported Hamilton’s plans and a strong national government. The Democratic-Republicans, led by Jefferson and Madison, favored a limited federal government and more power for the states.
The Election of 1800
Washington’s successor was fellow Federalist John Adams. A series of
unpopular taxes and laws passed during his first term gave Adams a
disadvantage in seeking reelection in 1800. The Democratic-Republican
nominees were Jefferson for president and Aaron Burr for vice president.
Under the Constitution, each state chooses electors—the same number as it has representatives and senators. This group, the Electoral College, then votes for the president. In 1800 each elector was to vote for two people of their choice for president, even if one were nominated for vice president.
When the votes were counted, the Federalist candidates had lost and Jefferson and Burr were tied at 73 votes each. Since neither
had a majority, the House of Representatives had to choose a	GEOGRAPHY CONNECTION
president and chose Jefferson.
The election of 1800 was a major turning point in Amerl a READING PROGRESS CHECK	political history because it was the first transfer of powe
Explaining Why did Jefferson and others oppose Hamilton's	between political parties under the federal Constitution
financial program?	1 THE WORLD IN SPATIAL TERMS IVWc
states were split in their choice for president?
enumerated powers
powers listed in the Constitution as belonging to the federal government
implied powers powers not specifically listed in the Constitution but claimed by the federal government
revenue the total income produced by a given source
Creating a Nation
- Analuzinq — Supreme Court
cases
Marbury v. Madison
William Marbury based his request for a court order on the Judiciary Act of 1789, which said that requests for federal court orders go directly to the Supreme Court. In the 1803 case Marbury v. Madison, the Supreme Court decided that part of the Judiciary Act was unconstitutional and thus invalid. The Constitution specifies which cases can go directly to the Supreme Court, and court orders are not mentioned. In the Court’s opinion, Marshall wrote:
“So if a law be in opposition to the constitution; if both the law and the constitution
The Nineteenth Century Begins
guiding question Howdid the United States assert itself as an independent nation?
President Jefferson attempted to limit federal powers and helped expand the size of the country. Later, the United States faced war with Britain.
Jefferson in Office
Thomas Jefferson took office committed to limiting government. He began paying off federal debt, cut government spending, eliminated the hated whiskey tax, and planned to rely on local militia instead of a standing army.
Weakening the Federalists’ control ofthe judiciary was another aim of the new administration. On his last day in office, President Adams had appointed dozens of new Federalist judges and court officers. Jefferson asked the incoming Democratic-Republican Congress to abolish some of the new positions and to withhold the paperwork confirming other appointments. One of those who did not receive his documents, William Marbury, took the matter to the Supreme Court. The Court sympathized with Marbury but ruled in 1803 that it could not issue an enforcement order. According to Chief Justice John Marshall and his colleagues, the law that authorized the Court to write such orders actually was unconstitutional and invalid. The decision established the Courts power of judicial review—the power to declare laws unconstitutional and invalid.
apply to a particular case ... the court must determine which of these conflicting rules governs the case. This is of the very essence of judicial duty.”
THINKING
Drawing Conclusions What principle did the ruling in Marbury v. Madison establish? With the help of their Native American guide and interpreter, Sacagawea, Meriwether Lewis and William Clark explored the territory acquired by the Louisiana Purchase.
CRITICAL THINKING
Predicting Consequences Why was the Louisiana Purchase a significant event for the young United States?
Westward Expansion
Under Jefferson, the size of the country increased considerably. The Treaty of Paris of 1783 had already established the Mississippi River as the nations western border. After the defeat of Native Americans in the Northwest Territory and the Treaty of Greenville in 1795, more settlers poured into the region. During Washingtons term, Kentucky and Tennessee had become states, and Ohio followed in 1803.
In 1800 Spain had given Louisiana back to France. To finance his plans for European conquest, the French leader, Napoleon Bonaparte, now offered to sell all of the Louisiana Territory, as well as New Orleans, to the United States. Congress overwhelmingly approved the Louisiana Purchase on April 30, 1803. The United States paid $11.25 million and also agreed to take on French debts of about $3.75 million owed to U.S. citizens. With the purchase, the nation had more than doubled its size.
Even before Louisiana became part of the United States, Jefferson had asked Congress to fund a secret expedition into the Louisiana Territory. After receiving approval from Congress, Jefferson chose Meriwether Lewis and William Clark to lead the expedition. During their explorations, they found a path through the Rocky Mountains and eventually reached the
Pacific Ocean.
The War of 1812
In 1809 James Madison succeeded Jefferson as president, and a foreign-relations crisis loomed. The British regularly seized American ships at sea and often practiced impressment, a legalized form of kidnapping that forced people into military service. Britain claimed the right to stop American ships and search for British deserters. On several
26
occasions they impressed American citizens into service as well. Americans in the West also blamed Britain for encouraging attacks by Native Americans along the frontier. President Jefferson had tried economic sanctions against Britain with the Embargo Act of 1807, but the actions mostly hurt the American economy.
Like Jefferson, President Madison first responded with economic measures. After several attempts, the measures finally began to have the desired effect. Unfortunately, word of British cooperation came too late—Congress had already declared war against Britain.
At the beginning of the War of 1812, conquering Canada was the primary objective of the United States. U.S. forces were victorious on Lake Erie and Lake Champlain. The British, however, easily entered Washington, D.C. They dispersed the poorly trained militia defending the capital and set fire to the White House and the Capitol. In Baltimore, however, the city militia inflicted heavy casualties on the British. British forces bombarded Fort McHenry throughout the night of September 13,1814, and then abandoned their attack. The sight of the U.S. flag still flying over the fort at dawn inspired Francis Scott Key to write “The Star-Spangled Banner,” which became the national anthem.
As battles raged, peace talks began in the Belgian city of Ghent. The Treaty of Ghent, signed on December 24, 1814, ended the war and restored prewar boundaries, but did not mention impressment. At about the same time, British and U.S. forces faced each other in New Orleans. Unaware that a treaty had been signed, U.S. general Andrew Jackson led his troops to a decisive victory over the British in the Battle of New Orleans in January 1815. Jackson became a national hero.
The War of 1812 increased the prestige of the United States overseas and generated a new spirit of patriotism and national unity. The American victory also weakened the Federalist Party, which had strongly opposed war with Britain.
B READING PROGRESS CHECK
Identifying What actions by Britain caused the United States to impose economic sanctions against them?
LESSON 2 REVIEW
Reviewing Vocabulary
1.	Explaining Explain the difference between enumerated powers and implied powers. 1A
Using Your Notes
2.	Comparing and Contrasting Use the notes you completed during the lesson to compare and contrast the Articles of Confederation and the Constitution. 1A, 1B
Answering the Guiding Questions
3.	Identifying How did the constitutions created during the Revolutionary War attempt to limit the power of government and protect the rights of citizens? 1B
4.	Describing What are the key compromises and provisions incorporated in the U.S. Constitution? 1A, 1B
5.	Explaining Why did political parties emerge in the new republic, and what were the consequences?
6.	Identifying How did the United States assert itself as an independent nation? 1A, 1B
Writing Activity
NARRATIVE
Suppose you are a delegate at the Constitutional Convention. Write a journal entry describing the arguments from each side of the debate that led to the Connecticut Compromise. 1A,1B Creating a Nation 27
NO l?“W WAT
/
iT'V'j
Reading HELPDESK
Academic Vocabulary
•	grant
•	responsive
Content Vocabulary
•	popular sovereignty
•	federalism
•	enumerated powers
•	reserved powers
•	concurrent powers
•	impeach
•	bill
•	cabinet
•	judicial review
•	due process
TAKING NOTES:
Key Ideas and Details
Organizing As you read about the Constitution, use the major headings of the handbook to fill in an outline like the one below.
I.
Major Principles A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.


TEKS
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills The
Constitution
HANDBOOK
it Matters Because
The Constitution is the mosf important document of the United States. It serves as the framework of national government and the source of American citizens'basic rights. To preserve self-government, all citizens need to understand their rights and responsibilities.
Major Principles
guiding question Woiv does the Constitution lay the framework for individual rights and a balanced representative government?
The principles outlined in the Constitution were the Framers' solution to the complex problems of a representative government. The Constitution rests on seven major principles of government: (1) popular sovereignty, (2) republicanism, (3) limited government, (4) federalism, (5) separation of powers, (6) checks and balances, and (7) individual rights.
1A analyze and evaluate the text, intent, meaning, and importance of the Declaration of Independence and the U.S. Constitution,
continued on p. 30
Popular Sovereigntyand Republicanism
The opening words of the Constitution, "We the people," reinforce the idea of popular sovereignty, or “authority of the people." In the Constitution, the people consent to be governed and specify the powers and rules by which they shall be governed.
The Articles of Confederation’s government had few powers, and it was unable to cope with the many challenges facing the nation. The new federal government had greater powers, but it also had specific limitations. A system of interlocking responsibilities kept any one branch of government from becoming too powerful.
Voters are sovereign, that is, they have ultimate authority in a republican system. They elect representatives and give them the responsibility to make laws and run the government. For most Americans today, the terms republic and representative democracy mean the same thing: a system of limited government in which the people are the final source of authority.
28
PHOTO:
Comstock/PunchStock Limited Government
Although the Framers agreed that the nation needed a stronger central authority, they feared misuse of power. They wanted to prevent the government from using its power to give one group special advantages or to deprive another group of its rights. By creating a limited government, they restricted the government’s authority to specific powers granted by the people.
The delegates to the Constitutional Convention were very specific about the powers granted to the new government. Their decision to provide a written outline of the government’s structure also served to show what they intended. Articles I, II and III of the Constitution describe the powers of the federal government and the limits on those powers. Other limits are set forth in the Bill of Rights, which guarantees certain rights to the people.
Federalism
In establishing a strong central government, the Framers did not deprive states of all authority. The states gave up some powers to the national government but retained others. This principle of shared power is called federalism. The federal system allows the people of each state to deal with their needs in their own way, but at the same time, it lets the states act together to deal with matters that affect all Americans.
The Constitution defines three types of government powers. Certain powers belong only to the federal government. These enumerated powers include the power to coin money, regulate interstate and foreign trade, maintain the armed forces, and create federal courts (Article I, Section 8).
The second kind of powers are those retained by the states, known as reserved powers, including the power to establish schools, set marriage and divorce laws, and regulate trade within the state. Although reserved powers are not specifically listed in the Constitution, the Tenth Amendment says that all powers not granted to the federal government “are reserved to the States.”
The third set of powers defined by the Constitution is concurrent powers—powers the state and federal governments share. They include the right to raise taxes, borrow money, provide for public welfare, and administer criminal justice. Conflicts between state law and federal law must be settled in a federal court. The Constitution declares that it is “the supreme Law of the Land.”
A replica of the U.S. Constitution
CRITICAL THINKING
Drawing Conclusions Why do you think the first three words of the Constitution were written in such a large size? popular sovereignty
authority of the people
federalism political system in which power is divided between the national and state governments grant to award or give as law
enumerated powers
powers listed in the Constitution as belonging to the federal government
reserved powers powers retained by the states
concurrent powers powers shared by the state and federal governments
The Constitution Handbook 29
(continued from p. 28)
TEKS
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills including the Bill of Rights, and identify the full text ofthe first three paragraphs of the Declaration of Independence
22C describe U.S. citizens as people from numerous places throughout the world who hold a common bond in standing for certain self-evident truths
23A identify methods of expanding the right to participate in the democratic process, including amendments to the U.S. Constitution
23C explain how participation in the democratic process reflects our national ethos, patriotism, and civic responsibility as well as our progress to build a “more perfect union”
CHARTS/GRAPHS
The Framers deliberately created a system of checks and balances to limit the power of each branch of government. ► CRITICAL THINKING
1	Analyzing Information How can the president help control the judiciary?
2	Drawing Conclusions Why is it important that the legislative branch can override a presidential veto?
Separation of Powers
To prevent any single group or institution in government from gaining too much authority, the Framers divided the federal government into three branches: legislative, executive, and judicial. Each branch has its own functions and powers. The legislative branch, Congress, makes the laws.
The executive branch, headed by the president, carries out the laws. The judicial branch, consisting of the Supreme Court and other federal courts, interprets and applies the laws.
In addition to giving separate responsibility to separate branches, the membership of each branch is chosen in different ways. The president nominates federal judges, and the Senate confirms the appointments.
People vote for members of Congress. Voters cast ballots for president, but the method of election is indirect. On Election Day, the votes in each state are counted. The candidate who receives the majority receives that state’s electoral votes, which total the number of senators and representatives the state has in Congress. Electors from all states meet to formally elect a president. A candidate must win a majority of votes in the Electoral College to win. Checks and Balances
The Framers who wrote the Constitution deliberately created a system of checks and balances in which each branch of government can check, or limit, the power of the other branches. This system helps balance the power of the three branches and prevents any one branch from becoming too powerful. For example, imagine that Congress passes a law. The president can reject the law by vetoing it. Congress, however, can override, or reverse, the president’s veto if two-thirds of the members of both the Senate and the House of Representatives vote again to approve the law.
CHECKS AND BALANCES
LEGISLATIVE BRANCH
Congress Makes the Law
Checks on the Judicial Branch:
•	Creates lower federal courts
•	Can impeach and remove judges
•	Can propose amendments to overrule judicial decisions
•	Approves appointments of federal judges
Checks on the Executive Branch:
•	Can override presidential veto
•	Confirms executive appointments •Ratifies treaties
•	Can declare war
•	Appropriates money
•	Can impeach and remove president
Checks on the Legislative Branch:
• Can declare acts of Congress unconstitutional
JUDICIAL BRANCH
Supreme Court Interprets the Law
Checks on the Executive Branch:
• Can declare executive actions unconstitutional
Checks on the Legislative Branch:
•	Can propose laws
•	Can veto laws
•	Can call special sessions of Congress
•	Makes appointments to federal posts
•	Negotiates foreign treaties
EXECUTIVE BRANCH
President Carries Out the Law
•	1 X11f'* * lli*XBX
ISBlSluIIllIl
---------WEa»---
Checks on the Judicial Branch:
•	Appoints federal judges
•	Can grant pardons to federal offenders
30
Individual Rights
In 1791 the states ratified 10 amendments to the Constitution to protect certain basic rights, including freedom of speech, religion, and the right to a trial by jury. Congress approved these 10 amendments and referred to them as the Bill of Rights. Over the years, 17 more amendments have been added to the Constitution. Some give additional rights to American citizens and some modify how the government works. Included among them are amendments that abolish slavery, guarantee voting rights, authorize an income tax, and set a two-term limit on the presidency.
g READING PROGRESS CHECK
Explaining Describe some of the principles outlined in the Constitution that help ensure individual rights and a balanced representative government.
PHOTO:
Mark Wilson/Getty Images News/Getty Images The Legislative Branch
guiding question Howis the legislative branch organized, and what are its functions?
The legislative branch includes the two houses of Congress: the Senate and the House of Representatives. Congress has two primary roles: to make the nations laws and to decide how to spend federal funds.
The government cannot spend any money unless Congress appropriates, or sets aside, funds. All tax and spending bills must originate in the House of Representatives and be approved in both the House and the Senate before moving to the president to be signed.
Congress also monitors the executive branch and investigates possible abuses of power. The House of Representatives can impeach, or bring formal charges against, any federal official it suspects of wrongdoing or misconduct. If an official is impeached, the Senate acts as a court and tries the accused official. Officials who are found guilty may be removed from office.
The Senate has certain additional powers. Two-thirds of the Senate must ratify treaties made by the president. The Senate must also confirm presidential appointments of federal officials such as department heads, ambassadors, and federal judges.
All members of Congress have the responsibility to represent their constituents, the people of their home states and districts. As a constituent, you can expect your senators and representative to promote national and state interests. Congress members introduce thousands of bills—proposed laws—every year. Because individual members of Congress cannot possibly study all these bills carefully, both houses form committees of selected members to evaluate proposed legislation.
Standing committees are permanent committees in both the House and the Senate that specialize in a particular topic, such as agriculture, commerce, or veterans’ affairs. These committees are usually divided into subcommittees that focus on a particular aspect of an issue. The House and the Senate also form temporary select committees to deal with issues requiring special attention. These committees meet only until they complete their task.
Occasionally the House and the Senate form joint committees with members from both houses. These
impeach to bring formal charges against a federal official
HOW A BILL BECOMES LAW
D A
legislator introduces a bill in the House or Senate, where it is referred to a committee for review. AAA
Q
If the House and Senate pass different versions of the bill, the houses must meet in a conference committee to decide on a compromise version. After review, the committee decides whether to shelve it or to send it back to the House or Senate with or without revisions.
The compromise bill is then sent to both houses.
Q
If the president signs the bill, it becomes law. CHARTS/GRAPHS
Q
The House or Senate then debates the bill, making revisions if desired. If the bill is passed, it is sent to the other house. Qj If both houses pass the bill, it is sent to the president to sign.
ES
The president may veto the bill, but if two-thirds ofthe House and Senate vote to approve it, it becomes law without the president's approval. The legislative process is complex. It begins when a member of Congress introduces a bill. That bill then works its way to the president who either signs the bill into law or vetoes it.
► CRITICALTHINKING
1 Analyzing Information
What is the role of a conference committee?
2	Identifying Central Issues
How can a bill become law without the approval ofthe president?
committees meet to consider specific issues. One type of joint committee, a conference committee, has a special function. If the House and the Senate pass different versions of the same bill, a conference committee meets to work out a compromise bill acceptable to both houses.
Once a committee in either house of Congress approves a bill, it is sent to the full Senate or House for debate. After debate the bill may be passed, rejected, or returned to the committee for further changes. When both houses pass a bill, it goes to the president. If the president approves the bill and signs it, the bill becomes law. If the president vetoes the bill, it does not become law unless Congress takes it up again and votes to override the veto.
P READING PROGRESS CHECK
Describing Describe the organization and functions ofthe legislative branch.
The Executive Branch
guidingquestion How does the president carry out laws that Congress passes?
The executive branch of government includes the president, the vice president, and various executive offices, departments, and agencies. The executive branch executes, or carries out, the laws that Congress passes.
>2
The President's Roles
The president plays a number of different roles in government. These roles include serving as the nation’s chief executive, chief diplomat, commander in chief of the military, chief of state, and legislative leader.
Chief Executive As chief executive, the president is responsible for carrying out the nations laws.
Chief Diplomat As chief diplomat, the president directs foreign policy, appoints ambassadors, and negotiates treaties with other nations.
Commander in Chief As commander in chief of the armed forces, the president can give orders to the military and direct its operations. The president cannot declare war; only Congress holds this power. The president can send troops to other parts of the world for up to 60 days but must notify Congress when doing so. The troops may remain longer only if Congress gives its approval or declares war.
Chief of State As chief of state, the president is symbolically the
representative of all Americans. The president fulfills this role when receiving foreign ambassadors or heads of state, visiting foreign nations, or honoring Americans.
Legislative Leader The president serves as a legislative leader by proposing laws to Congress and working to see that they are passed. In the annual State of the Union address to the American people, the president presents his goals for legislation in the upcoming year.
The Executive at Work
Many executive offices, departments, and independent agencies help the president carry out and enforce the nation’s laws. The Executive Office of the President (EOP) is made up of individuals and agencies that directly assist the president. Presidents rely on the EOP for advice and for gathering information needed for decision making.
The executive branch has 15 executive departments, each responsible for a different area of government. For example, the Department of State carries out foreign policy, and the Department of the Treasury manages the nation’s finances. The department heads have the title of secretary, and are members of the president’s cabinet. The cabinet helps the president set policies and make decisions.
President Barack Obama signs a bill into law. As chief executive, the president is responsible for carrying out the laws of the nation.
CRITICAL THINKING
Making Generalizations Why is it important that the president carries oui the laws of the nation? cabinet a group of advisers to the president
PHOTO:
Alex Wong/Getty Images News/Getty Images The Qualities of an Effective Leader
The multiple roles imposed on the president makes his ability to lead the nation very challenging. Throughout American history various presidents have been both praised and criticized for their leadership. Being an effective leader in a federal constitutional republic requires a number of important qualities.
As chief of state and chief diplomat, the president represents the nation to the American people and to the world. To be effective, a president must demonstrate principles and conviction, yet be optimistic and friendly, open to others, and able to communicate clearly and effectively. Great leaders can inspire their people to greatness with their words, their confidence, and their determination.
As a legislative leader, the president must be able to compromise, to understand different points of view and to work with many different personalities in Congress while at the same time understanding clearly what principles and goals should be upheld. A president that bows to political pressures too often will be seen as weak or vacillating, but a president who
The Constitution Handbook :
refuses to negotiate and compromise with Congress will be seen as stubborn, aloof, or ineffective.
As commander-in-chief, the president has to be decisive and willing to make difficult decisions. At the same time, presidents must be willing to listen to advice and the expertise of those serving under them. The president is the final decision maker when the nation is at war, and his or her decisions can impact the lives of hundreds of millions of people. A president who refuses to act when necessary will be seen as timid and indecisive, which can embolden the nations enemies.
CHARTS/GRAPHS
The judicial branch consists of a system of federal courts that reviews and evaluates laws and interprets the Constitution.
1	Analyzing Information How
many routes to the U.S. Supreme Court are shown in the chart?
2	Drawing Conclusions Why might the Supreme Court review only decisions made by a small number of
But if the president moves too quickly, it will be seen as reckless or dangerous.
As the head of an enormous and complex bureaucracy, the president must resist the temptation to go into too much detail on every little issue. There is not enough time to do so. Instead, an effective chief executive must have the ability to choose good people that can be trusted to implement the president s goals within the executive departments. The president must support the team he or she has chosen and be loyal to them. An effective president will set high expectations, clear goals, and will lead by example.
At the same time, presidents have to hold their people and themselves accountable for any failures, and be willing to learn from mistakes.
As the chief executive responsible for carrying out the nation’s laws and upholding the Constitution, the president, above all, needs integrity. Presidents have to implement laws they disagree with; they cannot allow personal feelings to interfere with their decisions or distort their judgment. They cannot give in to corruption and use their office for personal gain. Nor should they make decisions purely on the basis of what will get them reelected. The president, as the leader of a democratic republic, should listen
34
to the people. But presidents must also reconcile competing demands and goals, and lead the nation in a way that upholds the Constitution and the nation’s founding ideals and principles.
READING PROGRESS CHECK
PHOTO:
Jim West/Alamy Sonia Sotomayor
Explaining What functions does the president fulfill as Legislative Leader?
The Judicial Branch
guiding question Howdoes the judicial branch function to review and evaluate laws and interpret the Constitution?
Article III of the Constitution calls for the creation of a Supreme Court and “such inferior [lower] courts as Congress may from time to time ordain and establish.” The federal courts of the judicial branch review and evaluate laws and interpret the Constitution in making their decisions.
District and Appellate Courts
United States district courts are the lowest level of the federal court system. These courts consider criminal and civil cases that come under federal authority, such as kidnapping, federal tax evasion, claims against the federal government, and cases involving constitutional rights, such as free speech. There are 94 district courts, with at least one in every state.
The appellate courts, or courts of appeal, consider district court decisions in which the losing side has asked for a review of the verdict. If an appeals court disagrees with the lower court’s decision, it can overturn the verdict or order a retrial. There are 14 appeals courts: one for each of 12 federal districts, one military appeals court, and an appellate court for the federal circuit.
The Supreme Court
The Supreme Court is the final authority in the federal court system. It consists of a chief justice and eight associate justices. Most of the Court’s cases come from appeals of lower court decisions. Only cases involving
foreign diplomats
or disputes between states can begin in the Supreme Court.
Supreme Court Independence The president appoints the Court’s justices for life, and the Senate confirms the appointments. The public has no input. The Framers hoped that by appointing judges, they would be free to evaluate the law with no concern for pleasing voters.
Judicial Review The role of the judicial branch is not described in detail in the Constitution, but the role of the courts has grown as powers implied in the Constitution have been put into practice. In 1803 Chief Justice John Marshall expanded the power of the Supreme Court by striking down an act of Congress in the case of Marbury v. Madison.
Although not mentioned in the Constitution, judicial review has become a major power of the judicial branch. Judicial review gives the Supreme Court the ultimate authority to interpret the meaning of the Constitution.
B READING PROGRESS CHECK
Analyzing How does the judicial branch evaluate laws and interpret the Constitution?
Connections to
Today
The daughter of parents who moved from Puerto Rico to New York, Sonia Sotomayor became the first Latino justice of the U.S. Supreme Court. Nominated by President Barack Obama to replace departing Justice David Souter, Sotomayor was confirmed by the Senate in August 2009. She became just the third woman to serve on the Supreme Court.
judicial review the process by which the Supreme Court has the final authority to interpret the Constitution
AMENDING THE CONSTITUTION
PROPOSAL RATIFICATION
Amendment proposed by a vote of two-thirds of	'OS both houses of Congress	After approval by SSBBbv^- three-fourths of state legislatures
	
Amendment proposed by a national convention	, requested by two-thirds of states	After approval by .	three-fourths of ' state ratifying conventions
CHARTS/GRAPHS	
Article V of the Constitution enables Congress and the states to amend, or change, the Constitution.	1 Interpreting What role do the states play in the amendment process?
2 Analyzing Information How many approvals by state legislatures are required for an amendment to the Constitution?
SKILLS PRACTICE_____________
Sefore you read the text election about the rights and ssponsibilities of citizens, make graphic organizer with three olumns. In the first column, ?cord what you know about aur rights and responsibilities $ a citizen. In the second, rite what you would like to arn. Use the third column • record what you learn as >u read.
le process the following of cedures established by law
Rights and Responsibilities
guiding question What are the protections and freedoms the Constitution and the Bill of Rights provide Americans?
All citizens of the United States have certain basic rights, but they also have specific responsibilities. Living in a system of self-government means ultimately that every citizen is partly responsible for how society is governed and for the actions the government takes on his or her behalf.
The Rights of Americans
The rights of Americans fall into three broad categories: to be protected from unfair actions of the government, to receive equal treatment under the law, and to retain certain basic freedoms.
Protection From Unfair Actions Parts of the Constitution and the Bill of Rights protect all Americans from unfair treatment by the government or the law. Among these rights are the right to a lawyer when accused of a crime and the right to a trial by jury when charged with a crime. In addition, the Fourth Amendment protects us from unreasonable searches and seizures. This provision requires police to have a court order before searching a person’s home for criminal evidence. To obtain this, the police must have a very strong reason to suspect someone of a crime.
Equal Treatment All Americans, regardless of race, religion, or political beliefs, have the right to be treated the same under the law. The Fifth Amendment states that no person shall “be deprived of life, liberty, or property, without due process of law.” Due process means that the government must follow procedures established by law and guaranteed by the Constitution, treating all people equally. The Fourteenth Amendment requires every state to grant its citizens “equal protection of the laws.”
Basic Freedoms The First Amendment describes our basic freedoms—freedom of speech, freedom of religion, freedom of the press, freedom of assembly, and the right to petition. In a democracy, power rests in the hands of the people. Therefore, citizens in a democratic society must be able to exchange ideas freely. The First Amendment allows citizens to criticize the government, in speech or in the press, without fear of punishment.
In addition, the Ninth Amendment states that the rights of Americans are not limited to those in the Constitution. Over the years, this has allowed Americans to assert other basic rights that have been upheld in court or assured by amending the Constitution.
Limits on Rights The rights of Americans are not absolute.
They are limited based on the principle of respecting everyone's rights equally. For example, many cities and towns require groups to obtain a permit to march on city streets. Such laws do limit free speech, but they also protect the community by ensuring that the march will not endanger other people.
In this and other cases, the government balances an individuals rights, the rights of others, and the community's health and safety. Most Americans are willing to accept some limitations on their rights to gain these protections as long as the restrictions are reasonable and apply equally to all. A law banning all marches would violate the First Amendment rights of free speech and assembly and be unacceptable. Similarly, a law preventing only certain groups from marching would be unfair because it would not apply equally to everyone.
Registration drives encourage others to exercise their responsibility to vot • CRITICALTHINKING Making Inferences How might an increase in young voters make an impa ■ on an election?
I
1
2 1
Citizens' Responsibilities
Citizens in a democratic society have both duties and responsibilities.
Duties are actions required by law. Responsibilities are voluntary actions. Fulfilling duties and responsibilities ensures good government and protects rights.
Duties One basic duty of all Americans is to obey the law. Laws serve three important functions. They help maintain order; they protect the health, safety, and property of all citizens; and they make it possible for people to live together peacefully. If you believe a law is wrong, you can work through your representatives to change it.
Americans also have a duty to pay taxes. The government, uses tax money to defend the nation, to build roads and bridges, and to assist people in need. Americans often benefit from services provided by the government. Another duty of citizens is to defend the nation. All males aged 18 and older must register with the government in case the nation needs to call on them for military service. Military service is not automatic, but a war could make it necessary.
The Constitution guarantees all Americans the right to a trial by a jury of their equals. For this reason, you may be called to jury duty when you reach the age of 18. Having a large group of jurors on hand is necessary to guarantee the right to a fair and speedy trial. You also have a duty to serve as a trial witness if called to do so.
Most states require you to attend school until a certain age. School is where you gain the knowledge and skills needed to be a good citizen. In
The Constitution H(^nc^i^(^iok ■
responsive
take action
school you learn to think more clearly, to express your opinions more accurately, and to analyze the ideas of others. These skills will help you make informed choices when you vote.
Responsibilities The responsibilities of citizens are not as clear-cut as their duties, but they are as important because they help maintain the quality of government and society. One important responsibility is to be well informed. Knowing what your government is doing and expressing your
open and quick to thoughts about its actions helps to keep it responsive to the wishes of the people. You also need to be informed about your rights and to assert them when necessary. Knowing your rights helps preserve them. Other responsibilities include accepting responsibility for your actions and supporting your family.
To enjoy your rights to the fullest, you must be prepared to respect the rights of others. Respecting the rights of others also means respecting the rights of people with whom you disagree. Respecting and accepting others regardless of race, religion, beliefs, or other differences is essential in a democracy.
Vote, Vote, Vote! Perhaps the most important civic responsibility of American citizens is to vote when they reach the age of 18. Voting allows you to participate in the democratic process and to guide its direction.
When you vote for people to represent you in government, you will be exercising your right of self-government. If you disapprove of the job your representatives are doing, it will be your responsibility to help elect other people in the next election.
In addition to voting, there are other ways you can participate in the democratic process. You can let your representatives know what you think about issues through email, letters, telephone calls, petitions, and by taking part in public meetings or political rallies. You can join a political party and help campaign for a candidate that you support. Political parties are always looking for volunteers to help. In addition, membership in a party will let you play a role in choosing who runs as candidates for election. And the time may come when you too may want to participate by running for office.
Participating in the democratic process reflects our patriotism. We live in a constitutional democratic republic. The national ethos, the beliefs and ideas Americans all share as a community, includes the belief that the best and most effective government is government of, for, and by the people. The only way to live up to those beliefs is to embrace them by participating in the democratic process.
The Constitution’s preamble states that the goal of the people of the United States is “to form a more perfect union.” Because the United States is a government of the people and a democratic republic, it becomes “more perfect” and moves closer to its goals when all of its people, in all of their variation and diversity, participate. If someone does not participate, the union does not have their input and is less likely to reflect a balance of all of the needs, concerns, and goals of the people. This make it harder to achieve justice, peace, security, liberty or to promote the general welfare.
If we truly love the country then we want it to succeed, and if there are aspects to it that you do not like, the best way to change them is by getting involved in politics and working to bring about the changes you think are needed. Patriotism is not standing by while others act; patriots act so as to help make their country better.
The United States is made up of people who have come from all over the world, sometimes to escape violence or poverty or oppression, and sometimes seeking employment, education, and more opportunity.
38
Whatever their reasons, each immigrant who becomes a citizen promises in their oath of allegiance that “I support and defend the Constitution and laws of the United States of America against all enemies, foreign and domestic; that I will bear true faith and allegiance to the same . . .” As citizens of a self-governing democratic republic, all American citizens share a common bond in that they stand for certain self evident truths: “that all men are created equal, that they are endowed by their Creator with certain unalienable rights, that among these are life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness.”
B READING PROGRESS CHECK
Describing What are the rights and responsibilities of an American citizen?
Understanding Symbols and Mottos
guiding question Howdo thesymbols and mottos of the United States help to define American society?
All nations make use of symbols. A symbol is something that stands for something else. It is a short-hand way of remembering all the qualities and ideas embodied in something. Nations use symbols to remind people what the nation represents. They are also a statement of sovereignty. When a nation’s flag is flown over something, it is saying that it belongs to the nation. Similarly, when a national seal is put on a document, it is saying that the document is an official statement of the nation. Symbols remind people of their nation’s history, values, and goals. They evoke patriotism and pride. Perhaps most important, they remind people that, despite their differences, they are all united in one national community.
The American Flag
The best known and most visible symbol of the United States is the flag, sometimes nicknamed the Stars and Stripes, the Star-Spangled Banner, the Red, White and Blue, or Old Glory. The Continental Congress approved the design of the flag in June 1777. The 13 alternating stripes on the flag represent the original 13 colonies that founded the United States. Each star in the blue field represents one state.
The stars were a metaphor for the new nation. Stars in the night sky are grouped into constellations, or patterns. The stars on the flag represent that the United States is a new constellation, a new arrangement in the world.
The colors used on the flag have been said to have at least two meanings. They are the same colors as used on the British flag, and so remind the United States of its origins as British colonies. They are also the same colors used on the Great Seal of the United States, which was designed before the flag and have specific meanings. Red for strength and courage, white for purity and innocence, and blue for perseverance, vigilance, and justice.
E
Pluribus Unum On July 4, 1776, nearly a year before the Continental Congress decided on the design for a flag, it began work on the Great Seal of the United States. A seal is a type of signature. Most nations have an official symbol that they use to “seal,” or sign official documents, and treaties with other nations. Seals date to the days when letters and documents would be signed and sealed by melting wax onto them and then pressing a symbol into the wax “sealing” the envelope closed. They are also commonly put on coins and currency to show that the money has been officially issued by a particular country.
The Great Seal has two sides. On the one side is an eagle holding a banner with the Latin motto “E Pluribus Unum,” which means “Out of
The Constitution Handbook 3
Many, One.” This vmotto refers to the creation of a nation from 13 separate colonies. Today, it also is used to describe the United States as a country of many peoples from many different cultures, races, and backgrounds united into one nation. The motto was never made the official motto of the United States, but it has been used on American coins since the late 1700s.
On the same side of the seal, the eagle also clutches an olive branch with 13 leaves in one claw and 13 arrows in the other claw, symbolizing the nations power in war and peace. The Eagle also carries a shield with red and white stripes and a blue field. Thirteen stars, symbolizing the original 13 colonies fly above the eagle.
On the opposite side of the seal are symbols that often puzzle people. There is an unfinished pyramid with 13 levels and the date 1776 in Roman numerals at it base. It represents the 13 colonies and the idea that the United States is a work in progress and not yet finished. A pyramid was chosen because it represents strength and duration, like the pyramids of Egypt that have lasted for thousands of years. Hovering over the pyramid is an eye in a triangle. The triangle looks like the capstone, or top of the pyramid and the eye is intended to represent God watching over the nation. Above the eye are the Latin words “Annuit Coeptis”, which means “He approves the undertaking,” indicating God approves of the new nation. Below the pyramid are the Latin words “Novus Ordo Seclorum” meaning “new order of the ages” referring to the idea that the United States as a democratic republic, was a new way of organizing society in the world.
Star Spangled Banner
The Star Spangled Banner is the national anthem of the United States. Its lyrics were first written down as a poem in 1814 by Francis Scott Key after he watched the British attack Fort McHenry during the War of 1812. The poem describes Key watching anxiously in the early morning dawn to see if
The American flag is one of the most easily recognizable symbols of the United States.
CRITKALTHINKING
Drawing Conclusions How would the flag need to change if more states were added to the Union? 40
the flag is again raised over the “the land of the free and home of the brave” The song became popular in the 1800s, and was played regularly on July 4th. In 1889, Secretary of the Navy Benjamin Tracy ordered that it be played whenever the Navy raised the American flag, but the song was not made the official national anthem of the United States until 1931.
In God WeTrust
The official motto of the United States is “In God We Trust.” The origins of the phrase probably dates to the national anthem. In the fourth verse of the Star Spangled Banner is the phrase: “And this be our motto: “In God is our Trust.” But the motto was not approved by Congress at the time and for much of its history, the United States did not have an official motto.
The phrase was used as a battle cry by some units in the Union army, and in the late 1800s, after the Civil War, Congress approved the phrase “In God We Trust” for use on American coins. Since 1938, all United States coins have had this phrase inscribed on them. In 1956,
with the United States in the midst of the Cold War with the Soviet Union, Congress declared the national motto to be “In God We Trust.”
The motto was meant to assert the general American belief in God, and to contrast it with the communist belief in atheism. In 1957, the phrase began to be used on American paper currency as well.
In recent years, the motto has become controversial, with some people arguing that it violates the First Amendments ban on government establishing a religion. Lower courts, as well as the Supreme Court, have repeatedly ruled that the motto, and its use on coins and currency, is not a violation of the First Amendment because it serves a ceremonial, not a religious purpose, and does not constitute the creation of a state church.
P READING PROGRESS CHECK
Explaining Why was the Great Seal of the United States the first symbol created by Congress?
The motto of the United States can be found on its currency.
Reviewing Vocabulary
1. Analyzing Explain the significance cf popular sovereignty to the Constitution. a, 22a
5.	Listing How does the president carry out laws that Congress passes?
1A
6.	Defining Hew dees the judicial branch function tc review and evaluate laws and interpret the Constitution? aa
Using Your Notes
2.	Identifying Use the notes you completed during the lesson to identify the major principles of the Constitution. 1A
Answering the Guiding Quusttc^ns
3.	Summarizing How doss the Constitution lay the framework for individual rights and a balanced representative government? 1A
4.	Explaining How is the legislative branch organized, and what are its functions? 1A
7.	Describing What are the protections and freedoms the Constitution and the Bill of Rights provide Americans? A
Writing Activity
ARGUMENT
Write a short paragraph taking a pro or aon position on the following question: Should communities permit rallies by unpopular groups, such as the Ku Klux Kan, even though such rallies may upset some members of the community or could possibly incite violence? The Constitution Handbook 41
The Constitution
ofthe UNITED STATES
The Constitution of the United States is a truly remarkable document. It was one of the first written constitutions in modern history. The entire text of the Constitution and its amendments follow. For easier study, those passages that have been set aside or changed by the adoption of amendments are printed in blue. Also included are explanatory notes that will help clarify the meaning of important ideas presented in the Constitution.
Preamble
We the People of the United States, in Order to form a more perfect Union, establish Justice, insure domestic Tranquility, provide for the common defence, promote the gc^m^iral Welfare, and secure the Blessings of Liberty to ourselves and our Posterity, do ordain and establish this Constitution for the United States of America.
The Preamble introduces the Constitution and sets forth the general purposes for which the government was established. The Preamble also declares that the power ofthe government come; from the people.
The printed text ofthe document shows the spelling and punctuation of the parchment original.
Article I
Section 1
All legislative Powers herein granted shall be vested in a Congress of the United States, which shall consist of a Senate and House of Representatives.
Section 2
[1.] The House of Representatives shall be composed of
Members chosen every second Year by the People of the several States, and the Electors in each State shall have the Qualifications requisite for Electors of the most numerous Branch of the State Legislature.
[2.] No person shall be a Representative who shall not have attained the Age of twenty five Years, and been seven Years a Citizen of the United States, and who shall not, when elected, be an Inhabitant of that State in which he shall be chosen.
[3.] Representatives and direct Taxes shall be apportioned among the several States which may be included within this Union, according to their respective Numbers, which shall be determined by adding to the whole Number of free Persons, including those bound to Service for a Term of Years, and excluding Indians not taxed, three fifths of all other Persons. The actual Enumeration shall be made within three Years after the first Meeting of the Congress of the United States, and within every subsequent Term of ten Years, in such Manner as they shall by Law direct. The Number of Representatives shall not exceed one for every thirty Thousand, but each State shall have at Least one Representative; and until such enumeration shall be made, the State of New Hampshire shall be entitled to chuse three; Massachusetts eight, Rhode-Island and Providence Plantations one, Connecticut five, New-York six, New Jersey four, Pennsylvania eight, Delaware one, Maryland six, Virginia ten, North Carolina five, South Carolina five, and Georgia three.
[4.] When vacancies happen in the Representation from any State, the Executive Authority thereof shall issue Writs of Election to fill such Vacancies.
[5.] The House of Representatives shall chuse their Speaker and other Officers; and shall have the sole Power of Impeachment.
Article I.
The Legislative Branch
The Constitution contains seven division called articles. Each article covers a general topic. For example, Articles I, II, and III create the three branches ofthe national government—the legislative, executive, and judicial branches. Most of the articles are divided into sections.
Lawmaking The power to make \ laws is given to a Congress made up o | two chambers to represent different j interests: the Senate to represent j the states and the House to be more i responsive to the people's will.
Division of Representatives Among the States The number o representatives from each state is ba: on the size ofthe state's population. Each state is entitled to at least one representative. The Constitution state that each state may specify who can vote, but the Fifteenth, Nineteenth, Twenty-fourth, and Twenty-sixth Amendments have established guidelines that all states must follow regarding the right to vote. What a the qualifications for members ol the House of Representatives?
i
Vocabulary__________________________
preamble: introduction
constitution: principles and laws of a nation
enumeration: census or population count impeachment: bringing charges
against an official
The Constitution 4

a®
islators
Voting Procedure Originally, senators were chosen by the legislators of their own states. The Seventeenth Amendment changed this, so that senators are now elected by their state's people. There are 100 senators, 2 from each state.
What Might Have Been
Electing Senators South Carolina delegate Charles Pinckney suggested during the Convention that the members of the Senate come from four equally proportioned districts within the United States and that the legislature elect the executive every seven years.

Section 3 .The Sena
Trial of Impeachments One of
Congress's powers is the power to impeach—to accuse government officials of wrongdoing, put them on trial, and, if necessary, remove them from office. The House decides if the offense is impeachable. The Senate acts as a jury, and when the president is impeached, the Chief Justice of the United States serves as the judge.
A two-thirds vote of the members present is needed to convict impeached officials. What punishment can the Senate give if an impeached official is convicted?
Section 3
[1.] The Senate of the United States shall be composed of two Senators from each State, chosen by the Legislature thereof, for six Years; and each Senator shall have one Vote.
[2.] Immediately after they shall be assembled in
Consequence of the first Election, they shall be divided as equally as may be into three Classes. The Seats of the Senators of the first Class shall be vacated at the Expiration of the second Year, of the second Class at the Expiration of the fourth Year, and of the third Class at the Expiration of the sixth Year, so that one third may be chosen every second Year; and if Vacancies happen by Resignation, or otherwise, during the Recess of the Legislature of any State, the Executive thereof may make temporary Appointments until the next Meeting of the Legislature, which shall then fill such Vacancies.
[3.] No Person shall be a Senator who shall not have attained to the Age of thirty Years, and been nine Years a Citizen of the United States, and who shall not, when elected, be an Inhabitant of that State for which he shall be chosen.
[4.] The Vice President of the United States shall be President of the Senate, but shall have no Vote, unless they be equally divided.
[5.] The Senate shall chuse their other Officers, and also a President pro tempore, in the Absence of the Vice President, or when he shall exercise the Office of the President of the United States.
[6.] The Senate shall have the sole Power to try all
Impeachments. When sitting for that Purpose, they shall be on Oath or Affirmation. When the President of the United States is tried, the Chief Justice shall preside: And no Person shall be convicted without the Concurrence of two thirds of the Members present.
[7.J Judgment in Cases of Impeachment shall not extend further than to removal from Office, and disqualification to hold and enjoy any Office of honor, Trust or Profit under the United States: but the Party convicted shall nevertheless be liable and subject to Indictment, Trial, Judgment and Punishment, according to Law.
Vocabulary___________________
president pro tempore: presiding officer of the Senate who serves when the vice president is absent
Section 4
[l.J The Times, Places and Manner of holding Elections for Senators and Representatives, shall be prescribed in each State by the Legislature thereof; but the Congress may at any time by Law make or alter such Regulations, except as to the Places of chusing Senators.
[2.] The Congress shall assemble at least once in every Year, and such Meeting shall be on the first Monday in December, unless they shall by Law appoint a different Day.
44 The Constitution
Section 5
[1.] Each House shall be the Judge of the Elections, Returns and Qualifications of its own Members, and a Majority of each shall constitute a Quorum to do Business; but a smaller Number may adjourn from day to day, and may be authorized to compel the Attendance of absent Members, in such Manner, and under such Penalties as each House may provide.
[2.] Each House may determine the Rules of its Proceedings, punish its Members for disorderly Behaviour, and, with the Concurrence of two thirds, expel a Member.
[3.] Each House shall keep a Journal of its Proceedings, and from time to time publish the same, excepting such Parts as may in their Judgment require Secrecy; and the Yeas and Nays of the Members of either House on any question shall, at the Desire of one fifth of those Present, be entered on the Journal.
[4.] Neither House, during the Session of Congress, shall, without the Consent of the other, adjourn for more than three days, nor to any other Place than that in which the two Houses shall be sitting.
Section 6
[1.1 The Senators and Representatives shall receive a
Compensation for their Services, to be ascertained by Law, and paid out of the Treasury of the United States. They shall in all Cases, except Treason, Felony and Breach of the Peace, be privileged from Arrest during their Attendance at the Session of their respective Houses, and in going to and returning from the same; and for any Speech or Debate in either House, they shall not be questioned in any other Place.
[2.J No Senator or Representative shall, during the Time for which he was elected, be appointed to any civil Office under the Authority of the United States, which shall have been created, or the Emoluments whereof shall have been encreased during such time; and no Person holding any Office under the United States, shall be a Member of either House during his Continuance in Office.
Section 7
[1.] All Bills for raising Revenue shall originate in the House of Representatives; but the Senate may propose or concur with Amendments as on other Bills.
[2.] Every Bill which shall have passed the House of Representatives and the Senate, shall, before it become a Law, be presented to the President of the United States; If he approve he shall sign it, but if not he shall return it, with his Objections to that House in which it shall have originated, who shall enter the Objections at large on their Journal, and proceed to reconsider it. If after such Reconsideration two thirds of that House shall agree to pass the Bill, it shall be sent,
Vocabulary________________________
quorum: minimum number of members that must be present to conduct sessions
adjourn: to suspend a session concurrence: agreement emoluments: salaries revenue: income raised by government bill: draft of a proposed law
Pay and Privileges To strengthen the federal government, the Founders set congressional salaries to be paid by the United States Treasury rather than by members' respective states. Originally, members were paid $6 per day. In 2011, all members of Congress received a base salary of $174,000.
Section 7. Laws

Revenue Bill All tax laws must originate in the House of Representatives. This ensures that the branch of Congress that is elected by the people every two years has the major role in determining taxes.
The Constitution 45
n 7. Passing Laws
How Bills Become Laws A bill may | become a law only by passing both houses of Congress and being signed by the president. The president can check Congress by rejecting—vetoing—its legislation. How can Congress override the president's veto?
together with the Objections, to the other House, by which it shall likewise be reconsidered, and if approved by two thirds of that House, it shall become a Law. But in all such Cases the Votes of both Houses shall be determined by yeas and Nays, and the Names of the Persons voting for and against the Bill shall be entered on the Journal of each House respectively. If any Bill shall not be returned by the President within ten Days (Sundays excepted) after it shall have been presented to him, the Same shall be a Law, in like Manner as if he had signed it, unless the Congress by their Adjournment prevent its Return, in which Case it shall not be a Law.
[3.] Every Order, Resolution, or Vote to which the Concurrence of the Senate and House of Representatives may be necessary (except on a question of Adjournment) shall be presented to the President of the United States; and before the Same shall take Effect, shall be approved by him, or being disapproved by him, shall be repassed by two thirds of the Senate and House of Representatives, according to the Rules and Limitations prescribed in the Case of a Bill.
Section 8
Powers of Congress Expressed powers are those powers directly stated in the Constitution. Most of the expressed powers of Congress are listed in Article I, Section 8. These powers are also called enumerated powers because they are numbered 1-18. Which clause gives Congress the power to declare war?
Vocabulary___________________________
resolution: legislature's formal expression of opinion
naturalization: procedure by which a citizen of a foreign nation becomes a citizen ofthe United States
[1.] The Congress shall have the Power to lay and collect Taxes, Duties, Imposts and Excises, to pay the Debts and provide for the common Defence and general Welfare of the United States; but all Duties, Imposts and Excises shall be uniform throughout the United States;
[2.] To borrow Money on the credit of the United States;
[3.] To regulate Commerce with foreign Nations, and among the
several States, and with the Indian Tribes;
[4.] To establish an uniform Rule of Naturalization, and uniform Laws on the subject of Bankruptcies throughout the United States;
[5.] To coin Money, regulate the Value thereof, and of foreign Coin, and fix the Standard of Weights and Measures;
[6.] To provide for the Punishment of counterfeiting the Securities and current Coin of the United States;
[7.] To establish Post Offices and post Roads;
[8.] To promote the Progress of Science and useful Arts, by securing for limited Times to Authors and Inventors the exclusive Right to their respective Writings and Discoveries;
[9.] To constitute Tribunals inferior to the supreme Court;
[10.] To define and punish Piracies and Felonies committed on
the high Seas, and Offences against the Law of Nations;
[11.] To declare War, grant Letters of Marque and Reprisal, and make Rules concerning Captures on Land and Water;
[12.] To raise and support Armies, but no Appropriation of Money to that Use shall be for a longer Term than two Years;
[13.] To provide and maintain a Navy;
[14.] To make Rules for the Government and Regulation of the land and naval Forces;
46 The Constitution

[15.] To provide for calling forth the Militia to execute the Laws of the Union, suppress Insurrections and repel Invasions;
[16.] To provide for organizing, arming, and disciplining, the Militia, and for governing such Part of them as may be employed in the Service of the United States, reserving to the States respectively, the Appointment of the Officers, and the Authority of training the Militia according to the discipline prescribed by Congress;
[17.] To exercise exclusive Legislation in all Cases whatsoever, over such District (not exceeding ten Miles square) as may, by Cession of particular States, and the Acceptance of Congress, become the Seat of Government of the United States, and to exercise like Authority over all Places purchased by the Consent of the Legislature of the State in which the Same shall be, for the Erection of Forts, Magazines, Arsenals, dock-Yards, and other needful Buildings; And
[18.] To make all Laws which shall be necessary and proper for carrying into Execution the foregoing Powers, and all other Powers vested by this Constitution in the Government of the United States, or in any Department or Officer thereof.
Section 9
[1.] The Migration or Importation of such Persons as any of the States now existing shall think proper to admit, shall not be prohibited by the Congress prior to the Year one thousand eight hundred and eight, but a Tax or duty may be imposed on such Importation, not exceeding ten dollars for each Person.
[2.] The Privilege of the Writ of Habeas Corpus shall not be suspended, unless when in Cases of Rebellion or Invasion the public Safety may require it.
[3.] No Bill of Attainder or ex post facto Law shall be passed.
[4.] No Capitation, or other direct, Tax shall be laid, unless
in Proportion to the Census or Enumeration herein before directed to be taken.
[5.] No Tax or Duty shall be laid on Articles exported from any State.
[6.] No Preference shall be given by any Regulation of Commerce or Revenue to the Ports of one Sita^<e over those of another: nor shall Vessels bound to, or from, one State, be obliged to enter, clear, or pay Duties in another.
[7.] No Money shall be drawn from the Treasury, but in Consequence of Appropriations made by Law; and a regular Statement and Account of the Receipts and Expenditures of all public Money shall be published from time to time.
[8.] No Title of Nobility shall be granted by the United States: And no Person holding any Office of Profit or Trust under them, shall, without the Consent of the Congress, accept of any present, Emolument, Office, or Title, of any kind whatever, from any King, Prince, or foreign State.

Section 8. Powe
ed to Congress

Elastic Clause The final enumerated power is often called the "elastic clause This clause gives Congress the right to make all laws "necessary and proper" to carry out the powers expressed in the other clauses of Article I. It is called the elastic clause because it lets Congress "stretch" its powers to meet situations the Founders could never have anticipated.
Almost from the beginning, this phrase was a subject of dispute. The issue was whether a strict or a broad interpretation of the Constitution should be applied. The dispute was first addressed in 1819, in the case of McCulloch v. Maryland, when the Supreme Court ruled in favor of a broac interpretation. The Court stated that the elastic clause allowed Congress to use its powers in any way that was not specifically prohibited by the Constitution. What does the phrase "necessary and proper" in the elastic clause mean?

Original Rights A writ of habeas corpus issued by a judge requires a law official to bring a prisoner to
j court and show cause for holding the i prisoner. A bill of attainder is a bill | that punishes a person without a jury
trial. An "ex post facto" law is one that makes an act a crime after the act has
I been committed. What does the j Constitution say about bills j of attainder?
1 l
The Constitution 4
Section 10. Powers Denied to the States
Limitations on Powers Section 10 lists limits on the states.These restrictions were designed, in part, to prevent an overlapping in functions and authority with the federal government.
What Might Have Been
"'W
Section 1.Presi< Vice President
Article II.
The Executive Branch
Article II creates an executive branch to carry out laws passed by Congress. Article II lists the powers and duties of the president, describes qualifications for office and procedures for electing the president, and provides for a vice president.
Term of Office Alexander Hamilton also provided his own governmental outline at the Constitutional Convention. Some of its most distinctive elements were that both the executive and the members of the Senate were "elected to serve during good behaviour," meaning there was no specified limit on their time in office.
Former Method of Election In the
election of 1800, the top two candidates received the same number of electoral votes, making it necessary for the House of Representatives to decide the election. To eliminate this problem, the Twelfth Amendment, added in 1804, changed the method of electing the president stated in Article II, Section 3. The Twelfth Amendment requires that the electors cast separate ballots for president and vice president.
Section 10
[1.] No State shall enter into any Treaty, Alliance, or
Confederation; grant Letters of Marque and Reprisal; coin Money; emit Bills of Credit; make any Thing but gold and silver Coin a Tender in Payment of Debts; pass any Bill of Attainder, ex post facto Law, or Law impairing the Obligation of Contracts, or grant any Title of Nobility.
[2.] No State shall, without the Consent of the Congress, lay any Imposts or Duties on Imports or Exports, except what may be absolutely necessary for executing its inspection Laws: and the net Produce of all Duties and Imposts, laid by any State on Imports and Exports, shall be for the Use of the Treasury of the United States; and all such Laws shall be subject to the Revision and Controul of the Congress.
[3.] No State shall, without the Consent of Congress, lay any Duty of Tonnage, keep Troops, or Ships of War in time of Peace, enter into any Agreement or Compact with another State, or with a foreign Power, or engage in War, unless actually invaded, or in such imminent Danger as will not admit of delay.
Article II
Section 1
[1.] The executive Power shall be vested in a President of the United States of America. He shall hold his Office during the Term of four Years, and, together with the Vice President, chosen for the same Term, be elected, as follows.
[2.] Each State shall appoint, in such Manner as the Legislature thereof may direct, a Number of Electors, equal to the whole Number of Senators and Representatives to which the State may be entitled in the Congress: but no Senator or Representative, or Person holding an Office of Trust or Profit under the United States, shall be appointed an Elector.
[3.] The Electors shall meet in their respective States, and vote by Ballot for two Persons, of whom one at least shall not be an Inhabitant of the same State with themselves. And they shall make a List of all the Persons voted for, and of the Number of Votes for each; which List they shall sign and certify, and transmit sealed to the Seat of the Government of the United States, directed to the President of the Senate. The President of the Senate shall, in the Presence of the Senate and House of Representatives, open all the Certificates, and the Votes shall then be counted. The Person having the greatest Number of Votes shall be the President, if such Number be a Majority of the whole Number of Electors appointed; and if there be more than one who have such Majority, and have an equal Number of Votes, then the House of Representatives shall immediately chuse by Ballot one of them for President; and if no person have a Majority, then from the five highest on the List the said House
18 The Constitution
What Might Have Been
shall in like Manner chuse the President. But in chusing the President, the Votes shall be taken by States, the Representation from each State having one Vote; A quorum for this Purpose shall consist of a Member or Members from two thirds of the States, and a Majority of all the States shall be necessary to a Choice. In every Case, after the Choice of the President, the Person having the greatest Number of Votes of the Electors shall be the Vice President. But if there should remain two or more who have equal Votes, the Senate shall chuse from them by Ballot the Vice President.
[4.] The Congress may determine the Time of chusing the Electors, and the Day on which they shall give their Votes; which Day shall be the same throughout the United States.
[5.] No Person except a natural born Citizen, or a Citizen of the United States, at the time of the Adoption of this Constitution, shall be eligible to the Office of President; neither shall any Person be eligible to that Office who shall not have attained to the Age of thirty five Years, and been fourteen Years a Resident within the United States.
[6.] In Case of the Removal of the President from Office, or of his Death, Resignation, or Inability to discharge the Powers and Duties of the said Office, the Same shall devolve on the Vice President, and the Congress may by Law provide for the Case of Removal, Death, Resignation or Inability, both of the President and Vice President, declaring what Officer shall then act as President, and such Officer shall act accordingly, until the Disability be removed, or a President shall be elected.
[7.] The President shall, at stated Times, receive for his Services, a Compensation, which shall neither be encreased nor diminished during the Period for which he shall have been elected, and he shall not receive within that Period any other Emolument from the United States, or any of them.
[8.] Before he enter on the Execution of his Office, he shall take the following Oath or Affirmation:—“I do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will faithfully execute the Office of President of the United States, and will to the best of my Ability, preserve, protect and defend the Constitution of the United States.”
Section 2
[1.] The President shall be Commander in Chief of the Army and Navy of the United States, and of the Militia of the several States, when called into the actual Service of the United States; he may require the Opinion, in writing, of the principal Officer in each of the executive Departments, upon any Subject relating to the Duties of their respective Offices, and he shall have Power to grant Reprieves and Pardons for Offences against the United States, except in Cases of Impeachment.
Qualifications At the Constitutional Convention, the New Jersey Amendments, sponsored by the smalh states, raised the possibility of making the executive a committee of people rather than a single individual. Also, executives were not allowed to run for a second term of office under this plar
Section 1. President an< Vice President
I
Qualifications The president must be a citizen ofthe United States by birth, a least 35 years of age, and a resident of the United States for 14 years.
Section 1. President ani Vice President

Vacancies If the president dies, resigi is removed from office by impeachmen
J or is unable to carry out the duties of - the office, the vice president becomes \ president, (see Amendment XXV)
Salary Originally, the president's salary was $25,000 per year. The president's current salary is $400,00 plus a $50,000 nontaxable expense account per year. The president also receives living accommodations in two residences—the White House and Camp David.
Section 2. Powers of th President
Cabinet Mention of "the principal officer in each ofthe executive departments" is the only suggestion ofthe president's cabinet to be found in the Constitution. The cabinet is an advisory body, and its power depend on the president. Section 2, Clause 1 also makes the president the head of the armed forces. This established the principle of civilian control ofthe milit;
The Constitution 4
■I
Section 2. Powers of t President
Treaties The president is responsible for the conduct of relations with foreign countries. What role does the Senate have in approving treaties?
Section 3. Powers President
Executive Orders An important presidential power is the ability to issue executive orders. An executive order is a rule or command the president issues that has the force of law. Only Congress can make laws under the Constitution, but executive orders are considered part of the president's duty to "take care that the laws be faithfully executed."This power is often used during emergencies. Over time, the scope of executive orders has expanded. Decisions by federal agencies and departments are also considered to be executive orders.
■wish,
Reasons for Removal From Office This section states the reasons for which the president and vice president may be impeached and removed from office. Only Andrew Johnson and Bill Clinton have been impeached by the House. Richard Nixon resigned before the House could vote on possible impeachment.
Article III.
The Judicial Branch
The term judicial refers to courts. The Constitution set up only the Supreme Court but provided for the establishment of other federal courts. The judiciary of the United States has two different systems of courts. One system consists of the federal courts, whose powers derive from the Constitution and federal laws. The other includes the courts of each of the 50 states, whose powers derive from state constitutions and laws.
[2 ] He shall have Power, by and with the Advice and Consent of the Senate, to make Treaties, provided two thirds of the Senators present concur; and he shall nominate, and by and with the Advice and Consent of the Senate, shall appoint Ambassadors, other public Ministers and Consuls, Judges of the supreme Court, and all other Officers of the United States, whose Appointments are not herein otherwise provided for, and which shall be established by Law: but the Congress may by Law vest the Appointment of such inferior Officers, as they think proper, in the President alone, in the Courts of Law, or in the Heads of Departments.
[3.] The President shall have Power to fill up all Vacancies that may happen during the Recess of the Senate, by granting Commissions which shall expire at the End of their next Session.
Section 3
He shall from time to time give to the Congress Information of the State of the Union, and recommend to their Consideration such Measures as he shall judge necessary and expedient; he may, on extraordinary Occasions, convene both Houses, or either of them, and in Case of Disagreement between them, with Respect to the Time of Adjournment, he may adjourn them to such Time as he shall think proper; he shall receive Ambassadors and other public Ministers; he shall take Care that the Laws be faithfully executed, and shall Commission all the Officers of the United States.
Section 4
The President, Vice President and all civil Officers of the United States, shall be removed from Office on Impeachment for, and Conviction of, Treason, Bribery, or other high Crimes and Misdemeanors.
Article III
Section 1
The judicial Power of the United States, shall be vested in one supreme Court, and in such inferior Courts as the Congress may from time to time ordain and establish. The Judges, both of the supreme and inferior Courts, shall hold their Offices during good Behaviour, and shall, at stated Times, receive for their Services, a Compensation, which shall not be diminished during their Continuance in Office.
Section 2
[1.] The judicial Power shall extend to all Cases, in Law and
Equity, arising under this Constitution, the Laws of the
United States, and Treaties made, or which shall be made, under their Authority;—to all Cases affecting Ambassadors, other public Ministers and Consuls;-to all Cases of admiralty and maritime Jurisdiction;—to Controversies to which the United States shall be a Party;—to Controversies
50 The Constitution
between two or more States;—between a State and Citizens of another State; between Citizens of different States,— between Citizens of the same State claiming Lands under Grants of different States, and between a State, or the Citizens thereof, and foreign States, Citizens or Subjects.
[2.] In all Cases affecting Ambassadors, other public Ministers and Consuls, and those in which a State shall be Party, the supreme Court shall have original Jurisdiction. In all the other Cases before mentioned, the supreme Court shall have appellate Jurisdiction, both as to Law and Fact, with such Exceptions, and under such Regulations as the Congress shall make.
[3.] The Trial of all Crimes, except in Cases of Impeachment, shall be by Jury; and such Trial shall be held in the State where the said Crimes shall have been committed; but when not committed within any State, the Trial shall be at such Place or Places as the Congress may by Law have directed.
Section 3
[1.] Treason against the United States, shall consist only in levying War against them, or in adhering to their Enemies, giving them Aid and Comfort. No Person shall be convicted of Treason unless on the Testimony of two Witnesses to the same overt Act, or on Confession in open Court.
[2.] The Congress shall have Power to declare the Punishment of Treason, but no Attainder of Treason shall work Corruption of Blood, or Forfeiture except during the Life of the Person attainted.
Article IV
Section 1
Full Faith and Credit shall be given in each State to the public
Acts, Records, and judicial Proceedings of every other State.
And the Congress may by general Laws prescribe the Manner in which such Acts, Records and Proceedings shall be proved, and the Effect thereof.
Section 2
[1.] The Citizens of each State shall be entitled to all Privileges and Immunities of Citizens in the several States.
A
Person charged in any State with Treason, Felony, or other Crime, who shall flee from Justice, and be found in another State, shall on Demand of the executive Authority of the State from which he fled, be delivered up, to be removed to the State having Jurisdiction of the Crime. [3.] No Person held to Service of Labour in one State, under the Laws thereof, escaping into another, shall, in Consequence of any Law or Regulation therein, be discharged from such Service or Labour, but shall be delivered up on Claim of the Party to whom such Service or Labour may be due.
Section 2. Jurisdiction
General Jurisdiction Federal courts deal mostly with "statute law," or laws passed by Congress, treaties, and cases involving the Constitution itself.

Section 2. Jurisdiction
The Supreme Court A court with "original jurisdiction" has the authority to be the first court to hear a case. The Supreme Court generally has "appellate jurisdiction" in that it mostly hears cases appealed from lower courts.
Section 2. Jurisdiction
Jury Trial Except in cases of impeachment, anyone accused of a crime has the right to a trial by jury. The trial must be held in the state where the crime was committed. Jury trial guarantees were strengthened in the Sixth, Seventh, Eighth, and Ninth Amendments.
I
| Vocabulary______________________________
( original jurisdiction: authority to be the 1 first court to hear a case
appellate jurisdiction: authority to hear i	cases appealed from lower courts
f treason: violation of the allegiance owed
by a person to his or her own country for example, by aiding an enemy
Article IV.
Relations Among the States
• Article IV explains the relationship of the states to one another and to the national government. This article requires each state to give citizens of other states the same rights as its own citizens, addresses the admission of new states, and
; guarantees that the national government '■ will protect the states.
Section 1. Official Ac
\	Recognition by States This
j	provision ensures that each state
! I recognizes the laws, court decisions, and
records of all other states. For example, F] a marriage license issued by one state | must be accepted by all states.
I
I
The Constitution 51
Section 3. New States and Territories
New States Congress has the power to admit new states. It also determines the basic guidelines for applying for statehood. Two states, Maine and West Virginia, were created within the boundaries of another state. In the case of West Virginia, President Lincoln recognized the West Virginia government as the legal government of Virginia during the Civil War. This allowed West Virginia to secede from Virginia without obtaining approval from the Virginia legislature.
Article V.
The Amendment Process
Article V explains how the Constitution can be amended, or changed. All of the 27 amendments were proposed by a two-thirds vote of both houses of Congress. Only the Twenty-first Amendment was ratified by constitutional conventions of the states. All other amendments have been ratified by state legislatures.
What is an amendment?
Vocabulary____________________
amendment: a change to the Constitution
ratification: process by which an amendment is approved
Article VI.
Constitutional
Supremacy
Article VI contains the "supremacy clause."This clause establishes that the Constitution, laws passed by Congress, and treaties of the United States "shall be the supreme Law of the Land." The "supremacy clause" recognizes the Constitution and federal laws as supreme when in conflict with those of the states.
Section 3
ri i New States may be admitted by the Congress mto this Union; but no new State shall be formed or erected within the Jurisdiction of any other State; nor any State be formed by the Junction of two or more States, or Parts of States, without the Consent of the Legislatures of the States concerned as well as of the Congress.
j2.j The Congress shall have Power to dispose of and make all needful Rules and Regulations respecting the Territory or other Property belonging to the United States; and nothing in this Constitution shall be so construed as to Prejudice any Claims of the United States, or of any particular State.
Section 4
The United States shall guarantee to every State in this Union a Republican Form of Government, and shall protect each of them against Invasion; and on Application of the Legislature, or of the Executive (when the Legislature cannot be convened) against domestic Violence.
Article V
The Congress, whenever two thirds of both Houses shall deem it necessary, shall propose Amendments to this Constitution, or, on the Application of the Legislatures of two thirds of the several States, shall call a Convention for proposing Amendments, which, in either Case, shall be valid to all Intents and Purposes, as Part of this Constitution, when ratified by the Legislatures of three fourths of the several States, or by Conventions in three fourths thereof, as the one or the other Mode of Ratification may be proposed by the Congress; Provided that no Amendment which may he made prior to the Year One thousand eight hundred and eight shall in anv Manner affect the first and fourth Clauses in the \inth Section of the first Article; and that no State, without its Consent, shall be deprived of its equal Suffrage in the Senate.
Article VI
[1.] All Debts contracted and Engagements entered into, before the Adoption of this Constitution, shall be as valid against the United States under this Constitution, as under the Confederation.
[2.] This Constitution, and the Laws of the United States which shall be made in Pursuance thereof; and all Treaties made, or which shall be made, under the Authority of the United States, shall be the supreme Law of the Land; and the Judges in every State shall be bound thereby, any Thing in the Constitution or Laws of any State to the Contrary notwithstanding.
[3.] The Senators and Representatives before mentioned, and the Members of the several State Legislatures, and all executive and judicial Officers, both of the United States an of the several States, shall be bound by Oath or Affirmation
52 The Constitution
to support this Constitution; but no religious Test shall ever be required as a Qualification to any Office or public Trust under the United States.
Article VII
The Ratification of the Conventions of nine States, shall be sufficient for the Establishment of this Constitution between the States so ratifying the Same.
Done in Convention by the Unanimous Consent of the States present the Seventeenth Day of September in the Year of our Lord one thousand seven hundred and Eighty seven and of the Independence of the United States of America the Twelfth. In witness whereof We have hereunto subscribed our Names,
Article VII.
Ratification
Article VII addresses ratification and states that, unlike the Articles of Confederation, which required approval of all thirteen states for adoption, the Constitution would take effect after it was ratified by nine states.
George Washington,
President and Deputy from Virginia
New Hampshire
John Langdon Nicholas Gilman
Massachusetts
Nathaniel Gorham Rufus King
Connecticut
William Samuel Johnson Roger Sherman
New York
Alexander Hamilton
New Jersey
William Livingston David Brearley William Paterson Jonathan Dayton
Signers
Pennsyivania
Benjamin Franklin Thomas Mifflin Robert Morris George Clymer Thomas FitzSimons Jared Ingersoll James Wilson Gouverneur Morris
Delaware
George Read Gunning Bedford, Jr.
John Dickinson Richard Bassett Jacob Broom
Maryland
James McHenry Daniel of St. Thomas Jenifer Daniel Carroll
Virginia
John Blair James Madison, Jr.
North Carolina
William Blount Richard Dobbs Spaight Hugh Williamson
South Carolina
John Rutledge Charles Cotesworth Pinckney Charles Pinckney Pierce Butler
Georgia
William Few Abraham Baldwin
Attest: William Jackson, Secretary

Amendment I
Congress shall make no law respecting an establishment of religion, or prohibiting the free exercise thereof; or abridging the freedom of speech, or of the press; or the right of the people peaceably to assemble, and to petition the Government for a redress of grievances.
The Amendments
This part ofthe Constitution consists of changes and additions.The Constitution has been amended 27 times throughout the nation's history.
The Constitution 53
The Bill of Rights
The first 10 amendments are known as the Bill of Rights (1791). These amendments limit the powers of the federal government. The First Amendment protects the civil liberties of individuals in the United States. Yet, the amendment's freedoms are not absolute. They are limited by the rights of other individuals. What freedoms does the First Amendment protect?


Vocabulary
quarter; to provide living accommodations warrant: document that gives police
particular rights or powers
Amendment 5
Rights of the Accused This amendment contains protections for people accused of crimes. One ofthe protections is that government may not deprive any person of life, liberty, or property without due process of law. This means that the government must follow proper constitutional procedures in trials and in other actions it takes against individuals. According to Amendment V, what is the function of a grand jury?

Amendment 6
Right to Speedy and Fair Trial
A basic protection is the right to a speedy, public trial. The jury must hear witnesses and evidence on both sides before deciding the guilt or innocence of a person charged with a crime. This amendment also provides that legal counsel must be provided to a defendant. In 1963, in Gideon v. Wainwright, the Supreme Court ruled that if a defendant cannot afford a lawyer, the government must provide one to defend him or her. Why is the right to a "speedy" trial important?

Vocabulary
common law: law established by previous court decisions
Amendment II
A well regulated Militia, being necessary to the security of a free State, the right ofthe people to keep and bear Arms, shall nc be infringed.
Amendment III
No Soldier shall, in time of peace be quartered in any house, without the consent ofthe Owner, nor in time of war, but in a manner to be prescribed by law.
Amendment IV
The right ofthe people to be secure in their persons, houses, papers, and effects, against unreasonable searches and seizures, shall not be violated, and no Warrants shall issue, but upon probable cause, supported by Oath or affirmation, and particularly describing the place, to be searched, and the persons or things to be seized.
Amendment V
No person shall be held to answer for a capital, or otherwise infamous crime, unless on a presentment or indictment of a Grand Jury, except in cases arising in the land or naval forces, or in the Militia, when in actual service in time of War or public danger; nor shall any person be subject for the same offence to be twice put in jeopardy of life or limb; nor shall be compelled in any criminal case to be a witness against himself, nor be deprived of life, liberty, or property, without due process of law; nor shall private property be taken for public use without just compensation.
Amendment VI
In all criminal prosecutions, the accused shall enjoy the right to a speedy and public trial, by an impartial jury of the State and district wherein the crime shall have been committed, which district shall have been previously ascertained by law, and to be informed of the nature and cause ofthe accusation; to be confronted with the witnesses against him; to have compulsory process for obtaining Witnesses in his favor, and to have the assistance of counsel for his defence.
Amendment VII
In Suits at common law, where the value in controversy shall exceed twenty dollars, the right of trial by jury shall be preserved, and no fact tried by a jury, shall be otherwise reexamined in any Court ofthe United States, than according to the rules of common law.
54 The Constitution
Amendment VIII
Excessive bail shall not be required, nor excessive fines imposed, nor cruel and unusual punishments inflicted.
Amendment IX
The enumeration in the Constitution, of certain rights, shall not be construed to deny or disparage others retained by the people.
Amendment X
The powers not delegated to the United States by the
Constitution, nor prohibited by it to the States, are reserved to the States respectively, or to the people.
Amendment XI
The Judicial power of the United States shall not be construed to extend to any suit in law or equity, commenced or prosecuted against one of the United States by Citizens of another State, or by Citizens or Subjects of any Foreign State.
f,
Powers Reserved to the People
This amendment prevents government from claiming that the only rights people have are those listed in the Bill of Rights.
Amendment 9
Amendment 1
Powers Reserved to the States
This amendment protects the states and the people from the federal government. It establishes that powers not given to the national government and not denied to the states by the Constitution belong to the states or to the people. These are checks on the "necessary and proper" power of the federal government, which is provided for in Article I, Section 8, Clause 18.
Amendment XII
The electors shall meet in their respective states and vote by ballot for President and Vice-President, one of whom, at least, shall not be an inhabitant of the same state with themselves; they shall name in their ballots the person voted for as President, and in distinct ballots the person voted for as Vice-President, and they shall make distinct lists of all persons voted for as President, and of all persons voted for as Vice-President, and of the number of votes for each, which lists they shall sign and certify, and transmit sealed to the seat of the government of the United States, directed to the President of the Senate;—The President of the Senate shall, in the presence of the Senate and House of Representatives, open all the certificates and the votes shall then be counted;—The person having the greatest number of votes for President, shall be the President, if such number be a majority of the whole number of Electors appointed; and if no person have such majority, then from the persons having the highest numbers not exceeding three on the list of those voted for as President, the House of Representatives shall choose immediately, by ballot, the President. But in choosing the President, the votes shall be taken by states, the representation from each state having one vote; a quorum for this purpose shall consist of a member or members from two-thirds of the states, and a majority of all the states shall be necessary to a choice. And if the House of Representatives shall not choose a President whenever the right of choice shall devolve upon them, before the fourth day of March next following, then the Vice-President shall act as President, as in the case of the death or other constitutional disability of the President. The person having the greatest number of votes as Vice-President, shall be the Vice-President, if such number be a majority of the whole number of Electors appointed, and if no person have a majority, then from the
Amendment 11
Suits Against the States The
i \ Eleventh Amendment (1795) provides that a lawsuit brought by a citizen of the United States or a foreign nation against a state must be tried in a state court, not in a federal court. The Supreme Court had ruled in Chisholm v. Georgia (1793) that a federal court could try a lawsuit brought by citizens of South Carolina against a citizen of Georgia.
Vocabulary
bail: money that an accused person provides to the court as a guarantee that he or she will be present for a trial
majority: more than half
Amendment 12
Election of President and Vice President The Twelfth Amendment (1804) corrects a problem that had arisen in the method of electing the president and vice president, which is described in Article II, Section 1, Clause 3. This amendment provides for the Electoral College to use separate ballots in voting for president and vice president. If no candidate receives a majority of the electoral votes, who elects the president?
The Constitution 55
Amendment 13
Abolition of Slavery Amendments Thirteen (1865), Fourteen, and Fifteen often are called the Civil War or Reconstruction amendments. The Thirteenth Amendment outlaws slavery.
two highest numbers on the list, the Senate shall choose the Vice-President; a quorum for the purpose shall constst of two-thirds of the whole number of Senators, and a majority of the whole number shall be necessary to a choice. But no person constitutionally ineligible to the office of President shall be Pliaihle to that of Vice-President of the United States.
Amendment 14
Rights of Citizens The Fourteenth Amendment (1868) originally was intended to protect the legal rights of the freed slaves. Its interpretation has been extended to protect the rights of citizenship in general by prohibiting a state from depriving any person of life, liberty, or property without "due process of law." In addition, it states that all citizens have the right to equal protection of the laws in all states.

Vocabulary
abridge: to reduce
Amendment 14 Section 2
Representation in Congress
This section reduced the number of members a state had in the House of Representatives if it denied its citizens the right to vote. Later civil rights laws and the Twenty-fourth Amendment guaranteed the vote to African Americans.
Amendment 14. Section 3
Penalty for Engaging in Insurrection The leaders of the Confederacy were barred from state or federal offices unless Congress agreed to remove this ban. By the end of Reconstruction, all but a few Confederate leaders were allowed to return to public service.
Amendment XIII
Section 1
Neither slavery nor involuntary servitude, except as a punishment for crime whereof the party shall have been duly convicted, shall exist within the United States, or any place subject to their jurisdiction.
Section 2
Congress shall have power to enforce this article by appropriate legislation.
Amendment XIV
Section 1
All persons born or naturalized in the United States, and subject to the jurisdiction thereof, are citizens of the United States and of the State wherein they reside. No State shall make or enforce any law which shall abridge the privileges or immunities of citizens of the United States; nor shall any State deprive any person of life, liberty, or property, without due process of law; nor deny to any person within its jurisdiction the equal protection of the laws.
Section 2
Representatives shall be apportioned among the several States according to their respective numbers, counting the whole number of persons in each State, excluding Indians not taxed. But when the right to vote at any election for the choice of electors for President and Vice President of the United States, Representatives in Congress, the Executive and Judicial officers of a State, or the members of the Legislature thereof, is denied to any of the male inhabitants of such State, being twenty-one years of age, and citizens of the United States, or in any way abridged, except for participation in rebellion, or other crime, the basis of representation therein shall be reduced in the proportion which the number of such male citizens shall bear to the whole number of male citizens twenty-one years of age in such State.
Section 3
No person shall be a Senator or Representative in Congress, or elector of President and Vice President, or hold any office, civil or military, under the United States, or under any State, who, having previously taken an oath, as a member of Congress, or as an officer of the United States, or as a member of any State legislature, or as an executive or judicial officer of any State, to support the Constitution of the United States, shall
56 The Constitution
have engaged in insurrection or rebellion against the same, or given aid or comfort to the enemies thereof. But Congress may by a vote of two-thirds of each House, remove such disability.
Section 4
The validity of the public debt of the United States, authorized by law, including debts incurred for payment of pensions and bounties for service in suppressing insurrection or rebellion, shall not be questioned. But neither the United States nor any State shall assume or pay any debt or obligation incurred in aid of insurrection or rebellion against the United States, or any claim for the loss or emancipation of any slave; but all such debts, obligations and claims shall be held illegal and void. Section 5
The Congress shall have power to enforce, by appropriate legislation, the provisions of this article.
Amendment XV
Section 1
The right of citizens of the United States to vote shall not be denied or abridged by the United States or by any State on account of race, color, or previous condition of servitude.
Section 2
The Congress shall have power to enforce this article by appropriate legislation.
Amendment XVI
The Congress shall have power to lay and collect taxes on incomes, from whatever source derived, without apportionment among the several States and without regard to any census or enumeration.

/'
Amendm Section 4
w-;
Public Debt The public debt acquired by the federal government during the Civil War was valid and could not be questioned by the South. The debts of the Confederacy, however, were declared to be illegal. Could former slaveholders collect payment for the loss of their slaves?
Voting Rights The Fifteenth Amendment (1870) prohibits the government from denying a person's right to vote on the basis of race. Despite the law, many states denied African Americans the right to vote by such means as poll taxes, literacy tests, and white primaries.

Income Tax The origins of the Sixteenth Amendment (1913) date back to 1895, when the Supreme Court declared a federal income tax unconstitutional. To overturn this decision, this amendment authorizes an income tax that is levied on a direct basis.
Amendment XVII
Section 1
The Senate of the United States shall be composed of two Senators from each State, elected by the people thereof, for six years; and each Senator shall have one vote. The electors in each State shall have the qualifications requisite for electors of the most numerous branch of the State legislatures.
Section 2
When vacancies happen in the representation of any State in the Senate, the executive authority of such State shall issue writs of election to fill such vacancies: Provided, That the legislature of any State may empower the executive thereof to make temporary appointments until the people fill the vacancies by election as the legislature may direct.
Section 3
This amendment shall not be so construed as to affect the election or term of any Senator chosen before it becomes valid as part of the Constitution.
Vocabulary_______________________
insurrection: rebellion against the government
apportionment: distribution of seats in House based on population
vacancy: an office or position that is unfilled or unoccupied
i/H
Direct Election of Senators The
.' Seventeenth Amendment (1913) states that the people, instead of
! state legislatures, elect United States | senators. How many years are in a j Senate term?
The Constitution 57
Amendment 18
Prohibition The Eighteenth Amendment (1919) prohibited the production, sale, or transportation of alcoholic beverages in the United States. Prohibition proved to be difficult to enforce. This amendment was later repealed by the Twenty-first Amendment.

Amendment XVIII
Section 1	...	,
After one year from ratification ot this article, the manufacture, sale or transportation of intoxicating liquors within, the importation thereof into, or the exportation thereof from the United States and all territory subject to the jurisdiction thereof for beverage purposes is hereby prohibited.
Section 2
The Congress and the several States shall have concurrent power to enforce this article by appropriate legislation.
Section 3
This article shall be inoperative unless it shall have been ratified as an amendment to the Constitution by the legislatures of the several States, as prov ided in the Constitution, within seven years from the date of the submission hereof to the States by the Congress.
Woman Suffrage The Nineteenth Amendment (1920) guaranteed women the right to vote. By then women had already won the right to vote in many state elections, but the amendment made their right to vote in all state and national elections constitutional.
Amendment XIX
Section 1
The right of citizens of the United States to vote shall not be denied or abridged by the United States or by any State on account of sex.
Section 2
Congress shall have power by appropriate legislation to enforce the provisions of this article.
"Lame-Duck" The Twentieth Amendment (1933) sets new dates for Congress to begin its term and for the inauguration of the president and vice president. Under the original Constitution, elected officials who retired or who had been defeated remained in office for several months. For the outgoing president, this period ran from November until March. Such outgoing officials, referred to as "lame ducks," could accomplish little. What date was chosen as Inauguration Day?

Amendment XX
Section 1
The terms of the President and Vice President shall end at noon on the 20th day of January, and the terms of the Senators and Representatives at noon on the 3d day of January, of the years in which such terms would have ended if this article had not been ratified; and the terms of their successors shall then begin.
Section 2
The Congress shall assemble at least once in every year, and such meeting shall begin at noon on the 3rd day of January, unless they shall by law appoint a different day.
Section 3
Vocabulary_________________________
president elect: individual who is elected president but has not yet begun serving his or her term
If, at the time fixed for the beginning of the term of the President, the President elect shall have died, the Vice President elect shall become President. If a President shall not have been chosen before the time fixed for the beginning of his term, or if the President elect shall have failed to qualify, then the Vice President elect shall act as President until a President shall have qualified; and the Congress may by law
58 The Constitution
provide for the case wherein neither a President elect nor a Vice President elect shall have qualified, declaring who shall then act as President, or the manner in which one who is to act shall be selected, and such person shall act accordingly until a President or Vice President shall have qualified.
Section 4
The Congress may by law provide for the case of the death of any of the persons from whom the House of Representatives may choose a President whenever the right of choice shall have devolved upon them, and for the case of the death of any of the persons from whom the Senate may choose a Vice President whenever the right of choice shall have devolved upon them. Section 5
Section 1 and 2 shall take effect on the 15th day of October following the ratification of this article.
Section 6
This article shall be inoperative unless it shall have been ratified as an amendment to the Constitution by the legislatures of three-fourths of the several States within seven years from the date of its submission.
Amendment XXI
Section 1
The eighteenth article of amendment to the Constitution of the United States is hereby repealed.
Section 2
The transportation or importation into any State, Territory, or possession of the United States for delivery or use therein of intoxicating liquors, in violation of the laws thereof, is hereby prohibited.
Section 3
This article shall be inoperative unless it shall have been ratified as an amendment to the Constitution by conventions in the several States, as provided in the Constitution, within seven years from the date of the submission hereof to the States by the Congress.
Amendment XXII
Section 1
No person shall be elected to the office of the President more than twice, and no person who had held the office of President, or acted as President, for more than two years of a term to which some other person was elected President shall be elected to the office of the President more than once. But this Article shall not apply to any person holding the office of President when this Article was proposed by the Congress, and shall not prevent any person who may be holding the office of President, or acting as President, during the term within which this Article

Succession of President and Vice President This section provides that if the president elect dies before taking office, the vice president elect becomes president.
Repeal of Prohibition The Twenty-first Amendment (1933) repeals the Eighteenth Amendment. It is the only amendment ever passed to overturn an earlier amendment. It is also the only amendment ratified by special state conventions instead of state legislatures.
|
Presidential Term Limit The
Twenty-second Amendment (1951) limits presidents to a maximum of two elected terms. The amendment wrote into the Constitution a custom started by George Washington. It was passed largely as a reaction to Franklin D. Roosevelt's election to four terms between 1933 and 1945. It also provides that anyone who succeeds to the presidency and serves for more than two years ofthe term may not be elected more than one more time.
The Constitution 59
Amendment 23


it were a state.
D.C.
Electors The Twenty-third Amendment (1961) allows citizens living in Washington, D.C., to vote for president and vice president, a right previously denied residents of the nation's capital. The District of Columbia now has three presidential electors, the number to which it would be entitled if Ame
Abolition ofthe Poll Tax
The Twenty-fourth Amendment (1964) prohibits poll taxes in federal elections. Prior to the passage of this amendment, some states had used such taxes to keep low-income African Americans from voting. In 1966 the Supreme Court banned poll taxes in state elections as well.
becomes operative from holding the office of President or acting as President during the remainder of such term.
Section 2
This article shall be inoperative unless it shall have been ratified as an amendment to the Constitution by the legislatures of three-fourths of the several States within seven years from the date of its submission to the States by the Congress.
Amendment XXIII
Section 1
The District constituting the seat of Government of the United States shall appoint in such manner as the Congress may direct:
A number of electors of President and Vice President equal to the whole number of Senators and Representatives in Congress to which the District would be entitled if it were a State, but in no event more than the least populous State; they shall be in addition to those appointed by the States, but they shall be considered, for the purposes of the election of President and Vice President, to be electors appointed by a State; and they shall meet in the District and perform such duties as provided by the twelfth article of amendment.
Section 2
The Congress shall have power to enforce this article by appropriate legislation.
Amendment XXIV
Section 1
The right of citizens of the United States to vote in any primary or other election for President or Vice President, for electors for President or Vice President, or for Senator or Representative in Congress, shall not be denied or abridged by the United States or any State by reason of failure to pay any poll tax or other tax.
Section 2
The Congress shall have power to enforce this article by appropriate legislation.
Amendment XXV
Section 1
In case ofthe removal of the President from office or his death c resignation, the Vice President shall become President.
Section 2
Whenever there is a vacancy in the office of the Vice President, the President shall nominate a Vice President who shall take the office upon confirmation by a majority vote of bol Houses of Congress.
60 The Constitution
Section 3
Whenever the President transmits to the President pro tempore of the Senate and the Speaker of the House of Representatives his written declaration that he is unable to discharge the powers and duties of his office, and until he transmits to them a written declaration to the contrary, such powers and duties shall be discharged by the Vice President as Acting President.
Section 4
Whenever the Vice President and a majority of either the principal officers of the executive departments or of such other body as Congress may by law provide, transmit to the President pro tempore of the Senate and the Speaker of the House of Representatives their written declaration that the President is unable to discharge the powers and duties of his office, the Vice President shall immediately assume the power and duties of the office of Acting President.
Thereafter, when the President transmits to the President pro tempore of the Senate and the Speaker of the House of Representatives his written declaration that no inability exists, he shall resume the powers and duties of his office unless the Vice President and a majority of either the principal officers of the executive department or of such other body as Congress may by law provide, transmit within four days to the President pro tempore of the Senate and the Speaker of the House of Representatives their written declaration that the President is unable to discharge the powers and duties of his office. Thereupon Congress shall decide the issue, assembling within forty-eight hours for that purpose if not in session.
If the Congress, within twenty-one days after receipt of the latter written declaration, or, if Congress is not in session, within twenty-one days after Congress is required to assemble, determines by two-thirds vote of both Houses that the President is unable to discharge the powers and duties of his office, the Vice President shall continue to discharge the same as Acting President; otherwise, the President shall resume the power and duties of his office.
Amendment XXVI
Section 1
The right of citizens of the United States, who are eighteen years of age or older, to vote shall not be denied or abridged by the United States or by any State on account of age.
Section 2
The Congress shall have power to enforce this article by appropriate legislation.
Amendment XXVII
No law, varying the compensation for the services of Senators and Representatives, shall take effect, until an election of representatives shall have intervened.
Presidential Disability and
Succession The Twenty-fifth
Amendment (1967) established a process for the vice president to take over leadership of the nation when
) a president is disabled. It also set j procedures for filling a vacancy in the j office of vice president.
1 This amendment was used in 1973,
I when Vice President Spiro Agnew I resigned from office after being charged j with accepting bribes. President Richard j Nixon then appointed Gerald R. Ford i as vice president in accordance with j the provisions of the Twenty-fifth ? Amendment. A year later; President ; Nixon resigned during the Watergate i scandal, and Ford became president.
President Ford then had to fill the vice j presidency, which he had left vacant * upon assuming the presidency. He i named Nelson A. Rockefeller as vice \ president. Thus, individuals who had not i been elected held both the presidency
and the vice presidency. Whom does the president inform if he or she cannot carry out the duties of the office?
'.....\
Voting Age of 18 The Twenty-sixth Amendment (1971) lowered the voting age in both federal and state elections to 18.

Congressional Salary
Restraints The Twenty-seventh Amendment (1992) makes congressional pay raises effective during the term following their passage. James Madison offered the amendment in 1789, but it was never adopted. In 1982 Gregory Watson, then a student at the University of Texas, discovered the forgotten amendment while doing research for a school paper. Watson made the amendment's passage his crusade.
The Constitution 61
networks
There's More Online!
gf IMAGE Lowell Mill gf IMAGE True Womanhood
gf MAP Cotton Production and Enslaved Population VIDEO The Slave Trade
gf INTERACTIVE SELF-CHECK QUIZ
I I
LESSON 3
Antebellum America
Reading HELPDESK
Academic Vocabulary
•	controversy
•	predominantly
Content Vocabulary
•	revenue tariff
•	protective tariff
•	spoils system
•	temperance
•	emancipate
TAKING NOTES:
Key Ideas and Details
Organizing As you read about antebellum America, use a graphic organizer like the one below to take notes on how the North and the South developed in terms of industry, agriculture, and products.
North	South
	
	
	
TEKS
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills 1B analyze and evaluate the application of these founding principles to historical events in U.S. history
continued on the next page

u».-.
S • Whatdiaracteristicsdefineasociety? meats? • Howshouldsodetiessettiedisputes?
IT MATTERS BECAUSE
The people of the United States established a constitution and survived a second war with Britain. In antebellum America—the period before the Civil War—Americans faced a new question: Could they work together to create a strong and prosperous nation?
The Nation Matures
guidingquestion How did the United States develop politically and economically in the early 1800s?
I
After the War of 1812, the United States entered an "Era of Good Feelings.” A sense of nationalism swept the country. Riding this wave of nationalism was Democratic-Republican James Monroe, the nation’s fifth president. The Missouri Compromise
The Era of Good Feelings could not ward off the nation’s growing sectional disputes. Missouri’s application for statehood as a slave
\ state stirred up the divisive issue of whether slavery should expand \ westward. In 1819 the Union consisted of 11 free and 11 slave states.
Admitting any new state would upset the balance in the Senate and touch off a bitter struggle over political power. Many Northerners opposed extending slavery into the West, believing it to be morally wrong. The South feared that if slavery could not expand, then new free states would give the North enough votes in the Senate to outlaw slaveholding.
A solution emerged when Maine, which for decades had been part of Massachusetts, requested admission to the Union as a separate state. Th Senate voted to admit Maine as a free state and Missouri as a slave
state. This solution to the controversy kept the balance in the Senati Senator Jesse Thomas of Illinois then proposed an amendment that would prohibit slavery in the Louisiana Purchase territory north of Missouri s southern border. Slavery could expand into Arkansas Territo south of Missouri, but not in the rest of the Louisiana Purchase.
62
By a very close vote, carefully managed by Henry Clay of Kentucky, the House of Representatives voted to accept the Missouri Compromise. However, this merely postponed a debate over the future of slavery.
American Nationalism
Following the War of 1812, the Federalist Party rapidly lost political influence. Partisan infighting had largely ended because only one major political party—the Democratic-Republicans—remained. As Monroe’s presidency began, focus shifted from world affairs to national growth.
In 1823—while many of Spain’s colonies were fighting for independence— President Monroe proclaimed what became known as the Monroe Doctrine. It declared the United States’s opposition to European interference in the Americas.
The charter of the First Bank of the United States had expired in 1811.
In 1816 Representative John C. Calhoun of South Carolina introduced a bill proposing the Second Bank of the United States. The bill passed, giving the bank power to issue national currency and to control state banks.
Inexpensive British goods threatened to put American manufacturers out of business. Congress responded with the Tariff of 1816. Unlike earlier revenue tariffs, which provided income for the federal government, this tariff was a protective tariff that worked to raise the prices of imports.
Under Chief Justice John Marshall, the Supreme Court issued decisions that helped strengthen the national government. Between 1816 and 1824, Marshall interpreted the Constitution broadly to support federal power.
In the 1819 case McCulloch v. Maryland, the Court decided that Congress had the authority to establish the Second Bank of the United States. It ruled that the federal government could use any method that was necessary and proper for carrying out its powers as long as the method was not expressly forbidden by the Constitution. The ruling meant that a state could not interfere with a federal agency working within that state’s borders.
Industrialization and the Transportation Revolution
The Industrial Revolution, which had begun in Europe, spread to the United States during this time. Businesses began large-scale manufacturing using complex machines and organized workforces in factories. As transportation expanded, manufacturers sold their wares nationwide or abroad instead of just locally.
In 1806 Congress funded a major east-west highway called the National Road. Private businesses and state and local governments also built roads and canals. The invention of the steamboat transformed river transportation.
By 1835, more than 700 steamboats, called riverboats, traveled on the nation’s waterways. Railroads also appeared in the early 1800s. Industrialist Peter Cooper built the Tom Thumb, a tiny but powerful locomotive. The new trains helped settle the West and expand trade across the country.
g READING PROGRESS CHECK
Explaining What controversy led to the Missouri Compromise?
Life in the North
guiding qu estion How did life in the North change in the early 1800s?
Between 1815 and 1860, more than 5 million foreigners came to America. While thousands became farmers in the rural West, many others settled in cities, providing a steady source of cheap labor. More than 44,000 Irish arrived in 1845 after a widespread famine in their homeland.
---Analyzing----
Primary Sources
The Monroe Doctrine
M [T]he occasion has been judged proper for asserting... that the American continents... are henceforth not to be considered as subjects for future colonization by any European powers.... With the movements in this hemisphere we are of necessity more immediately connected.... With the existing colonies or dependencies of any European power we have not interfered and shall not interfere. But with the Governments who have declared their independence and maintained it... we could not view any interposition for the purpose of oppressing them, or controlling in any other manner their destiny, by any European power in any other light than as the manifestation of an unfriendly disposition toward the United States. &
—President Monroe, from a message to Congress, December 2,1823
UBQ
IDEAS
What does the Monroe Doctrine prohibit? controversy a prolonged public dispute
revenue tariff a tax on
imports for the purpose of raising money
protective tariff a tax on
imports designed to protect American manufacturers
(continued from p. 62)
thus Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills
9A trace the historical development of the civil rights movement in the 19th, 20th, and 21st centuries, including the 13th, 14th, 15th, and 19th amendments
22A discuss Alexis de Tocqueville’s five values crucial to America’s success as a constitutional republic: liberty, egalitarianism, individualism, populism, and laissez-faire
22B describe how the American values identified by Alexis de Tocqueville are different and unique from those of other nations
Creating a Nation 63
predominantly most frequent or common
Not all Americans welcomed the new immigrants. In the 1800s, many Americans were anti-Catholic, and the arrival of predominantly Catholic
Irish and German immigrants led to the rise of nativist groups and , push for laws banning immigrants from holding public office. In 1854 delegates from some of these groups formed the American Party, which came to be called the Know-Nothings.
Owners ofthe early factory mills expressed a paternalistic concern for their workers. The relationship between management and labor, however, became more strained whenever prices slumped and wages dropped. By 1860, factory workers numbered roughly 1.3 million. Men, women, and children alike typically toiled for 12 or more hours a day. Hoping to gain higher wages or shorter workdays, some workers began to organize in labor unions. During the late 1820s and early 1830s, about 300,000 men and women belonged to some form of union. Most employers refused to bargain with them, and the courts often saw them as unlawful conspiracies that limited free enterprise.
Despite the trend toward urban and industrial growth, agriculture remained the country’s leading economic activity. Until the late 1800s, farming employed more people and produced more wealth than any other kind of work. Northern farmers produced enough to sell their surplus in the growing Eastern cities and towns. As one Ohio newspaper reporter wrote in 1851: “As far as the eye can stretch in the distance nothing but corn and wheat fields are to be seen; and on some points in the Scioto Valley as high as a thousand acres of corn may be seen in adjoining fields, belonging to some eight or ten different proprietors.”
READING PROGRESS CHECK
Explaining How did the millions of new immigrants make a living in the United States?
The Land of Cotton
g u i d i n g q u e st i o n How did the emergence of "King Cotton " affect the South and its inhabitants?
In 1793 Eli Whitney invented the cotton gin, a device that removed the seeds from cotton.
CRITICAL THINKING
Making Inferences How did the cotton gin affect cotton production? Farming was even more important in the South, which lagged behind the North in industrialization. The South had few big cities and less industry. Compared with the many textile mills and factories in the North, the South had only scattered iron works, textile mills, and coal, iron, salt, and copper mines. Together, these accounted for only 16 percent of the nation’s total manufacturing. The South thrived on the production of several major cash crops, including cotton, tobacco, rice, and sugarcane. No crop would play a greater role in the Souths fortunes during this period than cotton. At first, however, profits from cotton were small, owing to the great amount o( labor needed to produce it.
Cotton Becomes King
Removing cotton seeds by hand from the fluffy bolls, or cotton pods, was so tedious that it took a worker an entire day to separate a pound of cotton lint. In 1793 Eli Whitney invented the cotton gin— gin being short for engine—a machine that quickly removed cotton seeds from the bolls. Cotton production soared, and by 1860, Southern cotton accounted for nearly two-thirds of the total export trade ofthe United States. Southerners began saying, rightly, “Cotton is King.”
Cotton was grown in a wide belt stretching from inland South aro ma west into Texas. The spread of cotton plantations boosted th< ou ern economy, and this greatly increased the demand for enslavec a or. ongress had outlawed the foreign slave trade in 1808.
CHARTS/GRAPHS
Rice, Sugar,
Hemp
10%
10%
Tobacco 10% _
Domestic Servants 15%
Mining,	.
Lumbering,-------
Industry,	'
Construction
10%
Between 1820 and 1850, the number of enslaved persons in the South rose from about 1.5 million to nearly 3.2 million.
1 Categorizing How would you categorize 75 percent of the work that enslaved people did?
Source: U.S. Census
2 Drawing Conclusions Why did cotton occupy such a large percentage of slave labor?
However, a high birthrate among enslaved women—encouraged by slaveholders—kept the population growing.
Slavery
The overwhelming majority of enslaved African Americans toiled in the fields on small farms. Some became house servants, while others worked in trades. All enslaved persons suffered indignities. State slave codes forbade enslaved men and women from owning property, leaving a slaveholder’s premises without permission, or testifying in court against a white person. Laws even banned them from learning to read and write.
Many enslaved men and women found ways to actively resist the dreadful lifestyle forced on them. Some quietly staged work slowdowns. Others broke tools or set fire to houses and barns. Still others risked beatings or mutilations by running away. Some enslaved persons turned to violence, killing their owners or plotting revolts.
Free African Americans occupied an ambiguous position in Southern society. In cities like Charleston and New Orleans, some were successful enough to become slaveholders themselves. Almost 200,000 free African Americans lived in the North, where slavery had been outlawed, but they still faced discrimination. Nonetheless, free African Americans in the North could organize their own churches and voluntary associations. They also were able to earn money from the jobs they held.
B READING PROGRESS CHECK
Determining Central Ideas Why was cotton called "king"?
The Age of Jackson
guiding question How wouldyou evaluate the "Age of Jackson"?
Andrew Jackson was elected president in the election of 1828, supported by rural and small-town voters. As president, Jackson actively tried to make the government more inclusive. He wanted ordinary citizens to play a role in government, and he supported the spoils system—the practice of giving people government jobs on the basis of party loyalty. Jackson had not been in office long before he had to focus on a national crisis that highlighted the growing rift between the North and the South.
South Carolina bought many needed goods from England and as a result, had to pay the high tariffs levied on those goods. When another tariff law was passed in 1832, South Carolina adopted an ordinance of nullification declaring
spoils system the practice of handing out government jobs to supporters of the winning candidate
Creating a Nation 65
In Andrew Jackson's Inaugural Address, he declared his intention to move all Native Americans to the Great Plains.
THE WORLD IN SPATIAL TERMS
Where did the Trail of Tears end? HUMAN SYSTEMS
Name two Native American groups in the northern half of the United States that were forced to relocate, the tariffs to be unconstitutional. Jackson regarded nullification as treason and sent a warship to Charleston. When Congress passed a bill that lowered tariffs gradually, South Carolina repealed its nullification of the tariff law.
Along with the nullification crisis, Jackson dismantled the Second Bank of the United States. Like most Westerners, and many working people in the East, he regarded the Bank as a monopoly that benefited the wealthy elite. He vetoed a bill that would have extended its charter and then withdrew all the government’s deposits, severely weakening the bank.
In his Inaugural Address, Jackson had declared his intention to move all Native Americans to the Great Plains. In 1830 Jackson signed the Indian Removal Act. The Cherokee in Georgia appealed to the Supreme Court, hoping to gain legal recognition of their territorial rights. Chief Justice Marshall supported this right in two decisions, both of which Jackson refused to carry out. In 1838 Martin Van Buren, Jacksons successor, sent in the army to forcibly move the Cherokee. Roughly 2,000 Cherokee died in camps while waiting for the westward march. On the journey, which became known as the Trail of Tears, about 2,000 others died of starvation, disease, and exposure.
H READING PROGRESS CHECK
Identifying What were three key events of Jackson's presidency?
A
Reforming Society guiding question M/to common characteristics did reform movements of this era share?
temperance moderation in or abstinence from consuming alcohol
During the mid-1800s, a number of reformers argued that no social vice caused more crime, poverty, or family hardship than the excessive consumption of alcohol. They advocated temperance, or moderation in the consumption of alcohol. Temperance groups formed across the country, preaching the evils of alcohol and urging people to give up liquor. In 1833 a number of groups formed a national organization, the American Temperance Union. In 1851 Maine passed the first state prohibition law, an example 12 other states followed by 1855. Other states passed “local option” laws, which allowed towns and villages to ban liquor sales.
66
Prisons, Asylums, and School Reform
Some reformers focused on providing better facilities for prisoners and the insane. Many states replaced their overcrowded prisons with penitentiaries so prisoners would be rehabilitated, and by the beginning of the Civil War, most states had established public mental institutions to keep the mentally ill out of the prison system.
Many reformers sought to establish a system of public education. They focused on establishing elementary schools to teach all children the basics of reading, writing, and arithmetic, and to instill a work ethic.
Women's Rights
By the mid-1800s, the development of factories separated the home from the workplace. Men often left home to go to work, while women tended the home. As the reform movements of the 1830s grew, some women set out to create more educational opportunities and began promoting new ideas about their role in society. In 1848 activists Lucretia Mott and Elizabeth Cady Stanton organized the Seneca Falls Convention in New York. The convention issued the Declaration of Sentiments and Resolutions, better known as the Seneca Falls Declaration. It began with words expanding on the Declaration of Independence: “We hold these truths to be self-evident: that all men and women are created equal. . . .” Stanton proposed that they focus on suffrage, or the right to vote, and the convention narrowly passed her proposal. Abolitionism
Of all the reform movements that began in the early 1800s, the most divisive was the one calling for abolition, or the immediate end to slavery. It polarized the nation and helped bring about the Civil War. Many of the nation’s founders knew that the United States would have difficulty remaining true to its ideals of liberty and equality if it did not emancipate, or free, all enslaved people. Some religious groups argued that slavery was a sin.
Free African Americans took a prominent role in the movement. One of the most famous was Frederick Douglass, who had escaped from slavery in Maryland. Another key abolitionist was Sojourner Truth. She gained her freedom in 1827 when New York freed all enslaved persons in the state. Her eloquent and deeply religious antislavery speeches attracted huge crowds. a READING PROGRESS CHECK
BIOGRAPHY
is Frederick Douglass < (1818-1895)
; Born into slavery, Frederick \ Douglass worked as a field hand Ji and a house servant. In Baltimore,
\ he learned to read. Seeking s freedom, he fled and changed his i name to elude slave hunters, f Douglass then became an eloquent
spokesperson for abolition. His i autobiography, which described
his experiences as an enslaved person, became a classic of
■ American literature. Douglass later i founded and edited an antislavery I newspaper. He also served as U.S.
(minister to Haiti, becoming the first African American to gain such a high position in the federal government.
CRITICAL THINKING
Making Inferences How was
j’ education important to Douglass's life?
Specifying What did each ofthe major reform movements stand for?
emancipate to set free or grant freedom to
LESSON 3 REVIEW
Reviewing Vocabulary
1.	Stating What was the key characteristic that determined who received government jobs under the spoils system?
Using Your Notes
2.	Summarizing Use the notes you completed during the lesson to summarize the differences between the North and the South in the 1800s.
Answering the Guiding Questions
3.	Identifying How did the United States develop politically and economically in the early 1800s?
4.	Explaining How did life in the North change in the early 1800s?
5.	Describing How did the emergence of "King Cotton" affect the South and its inhabitants?
6.	Evaluating How would you evaluate the "Age of Jackson"?^
7.	Identifying What common characteristics did reform movements ofthis era share? 1B,9A
Writing Activity
NARRATIVE
Suppose that you lived in the North during the early 1800s. Write a letter to a cousin in Europe telling about the changes in transportation and daily life that were taking place at the time. Creating a Nation 67
TEKS 22A.22B.29A
Tocqueville’s
Democracy in America
In 1831, Alexis de Tocqueville, o French lawyer, was commissioned by the French government to study American prisons. While in America, Tocqueville traveled to the Michigan frontier and as far south as New Orleans, but spent most of his time in New England. He became convinced that there was something exceptional about American society. Between 1835 and 1839, he published a two volume book, Democracy in America. The book is regarded as one of the great works of political thought because of its discussions of liberty, egalitarianism, individualism, populism, and laissez-faire economics. Tocqueville argued that these five attributes made America exceptional in the world. America’s social and economic equality enabled the United States to have a remarkable amount of political liberty.
Tocqueville believed the political liberty found on the American frontier helped keep people equal and led to individualism and free economic exchange, both of which benefited America because they were constrained by democratic institutions.
DEMOCRACY AND EQUALITY
Among the novel objects that attracted my attention during my stay in the United States, nothing struck me more forcibly than the general equality of condition among the people. I readily discovered the prodigious influence that this primary fact exercises on the whole course of society; it gives a peculiar direction to public opinion and a peculiar tenor to the laws; it imparts new maxims to the governing authorities and peculiar habits to the governed.
I soon perceived that the influence of this fact extends far beyond the political character and the laws of the country, and that it has no less effect on civil society than on the government; it creates opinions, gives birth to
VOCABULARY
egalitarianism
idea that people should be treated as equals
populism
belief in the rights and values of regular people as opposed to the elite
prodigious
remarkable, impressive in size
eminently
highly, greatly, exceptionally
asunder
divided, apart
new sentiments, founds novel customs, and modifies whatever it does not produce.
The emigrants who colonized the shores of America in the beginning of the seventeenth century somehow separated the democratic principle from all the principles that it had to contend with in the old communities of Europe, and transplanted it alone to the New World. It has there been able to spread in perfect freedom and peaceably....
EQUALITY AND THE FRONTIER
Tocqueville believed social equality in the United States prevented the growth of an aristocracy and ensured popular democracy. In the excerpt below, he outlines how this equality combined with the open American frontier made the United States unique among nations and led to the development of capitalism.
The social condition of the Americans is eminently democratic; this was its character at the foundation of the Colonies, and is still more strongly marked at the present day. I have stated ... that great equality existed among the emigrants who settled on the shores of New England. The germ of aristocracy was never planted in that part of the Union.
I do not mean that there is any deficiency of wealthy individuals in the United States; I know of no country, indeed, where the love of money has taken stronger hold on the affections of
68

men, and where the profounder contempt is expressed for the theory of the permanent equality of property. But wealth circulates with inconceivable rapidity, and experience shows that it is rare to find two succeeding generations in the full enjoyment of it.
This picture ... still gives a very imperfect idea of what is taking place in the new States of the West and South-west. At the end of the last century a few bold adventurers began to penetrate into the valleys of the Mississippi, and the mass of the population very soon began to move in that direction: communities unheard of till then were seen to emerge from the wilds.... and in the Western settlements we may behold democracy arrived at its utmost extreme....
PUBLIC GOOD FROM INDIVIDUALISM
Individualism was a new concept in the 1800s and Tocqueville worried that it would cause people to pursue their self-interest at the expense of others. Tocqueville believed Americans had found ways to combine individual economic activity with democratic institutions so as to benefit rich and poor.
Individualism is a novel expression, to which a novel idea has given birth. Our fathers were only acquainted with egotism. Egotism is a passionate and exaggerated love of self.... Individualism is a mature and calm feeling,
which disposes each member of the community to sever himself from the mass of his fellow-creatures; and to draw apart with his family and his friends; so that, after he has thus formed a little circle of his own, he willingly leaves society at large to itself....
The great advantage of the Americans is that they have arrived at a state of democracy without having to endure a democratic revolution; and that they are born equal, instead of becoming so.... The Americans have combated by free institutions the tendency of equality to keep men asunder, and they have subdued it....
In the United States the more opulent citizens take great care not to stand aloof from the people; on the contrary, they constantly keep on easy terms with the lower classes: they listen to them, they speak to them every day. They know that the rich in democracies always stand in need of the poor....
It would seem as if every imagination in the United States were upon the stretch to invent means of increasing the wealth and satisfying the wants of the public. The best-informed inhabitants of each district constantly use their information to discover new truths which may augment the general prosperity; and if they have made any such discoveries, they eagerly surrender them to the mass of the people.
Analyzing Historical Documents
1.	What aspect of American society is most striking to Tocqueville? Why does this aspect stand out to him?
2.	Tocqueville wrote, “in America I saw more than America.” What did he mean by this?
3.	How are equality of social and economic conditions and economic opportunities connected in Tocqueville’s text?
4.	According to Tocqueville, why did an elite aristocracy never take root in the United States?
5.	How does the American system encourage both individualism and the general prosperity of everyone?
6.	What are some of the problems with American democracy that troubled Tocqueville the most?
69
$MKterktk5deflneasodety? UwshouUsodetiessettiedisputes?
Academic Vocabulary
It Matters Because
Sectionalism and disagreements over slavery in the new territories intensified as the United States continued to expand west. The friction led to the collapse of old political parties and the formation of new ones.
*	resolution
•	perception Content Vocabulary
Manifest Destiny
•	empresario
•	popular sovereignty
guiding question Why did Americans want to expand westward, and why were they willin to go to war to secure the West?
TAKING NOTES:
Key Ideas and Details
Ootlbmg As you read, use the following graphic organizer to record the main ideas about westward expansion and the rise of sectionalism.

The Sectional Crisis Manifest Destiny A.
D.
C.
After the Louisiana Purchase, thousands of people pushed west, journeying all the way to the Mexican f rontier of California and th Oregon Territory, which was jointly controlled by the United States and Britain. Between the late 1830s and early 1860s, more than 250,000 Americans braved great obstacles on overland trails. Western Pioneers
New opportunities lured farmers, adventurers, and merchants alike to the West. Most believed in Manifest Destiny, the idea that Cod had bestowed the entire continent to the Americans. By the 1840s, several east-west routes existed. The movement of white settlers along these trails provoked Native Americans' hostility over the threat it posed to their way of life.
TEKS
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills 1B analyze and evaluate the application of these founding principles to historical events in U.S. history
4
9A trace the historical development of the civil rights movement in the 19th, 20th, and 21st centuries, including the 13th, 14th, 15th, and 19th amendments
Oregon and Texas
At first, empresarios, or colonization agents, had encouraged Americans to settle the Mexican region of Texas. Tensions developed, however, and the settlers decided to separate and create their own government. The people of Texas fought for their independence from Mexico. Losses at the Alamo and Goliad galvanized the Texans. They defeated the Mexican army at the Battle of San Jacinto in April 1836.
The citizens of Texas voted in favor of joining the United States However, Texas wished to be admitted to the Union as a slave state, which antislavery leaders in Congress opposed. The annexation of Texas became a key issue in the presidential race of 1844.
70
Democratic candidate James K. Polk promised to annex Texas. He and the Democrats also demanded the right to all of the Oregon Country, which was then jointly controlled by the United States and Britain.
Polk won the election. In February 1845, Congress passed a joint resolution to annex Texas. Britain and the United States agreed to divide Oregon along the 49th parallel the following year. Americans received the land that later became the states of Oregon, Washington, and Idaho.
empresario a person who arranged for the settlement of Texas in the early 1800s
resolution a formal expression of opinion, will, or intent voted by an official body or assembly
War With Mexico
Texas’s entry into the Union outraged Mexico. Polk’s plans to acquire California added to the conflict. In November 1845, the president tried to buy California, but Mexico’s president refused to meet with the U.S. envoy.
In January 1846, Polk ordered General Zachary Taylor to lead troops across the Nueces River into territory claimed by both the United States and Mexico. He wanted Mexican troops to fire the first shot, because then he could more easily win support for a war. On May 9, news arrived that a Mexican force had attacked Taylor’s men. Four days later, the Senate and House both overwhelmingly voted in favor of the war.
Even before war with Mexico was officially declared, settlers in northern California had begun an uprising. The settlers had little trouble overcoming the weak official Mexican presence in the territory. On June 14, 1846, they declared independence and proclaimed California the Bear Flag Republic. Despite the loss of California and defeat in several battles,
Mexico refused to surrender. Then Polk sent General Winfield Scott to seize Mexico City. After a six-month campaign beginning in the Gulf Coast city of Veracruz, Scott’s forces captured Mexico’s capital in September 1847.
A few months later, the war was over. On February 2,1848,
Mexico’s leaders signed the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo. Mexico gave the United States more than 500,000 square miles (1,295,000 sq. km) of territory, which is now the states of California, Nevada, and Utah, as well as most of Arizona and parts of New Mexico,
Colorado, and Wyoming. Mexico accepted the Rio Grande as the southern border of Texas. In return, the United States paid Mexico $15 million and took over $3.25 million in debts the Mexican government owed to U.S. citizens.
P READING PROGRESS CHECK
Explaining How did the results of the war with Mexico help fulfill what many Americans saw as their country's Manifest Destiny?
■
GEOGRAPHY CONNECTION
The war between the United States and Mexico ended with the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo, which greatly expanded the territory ofthe United States.
f THE WORLD IN SPATIAL TERMS In what regions was the war between the United States and Mexico mostly fought?
THE WORLD IN SPATIAL TERMS
At what city did Scott's troops land to begin their march to capture Mexico City? 
Harriet Tubman
Slavery and Westward Expansion
GUIDING QUESTION
How did the political system attempt toresolve the issues of sectionalism and slom (c. 1820-1913)
Born into slavery in Maryland, Harriet Tubman struggled early against the system's brutality. She escaped to freedom in 1849. About crossing into Pennsylvania, she later wrote: "I looked at my hands to see if I was the same person. There was such a glory over every thing; the sun came like gold through the trees, and over the fields, and I felt like I was in Heaven." After Congress passed the Fugitive Slave Act, Tubman returned to the South 19 times to guide enslaved people along the Underground Railroad to freedom. Slaveholders offered a bounty of $40,000 for her capture.
When California applied for statehood, attempts by Congress to find a compromise on slavery further heightened opposing viewpoints. Senator Lewis Cass of Michigan suggested that the citizens of each new territory should be allowed to decide for themselves if they wanted to permit slavery This idea came to be called popular sovereignty.
As the 1848 presidential election approached, both major candidates-Democrat Lewis Cass and Whig General Zachary Taylor-remained vague on the issues. On Election Day, Taylor won a narrow popular victory, but umn mnrp than half of the electoral vote.
Compromise of 1850 and the Fugitive Slave Act
In January 1848, gold was found in the Sierra Nevada in California. News of the find swept the nation, and the California Gold Rush was on. To maintair order, Californians decided to seek statehood and applied to enter the Unic as a free state in December 1849. At the time, the Union consisted of 15 fre states and 15 slave states. If California tipped the balance, the slaveholding states would become a minority in the Senate.
A few Southern politicians began to talk of secession. In early 1850, Senator Henry Clay of Kentucky proposed allowing a compromise measure:
PRIMARY SOURCE
« California, with suitable boundaries, ought, upon her application, to be admitted as one of the State of this Union, without the imposition by Congress of any restriction in respect to the exclusion or introduction of slavery within those boundaries.99
—from a speech to Congress, January 29,18
■3
CRITICAL THINKING
Analyzing Primary Sources What do you think Tubman meant when she wrote: "I looked at my hands to see if I was the same person"? popular sovereignty
before the Civil War, the idea that people living in a territory had the right to decide by voting if slavery would be allowed there
Clay further proposed that the rest of the newly acquired land from Mexicc be organized without restrictions on slavery. He also called for Congress to be prohibited from interfering with the domestic slave trade and to pass a stronger law to help Southerners recover enslaved African Americans who had fled to the North.
At first, Congress did not pass Clays bill, in part because President Taylor opposed it. Then, Taylor died unexpectedly in July. Vice President Millard Fillmore succeeded him and quickly threw his support behind the measure, which had been divided into several smaller bills. By September, Congress had passed all parts of the Compromise of 1850.
Henry Clay had conceived the Fugitive Slave Act as a measure to benefi slaveholders. The law, however, actually hurt the Southern cause by creatin; active hostility toward slavery among many Northerners. Under this law, a slaveholder or slave catcher had only to point out alleged runaways to have them taken into custody. The accused then would be brought before a federal commissioner. With no right to testify on their own behalf, African Americans had no way to prove their cases. An affidavit asserting that the captive had escaped from a slaveholder, or testimony by white witnesses, was all a court needed to order the person sent to the South.
The Underground Railroad helped many African Americans escape from the South. This informal network helped thousands of enslaved persons fle< north. Conductors” transported runaways in secret. The most famous conductor was Harriet Tubman, who was herself a runaway.
A mjor stop on the railroad was Cincinnati, Ohio, where author Harriet
f i iOWe. a f°r many years. She was inspired to “write something that would make this whole nation feel what an accursed thing slavery is.”
72
Her book, Uncle Toms Cabin, was first published in 1852. Stowe’s powerful depiction changed Northern perceptions of slavery.
The Crisis Over Kansas
The opening of the Oregon Territory and the admission of California to the Union convinced many people of the need for a transcontinental railroad. The location of the railroad’s eastern starting point was debated. Many Southerners favored the southern route, from New Orleans to San Diego. Democratic senator Stephen A. Douglas of Illinois wanted the eastern starting point to be in Chicago. Knowing a northern route would run through the unsettled lands west of Missouri and Iowa, he prepared a bill to organize the region into a new territory to be called Nebraska. Key Southern committee leaders prevented this bill from coming to a vote in the Senate. They made it clear that before Nebraska could be organized, Congress had to repeal part of the Missouri Compromise and allow slavery in the new territory.
Douglas finally agreed to repeal the antislavery provision of the Missouri Compromise and to divide the region into two territories. Nebraska would be to the north, adjacent to the free state of Iowa; Kansas would be to the south, west of the slave state of Missouri. This looked like Nebraska was intended to be free territory, while Kansas was intended for slavery. Warned that the South might secede without such concessions, President Franklin Pierce finally gave his support to the bill. Congress passed the Kansas-Nebraska Act in May 1854.
Hordes of Northerners hurried into Kansas to create an antislavery majority. Before the March elections of 1855, however, thousands of armed Missourians—called “border ruffians” in the press—crossed the border to vote illegally, helping to elect a pro-slavery legislature. Furious antislavery settlers countered by drafting their own constitution that banned slavery.
By January 1856, Kansas had two territorial governments, one opposed to slavery and the other supporting it. As more Northern settlers arrived, border ruffians began attacks. “Bleeding Kansas,” as newspapers dubbed the territory, had become the scene of a territorial civil war.
Politics and Sectional Divisions
The repeal of the Missouri Compromise had a dramatic effect on the political system. Pro-slavery Southern Whigs and antislavery Northern Whigs began to
THE CANING OF CHARLES SUMNER
BIOGRAPHY
Harriet Beecher Stowe (1811-1896)
In 1832 Harriet Beecher Stowe moved to Cincinnati, Ohio, right across the river from the slave state of Kentucky. She met fugitive slaves, employed a formerly enslaved woman, and learned about slavery from Southern friends. After moving to Maine, she began writing Unde Tom's Cabin, based on her experiences in Ohio and antislavery readings. The novel, which humanized the plight of the enslaved, was an instant sensation and further hardened the positions of both abolitionists and slaveholders.
CRITKALTHINKING
Determining Cause and Effect What was the effect of Unde Tom's Cabin on the slavery debate?

POLITICAL CARTOONS
During negotiations over the Kansas-Nebraska Act, Representative Preston Brooks beat Senator Charles Sumner with his cane for criticizing Brooks's cousin, Senator Andrew Butler. While many Northerners were outraged by the incident, Southerners voiced their approval by sending Brooks canes.
T
Analyzing Primary Sources Which side do you think the cartoonist favored—the North or the South? Explain.
2 Drawing Conclusions How might reactions to this incident be different in the North and in the South?
Creating a Nation 73
perception comprehension or understanding influenced by observation, interpretation, and attitude
split the party. During the congressional elections of 1854, many former Northern Whigs joined forces with a few antislavery Democrats and the Free-Soil Party. This coalition was officially organized as the Republican Party i, 1856. The party was determined to prevent Southern planters from gaining control ofthe federal government. Republicans did not agree on abolishing slavery, but they did agree that it had to be kept out of the territories.
At the same time, the American Party, also known as the Know-Nothing: was making gains. This anti-Catholic, nativist party opposed immigration. The party began to come apart, however, when members from the Upper South and the North split over the Kansas-Nebraska Act. Most Northern Know-Nothings were absorbed into the Republican Party.
In the 1856 presidential election, three candidates mounted a serious challenge. Democrat James Buchanan of Pennsylvania, who had campaign on the idea that only he could save the Union, won the election. Just two day after Buchanan’s inauguration, the Supreme Court ruled in a landmark cast involving slavery, Dred Scott v. Sandford.
Dred Scott was an enslaved Missouri man who had been taken north to work in free territory for several years. After he returned with his slaveholde to Missouri, Scott sued for his freedom, arguing that living in free territory had made him a free man. Dred Scott’s case went all the way to the Supreme Court, which found against him. While Southerners cheered the Dred Scott decision, Republicans called it a “willful perversion” of the Constitution. After the Dred Scott decision, the conflict in “Bleeding Kansas” intensified.
P READING PROGRESS CHECK
Explaining How did the Kansas-Nebraska Act affect the national political party syster
iTTTTTTi ANALYZING SUPREME COURT CASES
DRED SCOTT
v. SANDFORD, 1857 Background to the Case Between 1833 and 1843, enslaved African American Dred Scott and his wife Harriet had lived in the free state of Illinois and in the part ofthe Louisiana Territory that was considered free under the Missouri Compromise. When he was returned to Missouri, Scott sued his slaveholder, based on the idea that he was free because he had lived in free areas, and won. That decision was reversed by the Missouri Supreme Court, and Scott's case went to the U.S. Supreme Court.
How the Court Ruled
Chief Justice Roger B. Taney delivered the Supreme Court's ruling in the Dred Scott case. The decision made Scott and his family a topic for the nation's press.
The 7-2 decision enraged many Northerners, and delighted many in the South. In his lengthy opinion for the Court, Chief Justice Taney ruled that African Americans—enslaved or free—were not citizens ofthe United States. Thus, Scott had no rights under the Constitution and no right to sue in federal court. Further, Taney decreed that Congress did not have the authority to ban slavery in the territories. This made the Missouri Compromise unconstitutional.
Q
Identifying Central Ideas Why was the Missouri Compromise declared unconstitutional?
Q
Interpreting Significance Why was the decision in Dred Scott v. Sandford so significant?
74
The Union Dissolves
GUIDING QUESTION
W/wf events led to the secession of the Southern states? In 1859 abolitionist John Brown seized an arsenal in Harpers Ferry, Virginia, in an attempt to begin an insurrection, or rebellion, against slaveholders. His arrest and execution made him be viewed as a martyr in a noble cause by some and a sign of Northern aggression by others.
The Election of 1860
John Browns raid on Harpers Ferry became a turning point for the South.
In April 1860, Democrats from across the nation gathered in Charleston, South Carolina, to choose their nominee for president. When Northerners rebuffed the idea of a federal slave code in the territories, 50 Southern delegates stormed out of the convention. In June 1860, the Democrats reconvened in Baltimore. Again, Southern delegates walked out. The remaining Democrats then chose Stephen Douglas as their candidate. The Southern Democrats nominated their own candidate.
Republicans, realizing they stood no chance in the South, needed a candidate who could sweep most of the North. They nominated Abraham Lincoln, who had gained a national reputation through a series of debates with Douglas in 1858. Although not an abolitionist, Lincoln believed that slavery was morally wrong, and he opposed its spread into the Western territories. With the Democrats divided, Lincoln won the election.
The South Secedes
Many Southerners viewed Lincolns election as a threat to their society and culture, and saw no choice but to secede. Shortly after Lincolns election, the South Carolina legislature called for a convention. On December 20, 1860, amid marching bands, fireworks, and militia drills, the convention voted unanimously to repeal the states ratification of the Constitution and dissolve its ties to the Union. By February 1, 1861, Mississippi, Florida, Alabama, Georgia, Louisiana, and Texas had also voted to secede, and declared themselves to be a new nation—the Confederate States of America—or the Confederacy. Arkansas, Tennessee, North Carolina, and Virginia seceded in April 1861. A minority in these states did not want to leave the Union, but the majority of Southerners viewed secession as similar to the Revolution—a necessary course of action to uphold people’s rights.
B READING PROGRESS CHECK
Explaining Why did Lincoln's election trigger the secession of the Southern states?
---Analyzing----
PRIMARY SOURCES
Lincoln on Popular Sovereignty
M
What is Popular Sovereignty? Is it the right of the people to have Slavery or not have it, as they see fit, in the territories? ... [M]y understanding is that Popular Sovereignty, as now applied to the question of Slavery, does allow the people of a Territory to have Slavery if they want to, but does not allow them not to have it if they do not want it.
... [A]s I understand the Dred Scott decision, if any one man wants slaves, all the rest have no way of keeping that one man from holding them. D
—Abraham Lincoln, in a debate with Stephen Douglas, August 21,1858
DBQ
READING CLOSELY
According to Abraham Lincoln, why could people in a territory not ban slavery through popular sovereignty?
LESSON 4 REVIEW
Reviewing Vocabulary
1.	Explaining Explain how the idea of popular sovereignty relieved some ofthe tension created by the debate over slavery in the territories^
Using Your Notes
2.	Explaining Use the notes you completed during the lesson to write a short paragraph explaining ways that sectional tensions increased during this era.
Answering the Guiding Questions
3.	Summarizing Why did Americans want to expand westward, and why were they willing to go to war to secure the West?
4.	Describing How did the political system attempt to resolve the issues of sectionalism and slavery? 9A
5.	Making Connections What events led to the secession ofthe Southern states?
Writing Activity
NARRATIVE
Suppose that you have decided to move from the East to the Western frontier. Write a journal entry telling where you are going, why you are going there, and what you are hoping to achieve.
Creating a Nation 75
h h
TEKS 29A.29B
--	HZ1-&. “3. n* r- iV? "
Living Under Slavery
Enslaved persons were not free. That fundamental fact meant they could be sold and separated from their families. They could not legally marry or leave their slaveholder s property without permission. Slaveholders held such power that they controlled access to basic life necessities and could physically punish, even kill, the people they held in slavery without breaking the law.
AUTOBIOGRAPHY, 1845
Colonel Lloyd kept from three to four hundred slaves on his home plantation, and owned a large number more on the neighboring farms belonging to him.... The overseers of these, and all the rest of the farms, numbering over twenty, received advice and direction from the managers of the home plantation. This was the great business place. It was the seat of government for the whole twenty farms.... If a slave was convicted of any high misdemeanor, became unmanageable, or evinced a determination to run away, he was brought immediately here, severely whipped, put on board the sloop, carried to Baltimore, and sold to Austin Woolfolk, or some other slave-trader, as a warning to the slaves remaining....
The men and women slaves received, as their monthly allowance of food, eight pounds of pork, or its equivalent in fish, and one bushel of corn meal. Their yearly clothing consisted of two course linen shirts, one pair of linen trousers, like the shirts, one jacket, one pair of trousers for winter, made of coarse negro cloth, one pair of stockings, and one pair of shoes; the whole of which could not cost more than seven dollars. The allowance of the slave children was given to their mothers, or the old women having the care of them. The children unable to work in the field had neither shoes, stockings, jackets, nor trousers, given to them; their clothing consisted of two coarse linen shirts per year. When these failed them, they went naked until the next allowance-day. Children from seven to ten years old, of both sexes, almost naked, might be seen at all seasons of the year.
VOCABULARY
inevitable
impossible to avoid
overarched
forming an arch overhead or above
persecuted
to treat continually in a way meant to be cruel or harmful
allowance
a sum given
coarse
being harsh or rough
privation
lacking the basic necessities or comforts of life
There were no beds given the slaves, unle one coarse blanket be considered such, and none but the men and women had these. Th however, is not considered a very great privation. They find less difficulty from the want of beds, than from the want of time to sleep; for when their day’s work in the field i done, the most of them having their washinc mending, and cooking to do, and having fev none of the ordinary facilities for doing eithc of these, very many of their sleeping hours were consumed in preparing for the field th< coming day; and when this is done, old and young, male and female, married and single drop down side by side, on one common bed,—the cold, damp floor,—each covering himself or herself with their miserable blank and here they sleep till they are summoned the field by the driver’s horn. ... [Wjoe betii them who hear not this morning summons t the field.... Mr. Severe, the overseer, used stand by the door of the quarter, armed witl large hickory stick and heavy cowskin, reac whip any one who was so unfortunate as n< hear, or, from any other cause, was prevent from being ready to start.
—from Narrative of the Life ofFredi Douglass, an American S
76

AUTOBIOGRAPHY, 1861
Reader, it is not to awaken sympathy for myself that I am telling you truthfully what I suffered in slavery. I do it to kindle a flame of compassion in your hearts for my sisters who are still in bondage, suffering as I once suffered.
I once saw two beautiful children playing together. One was a fair white child; the other was her slave, and also her sister. When I saw them embracing each other, and heard their joyous laughter, I turned sadly away from the lovely sight. I foresaw the inevitable blight that would fall on the little slave’s heart. I knew how soon her laughter would be changed to sighs. The fair child grew up to be a still fairer woman. From childhood to womanhood her pathway was blooming with flowers, and overarched by a sunny sky. Scarcely one day of her life had been clouded when the sun rose on her happy bridal morning.
How had those years dealt with her slave sister, the little playmate of her childhood? She, also, was very beautiful; but the flowers and sunshine of love were not for her. She drank the cup of sin, and shame, and misery, whereof her persecuted race are compelled to drink.
In view of these things, why are ye silent, ye free men and women ofthe north? Why do your tongues falter in maintenance of the right? Would that I had more ability! But my heart is so full, and my pen is so weak! There are noble men and women who plead for us, striving to help those who cannot help themselves. God bless them! God give them strength and courage to go on! God bless those, every where who are laboring to advance the cause of humanity!
—from Incidents in the Life of a Slave Girl
▲ Frederick Douglass was one ofthe leaders of the abolitionist movement.
Analyzing Historical Documents
1.	Making Comparisons According to the narrative, did slaveholders treat the children of slaves better than they treated their parents? Explain your answer.
2.	Paraphrasing Using your own words, explain what Douglass meant by “They find less difficulty from the want of beds, than from the want of time to sleep.
3.	Judging Reliability Consider the tone of the excerpt. Does the tone make you more or less likely to believe Douglass’s claims? Why or why not?
4.	Interpreting What does the narrator mean when she says “the other was her slave, and also her sister” in the first paragraph?
5.	Contrasting How does the narrator use references to flowers to contrast the direction the young girls’ lives will take?
77
networks
There's More Online!
BIOGRAPHY
Ulysses S. Grant & BIOGRAPHY Robert E. Lee |gf IMAGE Battle of Gettysburg Ef IMAGE Siege of Vicksburg Ef IMAGE Signing at Appomattox Ef SLIDESHOW Postwar Destruction Ef SLIDESHOW Civil War
Technology
VIDEO
Supplying the Civil War & INTERACTIVE SELF-CHECK LESSON 5
The Civil War and Reconstruction
Whatcharacteristicsdefineasodety?
;? • HowshouldsocietiessettledisputA
QUIZ
It Matters Because
Reading HELPDESK
Academic Vocabulary
•	outcome • requirement
Content Vocabulary
•	siege	• carpetbaggers
•	pillage	• scalawags
TAKING NOTES:
Key Ideas and Details
Sequencing As you read the lesson, complete a time line like the one below to sequence events of the Civil War and Reconstruction.

TEKS
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills 1B analyze and evaluate the application of these founding principles to historical events in U.S. history
2A identify the major characteristics that define a historical era
2B identify the major eras in U.S. history from 1877 to the present and describe their defining characteristics
2C apply absolute and relative chronology through the sequencing of significant individuals, events, and time periods
continued on the next page
In the end, all attempts at compromise between the North and the South over slavery failed. The outcome of the 1860 election triggered the first shots ofthe long, bloody Civil Woi
The Opposing Sides
guiding question What were the advantages and disadvantages for the North and the Soi at the start of the war?
Although the South had many experienced officers to lead its troo in battle, the North had several economic advantages. In 1860 the population of the North was about 22 million, while the South had about 9 million people, more than one-third of whom were enslaved In 1860 almost 90 percent of the nations factories were located in the Northern states, which could provide troops with ammunition and other supplies more easily. The South had only half as many miles of railroad track as the North. Northern troops could more easily disrupt the Southern rail system and prevent the movement of supplies and troops.
The Union also controlled the national treasury and could expe< continued revenue from tariffs. Many Northern banks held large reserves of cash, which they lent the government by purchasing bon In contrast to the Union, the Confederacy’s financial situation was poor, and it became worse over time. Most Southern planters were ii debt and unable to buy bonds. Southern banks were small and had f cash reserves, so they could not buy many bonds, either. The best hope for the South to raise money was by taxing trade. But the Unio navy quickly blockaded Southern ports, reducing trade. The Confederacy enacted direct taxation of its people, but many Southerners refused to pay. The Confederacy was forced to print paper money, causing rapid inflation in the South.
The Civil War was, in many respects, the first modern war. It was ought with a large, civilian army and required vast amounts of suppli Cone-shaped bullets allowed accuracy at much greater distances.
CHARTS/GRAPHS
RESOURCES OF THE UNION AND OF THE CONFEDERACY
---------------____________________________
Source*. Historical Statistics ofthe United States.
The Union's wealth of resources gave it an advantage over the Confederacy.
1	Analyzing Information Based on the graph, what were the North's greatest advantages over the South?
2	Drawing Conclusions Which of the North's advantages do you think were most important in winning the war?
Instead of standing in a line, troops defending positions began to use trenches and barricades for protection. Attrition—the wearing down of one side through exhaustion of soldiers and resources—also played a critical role.
B READING PROGRESS CHECK
Identifying What advantages did factories and railroads give the North in the Civil War?
The Early Stages
guiding question When did the war change from a battle over preserving the Union to a war to end slavery? What caused this change?
The Civil War began in April 1861, when Confederate forces fired upon federal troops in Fort Sumter in Charleston Harbor. Confederate president Jefferson Davis claimed that the seceding states were fighting for the same “sacred right of self-government” that had inspired the American Revolution and that the Confederacy would “seek no conquest... all we ask is to be let alone.”
First Battle of Bull Run
Soon after the war began, Lincoln approved an assault on Confederate troops gathered near Manassas Junction, Virginia. The First Battle of Bull Run started well for the Union, but the tide turned when reinforcements helped the Confederates defeat the Union forces. The outcome made it clear that the North would need a large, well-trained army to prevail against the South.
The War in the West
The Union blockaded Southern ports along the Atlantic, but the South used small, fast ships to smuggle goods past the blockades. In April 1862, Union forces seized New Orleans, the South’s largest city, and gained control of the lower Mississippi River.
In early 1862, Union general Ulysses S. Grant began a campaign on the Cumberland and Tennessee Rivers. Control of these rivers would split Tennessee and provide the Union with a route into Confederate territory.
All of Kentucky and most of western Tennessee eventually fell.
The War in the East
While Grant fought in the West, Union general George B. McClellan’s forces set out to capture Richmond, Virginia, the Confederate capital. In late June 1862, Confederate general Robert E. Lee began a series of attacks on McClellan’s
(continued from p. 78)
TEKS
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills 9A trace the historical development ofthe civil rights movement in the 19th, 20th, and 21st centuries, including the 13th, 14th, 15th, and 19th amendments
26F discuss the importance of congressional Medal of Honor recipients, including individuals of all races and genders such as Vernon J. Baker, Alvin York, and Roy Benavidez
outcome something that follows as a result or consequence
Creating a Nation 79
forces. Together the two sides suffered more than 30,000 casualties. On September 17,1862, Lee’s forces met McClellans at Antietam (an-TEE-tuhm) Creek. The fight was the bloodiest one-day battle in American history, ending with nearly 6,000 soldiers killed and another 17,000 wounded. McClellan did not break Lee’s lines, but he inflicted so many casualties that Lee decided to retreat to Virginia.
The Battle of Antietam was a crucial victory for the Union. The British government had been ready to intervene in the war as a mediator if Lees invasion had succeeded. Now the British decided to wait and see how the war progressed. The South’s defeat at Antietam had an even more important political impact in the United States. It convinced President Lincoln that th time had come to end slavery in the South.
The Emancipation Proclamation
Most Democrats opposed ending slavery, while Republicans were divided. With Union casualties rising, however, many Northerners began to agree that slavery had to end, both to punish the South and to make the soldiers’ sacrifices worthwhile. On September 22, 1862, Lincoln publicly announce! that he would issue the Emancipation Proclamation—a decree freeing all enslaved persons in states still in rebellion after January 1, 1863. Because the Proclamation freed enslaved African Americans only in states at war with the Union, it did not address slavery in the border states. By its very existence, however, the Proclamation transformed the conflict over preserving the Union into a war of liberation.
H READING PROGRESS CHECK
Explaining Why was the Battle of Antietam significant?
GEOGRAPHY CONNECTION
As the Civil War progressed, two separate campaigns emerged.
THE WORLD IN SPATIAL TERMS
Which ofthe battles is farthest west? HUMAN SYSTEMS
What purpose did the North have in fighting so many battles along the coasts? The Turning Points and Final Battles
guiding question Why were Vicksburg and Gettysburg turning points in the war?
As 1863 began, there was no end to the war in sight. More than two years of battle lay ahead for Americans, and the casualties would continue to rise steeply. The new military technology produced a hug number of casualties, and doctors struggled to tend to the wounded, having little understanding of infection and germs. Disease was one c the greatest threats facing Civil War soldiers. In many cases, regimen!
lost half their men to illness. Smallpox, dysentery, typhoid, and pneumonia killed thousands of soldiers. Battlefield physicians often had to amputate arms and legs to prevent gangrene and other infections from spreading. General Carl Schurz described one field hospital:
---Analyzing----------
Primary Sources
The Gettysburg Address
PRIMARY SOURCE
« As a wounded man was lifted on the table... the surgeon quickly examined the wound and resolved upon cutting off the wounded limb. Some ether was administered.... The surgeon snatched the knife from between his teeth, where it had been while his hands were busy, wiped it rapidly... across his blood-stained apron, and the cutting began. The operation accomplished, the surgeon would look around with a deep sigh, and then—'Next!' 99
—quoted in The Civil War: An Illustrated History, 1990
It was in this field of battlefield medicine that the only woman ever to win the Medal of Honor made her contribution. Mary Edwards Walker was one of the few women before the Civil War to earn a medical degree. When the Civil War erupted, she volunteered to help the Union Army and worked as a surgeon near the front lines. She frequently crossed enemy lines to treat civilians, and on one such mission in 1864 she was arrested as a spy, and imprisoned for four months. For her contributions to the war effort, she was awarded the Medal of Honor in 1865.
Vicksburg
Gaining control of the Mississippi River was a vital element of the Union strategy for winning the Civil War. If the Union could capture Vicksburg, Mississippi, the last major Confederate stronghold on the river, then the North could cut the South in two. In May 1863, Grant launched two assaults on Vicksburg, but the city’s defenders repulsed both attacks and inflicted high casualties. Grant decided to put the city under siege by cutting off its food and supplies and bombarding it until its defenders gave up. On July 4, 1863, with his troops starving, the Confederate commander at Vicksburg surrendered. Gettysburg
Meanwhile, in Virginia, Lee had been able to defeat Union forces at Fredericksburg and Chancellorsville. Emboldened by these victories, Lee decided in June 1863 to launch another invasion of the North. At the end of June, as Lee’s army foraged in the Pennsylvania countryside, some of his troops headed into Gettysburg, hoping to seize a supply of shoes.
When they arrived near the town, they discovered two brigades of Union cavalry. On July 1, 1863, as Confederates pushed the Union troops out of the town, the main forces of both armies hurried to the scene ofthe fighting. On July 2, Lee attacked, but the Union troops held their ground. The following day, Lee ordered nearly 15,000 men under the command of General George E. Pickett and General A. P. Hill to make a massive assault. The attack, known as Pickett’s Charge, caused 7,000 casualties in less than half an hour, but failed to break the Union lines. “... [A] 11 this has been my fault,” said Lee. “It is I that have lost this fight.
Lee’s troops retreated to Virginia. At Gettysburg, the Union suffered 23,000 casualties, the South an estimated 28,000, more than one-third of Lee’s entire force. The disaster at Gettysburg proved to be the turning point ofthe war in the East. The Union’s victory strengthened the Republicans politically and ensured once again that the British would not recognize the Confederacy. For the remainder of the war, Lee’s forces remained on the defensive, slowly giving ground to the advancing Union army.
M
Four score and seven years ago our fathers brought forth on this continent, a new nation, conceived in Liberty, and dedicated to the proposition that all men are created equal. Now we are engaged in a great civil war, testing whether that nation, or any nation so conceived and so dedicated, can long endure....
... It is rather for us to be here dedicated to the great task remaining before us—that from these honored dead we take increased devotion to that cause for which they gave the last full measure of devotion— that we here highly resolve that these dead shall not have died in vain—that this nation, under God, shall have a new birth of freedom—and that government of the people, by the people, for the people, shall not perish from the earth. M
—President Lincoln, from the Gettysburg Address, November 19,1863
READING CLOSELY
What does Lincoln say is the main purpose ofthe Civil War and the reason for the sacrifices at Gettysburg?
siege a military blockade of a city or fortified place to force it to surrender
DBQ
Creating a Nation 81
The war devastated the South. Hundreds of thousands of people died, and several major cities, including Richmond (shown above), lay in ruins.
CRITICAL THINKING
Predicting Consequences What consequences do you think the damage caused by the Civil War had on the South in years to come? pillage to loot or plunder
The Thirteenth Amendment
More Union successes followed. General Grant succeeded in securing control ofthe Mississippi River. Lincoln rewarded him appointing him general in chief of the Union forces. Grant then began a relentless series of attacks against Lees forces, slowly pushing deeper into Virginia. In June 1864, Grant forces reachec the fortifications outside the city of Petersburg. Instead of attacking, he put the city under siege. As the siege dragged on, support for the war declined, and Lincoln expected to lose the 1! presidential election. In September 1864, however, General William Tecumseh Sherman captured Atlanta and then began a march to sea, pillaging and destroying railroads, warehouses, ra and factories. Shermans success revitalized northern support for
the war, and Lincoln won in a landslide.
The president interpreted his reelection as a mandate from the voters end slavery permanently by amending the Constitution. The Senate had passed an amendment the previous spring, but Lincoln and Congressiona Republicans had to build a coalition of anti-slavery Democrats to get the amendment passed in the House of Representatives.
On January 31, 1865, the Thirteenth Amendment to the Constitution, banning slavery in the United States, narrowly passed the House of Representatives and went to the states for ratification. It took the remainder of the year, but by December 1865, enough states had ratified the amendme for it to go into effect. The Thirteenth Amendment marked a culmination o the abolition movement that had begun in the years after the American Revolution. It also finally applied the founding principles ofthe Declaration Independence, the self-evident truths, as the Declaration put it, “that all mei are created equal” and had an unalienable right to liberty.
The War Ends
By the spring of 1865, Lee knew that time was running out. On April 1, 1865, Union troops cut the last rail line into Petersburg, Virginia. Lee’s troops attempted to escape Grant’s forces in the area, but Union cavalry blocked the road. With his battered troops surrounded and outnumbered, Lee surrendered to Grant at Appomattox Court House on Apr 9,1865. Grants generous terms of surrender guaranteed that the Union woi not prosecute Confederate soldiers for treason. When Grant agreed to let Confederates take their horses home “to put in a crop to carry themselves and their families through the next winter,” Lee thanked him, saying the kindness would “do much toward conciliating our people.”
With the war over, Lincoln delivered a speech describing his plan to restore the Southern states to the Union. In the speech, he mentioned including African Americans in Southern state governments. One listener, actor JohnWilkes Booth, sneered to a friend, “That is the last speech he w ever make. Although his advisers had repeatedly warned him not to appe; unescorted in public, Lincoln went to Fords Theatre with his wife to see a play on the evening of April 14, 1865. During the third act, Booth slipped quietly behind the president and shot him in the back ofthe head. Lincoln died the next morning.
The North’s victory in the Civil War saved the Union and strengthens the power of die federal government over the states. It transformed American
devact	S aver^’ but it a^so the South socially and economically
devastated, and many questions unresolved. Americans from the North
82
The sketch above from the 1870s shows South Carolina's legislature— the only state legislature with an African American majority during Reconstruction.
CRITICAL THINKING
Identifying Central Ideas Why do you think African Americans were so enthusiastic about participating in politics?
and the South tried to answer these questions in the years following the Civil War—an era known as Reconstruction.
B READING PROGRESS CHECK
Drawing Conclusions What were the differences the South experienced before and after the Battle of Gettysburg?
Reconstruction
guiding question IV/wf important decisions had to be made concerning the fate ofthe seceded states and the rights of those freed from slavery?
At the end of the Civil War, the South was a defeated region with a devastated economy. While some Southerners were bitter over the loss, for many, rebuilding their land and their lives was more important. The president and Congress grappled with the difficult task of Reconstruction.
Opposing Plans for Reconstruction
In December 1863, President Lincoln offered a general amnesty, or pardon, to Southerners who took an oath of loyalty to the United States and accepted the Unions requirements concerning slavery. However, certain Confederate officials and military officers were not included in the offer.
In his Second Inaugural Address in March 1865, Lincoln spoke of ending the war “with malice toward none, with charity for all.”
Resistance to Lincoln’s plan surfaced among a group of Republicans in Congress known as Radical Republicans. They wanted to prevent the leaders of the Confederacy from returning to power. They also wanted the federal government to guarantee African Americans their right to vote.
Vice President Andrew Johnson, a Democrat from Tennessee, assumed the presidency after Lincolns death. His 1865 plan for Reconstruction closely resembled Lincoln’s, and offered amnesty to all former citizens of the Confederacy except for former Confederate officials and wealthy planters. Many congressional Republicans were outraged when Southerners elected many former Confederate officials to Congress. They were further angered when Southern state legislatures passed a series of laws known as black codes that limited African Americans’ rights.
The Fourteenth Amendment
, In June 1866, in order to permanently block states from imposing black I codes or other restrictions on African American rights, Congress passed the I Fourteenth Amendment to the Constitution. This amendment granted !	citizenship to all persons born or naturalized in the United States and
|	declared that no state could deprive any person of life, liberty, or property
" “without due process of law.” It also declared that no state could deny any £ person “equal protection of the laws.’
requirement something essential to the existence or occurrence of something else
Creating a Nation 83
Connections to
Today
Historically Black Colleges
Ending the Civil War was about more than bringing the former Confederate states back into the Union. It was also about helping freed African Americans transition from enslavement to freedom. Increased education was key in this effort. Florida A& M University traces its origins back to 1887. Originally named the State Normal College for Colored Students, the school’s first president was Thomas DeSaille Tucker, an attorney. Tucker was only the second teacher at the school and presided over its first fourteen years. The school became Florida’s land-grant college for African Americans and received financial aid from the Morrill Land Grant Act. Today, Florida A & M continues the tradition of educating African Americans as one of the premier historically black institutions of higher education in the United States.
EXTREMIST ORGANIZATIONS
During Reconstruction, secret sodetic such as the White League and the Pale Faces formed to prevent Africai Americans from exercising their rights. The largest of these groups, the Ku Klux Kian, used violence to drive out carpetbaggers and intimidate African Americans. Other white extremist organizations included the Red Shirts and the Knights of the White Camellia. The Red Shirts originated in Mississippi and the Knights of the White Camellia first formed in New Orleans.
Defending Do you think the cartoon texl is correct in its assertion that these groups were "worse than slavery*? Explain.
In March 1867, Congressional Republicans passed the Military Reconstruction Act dividing the former Confederacy, except for Tennesse which had ratified the Fourteenth Amendment in 1866, into five military districts. In order for the former Confederate states to regain control oft! state government and be allowed to elect members to Congress, they had give the right to vote to all adult male citizens, regardless of race, and rati; the Fourteenth Amendment.
The Fourteenth Amendment was a turning point in American politic; and legal history. Since its ratification in 1868, it has been used to expand federal power over the states, and to extend civil rights through its equal protection clause. It also led to the doctrine of incorporation, the idea tha the Bill of Rights applies to state governments, not just the federal government. Although it did not prevent Southern states from imposing restrictions on African Americans in the late 19th century, the Fourteenth Amendment would empower the African American civil rights movement and help ensure its success in the 1950s and 1960s.
The Fifteenth Amendment
In the meantime, tensions between Radical Republicans and Johnson increased and eventually the House of Representatives voted to impeach t president. The impeachment trial in the Senate ended one vote short of convicting Johnson. Although Johnson remained in office, he did not run for re-election in 1868. That year the Republicans nominated General Gr< for president. Grant won easily and Republicans kept control of Congress
Republicans moved rapidly to expand their Reconstruction program. Recognizing the importance of African American suffrage, Congress pass the Fifteenth Amendment to the Constitution. This amendment declared that the right to vote “shall not be denied...on account of race, color, or previous condition of servitude.” By March 1870, enough states had ratifi< the amendment to make it part of the Constitution. Radical Reconstructs had a dramatic impact on the South, particularly in the short term. It changed Southern politics by bringing hundreds of thousands of African
84
Americans into the political process for the first time. It also began to change Southern society. As it did so, it angered many white Southerners, who began to fight back against the federal government’s policies.
The South During Reconstruction
By the autumn of 1870, all former Confederate states had rejoined the Union.
The Freedmens Bureau worked to feed and clothe war refugees and help formerly enslaved people. A large number of Northerners traveled to the South, where many were elected or appointed to positions in the new state governments. Southerners called these newcomers carpetbaggers because some arrived with their belongings in suitcases made of carpet fabric. Local residents saw them as intruders seeking to exploit the South. Some white Southerners did work with the Republicans and supported Reconstruction. Other Southerners called such supporters scalawags—an old Scots-Irish term for weak, underfed, worthless animals.
Having gained the right to vote, African American men entered into politics with great enthusiasm. They served as legislators and administrators for nearly all levels of government. Republicans built a coalition of poor Southern-born white farmers, African Americans, and Northern carpetbaggers to elect Republican candidates.
Compromise of 1877
After Ulysses S. Grant became president in 1869, scandals and economic pressures damaged his administration. In the 1870s, Democrats began to regain power in the South. The 1876 presidential election pitted Republican Rutherford B. Hayes against Democrat Samuel Tilden. On Election Day, 20 electoral votes were disputed, including 19 in the three Southern states controlled by Republicans. The Compromise of 1877 emerged. Historians are not sure if a deal really took place, but the compromise reportedly included a promise to pull federal troops out of the South in return for a Republican victory. This did in fact happen within a month of Hayes taking office; however, it is also true that the nation and Republican leaders were ready to end Reconstruction.
H READING PROGRESS CHECK
Identifying What steps were taken during Reconstruction to rebuild the South and preserve the rights of African Americans?
carpetbagger name given to many Northerners who moved to the South after the Civil War and supported the Republicans
scalawag name given to Southerners who supported Republicans and Reconstruction ofthe South
LESSON 5 REVIEW
Reviewing Vocabulary
1.	Explaining Who were the scalawags?
Using Your Notes
2.	Sequencing Use the notes you completed during the lesson to sequence the main events ofthe Civil War and Reconstruction^
Answering the Guiding Questions
3.	Assessing What were the advantages and disadvantages for the North and the South at the start of the war?
4.	Analyzing Cause and Effect When did the war change from a battle over preserving the Union to a war to end slavery? What caused this change? 1B, 9A
5.	Understanding Historical Interpretation Why were Vicksburg and Gettysburg turning points in the war?
6.	Making Connections What important decisions had to be made concerning the fate of the seceded states and the rights of those freed from slavery? 9A
Writing Activity
INFORMATIVE/EXPLANATORY
Write a short essay explaining the effects ofthe three Reconstruction Amendments and how they continue to shape the United States today. 9A Creating a Nation 85
TfXS 29A.29B
The Emancipation
Proclamation The secession of
the Southern states was prompted by fear that the institution of slavery was under attack. The Civil War, however, began as a battle over the question ofthe right ofthe Southern states to secede. When Abraham Lincoln decided to issue the Emancipation Proclamation, he put ending slavery at the heart of the Union effort. In doing so, he changed the meaning of the war. The proclamation was the first bold step in the abolition of slavery throughout the nation.
POLITICAL SPEECH,
1861 [The Confederate States of America’s] constitution has put at rest, forever, all the agitating questions relating to our peculiar institution—African slavery as it exists among us—the proper status ofthe negro in our form of civilization.... The prevailing ideas entertained by... most ofthe leading statesmen at the time ofthe formation ofthe old constitution, were that the enslavement of the African was in violation ofthe laws of nature; that it was wrong in principle, socially, morally, and politically....
Our new government is founded upon exactly the opposite idea; its foundations are laid, its cornerstone rests, upon the great truth that the negro is not equal to the white man; that slavery—subordination to the superior race—is his natural and normal condition.
H.
Stephens, vice president of the Confederate States of America, March 21,1861
POLITICAL SPEECH,
1862 Mr. Speaker... the people ofthe loyal States know that slavery lies at the bottom of all our troubles. They know that but for this curse this horrid revolt against liberty and law would not have occurred. They know that all the unutterable agonies of our many battlefields, all the terrible sorrows which rend so many
VOCABULARY
subordination
in a state yielding to or being controlled by authority
canker
a sore that spreads
deference
respect for someone else’s wishes or desires
paramount
superior to all others
hostilities
acts of warfare
thousands of loving hearts, all the ravages t desolation of this stupendous conflict, are t< be charged to slavery. They know that its barbarism has molded the leaders of this rebellion into the most atrocious scoundrels the nineteenth century.... What I said onth floor in January last, I repeat now, that the mere suppression of this rebellion will be an empty mockery of our sufferings and sacrifices, if slavery shall be spared to cankt the heart ofthe nation anew, and repeat its diabolical deeds.
—Representative George W. Julian of Indi, in the U.S. House of Representath
May 23,1S
LETTER, 1863
My dear Sir—
... After the commencement of hostilities I struggled nearly a year and a half to get aloni without touching the ‘institution’ [of slavery]; c when finally I conditionally determined to tow it, I gave a hundred days fair notice of my purpose, to all the States and people, within which time they could have turned it wholly aside, by simply again becoming good citizen ofthe United States. They chose to disregard and I made the peremptory proclamation on what appeared to me to be a military necessil And being made, it must stand. As to the Stat not included in it, of course they can have the rights in the Union as of old. Even the people
86

the states included, if they choose, need not to be hurt by it. Let them adopt systems of apprenticeship ... conforming substantially to the most approved plans of gradual emancipation; and, with the aid they can have from the general government, they may be nearly as well off, in this respect, as if the present trouble had not occurred, and much better off than they can possibly be if the contest continues persistently.
—Abraham Lincoln, letter to Major General John A. McClernand, January 8,1863
LETTERS, 1862
To Abraham Lincoln, president ofthe United States:
... On the face of this wide earth, Mr. President, there is not one disinterested,
A
Horace Greeley, editor of A President Abraham Lincoln the weekly “New Yorker" and founder of the “New York Tribune". determined, intelligent champion ofthe Union cause who does not feel that all attempts to put down the Rebellion, and at the same time uphold its inciting cause, are preposterous and futile—that the Rebellion, if crushed out tomorrow, would be renewed within a year if Slavery were left in full vigor—that Army officers who remain to this day devoted to Slavery can at best be but halfway loyal to the Union—and that every hour of deference to Slavery is an hour of added and deepened peril to the Union.
—Horace Greeley, editor ofthe New York Tribune, August 19,1862
Dear Sir—
... If there be those who would not save the Union unless they could at the same time save slavery, I do not agree with them—if there be those who would not save the Union unless they could at the same time destroy slavery, I do not agree with them.
My paramount object in this struggle is to save the Union, and is not either to save or destroy slavery—if I could save the Union without freeing any slave, I would do it; and if I could save it by freeing all the slaves, I would do it; and if I could do it by freeing some and leaving others alone, I would also do that.
—Abraham Lincoln’s response, August 22,1862
PHOTO: (I
to ijHulton Archive/Getty ESI
Analyzing Historical Documents 1.	Comparing How do Stephens and Julian differ on their opinions of slavery? Cite evidence from their speeches to support your answer.
2.	Explaining Does Alexander Stephens support slavery as a matter of states’ rights or does he approve ofthe practice for other reasons? Provide evidence to support your answer.
3.	Stating Representative Julian’s speech is very critical of the rebellion. What do you think he means when he laments about “unutterable agonies and the “terrible sorrows?”
4.	Citing Text Evidence What is Horace Greeley s prediction for Lincoln’s efforts to “put down the
Rebellion, and at the same time uphold its inciting cause?” What argument does Greeley use to support his prediction?
5.	Specifying President Lincoln’s response to Greeley is neither pro or anti slavery. What does President Lincoln state is his primary goal?
6.	Paraphrasing Using your own words, explain President Lincoln’s letter to Union Major General John A. McClernand.
7.	Identifying Alternatives What alternative to slavery does President Lincoln suggest in his letter to McClernand?
87
Understanding
Historical Eras
Why Learn This Skill?
Have you ever heard someone refer to music from "the 60s" or art from the Renaissance? Has your history teacher ever referred to the Middle Ages, or to the Gilded Age, or to the Cold War era? In each case, they are referring to an historical era. An era is a period of time in history that has distinct characteristics. Historians divide history into eras as a form of shorthand. Instead of having to refer to "the time when many people were out of work; the Great Plains were suffering dust storms, and the government was creating programs to help people," historians can simply refer to "The Great Depression." Understanding historical eras makes learning history easier. By breaking history into chunks, it is easier to remember what was happening and why.
Some era, like the Industrial Era, become known for the rapid growth of urban areas.
Learning the Skill
To be an historical era, a period of time has to have a common set of major characteristics. These characteristics are based on a combinatic of the unique politics, economics, technology, social issues, culture, and major events that we shaping people's lives at the time. It is not alwa clear when an era begins or ends. Some of the things common in one era may continue into tl next era, but usually several major things change, leading historians to identify it as a new era.
Historians often use a major event to mark the break or turning point that leads to a new era. Historians also break up history different! depending on what they are studying. An historian looking at international events regarc the 1920s and 1930s as the "Interwar Era" between World War I and World War II. But ar historian looking at economics sees the boomii 1920s as very different from the depression of the 1930s.
Because the history of the United States is short, the historical eras people use tend to be only a few decades long at most. Modern American history is usually said to begin in If
The reason 1877 is chosen as the start is because it marks the last year when political debates still involved the issues of the Civil W< and Reconstruction. After 1877, historians generally agree that the United States began tc change and deal with issues unrelated to the Civil War era.
These are the major eras of American histc since 1877 that most historians reference:
•	The Industrial Era, or Gilded Age, 1877-1900
•	The Progressive Era & World War I, 1900-1920
•	The Roaring 20s, or The New Era, 1920-1929
•	The Great Depression, or New Deal, 1929-1939
•	World War II, 1939-1945
•	Post War America, 1945 to the present
88
PHOTO:
Francis Miller/Time & Life Pictures/Getty Images; TEXT: Martin Luther King, Jr., “I Have a Dream,” August 28,1963. Reprinted by The decades since the end of World War II have been a time of great change, and historians disagree over how best to divide it into historical eras.
Many historians see 1945 to 1991 as an historical era, because 1945 marks the start of the Cold War and 1991 marks the end of the Soviet Union.
Others focus on events within the United States. Some like to divide the post-war era into decades, "the 50s," "the 60s,"
"the 70s" etc., because they see dramatic cultural changes in each decade. Others prefer to divide the post-war years into eras based on major political, economic, or technological changes, including the following:
•	Post-War America, 1945-1953
•	Civil Rights Era, 1954-1968
•	Vietnam Era, 1965-1975
•	The Conservative Resurgence, 1976-1992
•	End of the Century, 1980-2000
•	The Technology Revolution, 1981-present
•	The Post-9/11 Era, 2001-present
•	The Great Recession, 2007-present
Whatever era is used, the best way to understand it is to focus on the major characteristics that make it different from other times in history. Learning those characteristics will help you remember American history, and you will be able to make connections and generalizations about history more easily.
Practicing this Skill
Open up your textbook or the online student edition website. Look through the different chapters and lessons paying attention to the headings and topics to get a sense of the major characteristics of each era. Then answer the following questions:
Certain individuals often represent eras in iconic ways. Martin Luther King, for instance, has become an icon ofthe Civil Rights Era.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
What made the era from 1877 to 1900 different from previous eras?
What issues and concerns seem to characterize the Progressive Era?
Why do you think World War I is included as part of the Progressive Era?
What makes the 1920s a unique era according to some historians?
Why might some historians combine the 1930s and World War II into one era?
What other ways could you divide up the time period from 1877 to 1929? Identify alternative eras and make a brief list of the characteristics that define them.
Applying the Skill
Look through the different chapters and lessons from 1945 to the present. Examine the headings and topics. Think about what
i you already know about recent events in American history. Create a timeline illustrating the major historical eras you would use to understand 1945 to the present. Identify the dates for each era and
I list a few bullet points for each era J describing its characteristics.
89
kapfer i Assessment
Directions: On a separate sheet of paper, answer the questions below. Make sure you read carefully and answer all parts of the questions.
C®
V.
Lesson Review
Lesson 1
0 Identifying Cause and Effect What factors caused European nations to explore the Western Hemisphere and establish colonies?
0 Describing Colonies took on unique characteristics based on charters and colony formation. Explain how certain colonies offered freedom from religious persecutions for colonists.
0 Explaining Continuity and Change How was the idea of "No taxation without representation" an important factor leading to the American Revolution? 1B
0 Analyzing Text What are the four major sections of the Declaration of Independence? Evaluate the purpose of each section. 1A
Lesson 2
0 Contrasting What was a key difference between the Federalists and the Democratic-Republicans?
0 Analyzing and Evaluating What is the intent ofthe Bill of Rights? The Constitutional Convention did not think the Constitution needed a Bill of Rights. Why did the Framers agree to add it later? Do you think it was necessary?
Explain your answer. 1A
0 Identifying Cause and Effect How did Napoleon Bonaparte's interest in European conquest lead to U.S. expansion?
0 Explaining What contribution did James Madison make to the founding ofthe United States? 1C
0 Understanding Relationships Among Events How do
the ideas of the Connecticut Compromise affect the structure of our federal government today?
Constitution Handbook
0 Analyzing and Evaluating Why are the Constitution and the Bill of Rights important? What purpose do they serve and have they been effective? 1A
© Explaining Name three ways you can participate in the democratic process. How does participating in the democratic process help build a "more perfect union?" 2
© Explaining What is the meaning and historical significance ofthe motto "E Pluribus Unum"? 26E
© Describing Based on what you have learned about the structure of American government, its founding principl and the democratic process, what qualities do you think make for an effective leader in the United States? 1A, 1 1C, 24A
Lesson 3
© Identifying Central Issues How did opposing views o slavery lead to the Missouri Compromise?
© Comparing and Contrasting Compare the economies the North and South. What type of industry or agricultui existed and who performed the labor?
Lesson 4
© Making Connections How was the addition of Oregon to the United States an example of the idea of Manifest Destiny?
© Explaining What was the Fugitive Slave Act?
© Identifying Cause and Effect Why was there so much violence in Kansas in 1855 and 1856?
© Explaining Why did the South secede from the Union?
Lesson 5
© Identifying What were the South's financial disadvantages at the start ofthe Civil War?
Need Extra Help?
9	10	11	12	13	14	15	16	1?	18	19 j!
Cotopage | 5 | 7 | 8 | 14 | 23 | 24 I 26 I 23
22 | 28 | 38 | 39 | 28 | 62 | 64 I 70 I 72 I 73 I K
90
© Explaining Why did President Lincoln feel that the Emancipation Proclamation was necessary? How did this show effective leadership? ib, 24A
© Analyzing What method was used to expand the right of African Americans to participate in the democratic process after the Civil War? What changes resulted? 23A
Exploring the Essential Questions
© Analyzing Write a short essay explaining why participating in the democratic process reflects the national ethos, or ideals, patriotism, and civic responsibility. Use the example of voting to give specific evidence for your answer. Your essay should have an introduction, at least three paragraphs, and a conclusion. 23C
Read the Preamble to the Constitution below and then answer the questions that follow.
PRIMARY SOURCE
« We the People ofthe United States, in Order to form a more perfect Union, establish Justice, insure domestic Tranquility, provide for the common defence, promote the general Welfare, and secure the Blessings of Liberty to ourselves and our Posterity, do ordain and establish this Constitution for the United States of America.99
© Analyzing Intent and Meaning What are the major objectives of the Constitution as described in the Preamble? What does the text mean when it refers to "domestic tranquility?" What is "posterity?" 1A
© Evaluating Meaning What do you think the phrase "promote the general Welfare" means? Why do you think this phrase has been used so often to justify expanding the role ofthe federal government? 1A
Critical Thinking
© Summarizing Analyze the text ofthe Bill of Rights and write a summary evaluating what each amendment means and what rights are protected. Explain how the Tenth Amendment is different from the others. Which rights do you think are the most important? 1A
Need Extra Help?
© Explaining What is the meaning and historical significance ofthe motto "In God We Trust"? 26E
© Explaining Choose one ofthe following Founding Fathers ofthe United States: Benjamin Rush, John Hancock, John Jay, John Witherspoon, John Peter Muhlenberg, Charles Carroll, and Jonathan Trumbull Sr. Conduct research at the library or online and write a short essay explaining that person's contributions. Essays should have an introduction, at least two paragraphs, and a conclusion. 1C.30A
Q
Identifying Most Americans have ancestors who came to this country from different places around the world. What part ofthe Declaration of Independence shows that all Americans have a common bond, despite where they came from? 22c Social Studies Skills
© Categorizing Make a chart identifying and explaining the five values that Alexis de Tocqueville said were crucial to American success as a constitutional republic. Then describe how those values are different and unique from those of other nations. 22A, 22B
© Applying Absolute and Relative Chronology Identify a major contribution of each person on the following list of names. Write one sentence for each person describing their contribution. Then put the names in chronological order based on the contribution you identified. Give an approximate date or time range when they made the contribution you have identified. 2C
•	Frederick Douglass • James Madison
•	Abraham Lincoln • Thomas Jefferson
•	Christopher Columbus • George Washington
© Applying Absolute and Relative Chronology Create a
time line illustrating the major historical eras ofthe United
States from 1877 to the present. On the time line, identify
the approximate start and end date for each era, and use
captions to briefly describe the era's characteristics.
2A, 2B, 2C
21	22	23	24	25	26
28	29	30	31	32
|6otopage | 80 | 84 | 38 [ 43 | 43 |54[
9 1 U j 68 I 5 j 2 |
Creating a Nation 91
DBQ
© Sequencing Historical Events In what way was the Thirteenth Amendment the culmination ofthe abolitionist movement? Why might the abolitionist movement be considered the first civil rights movement ofthe 19th century? How did abolitionism represent an application of the founding principles of the United States? 1B, 9A, 23A
© Explaining Continuity and Change What rights did the Fourteenth and Fifteenth Amendments confer, and how did they set the stage for a new civil rights movement for African Americans? 1B, 9A, 23A
Analyzing Primary Sources
Read the following excerpt, and then answer the questions that follow.
PRIMARY SOURCE
« When in the Course of human events, it becomes necessary for one people to dissolve the political bands which have connected them with another, and to assume among the Powers ofthe earth, the separate and equal station to which the Laws of Nature and of Nature's God entitle them, a decent respect to the opinions of mankind requires that they should declare the causes which impel them to the separation.
We hold these truths to be self-evident, that all men are created equal, that they are endowed by their Creator with certain unalienable Rights, that among these are Life, Liberty, and the pursuit of Happiness.
That to secure these rights, Governments are instituted among Men, deriving their just powers from the consent ofthe governed. ”
© Identifying The three paragraphs come from what document? What date was this document issued? 1A
© Analyzing and Evaluating What organization issued the document, and what was the intent ofthe document? Did the document achieve what it was intended to do? 1A
© Analyzing and Evaluating Meaning What does the document mean when it says that "We hold these truths to be self-evident?" To what truths is it referring? According to the document, why do people create governments? 1A, 22c
Need Extra Help?
JOIN, or DIB.
® Analyzing and Evaluating Significance Why is the
document important? What has been its significance t both American history and world history? ia
Analyzing Visuals
Use the drawing to answer the following questions.
© Analyzing Visuals What message does this cartoon convey about the fate of the colonies as they faced challenges leading up to the American Revolution? 29H
Extended Response Questions
© Analyzing Write an essay that analyzes and evaluate the text ofthe U.S. Constitution and the intent of the document. What kind of structure does it impose on tl U.S. government? What is the intent of the U.S. Constitution? How does it structure the government tc achieve its purpose? Cite text from the document to support your evaluation and analysis. 1A
Standardized Test Practice
© What contributions did Mary Walker make during thei War to make her the only woman to earn the Medal of Honor? 26F
A
She captured Confederate soldiers. B
She served as a spy for Union troops. C
She served as an army surgeon near the frontline D She fought alongside men during the war. © Which amendment in the Bill of Rights guarantees the to due process and does not allow the government to t< property for public use without compensation? 1A, 14 F the First Amendment
G the Tenth Amendment H the Second Amendment J the Fifth Amendment
92
Settling the West
1865-1890
networks
There's More Online about settling the West.
CHAPTER 2
Miners and Ranchers
Lesson 2
Farming the Plains
Lesson 3
Native Americans
The Story Matters...
After the Civil War, Americans continued migrating to the western frontier. Their lives were filled with hardships. But this movement west created more hardships for the Native Americans, which dramatically altered their way of life.
Sitting Bull, a leader ofthe Sioux, steadfastly defended his people against forces trying to strip them of their homes, their culture, and their very existence.
◄ Sitting Bull (1831-1890)
PHOTO:
The Granger Collection, New York 93
CHAPTER 2
Place andTime: United States 1860-1900
Miners, ranchers, and farmers led the way to the expansion ofthe western territories. Homesteading allowed settlers to claim acres of land to cultivate and build new lives. With the building of railroads to connect the western states to the East, the population quickly grew. For centuries this land was home to many groups of Native Americans. The settling ofthe West altered their way of life forever.
Step Into the Place
Read the quotes and look at the information presented on the map. E33 29A, 29D,
Analyzing Historical Documents How does the first quote compare to the information and feelings expressed in the second quote from the document?
DBQ
PRIMARY SOURCE
« My heart is full of sorrow that so many were killed on each side, but when they compel us to fight, we must fight.... Tonight we shall mourn for our dead, and for those brave white men lying up yonder on the hillside.99
—Sitting Bull, after the Battle ofthe Little Bighorn, 1876
PRIMARYSOURCE
**The Seventh [Infantry] can handle anything it meets.99
—General George A. Custer while declining reinforcements for the Battle of the Little Bighorn
w... It is the opinion at headquarters among those who are most familiar with the situation, that Custer struck Sitting Bull's main camp.... Custer dropped squarely into the midst of no less than ten thousand red devils and was literally torn to pieces. The movement made by Custer is censured to some extent at military headquarters in this city....”
—as reported in the New York Times, July 7,1876
0
0
I
Step Into the Time
Making Connections
Research a president listed on the time line. Write a paragraph explaining how this president
1862 Homestead Act makes cheap land available to settlers
1864 Sand Creek Massacre takes place
A.
Johnson 1865-1869
1867 Chisholm Trail cattle drive begins

More Online!
TIME LINE
Explore the ® interactive version of the time line on Networks.
The Battle ofthe Little Bighorn, 1876
u ‘ The Last Stand
Calhoun
X


t
z




il
U.S.
Movements - known i U.S.
Movements - conjectured ... Native American Movements - known
Native American Movements - conjectured
$ Battle
■ Point of Interest □ Native American Encampment
'f/t
eB'gha,
\N
"77
1 km
984 projection
s
****<^ ^yernents After Cu
1 mile
Reno's 1st Position
Reno Ford

Sioux/Cheyenne Encampment □ n
Garfield Arthur Cleveland 1887 Dawes Act passed 1881	1881-1885 1885-1889	7889 Oklahoma
/CT\	/z^\	Land Rus^
I £	\ I 1&\ I flf' 1	takesplace
B.
Harrison 1889-1893
Cleveland
1893-1897
McKinley
1897-1901
networks
There's More Online!
CHART/GRAPH
Gold and Silver Production
IMAGE
Chinese Immigrant Miners Jgf IMAGE Nat Love gf IMAGE "Old West" Miners Ef IMAGE Women Branding Cattle MAP
Cattle Ranching and the Long Drive
Ef VIDEO Conquering the West
Bf INTERACTIVE SELF-CHECK
QUIZ



• I, '■
h ■-el
Reading HELPDESK
Academic Vocabulary
•	extract
•	prior
adapt
Content Vocabulary
LESSON 1
Miners and Ranchers
Nfty would people take on the dialkngtsd
IT MATTERS BECAUSE
The migration of miners and ranchers to western territorie: resulted in populations large enough to qualify for statehood. People mined for gold, silver, and lead or shipped longhorn cattle to the East.
Growth ofthe Mining Industry
guidingquestion Howdid mineral discoveries shape the settlement of the West!
•	vigilance committee
•	hydraulic mining
•	open range
•	hacienda
•	barrios
Mining played an important role in the settling of the American West. Demand for minerals rose dramatically after the Cavil War as the United States changed from a farming nation to an industrial nation. Mining also led to the building of railroads to connect the mines to factories back east.
TAKING NOTES:
Key Ideas and Details
Organizing As you read, complete a graphic organizer like the one below listing the locations of mining booms and the discoveries made there.
TEKS
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills 
3B analyze economic issues such as industrialization, the growth of railroads, the growth of labor unions, farm issues, the cattle industry boom, the rise of entrepreneurship, free enterprise, and the pros and cons of big business
continued on the next page
Boomtowns
In 1859 a prospector named Henry Comstock staked a claim near Virginia City, Nevada. When others found a rich source nearby Comstock claimed he owned the land and quickly struck a deal to share the fortune. He later sold his claim for thousands of dollars, not realizing that the sticky, blue-gray clay that made mining in the area difficult was nearly pure silver ore worth millions.
News of the Comstock Lode, as the strike came to be called, brought a flood of prospectors to Virginia City. So many people arrived that, in 1864, Nevada was admitted as the thirty-sixth state in the Union. This occurred many times in the American West. News of a mineral strike would start a stampede of prospectors. Almost overnight, tiny frontier towns were transformed into small cities. Virginia City, for example, grew from a town of a few hundred people to nearly 30,000 in just a few months. It had an opera house, shops with furniture and fashions from Europe, several newspapers, and a six-story hotel.
These quickly growing towns were called boomtowns. The term boom refers to a time of rapid economic growth. Boomtowns were

96
owdy places. Prospectors fought over claims, and thieves haunted the treets and trails. Often, law and order” was enforced by vigilance :ommittees self-appointed volunteers who would track down and punish vrongdoers. In some cases, they responded with their own form of justice, )ut most people respected the law and tried to deal firmly but fairly with ;he accused.
Eventually, the mines that supported the boomtown economy would be used up. A few boomtowns were able to survive when the mines closed, but many of them did not. Instead, these boomtowns went “bust”—a term borrowed from card games in which players lost all of their money. In Virginia City, for example, the silver mines were exhausted by the 1880s, and most residents moved on; only about 500 people remained by 1930. Other towns were completely abandoned and became ghost towns.
Mining Leads to Statehood
After gold was discovered in 1858 in Colorado near Pikes Peak, miners rushed to the area, declaring “Pikes Peak or Bust.” Many panned for gold without success and headed home, complaining of a “Pikes Peak hoax.” In truth, the Colorado mountains contained plenty of gold and silver, although much of it was hidden beneath the surface and hard to extract. Deep deposits of lead mixed with silver were found at Leadville in the 1870s. News of the strike attracted as many as 1,000 newcomers a week, making Leadville one of the West’s most famous boomtowns. This bonanza spurred the building of railroads through the Rocky Mountains and transformed Denver, the supply point for the mining areas, into the second-largest city in the West, after San Francisco.
vigilance committee
group of ordinary citizens who organize to find criminals and bring them to justice extract to remove by force
(continued from p. 96)
TCIB
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills 3C analyze social issues affecting women, minorities, children, immigrants, urbanization, the Social Gospel, and philanthropy of industrialists
12B identify and explain reasons for changes in political boundaries such as those resulting from statehood and international conflicts
13A analyze the causes and effects of changing demographic patterns resulting from migration within the United States, including western expansion, rural to urban, the Great Migration, and the Rust Belt to the Sun Belt
14A identify the effects of population growth and distribution on the physical environment
31A create thematic maps, graphs, and charts representing various aspects ofthe United States
The discovery of gold in the Black Hills of the Dakota Territory and copper in Montana drew miners to the region in the 1870s When the railroads were completed, many farmers and ranchers settled the area. In 1889 Congress admitted three new states: North Dakota, South Dakota, and Montana.
In the Southwest, the Arizona Territory followed a similar pattern. Miners had already begun moving to Arizona in the 1860s and 1870s to work one ofthe nation’s largest copper deposits. When silver was found at the town of Tombstone in 1877, it set off a boom that attracted a huge wave of prospectors to the territory.
The boom lasted about 30 years, and during that time Tombstone became famous for its lawlessness. Marshal Wyatt Earp and his brothers gained their reputations during the famous gunfight at the O.K. Corral there in 1881. Although Arizona did not grow as quickly as Colorado, Nevada, or Montana, by 1912 it had enough people to apply for statehood, as did the neighboring territory of New Mexico.
hydraulic mining method of mining by which water is sprayed at a very high pressure against a hill or mountain, washing away large quantities of dirt, gravel, and rock and exposing the minerals beneath the surface
Miners used high-pressure water to wash loose earth into ditches. The ditches carried the water and earth into riffle boxes that agitated the water, causing the silver or gold to settle out. The leftover debris, called tailings or"slickens,"was then washed into a nearby stream.
CRITICAL THINKING
Determining Cause and Effect How might this mining practice have helped miners in their search for minerals?
Mining Technology
Extracting minerals from the rugged mountains of the American West required ingenuity and patience. Early prospectors extracted shallow deposits of ore in a process called placer mining, using simple tools like picks, shovels, and pans.
Other prospectors used sluice mining to search riverbeds more quickly than the panning method. A sluice diverted the current of a river into trenches. The water was directed to a box with metal “riffle” bars that caused heavier minerals to settle to the bottom of the box. A screen at the end kept the minerals from escaping with the water and sediment.
When deposits near the surface ran out, miners began hydraulic mining to remove large quantities of earth and process it for minerals. Miners sprayed water at very high pressure against the hill or mountain they were mining. The water pressure washed away the dirt, gravel, and rock and exposed the minerals beneath the surface.
Changes to the Land
Hydraulic mining began in the Sierra Nevada mountains in California. It effectively removed large quantities of minerals and generated millions of dollars in gold. Unfortunately, it also had a devastating effect on the local environment. Millions of tons of silt, sand, and gravel were washed into local rivers. This sediment raised the riverbed. As a result, the rivers began overflowing their banks, causing major floods that wrecked fences, destroyed orchards, and deposited rocks and gravel on what had been good farm soil, destroying thousands of acres of rich farmland. In the 1880s, farmers fought back by suing the mining companies. In 1884 federal judge Lorenzo Sawyer ruled in favor of the farmers. He declared hydraulic mining a “public and private nuisance” and issued an injunction stopping the practice.
Congress eventually passed a law in 1893 allowing hydraulic mining if the mining company created a place to store the sediment. By then, most mining companies had moved to quartz mining—the kind of mining familiar to people today—in which deep mine shafts are dug, and miners go underground to extract the minerals.
P READING PROGRESS CHECK
Explaining What role did mining play in the development ofthe
American West?
iT‘.
Cowboys drove millions of cattle north from Texas to the railroads in Kansas and points beyond.
Ranching and Cattle Drives
GUIDING QUESTION
Why was cattle ranching an important business for the Great Plains? The lure of the Great Plains brought other Americans west to herd cattle. The Texas longhorn, a cattle breed descended from Spanish cattle introduced two centuries earlier, was well adapted to this region and flourished on scarce water and tough prairie grasses. By 1865, some 5 million roamed the Texas grasslands. Another boon to cattle ranching was the open range, a
vast area of grassland that the federal government owned. Here, ranchers could graze their herds free of charge and unrestricted by private property.
The Long Drive Begins
Prior to the Civil War, ranchers had little incentive to round up the longhorns and move them to market. Beef prices were low, and moving cattle to eastern markets was not practical. But during the war, eastern cattle had been slaughtered in huge numbers to feed the armies of the Union and the Confederacy. After the war, beef prices soared. Also, by this time, railroads had reached the Great Plains, heading to towns in Kansas and Missouri. Ranchers and livestock dealers realized that if they could move their cattle to the railroad, the longhorns could be sold for a huge profit and shipped east to market.
In 1866 ranchers rounded up about 260,000 longhorns and drove them to Sedalia, Missouri—the first “long drive.” Other cattle trails soon opened, including the route to Abilene, Kansas, as the railroads expanded in the West. Cowboys from major ranches went north with the herds, which could number anywhere from 2,000 to 5,000 cattle.
CRITICAL THINKING
Making Generalizations What effect did the increased ability to move cattle to different parts ofthe country have on the cattle industry? adapt to change in order to meet the demands of a certain environment or circumstance
open range vast areas of grassland owned by the federal government
prior before or previous
The End of the Open Range
Before long, sheep herders moved their flocks onto the range and farmers came in, breaking up the land for their crops. Eventually, hundreds of square miles of fields were fenced cheaply and easily with a new invention—barbed wire. The fences blocked the cattle trails. The cattle industry faced other struggles. Prices plunged in the mid-1880s, and many ranchers went bankrupt. The harsh winter of 1886-1887 buried the Plains in deep snow. Many cattle froze or starved to death.
Although it survived these terrible blows, the cattle industry was changed forever. The era of the open range ended, and cowboys became ranch hands. From then on, herds were raised on fenced-in ranches.
B READING PROGRESS CHECK
Analyzing Describe the reasons for the growth of the cattle industry on the Great Plains.
Settling the Hispanic Southwest
guidingquestion What was the relationship like between Hispanics in the Southwest and new settlers?
For centuries, much of what is today the American Southwest belonged to Spain’s empire. After Mexico won its independence, the region became the northern territories of the Republic of Mexico. When the United States defeated Mexico in 1848, it acquired this vast region. According to the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo, which ended the war, the region’s residents retained their property rights and could become American citizens.
Settling the West 99
hacienda a huge ranch
Changing Demographics in the Southwest
In California, the Spanish mission system had collapsed by the early 1800s. In its place, a society dominated by a landholding elite had emerged. These landowners owned vast haciendas—ranches that covered thousands of acres. The heavy influx of “Forty-Niners” during the California gold rusho 1849, however, changed this society dramatically. California’s population grew from about from 14,000 to around 100,000 in less than two years and its demographic pattern changed dramatically. Suddenly, Hispanic Californians were vastly outnumbered.
Some Hispanic Californians welcomed the newcomers and the economic growth that resulted. Others distrusted the English-speaking prospectors, who tried to exclude them from the mines. When California achieved statehood in 1850, Hispanics served in many state and local offices. Increasingly, however, the original Hispanic population found its status diminished, and Hispanics were often relegated to lower-paving and less desirable jobs.
As they had done with Native Americans, settlers from the East clashed with Mexican Americans over land. Across the region, many Hispanics lost their land to the new settlers. Mexican American claims to the land often
dated back to Spanish land grants. These grants were hundreds of years old and defined the boundaries of property in vague terms. When more than one person claimed ownership of a property, American courts frequently held that the old land grants were insufficient proof of ownership. This allowed others to stake claim to the property. In some instances, outright fraud was used to take land illegally from Mexican Americans.
The cattle boom of the 1870s and 1880s had a tremendous impact on Hispanics in the Southwest, where many had long worked as vaqueros (the Spanish word for “cowboys”). Spanish vaqueros had a long history of sharing their techniques for managing cattle. They shared methods of branding with Florida cattlemen as far back in history as when Florida was a Spanish colony. This interaction with American cowboys enriched the English language with such Spanish words as hirint. lasso, and stampede.
In the mid-19th century, most Hispanics in the Southwest lived on large haciendas where they worked in the fields or helped tend cattle.
CRITICAL TH3NK8W6
Identifying Central Ideas How might the change from being the majority to becoming the minority have affected Hispanics in the Southwest? » : 4-,
V/r*".
V
Clashes and Compromises in the Southwest
With the increasing demand for beef in the eastern United States, English-speaking ranchers wanted to expand their herds and claimed large tracts of land of Mexican origin. In some cases, the Hispanic population fought back. In New Mexico, residents of the town of Las Vegas were outraged when English-speaking ranchers tried to fence in land that had long been used by the community to graze livestock. In 1889 a group of Hispanic New Mexicans calling themselves Las Gorras Blancas (“The White Caps”) raided ranches owned by English speakers, tore down their fences, and burned their barns and houses. Attempts were made to call in federal troops to stop the raids, but the president refused to send them. The raids finally ended in 1891.
Despite the influx of English-speaking settlers, Hispanics in New Mexico remained more influential in public affairs than did their counterparts in California and Texas.
Hispanics remained the majority, both in population and in the territorial legislature. In addition, a Hispanic frequently served as New Mexico’s territorial delegate to Congress.
As more railroads were built in the 1880s and 1890s, the population of the Southwest continued to swell. The region attracted not only Americans and European immigrants from the East but also immigrants from Mexico. Mexican immigrants worked mainly in agriculture and on the railroads. In the growing cities of the Southwest—such as El Paso, Albuquerque, and Los Angeles—Hispanics settled in neighborhoods called barrios. These neighborhoods had Spanish-speaking businesses and Spanish-language newspapers, and they helped keep Hispanic cultural and religious traditions alive. As native Californian Mariano Guadalupe Vallejo explained in 1890:
A fancily dressed vaquero, known as a charro, poses for a photo in 1890.
CRITICAL THINKING
Making Generalizations Based on the appearance ofthe vaquero, what generalizations can be made about the man? barrios Spanish-speaking neighborhoods in a town or city
PRIMARY SOURCE
**No class of American citizens is more loyal than the Spanish Californians, but we shall always be especially proud... to honor the founders of our ancient families, and the saints and heroes of our history since the days when Father Junipero planted the cross at Monterey. **
—quoted in Foreigners in Their Native Land
H READING PROGRESS CHECK
Describing How did vaqueros contribute to the cattle industry in the West?
LESSON 1 REVIEW
Reviewing Vocabulary
1.	Analyzing What was the significance of barrios to Hispanic culture in the West? 3C
Using Your Notes
2.	Listing Review the notes that you completed throughout the lesson and list the discoveries that attracted prospectors and settlers to the boomtowns of the American West. 12B, 13A, 14A
Answering the Guiding Questions
3.	Determining Cause and Effect How did mineral discoveries shape the settlement ofthe West? 12B, 13A, 14A
4.	Summarizing Why was cattle ranching an important business for the Great Plains? 3B
5.	Analyzing What was the relationship like between Hispanics in the Southwest and new settlers? 3B, 3C, 13A, 14A
Writing Activity
ARGUMENT
Suppose that you are a farmer near Nevada City, California, in the 1880s. Write a letter explaining why hydraulic mining endangers your livelihood and therefore should be banned. 12A, 14A Settling the West 101
S U IL B U
t t, M' I- Tins 31A

Reading and Creating a Thematic Map
Why Learn This Skill?
You will often encounter thematic maps when studying history. Knowing how to read and create a thematic map will help you understand the information this type of map presents.
Learning the Skill
A thematic map takes data about a region and puts it on a map using colors and symbols that show how the data connects to geographical features. Thematic maps usually portray information about the politics, economy, society, culture, climate, or history of a geographic area. A land use map is an example of a thematic map. It uses colors and symbols to show things such as where crops are grown, where mines are located, or the population density. Another example is an historical map that uses symbols, arrows, and colors to show the routes followed by explorers or how borders change over time.
geographic features have to be included? This decision is usually based on the patterns you want to show.
•	Decide what symbols and colors best present the data. Should the symbols change size or color for different sets of data? Does the map need to show things changing over time?
•	Prepare your map key carefully.
When reading a thematic map, follow these steps:
•	Read the title: This will help you understand the map's theme, location, time period, and type of data being shown.
•	Read the Map Key: Thematic maps use symbols and colors to convey information. Sometimes the symbols change size to indicate if more or less of something exists at that point on the map.
•	Study the map and draw conclusions: Look for patterns on the map. They reveal how the data presented by the thematic symbols and colors relates to the geographic features.
When creating a thematic map, follow these steps:
•	Identify the data you want to present.
•	Decide what kind of map you need.
What region do you want to show? What
Practicing this Skill
Analyze thematic map "Mining Helps Build a Nation" then answer the following questions:
1.	What part of the United States does the map show?
2.	What symbols are used to depict mining activities?
3.	What other information does the map provide?
4.	Use the patterns on the map to list the states in order of their gold and silver discoveries. Explain why you put them in the order you did.
Applying the Skill
Create your own thematic map. Research where different types of crops were grown in the American west from 1870 to 1900. Use the thematic map to show key events and the geographic patterns that resulted from farming and ranching in the west.
102
e's More Online!
IMAGE
Farming in the West MAGE
Sod House IDEO
Settling the West INTERACTIVE SELF-CHECK UIZ

ading HELPDESK
lemic Vocabulary ospective • innovation
;ent Vocabulary
imestead
y farming
idbuster
>nanza farm
NG NOTES:
ideas and Details
inizing As you read about the ?ment ofthe Great Plains, complete phic organizer similar to the relow by listing the ways the rnment encouraged settlement.
S
Texas Essentiaf Knowledge and Skills 3B analyze economic issues such as industrialization, the growth of railroads, the growth of labor unions, farm issues, the cattle industry boom, the rise of entrepreneurship, free enterprise, and the pros and cons of big business
continued on the next page
LESSON 2
Farming the Plains



> Why would people take on the challenges of

It Matters Because
The Homestead Act encouraged settlers to move to the Great Plains. Although life was difficult, settlers discovered that they could grow wheat using new technologies. By 1890, the land had been settled and cultivated, and there was no longer a true frontier in the United States.
The Beginnings of Settlement
guiding question What encouraged settlers to move wesf to the Great Plains?
The Great Plains is a vast region of prairie roughly west of the Mississippi River and east of the Rocky Mountains in the United States and Canada. Although the population of the Great Plains grew steadily after the Civil War, the settlers faced many challenges. Summer temperatures could top 100°F. Prairie fires were a frequent danger. Sometimes swarms of grasshoppers destroyed crops. Winter brought terrible blizzards and extreme cold. A settler who experienced the fierce winters wrote in her diary on March 12, 1884:
PRIMARY SOURCE
C6
Nobody can describe a blizzard. There is one kind in which the snow sticks all over everything, and another that is colder, in which the snow drives with terrible force, the sun shining above it. This is the Dakota boomer's exhilarating weather! W —from The Checked Years: A Bonanza Farm Diary, 1884-1888
In this dry grassland, trees grew naturally only along rivers and streams. Without trees to use as timber, many settlers cut chunks of sod, densely packed soil held together by grass roots, to build their homes. To obtain water, they had to drill wells more than 100 feet deep and operate the pump by hand. Land once thought to be worthless was eventually transformed into Americas wheat belt. Major Stephen Long, who explored the region with an army expedition in 1819, called it the “Great American Desert”:
Settling the West 103
(continued from p. 103)
TEKS
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills 12A analyze the impact of physical and human geographic factors on the settlement ofthe Great Plains, the Klondike Gold Rush, the Panama Canal, the Dust Bowl, and the levee failure in New Orleans after Hurricane Katrina
13A analyze the causes and effects of changing demographic patterns resulting from migration within the United States, including western expansion, rural to urban, the Great Migration, and the Rust Belt to the Sun Belt
14A identify the effects of population growth and distribution on the physical environment
15A describe how the economic impact of the Transcontinental Railroad and the Homestead Act contributed to the close ofthe frontier in the late 19th century
27B explain how specific needs result in scientific discoveries and technological innovations in agriculture, the military, and medicine, including vaccines
30C use different forms of media to convey information, including written to visual and statistical to written or visual, using available computer software as appropriate
31B pose and answer questions about geographic distributions and patterns shown on maps, graphs, charts, and available databases
PRIMARYSOURCE
« flltisalmostwholly unfit for cultivation, and of course uninhabitable by a people depending upon agriculture for their subsistence.... [T]he scarcity of wood and water, almost un.formly prevalent, will prove an insuperable obstacle in the way of settling the country.
r	_qUOted in An Account of an Expedition from Pittsburghto
Rocky Mountains, Performed in the Years 1819, Il
prospective to be likely to, or have intentions to, perform an act
homestead a piece of U.S. public land acquired by living on it and cultivating it
dry farming a way of farming dry land in which seeds are planted deep in the ground where there is some moisture
sodbuster a name given to Great Plains farmers
innovation a new idea or method
bonanza farm a large, highly profitable wheat farm
During the late 1800s, the construction and development ofthe railroads stimulated growth. Railroad companies sold land along the rail lines at low prices and provided credit to prospective settlers. Pamphlets and posters spread the news across Europe and America that cheap land could be claimed by anyone willing to move.
In 1862 the government encouraged settlement on the Great Plains by passing the Homestead Act. For a small registration fee, an individual could file for a homestead—a tract of public land available for settlement. A homesteader could claim up to 160 acres of land and receive title to it after living there for five years. The Homestead Act provided a legal metho< for settlers to acquire clear title to property on the frontier. With their property rights assured and the railroads providing lumber and supplies, settlers began moving to the Plains in large numbers.
g READING PROGRESS CHECK
Analyzing What developments of the late 1800s attracted settlers to endure the hardships ofthe Great Plains?
Technology and the Wheat Belt
guiding question What new metho ds and technologies revolutionized agriculture and made it practical to cultivate the Plains?
The harsh dry climate and densely packed soil ofthe Great Plains required new farming methods and technological innovations in order for settlement to begin. One new farming method, called dry farming, was to plant seeds deep in the ground, where there was enough moisture for them to grow. By the 1860s, Plains farmers were using steel plows, threshing machines, seed drills, and reapers. These new machines made dry farming possible. Still, soil on the Plains could blow away during a dry season. As the population grew, the impact of the sodbusters, as those who plowed the Plains were called, helped change the environment. Many farmers eventually lost their homesteads through the combined effects of drought, wind erosion of the soil they had loosened, and overuse ofthe land.
Large landholders could buy mechanical reapers and steam tractors that made it easier to harvest a large crop. Threshing machines knocked kernels loose from the stalks. Mechanical binders tied the stalks into bundles for collection. These innovations were well suited for harvesting wheat, a crop that could endure the dry conditions of the Plains.
During the 1880s, many farmers from the states of the old Northwest Territory moved to the Great Plains to take advantage of the inexpensive land and new technology. The Wheat Belt began at the eastern edge of the Great Plains and covered much of the Dakotas and parts of Nebraska and Kansas. The new machines allowed a family to bring in a substantial harvest on a wheat farm of several hundred acres. Some wheat farms covered up to 65,000 acres. These were called bonanza farms because they yielded big profits. Like mine owners, bonanza farmers formed companies, invested in property and equipment, and hired laborers as needed.
104
Farmers Fall on Hard Times
The bountiful harvests in the Wheat Belt helped the United States become the world’s leading exporter of wheat by the 1880s. Then things began to go wrong. A severe drought struck the Plains in the late 1880s, destroying crops and ruining the soil. In addition, competition from other wheat-producing nations increased. By the 1890s, a glut of wheat on the world market caused prices to drop.
Some farmers tried to make it through these difficult times by mortgaging their land—that is,
they borrowed money from a bank based on the value of their land. If they failed to meet their mortgage payments, they forfeited the land to the bank. Some who lost their land continued to work it as tenant farmers, renting the land from its new owners. By 1900, tenants cultivated about one-third of the farms on the Plains.
Technology helped make it possible to farm the vast open grasslands of America. Here, horse-drawn farm equipment is used to gather hay in the 1880s.
Closing the Frontier
On April 22, 1889, the government opened one of the last large territories for settlement. Within hours, thousands of people raced to stake claims in an event known as the Oklahoma Land Rush. The next year, the Census Bureau reported that there was no longer a true frontier left in America. In reality, there was still a lot of unoccupied land, and the Homestead Act continued to encourage new settlement into the 1900s, but the “closing of the frontier” marked the end of an era. It worried many people, including historian Frederick Jackson Turner. Turner believed that the frontier had provided a “safety-valve of social discontent.” It was a place where Americans could always make a fresh start.
Most settlers did indeed make a fresh start, adapting to the difficult environment of the Plains. Water from their deep wells enabled them to plant trees and gardens. Railroads brought lumber and brick to replace sod as a building material, coal for fuel, and manufactured goods from the East, such as clothes and household goods. Small-scale farmers rarely became wealthy, but they could be self-sufficient. Typical homesteaders raised cattle, chickens, and a few crops. The real story of the West was about ordinary people who settled down and built homes and communities through great effort.
CRITICAL THINKING
Determining Cause and Effect How did technology help facilitate the settlement ofthe Great Plains?
D READING PROGRESS CHECK
Identifying How did new technologies help improve settlers' ability to cultivate larger, more profitable farms?
LESSON 2 REVIEW
Reviewing Vocabulary
1.	Explaining Why were some settlers on the Great Plains called homesteaders? 15A
2.	Explaining How did new machinery make dry farming easier for farmers? 14C.15A
Using Your Notes
3.	Drawing Conclusions Use your notes to explain why you think the government and the railroads used special policies to attract settlement in the Great Plains. 12A, 13A, 14C, 15A
Answering the Guiding Questions
4.	Identifying Cause and Effect What encouraged settlers to move west to the Great Plains? 12A, 13A, 14A, 15A, 27B
5.	Summarizing What new methods and technologies revolutionized agriculture and made it practical to cultivate the Plains? 14A.15A, 27B
Writing About History
ARGUMENT
Write an essay expressing your opinion about whether the "closing ofthe frontier" described by historian Frederick Jackson Turner was good or bad for the country. Settling the West 105
J
S K M
Interpreting Statistics
Why Learn This Skill?
Statistics are collections of data. They are often presented in charts and graphs and play an important role in inductive reasoning. Inductive reasoning is when we use evidence to make broad generalizations. Inductive reasoning does not prove something is true. Instead, when you reach a conclusion through inductive reasoning, you decide how probable, or likely, it is to be true. Inductive arguments can be strong or weak, not right or wrong. They help us make predictions and form hypotheses that we can test to see if they are true. Learning to interpret statistics improves inductive reasoning and helps us make better predictions. Learning the Skill
Use the following steps to help you interpret statistical information:
•	Scan the chart or graph, reading the titles and labels to get an idea of what is being shown.
•	Examine the statistics shown, looking for increases and decreases, similarities and differences.
•	Look for a correlation. When two pieces of data appear to be related, we say there is a correlation between them. In a positive correlation, as one number rises, the other number rises. In a negative correlation, as one number rises, the other number falls. For example, the percentage of overweight people has increased since 1970. At the same time the percentage of people living in the suburbs has also increased since 1970. There is a positive correlation between these two numbers.
•	Determine the conclusions you can draw. A correlation does not imply causation. Just because two numbers appear to have a relationship does not mean the one set of data causes the other. Using the example above, you might think being overweight makes you live in the suburbs. But you have to ask whether that is probable. In this case, it seems more likely there are independent reasons causing both numbers to rise. On the other hand, using inductive reasoning,
TEKS 30C, 31B
we can create a hypothesis to explain the relationship. For example, living in the suburbs might mean people exercise less because they don't walk to work. Asa result, they gain weight. Having used the statistics to create a hypothesis, wecannoi use other means to check if it is true.
Geographic Distribution of Population in the United States, 187D-						
Year	Born in the West			Bom Somewhere D		
	Living in the West	Living in the East		Living in the East	Living in th	
	Number	Number	Percent	Number	Number	1
1890	9,416,035	282,359	2.9	38,906,809	4,360,516	
1880	6,069,112	210,359	3.3	33,685,290	3,510,737	
1870	3,324,048	135,769	3.9	27,084,122	2,434,721	
Practicing this Skill
Analyze the geographic distribution and geographic patterns in the chart and answer tl following questions.
1.	Analyzing Geographic Distributions What data does the chart show?
2.	Analyzing Geographic Patterns Whicl figures in the chart are rising? Which a falling?
3.	Analyzing Geographic Patterns Is thei a positive or negative correlation in the data?
4.	Analyzing Geographic Distributions What hypothesis or prediction can you conclude from these statistics?
Applying the Skill
Posing Questions Reexamine the chart. P< additional questions that call into question conclusions you reached. What other questions about the geographic distributio and geographic patterns do you need answered to test your conclusions? Convey your information visually by presenting the statistical information as a bar graph or pie chart. If available, use spreadsheet softwai to create the graph or chart.
106
etworks
ere's More Online!
BIOGRAPHY
Chief Joseph BIOGRAPHY
Helen Hunt Jackson BIOGRAPHY
Sitting Bull CHART/GRAPH
Major Native American Treaties f GRAPHIC NOVEL The
Importance ofthe Buffalo
INFOGRAPHIC
Uses ofthe Buffalo VIDEO
Settlers and Native Americans INTERACTIVE SELF-CHECK QUIZ
Reading HELPDESK



^0^

LESSON 3
Native Americans
$!«-
sL
art
letake on the challenges of
liiM
'Bi
cademic Vocabulary
relocate • ensure approximately
It Matters Because
-As miners, ranchers, and farmers entered Native American lands on the Great Plains, clashes grew more common. Conflicts continued as the government tried to force Native Americans onto reservations and pressured them to assimilate into the culture ofthe United States.
ontent Vocabulary
nomad	• assimilate
annuity • allotment
TAKING NOTES:
fey Ideas and Details
Sequencing As you read about Native Americans during the late 1800s,
:omplete a time line like the one below to record the clashes between Native Americans and the U.S. government andthe results of each.
TiltS Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills
k 3A analyze political issues such as Indian
policies, the growth of political machines, civil service reform, and the beginnings of Populism
3C analyze social issues affecting women, minorities, children, immigrants, urbanization, the Social Gospel, and philanthropy of industrialists
continued on the next page
Struggles ofthe Plains Indians
guiding question Howdid westward migration change the Plains Indians'way of life?
For centuries the Great Plains were home to many groups of Native Americans. Some lived in farming and hunting communities, but many were nomads who roamed the land following their main source of food—the buffalo. The Plains Indian nations were divided into bands, ranging from a few dozen to several hundred people, who lived in extended family groups and respected nature.
The settlers who migrated to the Plains deprived these Native Americans of their hunting grounds, broke treaties that guaranteed them land, and often forced them to relocate. Native Americans resisted by attacking settlers’ property and occasionally going to war with them.
The Dakota Sioux Uprising
In 1862 the Dakota people (part of the Sioux) had a conflict with the settlers in Minnesota. The Sioux had agreed to live on a reservation in exchange for annuities that frequently never reached them. At the time, many Dakota lived in poverty and faced starvation. When local traders refused to provide food on credit, the Dakota protested by launching a rebellion that killed hundreds of settlers.
A military tribunal sentenced more than 300 Dakota to death after the uprising. After reviewing the evidence, however, President Lincoln reduced the number condemned to death to 38. Others fled the reservation when federal troops arrived and became exiles in a region that bore their name—the Dakota Territory.
Settling the West 107
Red Cloud's War
The Dakota Territory was home to another group of Sioux, the Lakota, nomads who had won control of their hunting grounds from other Native Americans. Their chiefs were Red Cloud, Crazy Horse, and Sitting Bull. In December 1866, the U.S. Army was building forts along the Bozeman Trail, the path to the Montana gold mines. Crazy Horse tricked the fort’s commander into sending Captain William Fetterman and about 80 soldiers out to pursue what they thought was a small raiding party.
Hundreds of waiting warriors wiped out the unit, an event that becam known as Fetterman’s Massacre, marking the start of “Red Cloud’s War.” The Sioux continued to resist any military presence in the region, and in 1868 the army abandoned its posts along the trail.
Native Americans are attacked by U.S. troops at Sand Creek.
CRITICAL THINKING
Making Inferences Why do you think obtaining peace between Native Americans and settlers was so difficult?
nomad a person who continually moves from place to place, usually in search of food
relocate to move to a new place
annuity money paid by contract at regular intervals
(continued from p. 107)
TEKS
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills 26A explain actions taken by people to expand economic opportunities and political rights, including those for racial, ethnic, and religious minorities as well as women, in American society 26B discuss the Americanization movement to assimilate immigrants and American Indians into American culture
Sand Creek Massacre
In Colorado, tensions began to rise in the 1860s between miners entering the territory in search of silver and gold and the Cheyenne and Arapaho who alre; lived there. As the number of settlers increased, bands of Native Americans began raiding wagon trains and ranches. By the summer of 1864, dozens of homes had been burned and an estimated 200 settlers killed. The governor persuaded the Native Americans to surrender at Fort Lyon, where he promise food and protection. Those who failed to report would be subject to attack
Although a number of Native Americans surrendered, many others did not. In November 1864, Chief Black Kettle brought several hundred Cheyenne to the fort to negotiate a peace deal. Fort Lyon’s commander, Major Scott Anthony, allowed the chief to make camp at nearby SandCre while he awaited orders. Shortly afterward, Colonel John Chivington oftl Colorado Volunteers attacked Black Kettle’s camp, even though the Cheyenne were there to negotiate.
What actually happened at Sand Creek is unclear. Some witnesses stated that Black Kettle had been flying both an American flag and a white flag of truce, which Chivington ignored. Others reported that the American troops fired on the unsuspecting Native Americans and then brutally murdered hundreds of women and children. Still others described a savage battle in which both sides fought ferociously for two days. Few soldiers died, but the number of Native Americans reported killed varied from 69 to 600. Thetn of what happened at Sand Creek is still debated.
ensure to guarantee or make certain
A
Doomed Plan for Peace As conflicts escalated with Native Americans, Congress took action. In 1 Congress formed an Indian Peace Commission, which proposed creating two large reservations on the Plains, one for the Sioux and another for Native Americans of the southern Plains. Federal agents would run the reservations, and the army would deal with any groups that refused to report or remain there.
The Indian Peace Commission’s plan was doomed to failure. Althouj negotiators pressured Native American leaders into signing treaties, they could not ensure that those leaders or their followers would abide by th< Nor could anyone prevent settlers from violating their terms. The Native Americans who did move to reservations faced many ofthe same con itions that drove the Dakota Sioux to violence—poverty, despair, ar the corrupt practices of American traders.
H READING PROGRESS CHECK
Explaining How did the arrival of new settlers affect the Plains Indians?
108
The Last Native American Wars
guidingquestion IVere Native Americans justified in leaving the reservations and refusing further relocation by the government?
By the 1870s, many Native Americans had left the reservations in disgust. They preferred hunting buffalo on the open plains. The buffalo were rapidly disappearing, however, as professional buffalo hunters sought hides for markets in the East and other hunters killed for sport. When buffalo blocked rail traffic, the railroads killed them and fed the meat to workers. The army, determined to force Native Americans onto reservations, encouraged buffalo killing. By 1889, very few buffalo remained.
Battle of the Little Bighorn
In 1876 prospectors overran the Lakota Sioux reservation in the Dakota Territory to mine gold in the Black Hills. The Lakota saw no reason to abide by a treaty that settlers were violating, so many left the reservation to hunt near the Bighorn Mountains in Montana. The government responded by sending an expedition accompanied by Lieutenant Colonel George A. Custer and the Seventh Cavalry. Custer underestimated the fighting capabilities of the Lakota and the Cheyenne. On June 25, 1876, he launched an attack on one of the largest groups of Native American warriors ever assembled on the Great Plains. The Native American forces rapidly defeated Custer and his more than 200 soldiers, killing them all. Newspaper accounts portraying Custer as a victim of a massacre produced a public outcry in the East, and
GEOGRAPHY CONNECTION
Native Americans fought hard to maintain their land and way of life, but over time, they agreed to move to reservations in different areas ofthe country to save their people.
PLACES AND REGIONS
In what region ofthe United States did a majority of battles occur between the settlers and the Native Americans during this time period?
HUMAN SYSTEMS
From whatstateto whatstatedidtheNez Percetravelin 1877?Throughwhat other states did they pass? BIOGRAPHY
CRITICAL THINKING
j Drawing Conclusions Why do you	'
think Custerwas removed from his	j
command fortestifying against the	j
Bureau of Indian Affairs?	t
George Custer (1839-1876)
George Custer graduated at the bottom of his West Point class, but through heroism during the Civil War, he became a general at age 23. The Cheyenne called him "Yellow Hair" because he wore his curly blond hair to his shoulders. President Grant removed Custer from his post for testifying about corruption in the Bureau of Indian Affairs, but he was soon reinstated—a decision that cost him his life and those of his troops.
the army stepped up its campaign on the Plains. Sitting Bull and his followers fled to Canada, but the other Lakota were forced to return to the reservation and give up the Black Hills.
Flight of the Nez Perce
Farther west, the Nez Perce people, led by Chief Joseph, refused to be moved to a smaller reservation in Idaho in 1877. When the army came to relocate them, they fled their homes and embarked on a journey of more than 1,300 miles. Finally, in October 1877, Chief Joseph acknowledged that the struggle was over. He and his followers were then exiled to Oklahoma. Tragedy at Wounded Knee
Native American resistance came to a final, tragic end on the Lakota Sioux reservation in 1890. Defying government orders, the Lakota continued to perform the Ghost Dance, a ritual that celebrated a hoped-for day of reckoning when settlers would disappear, the buffalo would return, and Native Americans would be reunited with their dead ancestors.
Federal authorities had banned the ceremony, fearing it would lead to violence. They blamed the latest defiance on Sitting Bull, who had returnee from Canada, and sent police to arrest the chief. Sitting Bull’s supporters tried to stop the arrest. In the exchange of gunfire that followed, Sitting Bu was killed and a group of Ghost Dancers fled the reservation. On Decembei 29, 1890, a battle ensued at Wounded Knee ('reek in South Dakota, taking the lives of 25 U.S. soldiers and approximately 200 Lakota men, women, and children.
Americanization and the Dawes Act
Some Americans had long opposed the mistreatment of Native Americans. In her 1881 book A Century of Dishonor, Helen Hunt Jackson detailed the years of broken promises and injustices. Her descriptions of events such as the Sand Creek Massacre sparked new debate on the issue. Some Americans believed the solution was Americanization. They thought that Native Americans should be encouraged to abandon their traditional tribal culture and assimilate into American society by learning English, adopting Anieric culture and values, and eventually becoming American citizens. Beginning in the 1880s, the Bureau of Indian Affairs sponsored the creation of Indian
POLITICAL CARTOONS
hk CARL SCHURZ INVESTIGATING THE BUREAU OF INDIAN AFFAIRS
This cartoon from 1878 shows Secretary ofthe Interior Carl Schurz investigating the Indian "bureau."
1	Analyzing According to the cartoon, why was the Bureau of Indian Affairs unable to help Native Americans?
2	Making Inferences Why do you
think Schurz did not want the War Department to regain control of Indian affairs?
Due to a cumbersome system of handling the administration of Indian laws, the agents of the Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA) had many opportunities for personal enrichment and an invitation for large-scale corruption. Secretary ofthe Interior Carl Schurz attempted to cleanse the BIA of corruption and prevent the War Department from regaining management of Indian affairs.
110
boarding schools separate from reservations. By 1902, some 25 schools had been set up. Officials then pressured parents to send children to these schools. There they were required to speak English, choose an English name, dress in American-style clothes, cut their hair to match American styles, attend church, and learn vocational skills. Over time the schools became controversial. They were often underfunded and poorly maintained, and discipline was strict. Some students found the schools repressive, and many cases of abuse were reported.
A second Americanization strategy was to encourage Native Americans to abandon the reservation system and become independent landowners. In 1887 Congress passed the Dawes Act, which altered the reservation system by dividing reservation land into allotments for farming or ranching.
Under the act, 160 acres were allotted to each head of household, 80 acres to each single adult, and 40 acres to each child. Any land remaining after allotments would be sold to American settlers, with the proceeds going into a trust for Native Americans. Citizenship would be granted to Native Americans who stayed on their allotments for 25 years.
While some Native Americans succeeded as farmers or ranchers, many had little training or enthusiasm for either pursuit. They often found their allotments too small to be profitable, so they leased them. In addition, some Native American groups had grown attached to their reservations and hated to see them divided into homesteads. Few stayed long enough to qualify for citizenship.
In the end, the assimilation policy proved a dismal failure. Native American culture on the Plains was doomed because it depended on buffalo for food, clothing, fuel, and shelter. When the herds were wiped out, there was no way to sustain the traditional way of life. Although the Dawes Act failed in its goals, American reformers continued to advocate for assimilation. In the early 1900s, reform groups such as the Friends of the Indians and the Indian Rights Association began to push for citizenship for all Native Americans believing it would encourage greater assimilation. Finally, in 1924 Congress passed the Citizenship Act, granting all Native Americans citizenship. In 1934 the Indian Reorganization Act reversed the Dawes Act’s policy of assimilation. It restored some reservation lands, gave Native Americans control over those lands, and permitted them to elect their own governments.
H READING PROGRESS CHECK
Cause and Effect What effect did Helen Hunt Jackson's book A Century of Dishonor have?
approximately an estimate of a figure that is close to the actual figure
assimilate to absorb a group into the culture of another population
allotment a plot of land assigned to an individual or a family for a specified use
SKILLS PRACTICE
Ask for help about something you do not understand about Americanization or the Dawes Act. Raise your hand or use some other signal. This may seem basic, but sometimes people feel embarrassed or unsure and don’t want others to know they don’t understand something. Successful learning requires practice asking questions. So, raise your hand!
LESSON 3 REVIEW
Reviewing Vocabulary
1.	Making Connections What is an annuity? What was the connection between annuities and the Dakota Sioux Uprising of 1862? 3A, 3C
2.	Summarizing How did settlers think they would get Native Americans to assimilate into their culture? 3A
Using Your Notes
3.	Making Generalizations Review the notes that you completed throughout the lesson to write a generalization about the result of the battles between Native Americans and the United States government. 3A,3C,26B
Answering the Guiding Questions
4.	Summarizing How did westward migration change the Plains Indians'way of life? 3A,3C,26A,26B
5.	Defending Were Native Americans justified in leaving the reservations and refusing further relocation by the government? 3A, 26A, 26B
Writing About History
NARRATIVE
Assume the role of a Plains Indian who has been granted an allotment under the Dawes Act. Write a journal entry describing how you feel and how the change has affected your life. Settling the West 111
chapter 2 Assessment
Directions:	On	a separate sheet	of paper,	answer	the	questions	below.	Make	sure you	read	carefully and
answer all parts to the question.
Lesson Review
Lesson 1
0 Naming What major agricultural enterprise became vital to the settlement of the southern Great Plains? Why was it important? 3C
0 Analyzing What social issues did Mexican Americans share when dealing with settlers from the East? 3B
0 Analyzing How did the cattle industry boom affect the economy ofthe West? 12B
0 Explaining Identify and explain the reasons western political boundaries changed between 1870 and 1900.
Lesson 2
0 Analyzing How did railroad companies help to encourage
settlement of the Great Plains? What other human
geographic factors affected settlement ofthe Great Plains?
12A
0 Evaluating How did the economic impact ofthe
Homestead Act contribute to the close ofthe frontier in the late 19th century? 15A
0 Analyzing How did the hardships offarmers in the West affect the economy ofthe area? 3B
Lesson 3
0 Analyzing What factors caused social conflicts between settlers on the Great Plains and Native Americans? 3C
0 Describing What was the Americanization movement and what policies did its followers propose for Native Americans? 3A.26B
0 Analyzing How did the Indian policies ofthe United States government affect the relationship between settlers in the West and Native Americans? 3A
0 Explaining What influenced the legislation they passer What actions did Congress take to expand political rights for Native Americans? 26A
Exploring the Essential Question
0 Discussing Write an essay in which you describe the hardships of and advantages to emigrating west during the nineteenth century. 12A
Critical Thinking
0 Analyzing How did the physical geography of the Grea Plains impact the farmers who settled there? 12A
0 Identifying How did population growth in the Great Plains affect the environment? 14A
0 Describing What was the Homestead Act and how did contribute to the closing of the frontier? 15A
0 Hypothesizing What happened to boomtowns once i mines that supported them were used up?
0 Drawing Conclusions What caused the increase in migration to the West, and what effect did this migrati have on the demographic patterns ofthe United States
0 Explaining What specific needs facing settlers on thi Great Plains led to new scientific discoveries and technological innovations in agriculture? How did thesi innovations contribute to the formation of the Wheat E
0 Evaluating What were the consequences of the Dawi Act and how did it reflect the Americanization movement? 26B
0 Evaluating How did the economic impact ofthe Homestead Act contribute to the close ofthe frontier ii late 19th century? 15A
Need Extra Help?
112
Social Studies Skills
O
Identifying Cause and Effect How did societal changes brought about by the gold rush impact Hispanics in California? 3C © Synthesizing What territory did the Wheat Belt encompass? Use correct social studies terminology to explain the territories involved. 30B
Understanding Relationships Why did the Dakota Sioux launch a major uprising in Minnesota?
© Problem-Solving What problems did sodbusters encounter when farming the Great Plains? How did some sodbusters overcome these problems? 27B
$ Research Skills Use Internet or print resources to research the major characteristics that defined the historical era ofthe 1860s to 1900. Write a short summary ofthe era and how each characteristic ofthe era was important to the history ofthe country. 2A, 2B
Identifying Perspectives and Differing Interpretations
Conduct research to find statistics about the wages, land prices, and employment opportunities on the Great Plains. Create a video or print advertisement that uses those statistics to promote life in the West. If you make a video advertisement, write the script out ahead of time. The advertisement should try to persuade people from different countries to move to the West and take advantages of its rich resources, and economy. 3OC
Geography Skills Create a thematic map ofthe major cattle trails in the United States during the late 1800s. Compare the map with a classmate and then display the map in the classroom. 31A
(J) Problem Solving Suppose you lived in the 1800s and received a letter from a relative who was struggling to make a living farming on the frontier. Write a letter to the relative in return to suggest a solution for the problem and a suggestion as to how the solution can be implemented. 32A, 32B
Native American Population		
Year	Total	On Reservations
1870	313,712	288,646
1880	306,543	256,127
1890	248,253	243,534
Source: Nations Within a Nation; U.S. Census.
Q
Geographic Distributions and Patterns What geographic patterns do you see in the chart? Is there a positive or negative correlation in the geographic distribution? What is different about the distribution in 1880 compared to the other two years? What might have caused this difference? What questions would you need answered in order to be sure your explanation of why 1880 is different from the other two years is correct? 30C, 31B DBQ
Analyzing Primary Sources
Read the excerpt from Chief Joseph, leader ofthe Nez Perce, and answer the questions that follow.
PRIMARYSOURCE
« Our chiefs are killed.... The little children are freezing to death.
My people... have no blankets, no food.... Hear me, my chiefs; I am tired; my heart is sick and sad. From where the sun now stands I will fight no more forever."
—from his speech of surrender to the U.S. Army, 1877
(J) Analyzing Primary Sources What does the quotation say about the government effort to Americanize Native Americans into American culture? 26B, 29A
Constructing Arguments What argument could you have made to the U.S. Army to help Chief Joseph and the Nez Perce instead of accepting their surrender?
Need Extra Help?
	21	22	23	24	25	26	27	28	29	30	31
| Go to page	1 1OO	104	1 ;107 : |	(104 |	94	96	99	96	1 109 |	110 1	110 I
Settling the West 113
Analyzing Visuals
Use the image to answer the following questions.
This engraving from 1889 depicts the Oklahoma Land Rush.
© Interpreting What is the significance of the title of this engraving, The Rush for the Promised Land: Over the Border to Oklahoma? 13A
© Analyzing Visuals What impression does this image give about the settlers who are rushing into the vast frontier to the "Promised Land"? 13A
Use the map Mining Helps Build a Nation to answer the following questions.
© Identifying Which territories gained statehood due to the growth of mining industries? 12B
© Explaining What reasons led to the change from U5. territory to statehood for these western states? 12B
Extended Response Question
© Expository Write an essay comparing two different perspectives of the settlement of the West. Analyze how the views of Native Americans and white settlers differs on settling the Great Plains. How did each group view th government's involvement and the environment?The essay should include an introduction, at least three paragraphs, and a conclusion that supports your opinion Use information gathered from primary and secondary sources to provide examples to support your answer. 29A, 3OA
Standardized Test Practice
© The Indian Peace Commission was formed to end the conflict with Native Americans on the Great Plains. They proposed— 3A
A.	a treaty to end the Battle of the Little Bighorn
B.	federal regulations for hunting buffalo
C.	creating two large reservations for the Plains India
D.	removing Sitting Bull from power
© In 1889 the discovery of gold and copper led to the rapii development of the northern Great Plains. Which of the following places gained statehood? 12B
F.
Montana, North Dakota, and South Dakota G.
Montana, Wyoming, and Arizona H.
North Dakota, South Dakota, and Oklahoma J. North Dakota, South Dakota, and Utah 
Industrialization
865-1901


networks
There's More Online about how industrialization changed life and business in the United States.
CHAPTER 3
Lesson 1
The Rise of Industry
Lesson 2
The Railroads
Lesson 3
Big Business
Lesson 4
Unions


The Story Matters...
Andrew Carnegie founded Carnegie Steel, one ofthe new businesses that fueled the Industrial Revolution in the United States. He became a multimillionaire, his company employed tens of thousands of workers, and his steel built the skyscrapers, bridges, and railroads that made the United States the world's leading industrial nation. Carnegie and other big-business leaders provided the leadership for an industrial society.
◄ Andrew Carnegie devoted his full attention to the steel industry in the 1870s.
PHOTO:
The Granger Collection, New York 115
CHAPTER 3
Place andTime: United States 1865-1901
American business and industry grew rapidly after the Civil War ended. Natural resources and a large labor force contributed to industry's growth. Inventions, such as the telephone and the lightbulb, spurred economic development. Railroads accelerated the nation's industrialization and linked the country together. Corporations could produce goods more efficiently. With industrialization came the benefits of new products versus the struggles of low wages, long hours, and difficult working conditions. All of these things changed the way people lived and worked.
Step Into the Place
Look at the information presented on the map to identify the regions affected by the building ofthe transcontinental railroad. fZ2Z? 3B, 15a
PACIFIC
OCEAN
Transcontinental Railroad Lines
San Francisco
Analyzing Historical Documents How could an increase in the number of railroad lines across the West contribute to the economic growth ofthe United States?
DBQ
PHOTOS: left page detail/White House Collection/The White House Historical Association;
right page detail/White House Collection/The White House Historical Association
0	400 km
Albers Equal-Area projection
400 miles
Hayes
1877-1881
Step Into the Time
Making Generalizations
time line and write a paraqraoh "*****3*3fil
1876 Alexander Graham Bell invents telephone
tw@rks
e's More Online!
CANADA
"'-4

ATLANTIC
OCEAN

Transcontinental Railroad
Southern Pacific Railroad (and connector lines)
Denver & Rio Grande/Atchison & Topeka Railroad —• Northern Pacific Railroad
— Texas & Pacific Railroad (and connector lines)

Arthur Cleveland
581-1885 1885-1889

1886
Haymarket riot occurs
B.
Harrison 1889-1893
1892
Homestead strike occurs
2^
I
Cleveland
1893-1897
McKinley
1897-1901
J. P.
Morgan forms U.S. Steel I
M*
• resource • practice
United States become an
IT MATTERS BECAUSE
American business and industry grew rapidly after the end ofthe Civil War. Industrialization changed the way people lived and worked.
The United States Industrializes
Content Vocabulary
TEKS
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills 3B analyze economic issues such as industrialization, the growth of railroads, the growth of labor unions, farm issues, the cattle industry boom, the rise of entrepreneurship, free enterprise, and the pros and cons of big business
15B describe the changing relationship between the federal government and private business, including the costs and benefits of laissez-faire, anti-trust acts, the Interstate Commerce Act, and the Pure Food and Drug Act continued on the next page
•	gross national product
•	laissez-faire
•	entrepreneur
TAKING NOTES:
Key Ideas and Details
Organizing As you read about the changes industrialization brought to the United States, complete the graphic organizer shown below with the causes of industrialization.
Causes
United States Becomes an Industrial Nation
C

g u i di ng qLi estion Why was the United States successful at industrialization?
Although the Industrial Revolution reached the United States in the early 1800s, most Americans still lived on (arms when the Cavil War began in 1861. After the war, industry rapidly expanded, and millions of Americans left their farms to work in mines and factories. By the early 1900s, the United States was the world s leading industrial nation. Its gross national product (GNP) —the total value of all goods and services that a country produces during a year—was roughly three times greater than it had been in the late 1860s. Natural Resources
An abundance of raw materials was one reason for the nation's industrial success. The United States had vast natural resources, including timber, coal, iron, and copper. This meant that American companies could obtain resources cheaply and did not have to impor them from other countries. Many of these resources were located in the American West. The settlement of the West helped accelerate industrialization, as did the transcontinental railroad. Railroads took settlers and miners to the West and carried resources back to the Eas
At the same time, people began using a new resource: petroleum. Even before the automotive age, petroleum was in high demand becam it could be turned into kerosene. The American oil industry was built on the demand for kerosene, a fuel used in lanterns and stoves. The industry began in western Pennsylvania, where residents had long noticed oil bubbling to the surface of area springs and streams. In 1859 Edwin Drake drilled the first oil well near Titusville, Pennsylvania, and by 1900, oil fields had been drilled from Pennsylvania to Texas. As oil production rose, it fueled economic expansion.
118
A
Large Workforce The human resources available to American industry were as important as natural resources in enabling the nation to industrialize rapidly. Between 1860 and 1910, the population ofthe United States nearly tripled. This population growth provided industry with a large workforce and created greater demand for consumer goods.
Population growth stemmed from two sources—large families and a flood of immigrants. Because of better living conditions, more children survived and grew to adulthood. At the same time, social and economic conditions in parts of Europe and China convinced many people to immigrate to the United States in search of a better life. Between 1870 and 1910, more than 17 million immigrants arrived in the United States.
g READING PROGRESS CHECK
Summarizing What were two significant factors in the growth of U.S. industry?
New Inventions
guidingquestion What invention from this period has had the most impact on your daily life?
New inventions and technology were also important to industrialization. New technology increased the nation’s productivity and improved transportation and communication. New inventions also resulted in new industries, which in turn produced more wealth and jobs.
gross national product
the total value of goods and services produced by a country during a year
resources materials used in the production process, such as money, people, land, wood, or steel
(continued from p. 118)
tub Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills
27A explain the effects of scientific discoveries and technological innovations such as electric power, telephone and satellite communications, petroleum-based products, steel production, and computers on the economic development of the United States
28A analyze how scientific discoveries, technological innovations, and the application of these by the free enterprise system, including those in transportation and communication, improve the standard of living in the United States
Electric Power
Perhaps the leading pioneer in new technology was Thomas Alva Edison. A great innovator, Edison and his company worked tirelessly
GEOGRAPHY CONNECTION,
A wealth of natural resources helped fuel U.S. industrialization.
---------Analyzing----
Primary Sources
The Birth of the Telephone
M
He then sketched for me an instrument that he thought would [transmit speech], and we discussed the possibility of constructing one. I did not make it; it was altogether too costly and the chances of its working too uncertain, to impress his financial backers... who were insisting that the wisest thing for Bell to do was to perfect the harmonic telegraph; then he would have money and leisure enough to build air castles like the telephone. M A.
Watson, from "Recollections of the Birth and Babyhood of the Telephone," 1913 DBQ
MAKING INFERENCES
What can you infer about the difficulties that inventors faced
during the late 1800s?
to invent new products and to improve products invented by others. He first achieved international fame in 1877 with the invention of the phonograph. Two years later he perfected the electric generator and the light bulb. His laboratory then went on to invent or improve several other devices, including the battery and the motion picture. In 1882, Owen Latimer, who worked for Edison, invented a process for making cheap long-lasting carbon filaments for light bulbs. With this invention, electric lighting became increasingly affordable. In 1889 several Edison companies merged to form the Edison General Electric Company (today known as GE).
The revolution in electricity took another step forward when engineer George Westinghouse developed an alternating current (AC) system to distribute electricity over long distances using transformers and generators. With this innovation, electricity began to improve living standards rapidly. City streets became safer as streetlights were installed. Electric trolley cars improved commute times to work, and new electric devices in the home made domestic chores easier and less time consuming. AC current and transformers are still used today to distribute electricity.
Innovation using electricity also launched a revolution in communication In 1874 Alexander Graham Bell began experimenting with ways to transmit sound via an electric current of varying intensity. In 1876 he succeeded. His device, which became known as the telephone, transformed communication and helped improve the nation’s standard of living, f amily members could quickly get in touch with each other; businesses could place orders much more quickly, and news of events that might shape personal and business choices could be obtained in time for better decisions to be made. In 1877 Be founded the Bell Telephone Company, which eventually became the America Telephone and Telegraph Company (AT&T).
Innovation Improves the Standard of Living
In ways big and small, technology improved the standard of living. Shortly after the Civil War, Thaddeus Lowe invented an ice-making machine—
POLITICAL CARTOONS
k____________ GOVERNMENT AND THE ECONOMY
These two political cartoons address ! tariffs and protectionism in the United States in the late 1800s.
The cartoon on the left depicts a flood of ; European goods damaging the demand for products made at American factories. \ The cartoon on the right shows a	j
shopper being pulled between paying	|
extra money to trusts (monopolies) to buy domestic goods and extra money (duties) to buy foreign goods.
i
1	Interpreting What event is shown as leading to the destruction of American factories?
i
2	Analyzing What argument does the cartoon on the right make about free trade?
The gate is labeled "Protection."The flood is labeled "European Pauper Manufactures."
This cartoon is entitled "The Consumer Consumed."

120
enabling people to obtain low-cost ice year round for ice boxes that kept food fresh. A few years later, in the early 1870s, Gustavus Swift hired an engineer to develop a refrigerated railroad car. Swift shipped the first refrigerated load of fresh meat in 1877. The widespread use of refrigerated shipping containers enabled fresh food, especially meat, to be shipped long distances. As a result, the price of food began to drop and the quality of food people could obtain year round rose dramatically.
The pace of innovation continued rapidly throughout the late 1800s. In 1873, Christopher Scholes invented the typewriter. In 1886, Josephine Cochrane developed the automatic dishwasher. In 1888 George Eastman patented the first handheld camera—the Kodak camera. In 1893, Frank and Charles Duryea built the first gasoline-powered carriage. Power-driven sewing machines and cloth cutters rapidly moved the clothing business from small tailor shops to large factories. Similar changes took place in shoemaking. Large factories began using new processes and inventions to mass-produce shoes efficiently and inexpensively and could pass those savings on to their customers in the form of lower prices. By the early 1900s, tailors and cobblers had nearly disappeared. Prices of many other products also dropped as the United States industrialized.
H READING PROGRESS CHECK
Evaluating Which invention do you think has had the most lasting influence?
Free Enterprise
guidingquestion Howdid laissez-faire economics promote industrialization?
Another important reason the United States industrialized rapidly was the nation’s free enterprise system. In the late 1800s, the profit motive attracted many people of high ability and ambition into business. Entrepreneurs— people who risk their capital in organizing and running a business— believed they could make money in manufacturing and transportation.
Many of the new inventions that transformed society would not have been possible without entrepreneurs willing to risk their money to help develop and implement their inventions. Many entrepreneurs from New England, who had accumulated money by investing in trade, fishing, and textile mills, invested their money in factories and railroads. An equally important source of private capital was Europe, especially Great Britain. Foreign investors saw great opportunities for profit in the United States.
The Benefits of Laissez-Faire
Part of what attracted entrepreneurs to invest in American businesses was society’s and government’s support in principle for the idea of laissez-faire (leh.say.FAR), a French phrase meaning “let people do as they choose.” Supporters of laissez-faire believe that the government should not interfere in the economy other than to protect private property rights and maintain peace. They argue that if the government regulates the economy, it increases costs and eventually hurts society more than it helps.
Laissez-faire relies on supply and demand rather than the government to regulate wages and prices. Supporters believe a free market with competing companies leads to greater efficiency and creates more wealth for everyone. Laissez-faire advocates also support low taxes and limited government debt to ensure that private individuals, not the government, will make most of the decisions about how the nation’s wealth is spent.
entrepreneur one who
organizes, manages, and assumes the risks of a business or enterprise
laissez-faire a policy that government should interfere as little as possible in the nation's economy
Industrialization 121
practice to do something repeatedlyso it becomes the standard
SKILLS PRACTICE
Use a concept map to help you understand new vocabulary in this lesson. Write the word “laissez-faire” in the center circle, and write details and ideas about the word in the surrounding circles. Do the same with the term “entrepreneur.”
The Government's Relationship to Business
In many ways, the United States practiced laissez-faire economics in the 1; 1800s. State and federal governments kept taxes and spending low. Theyd not impose costly regulations on industry or try to control wages andprfc In the late 1800s, the United States was also one of the largest free trade areas in the world. Unlike Europe, which was divided into dozens of countries, each with tariffs, the entire United States was open to trade. Th Constitution bans states from imposing tariffs, and there were few regulations on commerce or immigration. Supporters of laissez-faire say these factors played a major role in the country’s rapid economic growth.
In other ways, however, the government went beyond laissez-faire an< introduced policies intended to promote business. Since the early 1800s, leaders in the North and the South had different ideas about the proper ri of the government in the economy. Northern leaders wanted high tariffs I protect manufacturers from foreign competition and supported federal subsidies for companies building roads, canals, and railroads. Southern leaders opposed subsidies and favored low tariffs to promote trade and tc keep the cost of imported goods low.
The Civil War ended the debate. After the southern states seceded,th Republican-controlled Congress passed the Morrill Tariff greatly increasi tariff rates. By 1865, tariffs had nearly tripled. Congress also gave vast tra of western land and nearly $65 million in loans to western railroads and public lands with mineral resources for much less than their market valu Historians still debate whether these policies helped the economy grow.
High tariffs, however, contradicted laissez-faire ideas. When the nati raised tariffs on foreign goods, other countries raised their tariffs on American goods. This hurt American companies trying to sell goods abr particularly farmers who sold their products overseas. Despite these problems, many business leaders and members ot Congress believed tari were necessary. Few believed that new American industries could comp< with established European factories without tariffs to protect them. Late the early 1900s, after American companies had become large and efficiei business leaders began to push for free trade. They believed they could r compete internationally and win sales in foreign markets.
Bi REAPING PROGRESS CHECK
Assessing How did laissez-faire economics encourage businesses to industri;
LESSON 1 REVIEW ^22
Reviewing Vocabulary
1.	Defining What does gross national product measure? Create a line graph ofthe nation's Gross National Product over the last five years. 3B
Using Your Notes
2.	Defending Use your notes to identify what you think was the most important cause of American industrialization. Then write a sentence or two identifying your choice and defending its importance. 3B,isb,27A,28A
Answering the Guiding Questions
3.	Evaluating Why was the United States successful at industrialization? 3B, 15B, 27A, 28A
4.	Making Connections What invention from this period has the most impact on your daily life? 3B, 15B, 27A, 28A
5.	Analyzing Cause and Effect How did laissez-faire econom promote industrialization? 15B
Writing Activity
ARGUMENT
Industrialization changed nearly every aspect American life. Consider whether these changes have been generally positive or generally negative. Write a paragraph i which you express your thoughts and feelings about the pro cons of widespread industrialization. 3B.15B.27A.28A 122
|etw@rks
ere's More Online!
BIOGRAPHY
Jay Gould BIOGRAPHY Leland Stanford VIDEO Building the Railroads INTERACTIVE SELF-CHECK QUIZ
LESSON 2
The Railroads


N • How did the United States become an after the Civil War?
Reading HELPDESK
Uademic Vocabulary > integrate • investor
It Matters Because
Major railroads, including the transcontinental railroad, were constructed rapidly after the Civil War ended. Railroads required major capital investment and government land grants. The potential profits led to some corruption as well.
Content Vocabulary • land grant
TAKING NOTES:
Key Ideas and Details
As you read about the development of a nationwide rail network, complete a graphic organizer similar to the one below to list the effects of this network on the nation.
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills
3B analyze economic issues such as industrialization, the growth of railroads, the growth of labor unions, farm issues, the cattle industry boom, the rise of entrepreneurship, free enterprise, and the pros and cons of big business
continued on the next page
Linking the Nation
guiding question How did the transcontinental railroad transform the West?
In 1865 the United States had about 35,000 miles of railroad track, almost all of it east of the Mississippi River. After the Civil War, railroad construction expanded dramatically. By 1900, the United States had more than 200,000 miles of track.
The Transcontinental Railroad
The railroad boom began in 1862 with the Pacific Railway Act. This act gave two corporations—the Union Pacific and the Central Pacific—permission to build a transcontinental railroad. It also offered each company land along its right-of-way.
Under the direction of engineer Grenville Dodge, a former Union general, the Union Pacific Railroad began pushing westward from Omaha, Nebraska, in 1865. The railroad workers of the Union Pacific included Civil War veterans, newly recruited Irish immigrants, frustrated miners and farmers, cooks, adventurers, and ex-convicts. At the height of the project, the Union Pacific employed about 10,000 workers.
The Central Pacific Railroad began as the dream of engineer Theodore Judah. He sold stock in his fledgling Central Pacific Railroad Company to four Sacramento merchants: Leland Stanford, Charley Crocker, Mark Hopkins, and Collis P. Huntington. These “Big Four” eventually made huge fortunes. Stanford became governor of California, served as a U.S. senator, and founded Stanford University. Because of a shortage of labor in California, the Central Pacific Railroad hired about 10,000 workers from China. It paid them
Industrialization 123
(continued from p. 123)
TEKS
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills 15A describe how the economic impact of the Transcontinental Railroad and the Homestead Act contributed to the close of the frontier in the late 19th century 28A analyze how scientific discoveries, technological innovations, and the application of these by the free enterprise system, including those in transportation and communication, improve the standard of living in the United States
about $1 a day. All the equipment-rails, cars, locomotives, and machine was sent by ship from the eastern United States to San Francisco.
Workers completed the transcontinental railroad in only four years, de the physical challenges. Each mile of track required 400 rails, and each rail 10 spikes. The Central Pacific, starting from the west, laid a total of 688 mi track. The Union Pacific laid 1,086 miles. On May 10, 1869, hundreds of spectators gathered at Promontory Summit, Utah. They watched dignitaric hammer five gold and silver spikes into the final rails that would join the I Pacific and Central Pacific. Engineer Grenville Dodge was at the ceremony
PRIMARY SOURCE
U
The two trains pulled up facing each other, each crowded with workmen... .The officers and invite formed on each side ofthe track.... Prayer was offered; a number of spikes were driven in the two adj rails... and thus the two roads were wedded into one great trunk line from the Atlantic to the Pacific’ from How kVe Built the Union Pacific Pail
integrate to combine two previously separate things
investor one who puts money into a company in order to gain a future financial reward
land grant a grant of land by the federal government, especially for roads, railroads, or agricultural colleges
Railroads Spur Growth
The transcontinental railroad was the first of many lines that began crisscrossing the nation after the Civil War. By linking the nation, rail increased the markets for many products, spurring industrial growth. Railroad companies also stimulated the economy by spending huge amounts of money on steel, coal, timber, and other materials.
Large rail companies consolidated hundreds of small, unconnected railroads to create large, integrated railroad systems. Meanwhile, new locomotive technology and the invention of air brakes enabled railroat put longer and heavier trains on their lines. When combined with the i integrated rail systems, operations became so ef f icient that the average per mile for a ton of freight dropped from two cents in I860 to three-quarters of a cent in 1900.
Railroads Help Close the Frontier
Building railroad lines often required more money than most private investors could raise on their own. To encourage railroad constructioi across the Great Plains, the federal government gave land grants to m railroad companies. The railroads then sold the land to settlers, reales companies, and other businesses to raise money to build the railroad. During the 1850s and 1860s the federal land grant system gave railroa< more than 120 million acres of public land, an area larger than New England, New York, and Pennsylvania combined. Several railroads,
The Union Pacific and Central Pacific lines met in Utah. Ceremonial gold and silver spikes were driven into the track, joining the two lines.
CRITICAL THINKING
Predicting Consequences How might the completion ofthe transcontinental railroad change American life? 124

Federal Land Grants to Railroads
**
\
'A v
7°1l
AfJI
■s, 'KJP*
SwtiSi < WSOttlrt
MM
•ACIFIt OCEAN^
"30°h~
ATLANTIC
OCEAN
, A';W
I-----1----T"
0	400 km
Lambert Azimuthal Equal-Area projection
400 miles
—J
II □
Land reserved for grants to railroads
Approximate area of land actually received by railroads Area forfeited by railroads
MEXICO
GEOGRAPHY CONNECTION
From 1870 to 1890, the railroads added more than 100,000 miles of track.
ENVIRONMENT AND SOCIETY
Along how many major routes could people and goods travel into the West? HUMAN SYSTEMS
How did the location of federal land grants to railroads influence the growth ofthe West? USA


^>n ‘,^“<
t k,
including the Union Pacific and Central Pacific, received enough land to cover most of the cost of building their lines.
The land was only valuable, however, if the railroads could sell it. To convince people to move west, railroads and real estate companies offered the land at low prices and provided credit to settlers. Pamphlets, posters, and newspaper advertisements enticed people to move west. The building of the railroads themselves offered further encouragement, as settlers no longer had to migrate the entire distance on their own. They could take the train to a location near the land they bought. In all of these ways, the railroads helped move settlers onto the Great Plains and thereby close the American frontier.
B READING PROGRESS CHECK
Explaining How did the transcontinental railroad help unite the nation?
Robber Barons
guiding question Howdid government grants to build railroads result in large-scale corruption?
The great wealth many railroad entrepreneurs acquired in the late 1800s led to accusations that they had built their fortunes by swindling investors and taxpayers, bribing officials, and cheating on their contracts and debts. Jay Gould was perhaps the most notoriously corrupt railroad owner who practiced “insider trading” and manipulated stock prices. Bribery occurred frequently, partly because government was so deeply entangled in funding the railroads. Railroad investors discovered they could make more money by selling free government land grants than by operating a railroad and some bribed political representatives to vote for more grants.
Industrialization 125
POLITICAL CARTOONS
Jay Gould bowls on Wall Street with balls labeled "Trickery" and "False Reports."The pins are labeled "Banker,""Inexperienced Investor," "Small Operator," and "Stock Broker."
1	Analyzing Primary Sources
What does this political cartoon suggest about attitudes toward Jay Gould?
2	Predicting Consequences What is a likely outcome ofthe actions of robber barons on the people represented by the bowling pins?
JAY GOULD: ROBBER BARON
Railroad owners became condemned as robber barons as the American public increasingly began to suspect them of bribery, cheating, and swindling.
The Credit Mobilier Scandal
Corruption in the railroad industry became public in 1872 with the Credit Mobilier scandal. Credit Mobilier was a construction company set up by several stockholders of the Union Pacific Railroad, including Oakes Ames, a member of Congress. To convince Congress to give the railroad more grants, Ames sold other members of Congress shares at a price well below their market value.
During the election campaign of 1872, a letter appeared in the New YorkSiu
listing members of Congress who had bought shares. 1 he Credit Mobilier scandal produced widespread anger and led to the impression that railroad entrepreneurs were “robber barons”—people who loot an industry and become
rich unethically.
The Great Northern Railroad
Not all railroad men were robber barons. James J. Hill was clearly not. Hill built the Great Northern Railroad from Wisconsin and Minnesota to
Washington state without any federal land grants or subsidies. He planned the railroads route to pass by existing towns in the region and offered low fares to settlers who homesteaded along his route. He also identified products that were in demand in China, including cotton, textiles, and flou and hauled those goods to Washington to ship to Asia. This way, his railroa efficiently hauled goods both east and west, instead of simply sending good east and coming back empty like other railroads. The Great Northern became the most successful transcontinental railroad and one ofthe few railroads ofthe time that was not eventually forced into bankruptcy.
H READING PROGRESS CHECK
Explaining Why did robber barons bribe people in Congress?
LESSON 2 REVIEW
Reviewing Vocabulary
1.	Explaining Why did the government give land grants to railroad companies? 3B.15A
2.	Describing What were the advantages of integrating railroads into one interconnected network? 3B, 28A
Using Your Notes
3.	Identifying Cause and Effect Review your notes and write a brief explanation of how the growth of railroads helped American businesses expand. 3B, 28A
Answering the Guiding Questions
4.	Analyzing Information How did the transcontinental railroad transform the West? 3B, 15A, 28A
5.	Drawing Conclusions How did government grants to build railroads result in large-scale corruption? 3B, 15A
Writing Activity
INFORMATIVE/EXPLANATORY
Between 1860 and 1890, the amount of railroad track in the United States increased dramatically. How would you expect the growth ofthe railroad 1 influence settlement patterns? 15A 126
t^t w@rks
re's More Online!
.cademic Vocabulary
distribution
consumer
intent Vocabulary
corporation economies of scale monopoly holding company trust
TAKING NOTES:
Key Ideas and Details
Organizing As you read about the rise of corporations in the United States, use the following graphic organizer to identify the steps big businesses took to weaken or eliminate competition.
Slashed prices temporarily
rv
^TEKS Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills
3B analyze economic issues such as industrialization, the growth of railroads, the growth of labor unions, farm issues, the cattle industry boom, the rise of entrepreneurship, free enterprise, and the pros and cons of big business
continued on the next page
It Matters Because
Following the Civil War, large corporations developed that could consolidate business functions and produce goods more efficiently. Retailers began using new techniques to attract consumers.
The Rise of Big Business
guiding question What advantages do large corporations have over small businesses?
By 1900, big business dominated the economy, operating vast complexes of factories and distribution facilities. The corporation, an organization owned by many people but treated by law as though it were a person, made big business possible. Stockholders own corporations through shares of ownership called stock. Selling stock allows a corporation to raise money while spreading out the financial risk. Before the 1830s, few corporations existed because entrepreneurs had to convince state legislatures to issue them charters. In the 1830s, however, states began allowing companies to become corporations and issue stock without a charter from the legislature.
The freedom to form a corporation was one of the great benefits of the laissez-faire approach to economics in the later half of the 1800s. With the money raised from selling stock, corporations could invest in new technologies, hire large workforces, and purchase machines. This greatly increased their efficiency. They achieved economies of scale, in which the cost of manufacturing is decreased by producing goods quickly in large quantities.
All businesses have fixed costs and operating costs. Fixed costs are costs a company pays even if it is not operating (loans, mortgages, and taxes). Operating costs are incurred when running a company (wages, shipping costs, buying raw materials). Small manufacturers usually had low fixed costs but high operating costs. If sales dropped, it was cheaper to shut down temporarily. Big manufacturers, however, had the high fixed costs of building and maintaining a factory, while operating costs were low. Operating
Industrialization 127
(continued from p. 127)
TEKS
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills 15B describe the changing relationship between the federal government and private business, including the costs and benefits of laissez-faire, anti-trust acts, the Interstate Commerce Act, and the Pure Food and Drug Act 27A explain the effects of scientific discoveries and technological innovations such as electric power, telephone and satellite communications, petroleum-based products, steel production, and computers on the economic development of the United States
costs, such as wages, were such a small part of total costs that it made sense
to continue operating, even in a recession.
In these circumstances, big corporations had several advantages. They could produce more goods at a lower cost and could stay open in bad economic times by cutting prices to increase sales. Rebates from the railroads further lowered their operating costs. Of course, this also led eventually to one ofthe major costs of laissez-faire economics: small businesses, many family owned, that could not compete with large corporations were forced out of business.
H READING PROGRESS CHECK
Explaining How do economies of scale affect corporations?
distribution the act or
process of being given out or disbursed to clients, consumers, or members of a group
corporation an organization that is authorized by law to carry on an activity but treated as though it were a single person
economies of scale
the reduction in the cost of a good brought about especially by increased production at a given facility
consumer a person who buys what is produced by an economy
CHARTS^
Consolidating Industry
guidingquestion What new business strategies allowed businesses to weaken or eliminate competition
Although a laissez-faire economy benefited consumers because the intense competition led to falling prices, business leaders did not like the intense competition that had been forced on them. Cutting prices to beat the competition also cut into profits. This situation demonstrated one ofthe potential costs of laissez-faire. With no regulations governing their competition, companies were also free to make deals with each other to fix prices by organizing pools, or agreements to keep prices at a certain level. Another term for a pool that is used today is cartel.
American courts and legislatures, however, were suspicious of pools because they interfered with competition and property rights. As a result, even though the laissez-faire economy meant that companies could try to fi prices, companies that formed pools found that it also meant they had no legal protection and could not enforce their pool agreements in court. Asa result pools generally broke apart whenever one member cut prices to steal
TYPES OF BUSINESS ORGANIZATIONS
? Who owns the i business?
t How is money raised? j Advantages
Disadvantages
Sole Proprietorship
Partnership
Corporation
I
One owner who often manages ; the business ? Uses savings of owner i Borrows from creditors | Ease of setup ’ Nominal cost | Two or more owners who usually j manage the business
I
Invests savings from limited partners ; Borrows from creditors J Shared responsibility by each partner Shareholders, whether private or publit Managers are hired Sells stock
Borrows from creditors _______________
Exists as a separate entity Limited liability
Owner is personally liable for all debts Commingling of personal and business property and funds
Cannot raise capital by selling an interest in the business
I
Owners are personally liable for \ obligations and debts j Requires more legal and j accounting services f Partners may disagree on the ■ management ofthe company Must adhere to the principles that govern a corporation
• Making Inferences Comparing proprietorships and corporations, why do you think both still exist today?
Making Generalizations Based on the chart, what generalizations can you make about why a corporation might have a competitive advantage over a sole proprietorship?
VERTICAL INTEGRATION AND HORIZONTAL INTEGRATION
Vertical Integration
Integrated steel company
t
Steel mill
Horizontal Integration
Integrated steel company	Independent steel mills
Horizontal integration occurs when a company grows by buying its competitors.
t
Shipping facilities
Iron mine	Limestone quarry Coal mine
Zertical integration occurs when a company owns all parts )f the industrial process.
market share from another. As a result, by the late 1870s, competition had reduced many industries to a few large highly efficient corporations.
Andrew Carnegie and Steel
The remarkable life of Andrew Carnegie illustrates the rise of big business in the United States. A Scottish immigrant, Carnegie went to work at age 12 in a textile factory. He worked his way up to become secretary to Thomas Scott, a superintendent of the Pennsylvania Railroad. When Scott was promoted, Carnegie became the new superintendent.
Carnegie bought shares in iron mills and factories that made sleeping cars and railroad locomotives, as well as a company that built railroad bridges. By his early 30s, he quit his job to concentrate on his investments. As part of his business activities, Carnegie often traveled to Europe. On one trip, he met Sir Henry Bessemer, who had invented a new process for making high quality steel efficiently and cheaply. After meeting Bessemer, Carnegie opened a steel mill in Pittsburgh in 1875 and began using the
Bessemer process. He boasted about how cheaply he could produce steel:
Vertical integration and horizontal i integration helped consolidate industry.
£ Analyzing Information
How does a large company benefit when it buys its competitors?
Identifying Central Ideas
Why did business owners want to vertically integrate their companies?
$ Creating a Written Presentation
Using correct social studies terminology, write a report explaining the main reasons the American economy changed so dramatically in the years after the Civil War. As part of your report be sure to explain key historical concepts including industrialization, entrepreneurialism, laissez-faire economics, economies of scale, and corporations.
/ t \
PRIMARYSOURCE
Two pounds of ironstone... one pound and a half of coal, mined, manufactured into coke... one-half pound of lime,... [and] a small amount of manganese ore,... these four pounds of materials manufactured into one pound of steel, for which the consumer pays one cent. **
—from Triumphant Democracy, 1893
To make his company more efficient, Carnegie began the vertical integration of the steel industry. A vertically integrated company owns all of the different businesses on which it depends for its operation. Instead of paying companies for coal, lime, and iron, Carnegies steel company bought coal mines, limestone quarries, and iron ore fields. Vertical integration saved money and enabled many companies to expand.
Rockefeller and Standard Oil
Successful business leaders also pushed for horizontal integration, or combining many firms engaged in the same type of business into one large
Industrialization 129
monopoly total control of a type of industry by one person or one company
corporation. Horizontal integration took place frequently as companies competed. When a company began to lose market share, it would often sell
out to competitors to create a larger organization.
Perhaps the most famous example of an industrialist who achieved almo complete horizontal integration of his industry is John D. Rockefeller. Through a series of buyouts, Rockefeller’s Standard Oil began to horizontally integrate the oil industry. By 1880, the company controlled about 90 percent ofthe oil refining industry in the United States. When a single company . -Vi_______i	morkot it becomes a monopoly.
trust a combination of firms or corporations formed by a legal agreement, especially to reduce competition
holding company
a company whose primary business is owning a controlling share of stock in other companies
New Business Organizations
Many Americans feared monopolies because they believed that a monopol could charge whatever it wanted for its products. They argued that one of the costs of laissez-faire economics was that it created large powerful corporations that could control prices, and manipulate politicians and laws to ensure that they did not face any new competition.
Supporters of laissez-faire disagreed. They asserted that monopolies ha to keep prices low because raising prices would allow competitors to reappear and offer products at a lower price. In some industries, even though a company had a near monopoly in the United States, it was not really a monopoly because it was competing on a global scale. Standard Oi for example, came very close to having a monopoly in the United States, bi it was competing against European oil companies and the competition forced the company to keep its prices low in the late 1800s and early 1900s
Trusts In the late 1800s, in an effort to stop horizontal integration and the ris of monopolies, many states made it illegal for one company to own stock in another company. It did not take long, however, for companies to find ways around the laws. In 1882 Standard Oil formed the first trust, a new way of merging businesses that did not violate the law. A trust is a legal arrangement that allows one person to manage another person’s property. The person who manages that property is called a trustee.
Instead of buying a company outright, Standard Oi 1 had stockholders give their stocks to a group of Standard Oil trustees. In exchange, the stockholders received shares in the trust, which entitled them to a portion the trust’s profits. Since the trustees did not own the stock but were merely managing it, they were not violating any laws. The trustees could control a group of companies as if they were one large merged company.
Holding Companies In 1889 the state of New Jersey further accelerated the rise of big business with a new incorporation law. This law allowed corporatioi set up in New Jersey to own stock in other businesses. Many companies immediately used the law to create holding companies. A holding company does not produce anything. Instead, it owns the stock of companies that do produce goods. The holding company manages the companies it owns, effectively merging them into one large enterprise.
Investment Banking Another increase in the size of corporations began in the 1890s, when investment bankers began helping to create holding compank Investment bankers specialized in helping companies issue stock. Companies would sell large blocks of stock to investment bankers at a discount. The bankers would then find the investors and sell the stock for a profit. Perhaps th most successful investment banker was J. P. Morgan.
In the mid-1890s, investment bankers began merging many of America arge corporations into holding companies and then selling their stock. In 1901, J.P. Morgan bought out Andrew Carnegie. He then merged Carnegie
Steel with other large steel companies into an enormous
holding company called the United States Steel Company. U.S.
Steel was worth $1.4 billion, the first billion-dollar company
in American history.
Seiling the Product
The creation of giant manufacturing companies in the United States pushed retailers to expand in size as well. The vast array of products that American industries produced led retailers to look for new ways to attract consumers. N. W.
Ayer and Son, the first advertising company, began creating large illustrated ads instead of relying on the old small print line ads previously used in newspapers. By 1900, retailers were spending over $90 million a year on advertising in newspapers and magazines.
Advertising attracted readers to the newest retail business, the department store. In 1877 advertisements billed John Wanamaker s new Philadelphia department store, the Grand Depot, as the “largest space in the world devoted to retail selling on a single floor.” When it opened, only a handful of department stores existed in the United States.
Soon hundreds sprang up, providing a huge selection of products in one large building.
Chain stores, a group of retail outlets owned by the same company, first appeared in the mid-1800s. In contrast to department stores, chain stores such as Woolworth’s focused on offering low prices.
To reach the millions of people who lived in rural areas, retailers began issuing mail-order catalogs. Two of the largest mail-order retailers were Montgomery Ward and Sears, Roebuck and Co. Their huge catalogs were widely distributed through the mail. They used attractive illustrations and appealing descriptions to advertise thousands of items for sale.
H READING PROGRESS CHECK
Summarizing Why did some people think monopolies were disadvantageous for the consumer?
*
y

J. P.
Morgan created one ofthe largest holding companies, United States Steel Company. SKILLS PRACTICE
Work with a partner. Take turns using the following vocabulary words in sentences: corporation, consumer, monopoly, trust.
LESSON 3 REVIEW
Reviewing Vocabulary
1.	Summarizing Describe vertical and horizontal integration and explain how it contributed to the economic development ofthe United States. 3B.27A
2.	Explaining How did trusts and holding companies create unofficial monopolies? 3B.15B
Using Your Notes
3.	Making Connections Review the notes you completed throughout the lesson to identify a way that a corporation today could use similar tactics to weaken its competition. 3B, 15B
Answering the Guiding Questions
4.	Evaluating What advantages do large corporations have over small businesses? 3B.15B
5.	Synthesizing What new business strategies allowed businesses to weaken or eliminate competition? 3B, 15B
Writing Activity
INFORMATIVE/EXPLANATORY
Industrialization introduced many new ideas about how businesses could be formed and operated. Write a one-page essay explaining how these new ways of organizing businesses helped to improve the standard of living in the United States. 3B, 27A Industrialization 131
networks
There's More Online!
BIOGRAPHY
Eugene Debs * , / BIOGRAPHY
Samuel Gompers M# Ef BIOGRAPHY "Mother Jones"
Ef CHART/GRAPH Comparing Major Strikes
Ef PRIMARYSOURCE Communist
Party Manifesto
LESSON 4 Unions
Ef VIDEO The Rise of Labor
Ef interactive self-check QUIZ
Jlifetf States bee
vmean
Reading HELPDESK
Academic Vocabulary
• restraint • constitute
IT MATTERS BECAUSE
Workers tried to form unions in the 1800s, hoping to improve wages, hours, and working conditions. Business leaders worke with some trade unions but generally opposed industrial
unions. Strikes during this era sometimes led to violence, whid hurt the* unions' imaae and slowed their arowth.
Content Vocabulary
•	deflation
•	industrial union
•	lockout
•	arbitration
•	injunction
•	closed shop
TAKING NOTES:
Key Ideas and Details
Sequencing As you read about the increase of labor unions in the late 1800s, complete a time line similar to the one below by filling in the year of each incident of labor unrest discussed and the results of each incident.
1877 -			
Working in the United States
Why did workers try to form unions in the late 1800s?
There were many benefits of laissez-faire economics in the late 1800s, including rapid industrialization, dramatic innovation, and improving standard of living, but the laissez-faire idea that governments should avoid regulating the economy had costs as we Working conditions in factories and mines were difficult and ofter dangerous. Many workers performed dull, repetitive tasks in dangerous, unhealthy working conditions. Workers breathed in lir dust, and toxic fumes. Heavy machines lacking safety devices led t injuries. With no regulations governing workplace safety or trainii requirements, workers had no recourse when they were poorly treated other than to quit and look for a new job.
Despite these conditions, industrialism led to a dramatic rise i the standard of living. The average worker’s wages rose by 50 perc between 1860 and 1890. Nevertheless, the uneven division of incc between the wealthy and the working class caused resentment am workers. In 1900 the average industrial worker made 22C per hou and worked 59 hours per week.
Deflation, or a rise in the value of money, added to tensions. Between 1865 and 1897, deflation caused prices to fall, which increa: the buying power of workers’ wages. Although companies cut wages regularly in the late 1800s, prices fell even faster, so that wages were actually still going up in buying power. Workers, however, resented getting less money. Eventually, many concluded that they needed a union to bargain for higher wages and better working conditions.
i
Early Unions
There were two basic types of industrial workers in the United States in the 1800s craft workers and common laborers. Craft workers, such as machinists, iron molders, stonecutters, shoemakers, and printers, had special skills and training. They received higher wages and had more control over their time. Common laborers had few skills and received lower wages.
In the 1830s, as industrialization began to spread, craft workers began to form trade unions. By 1873, there were 30 national trade unions in the United States. Among the largest and most successful were the Iron Molders’ International Union, the International Typographical Union, and the Knights of St. Crispin—the shoemakers’ union.
(continued from p. 132)
TEKS
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills 3C analyze social issues affecting women, minorities, children, immigrants, urbanization, the Social Gospel, and philanthropy of industrialists
15B describe the changing relationship between the federal government and private business, including the costs and benefits of laissez-faire, anti-trust acts, the Interstate Commerce Act, and the Pure Food and Drug Act
continued on the next page
Opposition to Unions
Employers often had to negotiate with trade unions because the unions represented workers whose skills they needed. Employers, however, generally viewed unions as conspiracies that interfered with property rights. Business leaders particularly opposed industrial unions, which united all the workers in a particular industry.
Companies used several techniques to stop workers from forming unions. They required workers to take oaths or sign contracts promising not to join a union. They hired detectives to identify union organizers. Workers who tried to organize a union or strike were fired and placed on a blacklist—a list of “troublemakers”—so that no company would hire them. Companies used "lockouts" to break up existing unions. They locked workers out of the property and refused to pay them. If the union called a strike, employers would hire replacements, or strikebreakers.
Efforts to break unions often succeeded because there were no laws giving
deflation a decline in the volume of available money or credit that results in lower prices, and therefore increases the buying power of money
industrial union
an organization of common laborers and craft workers in a particular industry
lockout a company tool to fight union demands by refusing to allow employees to enter its facilities to work
workers the right to form unions or requiring owners to negotiate with them. Government policies toward unions did not really reflect a commitment to laissez-faire economics. Instead of staying out of economic disputes, and allowing workers to confront owners and work out their disagreements on their own, the government’s relationship toward business shifted toward policies that supported business owners and impeded the development of unions. Courts frequently ruled that strikes were “conspiracies in restraint of trade” for which and labor leaders were often fined or jailed. Eventually even state militias and federal troops would be used to break up strikes.
restraint the act of limiting, restricting, or keeping under control

ANNUAL NONFARM EARNINGS
■■■■■■' - Real wages
■ mi Not adjusted for inflation
Source: Historical Statistics ofthe United States: Colonial Times to 1970
In the late 1800s, industrial workers toiled in dangerous, unhealthy conditions. Bad working conditions eventually led workers to seek to organize unions, hoping to improve their situations.
HI
Comparing and Contrasting How did changes in real wages and wages that were not adjusted for deflation differ?
fjS Drawing Conclusions Why
do you think workers wanted to organize?
6
o
Industrialization 133
Part ofthe reason for the government’s objection to unions and collective action by workers was the perception that unions were un-American. In the 1800s, the ideas of Karl Nlarx, called bdarxism, became very influential in Europe. Marx argued that the basic force shaping capitalist society was the class struggle between workers and owners. He believed that workers would eventually revolt, seize control of the factorie: and overthrow the government. Eventually, Marx thought, the state would disappear, leaving a communist society where classes did not exist.
While many labor supporters agreed with Marx, a few supported anarchism. Anarchists believe that society does not need any government. In the late 1800s, anarchists assassinated government officials and setoff bombs across Europe, hoping to begin a revolution.
During the same period, tens of thousands of European immigrants headed to America. Anti-immigrant feelings were already strong in the United States and, as people began to associate immigrant workers with radical ideas, they became suspicious of unions. These fears, and concerns for law and order, often led officials to use the courts, the police, and even the army to crush strikes and break up unions.
H READING PROGRESS CHECK
Determining Cause and Effect Howdid working conditions encourage workers ti form unions in the late 1800s?

6S061ttFNY<
Strikes and labor unrest were felt in all regions ofthe United States.
f PLACES AND REGIONS What region ofthe country seems to have had the most strikes? Why do you think this was so?
PLACES AND REGIONS
What region ofthe country seems to have had the fewest strikes? Why do you think this was so? Struggling to Organize
guidingquestion What made it difficult for union workers to create large industrial unions?
Although workers attempted on many occasions to create large industrial unions, they rarely succeeded. In many cases, the confrontations with owners and the government led to violence and bloodshed.
The Great Railroad Strike
The Panic of 1873 was a severe recession that struck the American economy and forced many companies to cut wages. The economy had still not recovered when, in July 1877, the Baltimore and Ohio Railroad announced it was cutting wages for the third time. In Martinsburg, West Virginia, workers walked off the job and blocked the tracks.
As word spread, railroad workers across the country walked off the job. The strike eventually involved some 80,000 railroad workers and affected two-thirds of the nation’s railways. Angry strikers smashed equipment, tore up tracks, and blocked rail service in New York City, Baltimore, Pittsburgh, St. Louis, and Chicago. The governors of several states called out their militias. In many places, gun battles erupted between the militia and the strikers.
Declaring a state of “insurrection,” President Rutherford B. Hayes sent federal troops to Martinsburg, Baltimore, Pittsburgh, and elsewhere. It took 12 bloody days for police, state militias, and federal troops to restore order. By the time the strike collapsed, more than 100 people lay dead, and over $10 million in railroad property had been destroyed. The violence of this strike alarmed many Americans and only further contributed to the idea that allowing workers to organize was dangerous to society.
The Knights of Labor
The Knights of Labor, founded in 1869, took a different approach to labor issues. Its leader, Terence Powderly, opposed strikes in favor of boycotts and arbitration, in which a third party helps workers and employers reach an agreement. Unlike other unions, the Knights welcomed women and African Americans. They called for an eight-hour workday, equal pay for women, no child labor, and worker-owned factories.
The Haymarket Riot In 1886 supporters of the eight-hour workday called for a nationwide strike on May 1. On May 3, Chicago police intervening in a fight on a picket line opened fire on the strikers, killing four. The next day, about 3,000 people gathered to protest the shootings in Chicago’s Haymarket Square. Someone threw a bomb, police opened fire, and workers shot back, injuring about 170 people and killing 10 policemen. Eight men were arrested for the bombing. Though evidence against them was weak, public anger resulted in eight convictions. Four were executed.
Union critics used the Haymarket riot to claim that dangerous radicals dominated the unions. One of the men arrested was a member of the Knights of Labor. The blow to the Knights’ reputation along with lost strikes led to a decline in their membership and influence.
The Homestead and Pullman Strikes
In the summer of 1892, another labor dispute led to bloodshed. A steel mill owned by Andrew Carnegie in Homestead, Pennsylvania, was managed by Henry Clay Frick, an anti-union business partner. Frick proposed cutting
| wages by 20 percent. He then locked out employees (who were members of | the Amalgamated Association of Iron, Steel, and Tin Workers) and had the 1 Pinkerton Detective Agency bring in replacements. When the Pinkertons I and strikebreakers approached the plant, the strikers resisted. Over the next
In 1894 a former quarry foreman named Jacob Coxey organized unemployed workers and began a march on Washington to demand jobs on public works projects. The marchers were known as'Toxey's Army."
CRITICAL THINKING
Analyzing Primary Sources What does this photograph indicate about workers'interest in organizing to achieve their goals? arbitration settling a dispute by agreeing to accept the decision of an impartial outsider
Industrialization 135
injunction a court order whereby one is required to do or to refrain from doing a specified act
closed shop an agreement in which a company agrees to hire only union members
14 hours, Pinkertons and strikers clashed, leaving several dead and dozens injured. The governor of Pennsylvania sent in the militia to protect the strikebreakers, and four months later, the strike collapsed. >
In 1894 the Pullman Palace Car Company slashed workers wages without lowering rents and prices in the company town. American Railway Union (ARU) workers refused to handle Pullman cars, and railroads around to a near halt. Railroad managers arranged to have U.S. mail cars attached to the Pullman cars, and President Cleveland sent in federal troops to keep the mail running. A federal court then issued an injunction, or formal order, to halt the boycott. Both the strike and the ARU collapsed. The Supreme Court later upheld the right to issue such an injunction. This gave business a powerful tool for dealing with labor unrest.
a
Identifying Central Ideas How did major strikes prevent large industrial unions from maintaining power and influence?
New Unions Emerge
How were the new industrial unions different from the older trade unions?
Although workers often shared the same complaints about wages and working hours, unions took different approaches to how they tried to improve workers’ lives. Trade unions remained the most common type of labor organization, but unskilled workers were not represented by trade unions. New types of unions emerged to support these workers.
Samuel Gompers concentrated his efforts on improving working conditions and believed that a just society was built on a fair labor policy.
Drawing Conclusions How do you
think Gompers would view a society that did not allow labor unions?
The Rise of the AFL
The American Federation of Labor (AFL) was the dominant labor organization of the late 1800s. In 1886 leaders of several national trade un created the AFL. It focused on promoting the interests of skilled workers.
Samuel Gompers was the first president of the AFL, a position heh almost continuously until 1924. While other unions became involved ir politics, Gompers tried to concentrate on “pure and simple” unionism, focusing on wages, working hours, and working conditions. He was willing to use strikes to create change but preferred to negotiate.
The AFL had three main goals. First, it tried to convince companies recognize unions and agree to collective bargaining. Second, it pushed closed shops, meaning that companies could hire only union member: Third, it promoted an eight-hour workday. By 1900, the AFL was the b union in the country with more than 500,000 members. Still, at that ti the AFL represented less than 15 percent of all nonfarm workers. Mos members were white men, because the unions discriminated against African Americans, and only a few would admit women.
i ne iww
In 1905 a group of labor radicals, many of them socialists, created th< Industrial Workers of the World (IWW). Nicknamed “the Wobblies,” IWW wanted to organize all workers according to industry, without making distinctions between skilled and unskilled workers. The IW\ endorsed using strikes and declared: “The working class and the
TP ,7tn§ daSS haVC nothir*g in common.” The IWW believed all wc s ould be organized into “One Big Union.” In particular, the IWW tr organize the unskilled workers who were ignored by most unions.
t a U 1912JHe IWW kd a successful strike of 25,000 textile workers wrence, assachusetts, to protest wage cuts. The companies rever:
By the beginning ofthe twentieth century, many women had entered the workforce. Some were industrial workers in clothing or foodprocessing factories.
CRITICAL THINKING
Formulating Questions What is one question that you could ask to begin researching women in the industrial workforce? wage cuts after 10 weeks. The Lawrence strike was the Wobblies’ greatest victory. Most IWW strikes failed. The IWW never gained a large membership, in part because its radical philosophy and controversial strikes led many to condemn the organization.
Women and Organized Labor
After the Civil War, the number of female wage earners began to increase. By 1900, women made up more than 18 percent ofthe labor force. The types of jobs women did outside the home reflected society’s ideas about what constituted “women’s work.”
About one-third of women wage earners worked as domestic servants. Another third worked as teachers, nurses, sales clerks, and office clerical workers. The remaining third were industrial workers, often in the garment industry or food-processing plants.
Women were paid less than men even when they performed the same jobs. It was assumed that a woman had a man helping support her, and that a man needed higher wages in order to support a family. Most unions excluded women.
One of the most famous labor leaders of the era was Mary Harris Jones, also known as “Mother Jones.” Jones worked as a labor organizer for the Knights of Labor before helping organize mine workers. Her public speaking abilities made her a very successful organizer, leading John D. Rockefeller to dub her “the most dangerous woman in America.”
In 1900 Jewish and Italian immigrants who worked in the clothing business in New York City founded the International Ladies’ Garment Workers Union (ILGWU), which represented female and male workers in the women’s clothing industry. Membership expanded rapidly, and in 1909 a strike of some 30,000 garment workers won the ILGWU recognition in the industry, better wages, and benefits for employees.
In 1903 Mary Kenney O’Sullivan and Leonora O’Reilly decided to establish a separate union for women. With the help of Jane Addams and Lillian Wald, they established the Women’s Trade Union League (WTUL), which pushed for an eight-hour workday, a minimum wage, an end to evening work for women, and the abolition of child labor.
READING PROGRESS CHECK
constitute to compose, make up, or form
Explaining Why did women need to form their own trade unions?
LESSON 4 REVIEW
Reviewing Vocabulary
1.	Contrasting What is the difference between a closed shop and a lockout? 3B
2.	Paraphrasing What is another word or phrase for an injunction? 15B
Using Your Notes
3.	Comparing Use your notes from the lesson to identify some common features of incidents of labor unrest. 3B
Answering the Guiding Questions
4.	Drawing Condusions Why did workers try to form unions in the late 1800s? 3B.15B
5.	Making Generalizations What social issues led to the rise of the effort to form labor unions for women? 3B, 3C, 26A
6.	Contrasting How were the new industrial unions different from the older trade unions? 3B
Writing Activity
NARRATIVE
Suppose that you are a union leader. Write a letter to a factory owner in which you try to persuade him or her to make changes in wages or other work policies on behalf of the factory's workers. Be sure to be specific about your requests and the reasons why they are necessary. 3B Industrialization 137
chapter 3 Assessment

Directions: On a separate sheet of paper, answer the questions below. Make sure you read carefully and answer all parts to the question.
Lesson Review
Lesson 1
0 Analyzing Cause and Effect What role did
entrepreneurs play in the industrialization of the United States and why were they willing to invest their money in American companies? 3B
0 Describing What are three benefits that supporters of laissez-faire economics believe it provides? 15B
Q
Explaining How did the development of technological innovations using electric power contribute to the economic development of the United States? 27A 0 Analyzing How did innovation in communication improve the standard of living in the United States? 28A
Lesson 2
0 Analyzing Why did railroad construction expand so rapidly after the Civil War? 3B
0 Describing How did the completion ofthe
Transcontinental Railroad contribute to the closing ofthe frontier? 15A
0 Analyzing How did railroad companies improve the standard of living in the United States? 28A
0 Identifying Central Issues What kinds of business practices caused some railroad owners to be accused of being "robber barons"? 3B, 15B
Lesson 3
0 Evaluating How do big businesses benefit from economies of scale? 3B.15B
G
Describing In what ways did the laissez-faire economic policy change the structure of American business and how did these changes affect the government's relationship with business? 15B G
Explaining What was Standard Oil's purpose for forming a trust? 15B Need Extra Help?
G
Describing What technological innovation did Andrew Carnegie bring to the steel industry and how did it affect economic development in the United States? 27A Lesson 4
G
Describing What were some of the costs of the laissez-faire approach to economics for American workers?
15B
G
Analyzing Why did the government and court system generally side against unions in the late 1800s? 15B G
Explaining What actions did union leaders take to expand economic opportunities for women in the late 1800s? 26A G
Identifying What contribution did Jane Addams make to help women workers? 26D Exploring the Essential Question
G
Analyzing Write an oral presentation explaining the factors that contributed to the United States becoming an industrialized society after the Civil War. 3B, 28A Critical Thinking
G
Analyzing Write a short essay explaining how industrialism changed the American economy. Be sure to include in your discussion the impact ofthe railroads, the rise of entrepreneurship and attempts to form labor unions, and the pros and cons of big business. 3B
G
Making Inferences Analyze the social issues facing women who wanted to take jobs in the factories. What social values made it difficult for them to be treated the same as men? 3C G
Analyzing Issues Define the term laissez-faire and describe the costs and benefits ofthe laissez-faire approach to economic policy in the late 1800s. As part of your answer, outline how the relationship between the federal government and private business changed during the late 1800s and explain whether government policy was shaped solely by laissez-faire ideas. 15A 138
0 Analyzing How did the scientific discoveries and technological innovations of the late 1800s improve the standard of living in the United States? 28A
© Explaining How does the free enterprise system drive technological innovation? 3B
© Identifying Cause and Effect Explain why deflation
helped convince workers they should form unions.
3B, 29B
Social Studies Skills
© Time, Chronology, and Sequencing What led to the formation of the first women's unions? 3B, 26A
© Understanding Relationships Among Events What
goals did the major strikes of the period have in common?
3B
Analyzing Primary Sources
Read the following two excerpts and answer the questions that follow. The first is from a letter to Karl Marx, written by William Sylvis, president of the National Labor Union in 1869. Thesecond is from a book written by Terence Powderly, leader of the Knights of Labor, published in 1889.
PRIMARYSOURCE
« [Mjonied power is fast eating up the substance of the people. We have made war upon it, and we mean to win it. If we can we will win through the ballot box; if not, we will resort to sterner means. A little blood-letting is sometimes necessary in desperate cases. 99
—History of Labour in the United States, 1921
PRIMARY SOURCE
M
Co-operation for a common end was necessary. That common end was to forever stop the suicidal policy that debarred workingmen from entry to the workshop because of a difference of opinion which should have been submitted to a tribunal where the interests, not alone of the employer and his workmen would be considered, but a tribunal which would carefully investigate the cause of the strike and the effect of the stoppage of work by one branch of industry upon all others.99 —Terence Powderly, Thirty Years of Labor, 1889
Need Extra Help?
Interpreting What is the "suicidal policy" of employers that Powderly wants to end? What technique to resolving labor disputes is he advocating? 29H
© Detecting Bias What bias do you see in the quotes
above? Which of the two men do you think was most
biased against business owners? Explain your conclusion.
29F
© Evaluating Validity Government authorities feared that unions were a threat to law and order and wanted to start a revolution. Do the sources above corroborate that fear? Why or why not? 29E
Analyzing Visuals
Use the map Natural Resource Sites of the United States to answer the following questions.
© Extrapolating Given that most of the nation's first steel mills were set up near Pittsburgh, what resources do you think were most important to making steel? 31B
© Analyzing Maps Why do you think the iron mines in Minnesota and Wisconsin became major suppliers to the steel mills in Ohio and Pennsylvania? 31B
© Posing Questions About Maps Based on the location of softwood timber, what questions would you ask about the construction of railroads in the United States? 31B
	21	22	23	24	25	26	27	28	29	30	31
| Go to page	|u»|	lK	|132]	m	|132|	139 j	139	[J39j	LU2J	j 119 |	119 |
Industrialization 139
This photo shows Coxey's Army marching on Washington to demand higher wages. Use the image to answer the following question.
Interpreting Visuals What do you notice about the clothing the men are wearing? What bias or impression are they are trying to make on observers? Why do you think they are marching behind an American flag? 29F, 29H
Extended Response Question
© Presenting Information Write an expository essay explaining three ways retailers—companies that sell products directly to consumers—responded to growing industrialization. Read your essay to the class. 3B, 30A
© Problem-Solving Suppose you are a union leader and you are trying to get improved working conditions for factory workers. Choose one ofthe labor leaders or unions discussed in the chapter and research how that union's leaders would likely have solved the problem for your workers. Write a paragraph stating the problem, the union leader's position, and their possible solution. 32A
© Writing Presentations Research the work of Thomas Edison, Alexander Graham Bell, or another inventor in the field of communications during the Industrial Revolution Write a script for a short play about their impact on America. 27A, 3OA
Standardized Test Practice
© Supporters of laissez-faire believe which ofthe following ideas? 15B
A.
Industry should be regulated to ensure a safe workplace. B.
If left alone free enterprise leads to higher prices. C.
Government should not intervene in the economy. D.
Government should support big business with high tariffs and subsidies. © How did the railroads contribute to the closing ofthe frontier? 15A
F.
They shipped goods between the east coast and the west coast. G.
They offered cheap land and credit to settlers. H.
They gave farmers rebates on crops they shipped to eastern cities. J.
They bribed government officials for more land grants. Need Extra Help?
	32	33	34	35	36	37
| Go to page	| 135 | 131 | 133 | 119 | 121 | 124 |
IO
Urban America
1865-1896
ESSENTIAL QUESTIONS
• Why do people migrate? • How is urban life different from rural life? networks
There's More Online about urban America at the end ofthe nineteenth century.
CHAPTER 4
Lesson 1
Immigration
Lesson 2
Urbanization
Lesson 3
Social Darwinism and Social Reform
Lesson 4
Politics ofthe Gilded Age
Lesson 5
The Rise of Segregation
The Story Matters...
European and Asian immigrants arrived in the United States in great numbers during the late 1800s. Providing cheap labor, they made rapid industrial growth possible. They also helped populate the growing cities. As jobs in urban areas became more plentiful, many Americans moved from farms and small towns to cities. Read the chapter to learn how the events of the late nineteenth century shaped the United States as it is today.
◄ For many European immigrants, the Statue of Liberty was their first glimpse of America. The Statue of Liberty often represented the hopes and dreams of people looking for a better life.
PHOTO:
PhotoLink/Photodisc/Getty Images 141
CHAPTER 4
Place and Time: United States 1865-1896
Drawn to cities by jobs available in America's growing industries, the urban population of the United States grew from around 10 million in 1870 to more than 30 million by the turn of the century. Immigrants from Europe, Africa, Asia, Canada, Mexico, and South America began looking for better work and a higher standard of living. Rural Americans also began moving to the cities. Industrialization led to urbanization, new political parties, new art and literature, and different ideas about government's role in society. Industrialization brought changes to society, including new social classes and increased segregation for African Americans. New philosophies and movements sprang up to respond to all of these changes.
Step Into the Place
Look at the information presented on the map. f2Z?3c,i3B
Analyzing Historical Documents Why might the
levels of immigration between "old"and"new" immigrants from Europe be roughly equal?
DBQ
0	2,000 km
Miller projection


networks
There's More Online!
CHART/GRAPH
Immigration Restrictions IMAGE
Nativism Political Cartoon VIDEO
European Immigration INTERACTIVE SELF-CHECK QUIZ
Reading HELPDESK
Academic Vocabulary
ethnic
LESSON 1
Immigration
do people migrate? • How is urban
It Matters Because
In the late nineteenth century, a major wave of immigration began. Most immigrants settled in cities, where distinctive ethnic neighborhoods emerged. Some Americans, however, feared that the new immigrants would not adapt to Americc
culture or miaht be harmful to American society.
contentvoohui^r,------------- Immigrants Flood Into America
• immigrant • nativism	I	. ,
guiding question How did immigrants ofthe late 1800s change American society!
TAKING NOTES:
Key Ideas and Details
Categorizing As you read, fill out a graphic organizer similar to the one below with the reasons people left their homelands to immigrate to the United States.
Reasons for Immigrating to U.S.	
Push Factors	Pull Factors
	
	
	
TEKS
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills 3C analyze social issues affecting women, minorities, children, immigrants, urbanization, the Social Gospel, and philanthropy of industrialists


3D describe the optimism of the many immigrants who sought a better life in America
13B analyze the causes and effects of changing demographic patterns resulting from legal and illegal immigration to the United States
continued on p. 146
Between 1865, the year the Civil War ended, and 1914, the year World War I began, nearly 25 million people immigrated to the United States. Most, nearly 24 million, came from Europe, but moi than 1.3 million Canadians moved south ofthe border, over 425,0( Latin Americans came north, and more than 450,()()() Asians arrive as well during those years.
European Immigration
Europeans immigrated to the United States for many reasons. Man came because they were poor and American industries had plenty jobs available or because they had special skills. Europe’s industria cities, however, also offered plenty of jobs, so economic factors do not entirely explain why people migrated. Many immigrants came to the United States not just to find work, but to escape the restrictions of social class in Europe that kept them trapped at the bottom of society. In some cases, as in Italy, high rents and a chole: epidemic encouraged people to leave. In Poland and Russia, land shortages, unemployment, high taxes and a long military draft caused emigration. Others, especially Jews living in Russia and the Austro-Hungarian Empire, fled to escape religious persecution. Ellis Island
Most immigrants passed through Ellis Island, a tiny island in New York Harbor. There, a huge three-story building served as the processing center for many of the immigrants arriving from Europ
after 1892. In Ellis Islands enormous hall, crowds of immigrants filed past doctors for an inspection. Those who failed inspection might be separated from their families and returned to Europe. A medical examiner who worked there later described how “hour after hour, ship load after ship load . . . the stream of human beings with its kaleidoscopic variations was . . . hurried through Ellis Island by the equivalent of‘step lively’ in every language of the earth.”
About 12 million immigrants passed through Ellis Island between 1892 and 1954.
Changing Demographics and Culture
By the late 1890s, more than half of all immigrants entering the United States were from eastern and southern Europe, including Italy, Greece, Austria-Hungary, Russia, and Serbia.
This period of immigration is known as “new” immigration.
The “old” immigration, which occurred before 1890, had been primarily of people from northern and western Europe.
This wave of immigrants changed the culture of America’s cities and the demographics of its workforce. Although every immigrant group had some of its members working in every type of job and profession available, certain patterns emerged. Skilled Italian bricklayers and stonemasons contributed to the construction of many homes, churches and buildings in American cities. Polish immigrants often became coal miners, meatpackers and steel workers. Jewish immigrants often worked in the garment industry or as common laborers, although many became merchants as well. Irish immigrants, often among the poorest to arrive in America, frequently ended up as railroad workers, miners, dockworkers, ditch-diggers, and factory workers. And members of all ethnic groups also headed west to settle the Great Plains as farmers and ranchers.
By the 1890s, immigrants made up a large percentage of the population of major cities, including New York, Chicago, Milwaukee, and Detroit. Immigrants lived in neighborhoods that were often separated into ethnic groups, such as “Little Italy” or the Jewish “Lower East Side” in New York City. There they spoke their native languages and re-created the churches,
Immigrants migrated to the United States from all across Europe seeking an opportunity to better their lives.
CRITICAL THINKING
Drawing Conclusions Why do you think most immigrants came to the cities?
immigrant one who enters and becomes established in a country other than that of his or her original nationality
ethnic relating to large groups of people classed according to common racial, national, tribal, religious, linguistic, or cultural origin or background
WHY DID PEOPLE EMIGRATE?
Year
Source: Historical Statistics of the United States,
Push Factors
Farm poverty and worker uncertainty Wars and compulsory military service Political tyranny Religious oppression Population pressure
Pull Factors
Plenty of land and plenty of work
Higher standard of living Democratic political system Opportunity for social advancement
CHARTS/GRAPHS
Push factors and pull factors impacted U. S. immigration.
1	Look at the geographic distribution on the graph. Which two regions had the lowest immigration rates to the United States between 1865 and 1914?
2	Compare European immigration before and after the mid-1890s. What geographic pattern do you see on the graph?
Urban America 145
Many Chinese came to America to escape poverty and civil war. Some helped build railroads. Others set up small businesses. These children were photographed in San Francisco's Chinatown around 1900.
synagogues, clubs, and newspapers of their homelands. Because immigra tended to settle near others from their homeland, regional demographic patterns also emerged. For example: although there were large numbers c every ethnic group in New York City, Italians, Russians, and Jews were m likely to remain there, while large numbers of Germans, Swedes, and Pole moved to Midwestern cities such as Milwaukee, Pittsburgh and Chicago. Many Germans also moved to Texas to become farmers. Large numbers o Irish settled in the northeast and upper Midwest, and they were the large: ethnic group in Boston.
The wave of immigration in the late 1800s also brought about a cultui shift in American religion. In 1850 Catholics were only five percent ofthe population. By the early 1900s, they made up 17 percent of the total, and had become the single largest religious denomination in the country. Whi there had been Catholics in America from the earliest days when Lord Baltimore founded Maryland colony as a refuge for English Catholics, American culture had been overwhelmingly Protestant in its outlook and religious perspective. That began to change in the late 1800s as the United States became more culturally diverse.
Catholics were not the only contributors to a new religious diversity ii American culture. The large number of Greeks and Russians arriving in tl nation meant that the number of Orthodox Christians began to increase a well. And as persecution mounted in Russia, Poland, and Romania in the 1880s, a mass migration of East European Jews began. Most settled in Nev York City and elsewhere on the east coast, but Jewish communities appear all across the United States. By the early 1920s, nearly 2 million Jews had settled in America.
(continued from p. 144)
TEKS
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills 15C explain how foreign policies affected economic issues such as the Chinese Exclusion Act of 1882, the Open Door Policy, Dollar Diplomacy, and immigration quotas
26C explain how the contributions of people of various racial, ethnic, gender, and religious groups shape American culture
29F identify bias in written, oral, and visual material
29G identify and support with historical evidence a point of view on a social studies issue or event
31B pose and answer questions about geographic distributions and patterns shown on maps, graphs, charts, and available databases
Asian Immigration
The first large wave of Asian immigration to the United States began in thi years following the Civil War. In the mid-1800s, China was suffering from severe unemployment, poverty, famine, and a civil war, known as the Taiping Rebellion. These problems convinced tens of thousands of Chinest to head to the United States, as did news of the California Gold Rush. Almost all were young men in their teens or twenties seeking work, or hoping to strike it rich in the gold fields.
Chinese immigrants settled mainly in west coast cities, especially San Francisco. Although many headed to the gold fields, most failed to make much money and took jobs as laborers and servants. Some became merchants or skilled at a trade. Many helped build the Central Pacific Railroad. Initially, Asian immigrants arriving in San Francisco were inspected at a two-story shed on the wharf. In 1910, California opened a barracks on Angel Island for Asian immigrants. There immigrants waited, sometimes for months, for their hearings.
P READING PROGRESS CHECK
Making Generalizations How did the experiences of immigrating to the United State compare for Chinese and Europeans?
Nativism Resurges
guiding question Why didnativists oppose immigration?
nativism hostility toward immigrants by native-born people
fmmanvA	immigration ^d to increased feelings of nativism
native bornmneriC?nS;	" an 6Xtreme dislike immigrants by
people. It had surfaced during the heavy wave of Irish
146
immigration settlement patterns, late nineteenth century
I
China | Germany £ Ireland I |ta|y I Japan | Mexico | Poland J Russia Q Scandinavia
Settlement figures in thousands
CHARTS/GRAPHS
immigration in the 1840s and 1850s. By the late 1800s it was focused mainly on Asians, Jews, and eastern Europeans.
Nativists opposed immigration for many reasons. Some feared that the influx of Catholics from countries such as Ireland, Italy, and Poland would swamp the mostly Protestant United States. Many labor unions argued that immigrants undermined American workers because they would work for low wages and accept jobs as strikebreakers.
Nativists Organize
Increased feelings of nativism led to the founding of two major antiimmigrant organizations. The American Protective Association, founded by Henry Bowers in Iowa, in 1887, was an anti-Catholic organization. Its members vowed not to hire or vote for Catholics and the organization lobbied for restrictions of Catholic immigration to the United States. The APA built a large following in the Midwest and Northeast of the United States. On the west coast, where sentiment against the Chinese was very strong, widespread racial violence erupted. Denis Kearney, an Irish immigrant, formed the Workingman’s Party of California to fight Chinese immigration. The party won seats in the California legislature and made opposition to Chinese immigration a national issue.
Congress Passes New Immigration Laws
Opposition to immigration led Congress to pass several laws designed to limit the massive number of immigrants arriving in the United States.
Most of these were vetoed by the presidents of the era. In 1882, however, President Chester Arthur signed two bills—the Chinese Exclusion Act of 1882, and the Immigration Act of 1882. The Chinese Exclusion Act barred Chinese immigration for 10 years, and prevented Chinese already in the United States from becoming citizens. The Chinese in the United States organized a letter-writing campaign, petitioned Arthur, and filed suit in federal court, all to no avail. The ban on Chinese immigration was renewed in 1892, and then made permanent in 1902. It was not repealed until 1943.
This graph shows where different immigrant groups settled in the United States.
1	Which two states had the highest number of Irish immigrants?
2	Analyzing Information How
would you contrast the immigration settlement patterns in Texas and Ohio?
Urban America 147
The Immigration Act of 1882 imposed a head tax of 50 cents on each immigrant who arrived by ship at a United States port. The law also gave immigration officials the authority to reject immigrants who had a crimir record, were mentally disabled, or who were unable to take care of themselves “without becoming a public charge.”
For most of American history, the borders had been open, and virtual anyone who could get to the United States could settle there. State andlo governments controlled the ports and border crossings. The Immigration Act of 1882 began federal oversight of immigration and gave responsibilit to the Treasury Department to issue regulations, hire immigration agents and build inspection stations. One of the purposes of the head tax was to pay for the cost of the agents and offices needed to inspect immigrants. T law triggered a debate in American politics over the correct policies and regulations to adopt toward immigrants. The debate has continued to the present day.
Immigrant Optimism
Despite the difficulties of the journey, the challenges of finding work, anc the anger of nativists, many immigrants to the United States remained optimistic—in part because of what they were fleeing from, and in part because of what they discovered upon arriving. Although many Americai were poor and faced very difficult lives, there was no widespread famine, war or rebellion, unlike parts of China and Europe. There was no rigid d system. Immigrants understood that even though they were poor, theycc attempt to improve their position in life and were not permanently trappi because of the class into which they were born. In addition, wages wereh as compared to much of the world; jobs were plentiful, even if difficult ar sometimes demeaning, and there remained a lot of cheap land on the Gre Plains for those wishing to strike out on their own. In short, there was an opportunity to be free that many immigrants had never experienced befo and it created both optimism and a sense of possibility.
H REAPING PROGRESS CHECK
Explaining How did nativism affect Chinese immigrants on the west coast?
Reviewing Vocabulary
1.	Explaining What is nativism, and why did some Americans dislike immigrants? 3C
Using Your Notes
2.	Categorizing Use your notes on the reasons for immigrating to explain the push and pull factors for one of the immigrant groups discussed in the lesson. 13B
Answering the Guiding Questions
3.	Interpreting How did European immigrants of the late 1800s change American society? 13B, 26C
4.	Comparing and Contrasting How were the experiences of / immigrants different from those of European immigrants? 3C
5.	Analyzing How did the arrival of East European immigrants change American culture? 26C
Writing Activity
NARRATIVE
Suppose that you are an immigrant who has arrived in the United States in the 1800s. Choose a country t from and write a letter to a relative in your home country describing why you decided to move to America and what yi found when you arrived. 3C, 3D 148
3C, 13B, 29F, 29G
Identifying Bias and Points of View
Why Learn This Skill?
Everyday social media, talk shows, blog posts, text messages, and email flood us with opinion and commentary. In order to understand and assess what we see, hear, and read, and then make good decisions and choices, we need to be able to detect bias and a source's point of view, so as to evaluate the information we are receiving.
Learning the Skill
Everyone has bias—or tendency to look at information based their own experiences, knowledge, prejudices, and emotional reactions. People's biases and points of view are based on many factors including age, gender, race, ethnic background, economic class, religion, education, location, occupation, relationships, and personal experiences. All of these things need to be taken into account when looking for bias in a point of view.
To determine a point of view and detect bias in written, oral, or visual materials, follow these steps:
1.	What argument is being made? What are you being asked to think, do, feel, or believe? This is the point of view.
2.	Gather information about the author.
Is there anything that would cause the author to have a particular bias?
3.	Assess motivation. Will the author benefit from people adopting their point of view? Who will benefit?
4.	Determine the context. What was going on when the argument was made?
5.	Examine the language or visual imagery being used. Is it emotional? Do the words or pictures have positive or negative overtones? Are facts included that can be verified? Does the author use a lot of metaphors or analogies?
6.	Apply prior knowledge about the subject. Does the point of view match other sources? If necessary, research other sources on the subject and compare them to the author's viewpoint.
Practicing this Skill
Detecting Bias in Visuals Examine the cartoon by Thomas Nast published in 1871. It was drawn soon after New York City decided to fund Catholic schools.
1.	How would you describe the image's emotional content?
2.	Thomas Nast was an immigrant who had converted to Protestantism from Catholicism. At the time, he also supported the Republican Party. What might that suggest about his point of view?
3.	Based on your knowledge of the late 1800s, what bias and point of view is being depicted in this cartoon?
| Applying the Skill
| Detecting Bias in Oral Material Go to the
| last page ofthe lesson “The Rise of | Segregation.” Read the quote from a speech | by Booker T. Washington. What point of
view does the speech reveal? What bias do | you detect? Research Booker T. Washington j and write a paragraph explaining his point I of view.
149
PRIYAPY
SOUhChb The Immigrant
Experience Ellis Island operated as a federal immigration station from 1892 to 1954. More than 20 million people passed through on their way to a new life in the United States. After a long journey across the Atlantic, immigrants would be subject to long lines for medical and legal inspections, which would determine if they were permitted entry into the United States. For more than 80 percent of immigrants, the process took only a matter of hours. For the less fortunate, it took days or weeks. These excerpts provide first-hand accounts of two different immigrant experiences—one of a Chinese boy entering the United States from San Francisco, and the other of a Solvenian immigrant’s experience at Ellis Island.
VOCABULARY
imitate
to follow as an example
consisted
to be made up or composed of something
polygamist
a person who is married to more than one person at a time
anarchist
a person who supports a state of lawlessness, confusion, or disorder
custom
the usual practice of a person or group
dumbfounded
to become speechless with astonishment
MEMOIR,
Arriving on Ellis Island, 1906 “A group of Slovenian immigrants, of which this writer was one, arrived in New York from ... Austria.... It was a beautiful morning in May 1906. After leaving the French ship LA TOURAINE, we were transported to Ellis Island for landing and inspection. There we were ‘sorted out’ as to the country we came from and placed in a ‘stall’ with the letter ‘A’ above us. (‘A’ was for Austria).
There were at least a hundred Slovenian immigrants. We separated ourselves, as was the custom at home—men on the right and women and children on the left. All of us were waiting to leave for all parts of the United States.
The day was warm and we were very thirsty. An English speaking immigrant asked the nearby guard where we could get a drink of water. The guard withdrew and returned shortly with a pail of water, which he set before the group of women. Some men stepped forward quickly to have a drink, but the guard pushed them back saying: ‘Ladies first!’ When the women learned what the guard had said, they were dumbfounded, for in Slovenia ... women always were second to men.... Happy at the sudden turn of events, one elderly lady
stepped forward, holding a dipper of water, and proposed this toast:
‘Zivijo Amerika, kjer so zenske prve!’
(Long live America, where women are first!)’
—Marie Priesland, recalling herarriv in the United State
PHOTOGRAPH,
Ellis Island Health Inspection, 1905 Immigrants entering the United States were inspected for health problems before being allowed entry into the counti
150
Sample Question Form for Immigrants, c.1907
US IMMIGRATION SERVICE
1	Calling or Occupation?	Farmer
2	Able to Read?	Yes
3	Able to Write?	Yes
4	Nationality?	Germany
5	Whether having a ticket to final destination?	Yes
6	By whom was passage paid?	Father
7	Whether in possession of $50, and if less, how much?	$20
8	Whether going to join a relative or friend?	Friend
9	Ever in prison or almshouse or institution for care or treatment of the insane or supported by charity	No
MAGAZINE ARTICLE,
Starting Out in America, 1903 “My father gave me $100, and I went to Hong Kong with five other boys from our place and we got steerage passage on a steamer, paying $50 each. Everything was new to me. All my life I had been used to sleeping on a bord bed with a wooden pillow, and I found the steamer’s bunk very uncomfortable, because it was so soft. The food was different from that which I had been used to, and I did not like it at all. I was afraid of the stews, for the thought of what they might be made of by the wicked wizards of the ship made me ill. Of the great power of these people I saw many signs. The engines that moved the ship were wonderful monsters, strong enough to lift mountains. When I got to
5253 Analyzing Historical Documents
1.	Evaluating According to Lee Chew, what were some of the factors that helped him adapt as an immigrant and become a small business owner?
2.	Summarizing Based on the questions from this 1907 immigration questionnaire, what would you determine to be the main concerns of immigration officials regarding potential immigrants?
3.	Integrating Visual Information Based on the questionnaire questions and this photograph from Ellis Island in the 1920s, how would you describe the overall process of immigration? What potential
San Francisco ... I was half starved because I was afraid to eat the provisions of the barbarians, but a few days’ living in the Chinese quarter made me happy again. A man got me work as a house servant in an American family, and my start was the same as that of almost all the Chinese in this country.
The Chinese laundryman does not learn his trade in China; there are no laundries in China. The women there do the washing in tubs and have no washboards or flat irons. All the Chinese laundrymen here were taught in the first place by American women just as I was taught.
When I went to work for that American family I could not speak a word of English, and I did not know anything about housework. The family consisted of husband, wife and two children. They were very good to me and paid me $3.50 a week, of which I could save $3.
I did not understand what the lady said to me, but she showed me how to cook, wash, iron, sweep, dust, make beds, wash dishes, clean windows, paint and brass, polish the knives and forks, etc., by doing the things herself and then overseeing my efforts to imitate her. She would take my hands and show them how to do things. She and her husband and children laughed at me a great deal, but it was all good natured.... In six months I had learned how to do the work of our house quite well, and ...
I had also learned English.... I worked for two years as a servant... and I was now ready to start in business.”
—Chinese immigrant Lee Chew, reflecting on his first years in America
problems would you expect that are not documented in either source?
4.	Making Inferences What question is omitted from the questionnaire that you think would have been very important to immigration officials?
5.	Explaining Why were immigrants taken to Ellis Island for “processing”?
6.	Differentiating In Marie Priesland’s memoir, why did the American guards yell “Ladies first!” and push the men away from the water pail? Why were the women dumbfounded by the guard’s actions?
151
networks
There's More Online!
BIOGRAPHY
George Plunkitt BIOGRAPHY Jacob Riis gf BIOGRAPHY William Tweed
CHART/GRAPH
Rising Urban Populations IMAGE
Jacob Riis Photographs VIDEO
Urbanization INTERACTIVE SELF-CHECK QUIZ

LESSON 2
Urbanization

mpI

Reading HELPDESK
Academic Vocabulary • incentive • trigger
Content Vocabulary
•	skyscraper
•	tenement
•	political machine
•	party boss
•	graft
TAKING NOTES:
Key Ideas and Details
Organizing As you read, use the following graphic organizer to identify the problems the nation's cities faced.
TEKS
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills 

3A analyze political issues such as Indian policies, the growth of political machines, civil service reform, and the beginnings of Populism
3C analyze social issues affecting women, minorities, children, immigrants, urbanization, the Social Gospel, and philanthropy of industrialists
continued on p. 154

h
migrate? • How is urban li
IT MATTERS BECAUSE
Native-born Americans and immigrants were drawn to cities by the jobs available in America's growing industries. The new, modern cities developed skyscrapers, public transportation systems, and neighborhoods divided by social class. In many cities, political machines controlled city government.
Americans Migrate to the Cities
guidingquestion Howdoyou think life in big cities was different from life on farms and in small towns?
Most of the immigrants who arrived in the United States in the late 1800s lacked both the money to buy farms and the education to obtain higher-paying jobs. Thus, they settled in the nation’s growing cities and took jobs in the rapidly expanding factories of the United States. At the same time, rural Americans also began moving to the cities. Farmers moved to cities because urban areas offered betterpaying jobs than did rural areas. Many young men and women growing up on farms in the east, where cheap land was no longer available, preferred to build a life in the cities instead of becoming settlers on the distant Plains. Cities had much to offer, too—electric lights, running water, modern plumbing, plus attractions such as museums, libraries, and theaters.
As a result, after the Civil War, the United States steadily change from a rural nation to an urban one. New York City, which had mor than 800,000 inhabitants in 1860, grew to almost 3.5 million by 190( During the same period, Chicago swelled from some 109,000 residents to more than 1.6 million. The United States had only 131 cities with populations of 2,500 or more residents in 1840; by 1900, there were more than 1,700 such urban areas. By 1920, more Americans lived in urban areas than rural areas.
As city populations grew, the rising value of land provided an incentive to try new strategies of urban development. Some businessmen built upward rather than outward. Tall, steel frame
152
buildings called skyscrapers began to appear. To move people around cities quickly, various kinds of mass transit developed. At first, almost all cities relied on the horsecar, a railroad car pulled by horses. In 1890 horsecars moved about 70 percent of urban traffic in the United States. More than 20 cities, beginning with San Francisco in 1873, installed cable cars, which were pulled along tracks by underground cables. Then, in 1887, engineer Frank J. Sprague developed the electric trolley car. The country’s first electric trolley line opened the following year in Richmond, Virginia.
In the largest cities, congestion became a severe problem.
Chicago responded by building an elevated railroad, while Boston, followed by New York, built the first subway systems. g READING PROGRESS CHECK
Summarizing What attracted people to cities in the 1800s?
Separation by Class
guiding question How did the living conditions of the urban working class differ from those of other social classes?
In the growing cities, the upper, middle, and working classes lived in separate and distinct parts of town. The boundaries between neighborhoods can still be seen in many American cities today.
During the last half of the 1800s, the wealthiest families established fashionable districts in the heart of a city. As their homes grew larger, wealthy women increasingly relied on more servants, such as cooks, maids, butlers, nannies, and chauffeurs, and spent a great deal of money on social activities. In an age in which many New Yorkers lived on $500 a year, socialite Cornelia Sherman Martin spent $360,000 on a dance.
American industrialization expanded the middle class, which included doctors, lawyers, engineers, managers, social workers, architects, and teachers. Many middle-class people moved away from the central city to escape the crime and pollution and to be able to afford larger homes. Some used new commuter rail lines to move to “streetcar suburbs.”
In the late 1800s, wealthier families had at least one live-in servant. This gave the woman of the house more time to pursue activities outside the home, including “women’s clubs.” At first these clubs focused on social and educational activities, but over time “club women” became active in charitable and reform activities. In Chicago, for example, the Women’s Club helped establish juvenile courts and exposed the terrible conditions at the Cook County Insane Asylum.
Few families in the urban working class could hope to own a home.
Most spent their lives in crowded tenements, or multifamily apartment buildings. The first tenement in the United States was built in 1839. In New
Before the mid-1800s, few buildings exceeded four or five stories. To make wooden and stone buildings taller required thick lower walls. This changed when steel companies began mass-producing cheap steel girders and steel cable.
CRITICAL THINKING
Predicting Consequences What long-term effects do you think new building technologies had on cities? incentive something that motivates a person into action skyscraper a very tall building
tenement multifamily apartments, usually dark, crowded, and barely meeting minimum living standards
In the late 1800s, large numbers of people from farms and small towns, as well as immigrants, settled in cities.
CRITICAL THINKING
Identifying Central Ideas Why were so many people drawn to cities during this era? Urban America 153
Most working-class families lived in apartments, often only a single room in size. They had no servants, and typically husbands and wives both had to work.
York City, three out of four residents squeezed into dark and crowded tenements. To supplement the average industrial worker’s annual income of $445, many families rented preci space to a boarder. Zalmen Yoffeh, a Jewish immigrant journalist, lived in a New York tenement as a child. He recall his family’s everyday struggle:
PRIMARY SOURCE
« With one dollar a day [our mother] fed and clothed an ever-growing family. She took in boarders. Sometimes this helped; at other times it added to the burden of livin bmm.. Boarders were often out of work and penniless; how could one turn a hungry man out made all our clothes. She walked blocks to reach a place where meat was a penny cheaper, where bread
a half cent less. She collected boxes and old wood to burn in the stove. ”
—from "The Passing of the East Side? MenorahJoim
CRITICALTHINKING
Drawing Conclusions How effective was urban society at meeting the needs ofthe working class? (continued from p. 152)
TEKS
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills 13A analyze the causes and effects of changing demographic patterns resulting from migration within the United States, including western expansion, rural to urban, the Great Migration, and the Rust Belt to the Sun Belt
28A analyze how scientific discoveries, technological innovations, and the application of these by the free enterprise system, including those in transportation and communication, improve the standard of living in the United States
Within the working class, some people were better off than others. For example, white native-born men earned higher wages than African American men, immigrants, and women. One economist estimated that 64 percent of working-class families began to rely on more than one wage earner. In some cases, the whole family worked, including the children. The dangerous working conditions faced by child workers, and the lact that they were not in school, alarmed many reformers.
A growing number of women took jobs outside the home. White native-born women were better educated than other women. Thus, many found jobs as teachers, clerks, or secretaries. Many women, however, wen domestic servants, with immigrant women filling these jobs in the North and African American women doing such work in the South. Domestic servants endured long hours, low wages, and social isolation.
I READING PROGRESS CHECK
Explaining What was working life like for working-class families?
Urban Problems
guiding question What types of problems developed due to the rapid growth of urban areas?
29B analyze information by sequencing, categorizing, identifying cause-and-effect relationships, comparing and contrasting, finding the main idea, summarizing, making generalizations, making predictions, drawing inferences, and drawing conclusions
trigger to cause an action that causes a greater reaction
political machine an
organization linked to a political party that often controlled local government
party boss the person in control of a political machine
City living posed the risks of crime, violence, fire, disease, and pollution. The rapid growth of cities made these problems worse and complicated the ability of urban governments to respond to these problems.
Crime was a growing problem in American cities. Minor criminals, such as pickpockets, swindlers, and thieves, thrived in crowded urban living conditions. Major crimes multiplied as well. From 1880 to 1900, the murder rate jumped sharply from 25 per million people to more than 100 per million people.
Disease and pollution posed even bigger threats. Improper sewage disposal contaminated city drinking water and triggered epidemics of typhoid fever and cholera. Though sewer systems existed in the 1870s, pollution remained a severe problem. Horse manure was left in the street
bached smoke, and soot and built up from coal or wood fires.
The political machine, an informal political group designed to gain and keep power, came about partly because cities had grown much faster than their governments. New city dwellers needed jobs, housing, food, heat, and police protection. In exchange for votes, political machines anc Pl	oss®s who ran them eagerly provided these necessities. Geoq
ntm ’ One°f New York’s most powerful bosses, explained the benefit< political machines: “I can always get a job for a deservin’ man.... I knov
154
^POLITICAL CARTOONS
POLITICAL MACHINES
Critics of political machines said that they took bribes and gave contracts to friends, robbing cities of resources. In this image, workers in New York find the city treasury empty, while behind the scenes,
Boss Tweed and other city politicians enjoy a sumptuous feast.
1	Making Inferences What point is the artist trying to make?
2	Making Consequences
What problems could develop in cities as a result of the fraud of political machines?
every big employer in the district and in the whole city, for that matter, and they ain’t in the habit of sayin’ no to me when I ask them for a job.”
The party bosses also controlled the city’s finances. Many machine politicians grew rich as the result of fraud or graft, gaining money or power illegally. Outright fraud occurred when party bosses accepted bribes from contractors who were supposed to compete fairly to win contracts to build streets, sewers, and buildings. Corrupt bosses also sold permits to their friends to operate public utilities, such as railroads, waterworks, and power systems. Tammany Hall, the New York City Democratic political machine, was the most infamous such organization. William “Boss” Tweed was its leader during the 1860s and 1870s. Tweed’s corruptness led to a prison sentence in 1874.
City machines often controlled all the city services, including the police department. In St. Louis, the “boss” never feared arrest when he called out to his supporters at the police-supervised voting booth, “Are there any more repeaters out here that want to vote again?”
Opponents of political machines, such as cartoonist Thomas Nast, blasted corrupt bosses. Defenders argued that political machines provided necessary services and helped assimilate new city dwellers.
graft the acquisition of money in dishonest ways, as in bribing a politician
READING PROGRESS CHECK
Identifying Why were political machines so influential in cities?
LESSON 2 REVIEW
Reviewing Vocabulary
1.	Explaining Explain why tenements were a difficult place to live forthe urban working class. 3C
Using Your Notes
2.	Summarizing Use your notes on urban problems to explain why life in cities could be so difficult. 3C
Answering the Guiding Questions
3.	Interpreting How do you think life in big cities was different from life on farms and in small towns? 3C, 13A, 28A
4.	Analyzing Why did "political machines" develop in cities? 3A
5.	Making Connections What types of problems developed due to the rapid growth of urban areas? 3C, 13A
Writing Activity
ARGUMENT
Take on the role of an urban planner in a major city in the late 1800s. Write a letter to members of the city government listing specific reasons for the importance of setting aside city land for parks and recreational areas. 3C Urban America 155

I t

I **
networks
There's More Online!
BIOGRAPHY
Jane Addams Sf BIOGRAPHY Mark Twain & IMAGES Thomas Eakins Paintings Sf VIDEO The Gilded Age gf INTERACTIVE SELF-CHECK QUIZ

LESSON 3
Social Darwinism and Social Refo

Reading HELPDESK
Academic Vocabulary
• evolution • publish Content Vocabulary
IT MATTERS BECAUSE
The industrialization ofthe United States led to new art and literature and new ideas about government's role in society. Social Darwinists believed society developed through "survival of the fittest." Other Americans thought steps needed to be taken to help the less fortunate.
•	individualism
•	Social Darwinism
•	philanthropy
•	settlement house
•	Americanization
Gilded Age Ideas
guiding question What was the main idea of Social Darwinism, and how did it compare with the idea of individualism?
TAKING NOTES:
Key Ideas and Details
9
Categorizing As you read, complete a graphic organizer similar to the one below by filling in the main idea of each ofthe theories and movements listed.
Theory or Movement	Main Idea
Social Darwinism	
Laissez-Faire	
Gospel of Wealth	
Realism	
TEKS
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills 3C analyze social issues affecting women, minorities, children, immigrants, urbanization, the Social Gospel, and philanthropy of industrialists
continued on the next page
In 1873 Mark Twain and Charles Warner wrote a novel entitled The Gilded Age: A Tale of Today. Historians later adopted the term and applied it to the era in American history that began about 1870 and ended around 1900. The era was in many ways a time ot marvels. Amazing new inventions led to rapid industrial growth. Cities grew in size and people thronged the crowded streets. Wealthy entrepreneurs built spectacular mansions. Skyscrapers reached to the sky, and electric lights banished the darkness.
By calling this era the Gilded Age, Twain and Warner were sounding an alarm. Something is gilded if it is covered with gold on the outside but made of cheaper material inside. A gilded age might appear to sparkle, but critics pointed to corruption, poverty, crime, and great disparities in wealth between the rich and the poor.
Whether the era was golden or merely gilded, it was certainly a time of great cultural activity. Industrialism and urbanization altered the way Americans looked at themselves and their society, and these changes gave rise to new values, new art, and new entertainment.
The Idea of Individualism
One ofthe strongest beliefs of the era—and one that remains stron today—was the idea of individualism. Many Americans firmly believed that no matter how humble their origins, Americans coub rise in society and go as far as their talents and commitment woul< ta e them. No one expressed the idea of individualism better than
156
Horatio Alger, who wrote more than 100 “rags-to-riches” novels. In his books, a poor person goes to the big city and, through a combination of hard work and luck, becomes successful. Even though such dramatic jumps upward in social standing were not commonplace, Alger’s popular books convinced many young people that no matter how many obstacles they faced, success was possible.
Social Darwinism
Another powerful idea of the era was Social Darwinism. This philosophy, loosely derived from Charles Darwin’s theories, strongly reinforced the idea of individualism.
Herbert Spencer British philosopher Herbert Spencer applied Darwin’s theory of evolution and natural selection to human society. In his 1859 book On the Origin of Species by Means of Natural Selection, Darwin argued that plant and animal life had evolved over millions of years by a process he called natural selection. In this process, those species that cannot adapt to the environment in which they live gradually die out, while those that do adapt, thrive, and live on.
Spencer used this theory to argue that human society also evolved through competition and natural selection. He said that society became better because only the fittest people survived. Spencer and others, such as American scholar William Graham Sumner, became known as Social Darwinists and their ideas as Social Darwinism. “Survival of the fittest” became the catchphrase of their philosophy. Some industrial leaders used Social Darwinism to justify their support of laissez-faire capitalism. This economic doctrine opposed any government programs that interfered with business. Darwinism and the Church Many devout Christians found Darwin’s conclusions offensive. They rejected the theory of evolution because they believed it contradicted the Bible’s account of creation. Some clergy, however, concluded that evolution might have been God’s way of creating the world. One of the most famous ministers of the era, Henry Ward Beecher, called himself a “Christian evolutionist.”
Carnegie's Gospel of Wealth Andrew Carnegie advocated a gentler version of Social Darwinism that he called the Gospel of Wealth. This philosophy held that wealthy Americans should engage in philanthropy, using their fortunes to create the conditions that would help people help themselves. Building schools and hospitals, for example, was better than giving handouts to the poor. Carnegie funded the creation of public libraries in cities across the nation because libraries provide the information people needed to get ahead in life.
Herbert Spencer ? (1820-1903)
: Herbert Spencer was a philosopher 1 who wrote about"survival of the • fittest" several years before ; Darwin's Origin of Species was i published. In his major series,
’ Synthetic Philosophy, Spencer tried j to apply his beliefs about evolution : to a variety of social sciences. He
believed that both philosophy and science created an ordered system
j that supported human progress.
CRITICAL THINKING
Drawing Conclusions Why might Spencer's ideas have seemed controversial at the time they were written? (continued from p. 156)
TEKS
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills 24B evaluate the contributions of significant political and social leaders in the United States such as Andrew Carnegie, Thurgood Marshall, Billy Graham, Barry Goldwater, Sandra Day O’Connor, and Hillary Clinton
continued on the next page
PRIMARY SOURCE
«ln bestowing charity, the main consideration should be to help those who will help themselves; to provide part of the means by which those who desire to improve may do so; to give those who desire to rise the aids by which they may rise; to assist, but rarely or never to do all. Neither the individual nor the race is improved by almsgiving. Those worthy of assistance, except in rare cases, seldom require assistance. The really valuable men of the race never do, except in cases of accident or sudden change.... He is the only true reformer who is as careful and as anxious not to aid the unworthy as he is to aid the worthy, and, perhaps, even more so, for in almsgiving more injury is probably done by rewarding vice than by relieving virtue...."
—Andrew Carnegie, from The Gospel of Wealth and Other Timely Essays, 1886
Carnegie’s ideas were widely embraced by the nation’s wealthy. The late 1800s was a time when many people made a great deal of money. But it was
individualism the beliefthat no matter what a person's background is, he or she can still become successful through effort
Social Darwinism
a philosophy based on Charles Darwin's theories of evolution and natural selection, asserting that humans have developed through competition and natural selection with only the strongest surviving
Urban America 157
evolution the scientific theory that humans and other forms of life have evolved over time
philanthropy providing money to support humanitarian or social goals
also an era of philanthropy when the wealthy gave away a great deal of money to improve American society and build up American culture. Johr Rockefeller founded the University of Chicago, and many universities, including Stanford, Vanderbilt, and Johns Hopkins were named for the wealthy businessmen who helped found them. All across the nation, museums of art, symphonies, and operas were funded by wealthy patrons H READING PROGRESS CHECK
Summarizing How did Horatio Alger's books demonstrate the idea of individualis
(continued from p. 157)
TEKS
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills 25A describe how the characteristics and issues in U.S. history have been reflected in various genres of art, music, film, and literature
25B describe both the positive and negative impacts of significant examples of cultural movements in art, music, and literature such as Tin Pan Alley, the Harlem Renaissance, the Beat Generation, rock and roll, the Chicano Mural Movement, and country and western music on American society
26A explain actions taken by people to expand economic opportunities and political rights, including those for racial, ethnic, and religious minorities as well as women, in American society
26B discuss the Americanization movement to assimilate immigrants and American Indians into American culture
26D identify the political, social, and economic contributions of women such as Frances Willard, Jane Addams, Eleanor Roosevelt, Dolores Huerta, Sonia Sotomayor, and Oprah Winfrey to American society
The Rebirth of Reform
GUIDING question What methods and philosophies were developed for helping the urban poor?
The tremendous changes that industrialism and urbanization brought triggered a debate over how best to address society s problems. Some Americans embraced the ideas of individualism and Social Darwinism. Others disagreed, arguing that society’s problems could be fixed only if Americans and their government began to take a more active role in regulating the economy and helping those in need.
Challenging Social Darwinism
In 1880 journalist Henry George published Progress and Poverty, a discussion of the American economy that quickly became a national best seller. George observed, “The present century has been marked by a prodigious increase in wealth-producing power.” 'This should, he asserted have made poverty “a thing of the past.” Instead, he claimed, the “gull between the employed and the employer is growing wider; social contras are becoming sharper.” In other words, laissez-faire economics was niakii society worse—not better.
Most economists now argue that Georges analysis was Hawed. Industrialism did make some Americans very wealthy, but it also improvi the standard of living for most others as well. At the time, however, Americans in the midst of poverty did not see improvement. Georges ide spurred reformers to challenge Social Darwinism.
A young newsboy sells papers on a street corner in 1910.
Lester Frank Ward In 1883 Lester Frank Ward published Dynamic Sociology, in which he argued that humans were different from animals because they had the ability to make plans to produce the future outcomes they desired. Wards ideas came to be known as Reform Darwinism. People, he insisted, had succeeded in the world because of their ability to cooperate. Government, he argued, could regulate the economy, cure poverty, and promote education more efficiently than competition in the marketplace could.
Looking Backward Writer Edward Bellamy promoted another altern to Social Darwinism and laissez-faire economics. In 1888 he published Looking Backward, a novel about a man who falls asleep in 1887 and awakens in the year 2000 to find that the nation has become a perfect society with no crime, poverty, or politics. In this fictional society, the government owns all industry and shares the wealth equally with all
mencans. Bellamy’s ideas were essentially a form of socialism. Naturalism in Literature Criticism of industrial society also appean chai? Ure	Style of writing known as naturalism. Naturalists
failed i^ ff	^°cia^ Darwinism by suggesting that some peoj
could no!‘ceo«” Ly USe ,hey Were	“? in circumstances the
Among the most prominent naturalist writers were Stephen Crane,
Jack London, and Theodore Dreiser. Stephen Crane’s novel Maggie, A Girl of the Streets (1893) told the story of a girl’s descent into prostitution and death. Jack Londons tales of the Alaskan wilderness demonstrated the power of nature over civilization. Theodore Dreiser’s novels, such as Sister Carrie (1900), painted a world where people sinned without punishment and where the pursuit of wealth and power often destroyed their character.
Naturalist literature drew people’s attention to the issues and problems facing American society as a result of rapid industrialization and urbanization, issues such as poverty, violence, safety, disease, and isolation. The literature had a positive impact in that it encouraged readers to look at social problems. It encouraged some people to become reformers, and to try to help the less fortunate. But the literature also had a negative impact. By downplaying heroism and the ability of people to make a difference in their life, it discouraged people from taking action, and encouraged envy and resentment toward people of different social classes.
Naturalism also implicitly asked readers to consider whether individualism and laissez-faire was leading to the best possible society. So it was not surprising that readers of naturalist literature might conclude that the way to make things better was by government intervention. Whether that was a positive or negative impact of the literature depended on whether a person thought an increased government role in society and the economy was a good idea.
Helping the Urban Poor
The plight of the urban poor prompted some reformers to find new ways to help. The Social Gospel movement worked to better conditions in cities according to the biblical ideals of charity and justice. Washington Gladden, a minister, was an early advocate who popularized the movement in writings such as Applied Christianity (1887). Walter Rauschenbusch, a Baptist minister from New York, became the leading voice in the Social Gospel movement.
The Church, he argued, must “demand protection for the moral safety of the people.” The Social Gospel movement inspired many churches to build gyms, provide social programs and child care, and help the poor.
The Salvation Army and the Young Men’s Christian Association (YMCA) also combined faith and an interest in reform. The Salvation Army offered practical aid and religious counseling to the urban poor. The YMCA tried to help industrial workers and the urban poor by organizing Bible studies, citizenship training, and group activities. The YMCA also provided low-cost boarding houses for young men. The head of the Chicago YMCA, Dwight L. Moody, was a gifted preacher whose revival meetings drew thousands of people. Moody rejected both the Social Gospel movement and Social Darwinism. He believed the way to help the poor was not by providing them with services but by redeeming their souls and reforming their character.
The settlement house movement began as an offshoot of the Social Gospel movement. In the late 1800s, idealistic reformers—including many college-educated women—established settlement houses in poor, often heavily immigrant neighborhoods. The reformers lived in these settlement houses, which were community centers offering everything from medical care and English classes to kindergartens and recreational programs. Jane Addams opened Hull House in Chicago in 1889. Jewish reformer Lillian Wald founded the Henry Street Settlement in New York City. Both women were a powerful force in social work and the settlement house movement.
settlement house an
institution located in a poor neighborhood that provided numerous community services such as medical care, child care, libraries, and classes in English
Urban America 159
After visiting a settlement house in London, England, Jane Addams decided to open Hull House in 1889 to assist poor immigrants in Chicago. Addams wrote books about her experience at Hull House, giving an example to others throughout the nation.
CRITICALTHINKING
Drawing Conclusions Based on her involvement with Hull House, how would you describe Jane Addams as a person? Americanization the
process of acquiring or causing a person to acquire American traits and characteristics
SKILLS PRACTICE
There are many words that may be new to you in this lesson such as evolution, individualism, philanthropy, and Americanization. When you see a new word, think about it. Do you already know something about it? Use what you know to help you understand the new word.
Public Education
As the United States became increasingly industrialized and urbanized, i needed more trained and educated workers. The number ol public schoc increased dramatically after the Civil War. The number ol children attending school rose from 7,562,000 in 1870 to 15,503,000 in 1900. Pub schools were often crucial to the success of immigrant children. At schoi they were taught English and learned about American history and cultu a process known as Americanization.
Schools also tried to instill discipline. Grammar schools divided students into grades and drilled them in punctuality, neatness, and efficiency—necessary habits for the workplace. Vocational education in high schools taught skills required in specific trades. 1 lowever, children cities had greater access to education than those in rural areas. Many African Americans also faced education inequalities. Some started theii own schools, following the example of Booker T. Washington, who four the Tuskegee Institute in 1881.
H READING PROGRESS CHECK
Explaining Why were public schools important to the success of immigrant child
A
Changing Culture guidingquestion Why do you think artists and writers started portraying America more reaiistica
The late 1800s was a period of great cultural change for writers and arti It was also a time when many urban Americans took advantage of new forms of entertainment.
Realism in Art & Literature
A new movement in art and literature called realism began in the 1800s arwm tried to explain the natural world scientifically, artists and wi
ned to portray the world realistically. Realist artists did not generally
160
choose heroic or historical topics. Nor did they try to idealize people as romantic artists had done. Instead they painted ordinary people doing ordinary things. Among the best known of the realist painters are John Singer Sargent and Thomas Eakins. Much of the work they did was portraiture formal paintings in realistic detail of people posing for the artist. Eakins, however, was also known for paintings that depicted people in action. He painted men rowing, athletes playing baseball, a family out for a carriage ride, doctors performing surgery and scientists in action in their laboratories. The realist style captured many of the characteristics of the era such as clothing styles, social relationships, the differences between the social classes, and the way people looked doing ordinary things in life.
Writers also attempted to capture the world as they saw it. In several novels, William Dean Howells presented realistic descriptions of American life. For example, his novel The Rise of Silas Lapham (1885) described the attempts of a self-made man to enter Boston society. Also an influential literary critic, Howells was the first to declare Mark Twain an incomparable American genius.
Twain, whose real name was Samuel Clemens, published his
masterpiece, Adventures of Huckleberry Finn, in 1884. In this novel, the title character and his friend Jim, who has escaped from slavery, float down the Mississippi River on a raft. Twain wrote in local dialect with a lively sense of humor. Through the innocent eyes of his characters who question right and wrong in American society as they encounter it, Twain gave readers a humorous yet critical account of racism, violence, and poverty in the nation. Popular Culture
Popular culture changed considerably in the late 1800s. Industrialization improved the standard of living for many people, enabling them to spend money on entertainment and recreation. Increasingly, urban Americans divided their lives into separate units—that of work and that of home.
People began “going out” to public entertainment.
In cities, saloons often outnumbered groceries. As a place for social gathering, saloons played a major role in the lives of male workers. Saloons
With his book Adventures of Huckleberry Finn, Mark Twain had written a true American novel.
The setting, subject, characters, and style were clearly American.
CRITICALTHINKING
Making Inferences Why did Mark Twain write Adventures of Huckleberry Finn using local dialect? publish to make a document available to the general public
offered drinks, free toilets, water for horses, and free newspapers for customers. They even offered the first “free lunch”: salty food that made patrons thirsty and eager to drink more. Saloons also served as political centers, and saloonkeepers were often key figures in political machines.
Working-class families and single adults could find entertainment at new amusement parks such as New York City’s Coney Island. Amusements such as water slides and railroad rides cost only a nickel or dime. People also began watching professional sports. Formed in 1869, the first professional baseball team was the Cincinnati Red Stockings. In 1903 the first official World Series was played between the Boston Americans and the Pittsburgh Pirates. Football gained in popularity and by the late 1800s had spread to public colleges.
As work became less strenuous, many people looked for activities involving physical exercise. Tennis, golf, and croquet became popular. In 1891 James Naismith, athletic director for a college in Massachusetts, invented a new indoor game called basketball.
Tin Pan Alley
People also enjoyed comic theater and music. Adapted from French theater, vaudeville took on an American flavor in the early 1880s with its hodgepodge of animal acts, singers, comedians, acrobats, and dancers. Like
Urban America 161
vaudeville, ragtime music echoed the hectic pace of city life. Its syncopate rhythms grew out of the music of riverside honky-tonks, saloon pianists, and banjo players, using the patterns of African American music. Scott Joplin, one ofthe most important African American ragtime composers, became known as the King of Ragtime. He wrote his most famous piece, “The Maple Leaf Rag,” in 1899.
From the early 1880s to the late 1930s, the music industry in America was centered in New York City. The part of the city where many music publishers and songwriters were located became known as Tin Pan Alley. The name is thought to have come from a sarcastic description of the sou of many pianos playing different ragtime songs all at once—that it soundi like tin pans banging together. Tin Pan Alley musicians and publishers m most of their money by selling sheet music. Very few people owned phonographs in the 1880s and 1890s, but many homes had pianos, banjos and other instruments, and people would play popular songs for themseh and their families. Musicians, known as pluggers, put on performances tc advertise songs and get people to buy the sheet music.
The negative impact of Tin Pan Alley, especially in its early years, wa: that it also continued to promote racial stereotypes. Much of Tin Pan AU style and sound derived from African American songs and music but wit themes and content that appealed to white Americans. A portion of the music published, especially in the 1880s and 1890s, included racial jokes ideas that probably played a role in sustaining the racism of the era and t social separation of whites and African Americans.
Despite this, Tin Pan Alley’s positive impact on America was much greater than its negative impact. It was largely responsible for the birth o the modern music industry and made possible the careers of such famou songwriters as Irving Berlin, George Cohan, Ira Gershwin, ('ole Porter, Scott Joplin and many others. Some of the most popular songs of the era still known today, including “Hello! Ma Baby (Hello Ma Ragtime Gal),”“( My Regards to Broadway,” and “Take Me Out to the Ball Game" Tin Pan / also played an important role in World War I, deliberately publishing mi to help the morale of soldiers and people at home. “Perhaps the best kno song from World War I is “Over There.”
P READING PROGRESS CHECK
Analyzing Why was it possible to pursue more leisure activities and popular entertainment during this time period?
LESSON 3 REVIEW
Reviewing Vocabulary
1.	Explaining Explain the significance of philanthropy, and identify the reason for its growth during the late 1800s. 3C, 24B
Using Your Notes
2.	Defining Use your notes on the theories and movements ofthe Gilded Age to explain its defining characteristics. 3C, 25A
Answering the Guiding Questions
3.	Comparing What was the main idea of Social Darwinism, and how did it compare with the idea of individualism? 3C
4.	Summarizing What methods and philosophies were develt for helping immigrants and the urban poor? 24B, 26A,26B,2(
5.	Making Connections Why do you think artists and writers started portraying America more realistically? 25A
Writing Activity
ARGUMENT
Suppose that you are a newspaper editor in t late 1800s. Write an editorial in which you support or oppo philosophy of Social Darwinism. 3C 162
ietw@rks
here's More Online!
Zf BIOGRAPHY William Jennings Bryan
CHART/GRAPH
Political Parties Zf MAP Presidential Election of 1896 VIDEO
The Populist Party Zf INTERACTIVE SELF-CHECK QUIZ
LESSON 4
r < > ij
Politics of the Gilded Age



1I111B1B
Why do people migrate? « How is urban
Reading HELPDESK
Icademic Vocabulary
currency
strategy
bond
It Matters Because
In the late 1800s, the two major political parties were closely competitive, and issues such as tariffs and business regulations were hotly debated. Meanwhile, farmers facing falling crop prices and deflation tried to overcome their problems by forming organizations. In the 1890s, many farmers joined the Populist Party.
Content Vocabulary
populism
greenbacks
inflation
graduated income tax
deflation
cooperatives
FAKING NOTES:
fey Ideas and Details
Irganizing As you read about the 'mergence of populism in the 1890s, ise the major headings of the lesson o create an outline similar to the me below.
Politics of the Gilded Age I. Politics in Washington
A.
B.
V
TEKS
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills L 3A analyze political issues such as Indian
policies, the growth of political machines, civil service reform, and the beginnings of Populism
continued on the next page
Politics in Washington
guiding question Why was civil service reform needed?
Up until the 1880s, most jobs in the federal government were subject to the spoils system. After candidates won election and took office, they fired all of the people who worked for the government, and gave the jobs to people who had supported their election. This practice of rewarding political supporters with government jobs is known as patronage. Supporters of patronage claimed it was necessary to ensure that government workers stayed loyal to the elected representatives of the people. But after the Civil War, many Americans came to believe patronage made the government inefficient and corrupt.
Civil Service Reforms
When Rutherford B. Hayes became president in 1877, he tried to end patronage by firing officials who had been given jobs because of their support of the party and replacing them with reformers.
His actions split the Republican Party between “Stalwarts” (who supported patronage), “Halfbreeds” (who backed some reform), and reformers. No reforms were passed. In 1880 the Republicans nominated James Garfield, a “Halfbreed,” for president and Chester A. Arthur, a “Stalwart,” for vice president. Despite the feud over patronage, the Republicans managed to win the election. A few months later, President Garfield was assassinated by a man angry that he had not been given a government job.
Garfield’s assassination turned public opinion against the spoils system. In 1883 Congress passed the Pendleton Act, requiring that
Urban America 163
(continued from p. 163)
TEKS
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills 3B analyze economic issues such as industrialization, the growth of railroads, the growth of labor unions, farm issues, the cattle industry boom, the rise of entrepreneurship, free enterprise, and the pros and cons of big business
5C evaluate the impact of third parties, including the Populist and Progressive parties 12A analyze the impact of physical and human geographic factors on the settlement of the Great Plains, the Klondike Gold Rush, the Panama Canal, the Dust Bowl, and the levee failure in New Orleans after Hurricane Katrina
on service
15B describe the changing relationship between the federal government and private business, including the costs and benefits of laissez-faire, anti-trust acts, the Interstate Commerce Act, and the Pure Food and Drug Act
continued on the next page
some jobs be filled by competitive written exams, rather than by patrona; This marked the beginning of professional civil service-a system where most government workers are given jobs based on qualifications rather tl political affiliation. Only about 10 percent of federal jobs were made< dee positions in 1883, but the percentage increased over time.
In 1884 the Democrats nominated Grover Cleveland, the governor of] York, for president. Cleveland was a reformer with a reputation for honest; The Republicans nominated James G. Blaine, a former Speaker of the House rumored to have accepted bribes. Some Republicans were so unhappy with Blaine that they supported Cleveland.
Cleveland narrowly won the election, and then he faced supporters who expected him to reward them with jobs. Reformers, on the other hand, expe him to increase the number of jobs under the civil service system. Cleveland chose a middle course and angered both sides. Soon, however, economic issi replaced the patronage reform debate.
POLITICAL DEBATES OF THE GILDED AGE
P0
LITICAL CARTOONS
Senator George K. Pendleton is congratulated for his civil service bill. An overflowing trash bin suggests that reform is impossible.
Did the artist who drew the cartoon favor civil service reform? How does he indicate his opinion?
How might the passage of civil service reform change how government works?
Debating Economic Policy
By the 1880s, the American people had become increasingly concerned ab the power of large corporations, fearful they were controlling prices and wages, and corrupting the government. Small businesses and farmers had become particularly angry at the railroads. While large corporations could negotiate rebates and lower rates because of the volume of goods they shipped, others were forced to pay much highe rates. Eventually many states passed laws regulating railro rates. In 1886 the Supreme Court ruled in the case of Wab St, Louis, and Pacific Railway v. Illinois that only the federj government could regulate interstate commerce. Public pressure forced Congress to act, and in 1887 Cleveland sif the Interstate Commerce Act. This was the first federal la^ regulate interstate commerce.
The law limited railroad rates to what was “reasonab and just,” outlawed rebates, and made it illegal to charge higher rates for shorter hauls where the short haul wasp of a longer haul. The law also created the Interstate Commerce Commission (ICC); the nation’s first independent regulatory agency. The ICC was not very effective in regulating the industry because it had to tab railroads to court, prove they were violating the law, thei the court to enforce the ICC s rulings.
Despite its weaknesses, the creation of the ICC had $ benefits. By banning rebates and higher rates for short h it reduced some of the pressure on farmers and small businesses who were struggling to compete with large companies. On the other hand, it imposed costs on consumers. Eliminating rebates and different rates for short and long ha meant the costs of shipping goods increased for large companies. They i
paSSed th°Se COStS along in the form of higher prices to consumers. > ongress gave the ICC the power to regulate railroad safety as wel decision that brought its own costs and benefits. Safer railroads benefite o passengers and railroad workers. But at the same time, the costs of
meant^h k safety regulations increased railroad costs which in turn Tariff7 C ar§ed ulgh feeS f°r shiPPin§ and passenger tickets.
Congress	er Jconomic issue. Many Democrats thought that
Congress should cut tariffs because they raised the price of imported go
164
High tariffs also forced other nations to respond in kind, making it difficult for farmers to export surpluses. In December 1887 President Cleveland proposed lowering tariffs. The Democratic House passed moderate tariff reductions, but the Republican Senate rejected the bill.
In 1888 the Republicans and their presidential candidate, Benjamin Harrison, received large campaign contributions from industrialists who benefited from high tariffs. Cleveland and the Democrats campaigned against high tariff rates. In one of the closest presidential elections in American history, Harrison lost the popular vote but won the electoral vote, giving Republicans control of the White House.
In 1890 Representative William McKinley pushed through a bill that cut some taxes and tariff rates but increased rates on other goods. The McKinley Tariff, intended to protect American industry from foreign competition, instead helped trigger a steep rise in the price of all goods. In 1890 Congress also passed the Sherman Antitrust Act to curb the power of the large business combinations known as trusts. The act prohibited any “combination ... or conspiracy, in restraint of trade or commerce among the several States.”
(continued from p. 164)
TEKS
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills 15E describe the emergence of monetary policy in the United States, including the Federal Reserve Act of 1913 and the shifting trend from a gold standard to fiat money
B READING PROGRESS CHECK
Summarizing What actions did Congress take to reform the civil service? Why were these steps necessary?
Unrest in Rural America
populism apolitical movement founded in the 1890s representing mainly farmers that favored free coinage of silver and government control of railroads and other large industries
guiding question What kinds of problems did farmers face?
Populism was a movement to increase farmers’ political power and work for legislation in their interest. An economic crisis following the Civil War led farmers to join the Populist movement. New technology enabled farmers to produce more crops, but increased supply caused prices to fall. High tariffs also made it hard for farmers to sell their goods overseas. In addition, mortgages with large banks and rail shipping costs that continued to increase made the farmers’ difficulties worse.
The Money Supply
greenback a unit of paper currency first issued by the federal government during the Civil War
currency papermoneyusedasa medium of exchange
inflation an ongoing increase in prices and decrease in the value of money
Some farmers thought adjusting the money supply would solve their problems. During the Civil War, the government had expanded the money supply by issuing millions of dollars in greenbacks, paper currency that could not be exchanged for gold or silver coins. When currency is issued that cannot be exchanged for a commodity, like gold or silver, it is called fiat currency. It holds value only because the government says it does. The increased money supply without an increase in goods for sale caused
inflation, or a decline in the value of money. As the paper money lost value, the prices of goods soared.
After the Civil War ended, the United States had three types of currency in circulation—greenbacks, gold and silver coins, and national banknotes backed by government bonds. To get inflation under control, the federal government stopped printing greenbacks and began paying off its bonds. In 1873 Congress also decided to stop making silver into coins. These decisions meant
that the money supply was insufficient for the country’s growing economy. As the economy expanded, deflation—an increase in the value of money and a decrease in prices—began.
Deflation hit farmers especially hard. Falling prices meant that they sold their crops for less and then had to borrow money for seed and other
bond a note issued by the government that promises to pay off a loan with interest
This Civil War-era banknote from 1862 was part ofthe expanded money supply that caused a rise in inflation.
CRITICALTHINKING
Making Inferences Why would an increase in the amount of paper currency cause it to lose value? Urban America 165
deflation an ongoing decrease in prices and an increase in the value of money
supplies to plant their next crops. With money in short supply, interest ra began to rise, increasing the amount farmers owed. Rising interest rates a made mortgages more expensive, and despite their lower income, farmer; to make the same mortgage payments to the banks. Farmers knew their problems were partly due to a shortage of currency. Some wanted the government to print more greenbacks. Others, especially those in the We where new silver mines had been found, wanted silver coins to be issued again. Increasingly farmers realized that if they wanted the government t meet their demands, they had to organize.
cooperative a store where farmers buy products from each other; an enterprise owned and operated by those who use its services
The Grange Takes Action
In 1866 the Department of Agriculture sent Oliver H. Kelley to tour the r South and report on farmers’ conditions. Realizing that farmers were iso Kelley founded the first national farm organization, the Patrons of Husbandry, in 1867. It became known as the Grange.
In 1873 the nation plunged into a severe recession, and farm income fell sharply. Grangers responded by pressuring states to regulate railroad and warehouse rates. To reduce harmful competition among farmers, the Grangers also tried creating organizations called cooperatives in whic member farmers worked together to increase prices and lower costs. Not the strategies improved farmers’ economic conditions.
The Farmers7 Alliance
strategy a plan or method for achieving a goal
As the Grange began to fall apart, a new organization, known as the Farmers’ Alliance, began to form. By 1890, the Alliance had between 1. 3 million members. When Charles W. Macune became the leader of th< Alliance, he announced a plan to organize very large cooperatives, wh he called exchanges. The exchanges failed because they overextended
themselves, or because wholesalers, railroad owners, and bankers mac difficult for them to stay in business. They also failed because they we still too small to affect world prices for farm products.
POLITICAL CARTOONS
g READING PROGRESS CHEC
The People's Party, also known as the Populist Party, is shown as a patchwork of assorted movements and philosophies supporting a "Platform of Lunacy."
1 Why do you think the People's Party platform is portrayed as one of lunacy?
2 How does the patchwork balloon represent the artist's point of view? ‘
FORMATION OF THE PEOPLE'S PARTY
Explaining What measures c nation take after the Civil W improve its economic situat What was the result?
The Rise of Populism
guidingquestion What were ti of the Populist Party?
By 1890, many people in t Alliance were dissatisfied, felt that only through poli could they achieve their g< However, many Alliance members had become distrustful of both the Republican and Democral Parties. They believed tha parties favored industry a
166
banks over farmers. In July 1892, more than 1,000 delegates met in Omaha, Nebraska, to form the People s Party. The party held its first national convention and nominated James B. Weaver to run for president. The Omaha conventions platform called for a return to unlimited coinage of silver. It also called for federal ownership of railroads and a graduated income tax.
Populists also adopted proposals that were designed to appeal to organized labor. Ideas such as an eight-hour workday and immigration restrictions were put forth as appealing options. In the end, however, populism held little appeal to urban voters, who continued their traditional party allegiances. Many workers continued to vote for the Democrats, whose candidate, Grover Cleveland, won the election.
H READING PROGRESS CHECK
Summarizing Why did Southern Alliance groups resist the idea of a national People's Party?
The Election of 1896
guiding question Why did the Populists support the Democratic candidate—William Jennings Bryan—in 1896?
As the election of 1896 approached, leaders of the People’s Party decided to make the free coinage of silver the focus of their campaign and to hold their convention after the Republican and Democratic conventions. They believed, correctly, that the Republicans would endorse a gold standard.
They also expected the Democrats to nominate Grover Cleveland, even though Cleveland favored a gold standard. The People’s Party hoped that when it endorsed silver, pro-silver Democrats would choose the Populists.
Unfortunately, their strategy failed. William Jennings Bryan made an impassioned pro-silver speech at the convention and won the Democratic nomination.
PRIMARYSOURCE
« Having behind us the producing masses of this nation and the world supported by the commercial interests, the laboring interests and the toilers everywhere, we will answer their demand fora gold standard by saying to them: You shall not press down upon the brow of labor this crown of thorns; you shall not crucify mankind upon a cross of gold.99
—from Bryan's speech at the Democratic National Convention, 1896
The Populists faced a difficult choice: endorse Bryan and risk undermining their identity as a party, or nominate their own candidate and risk splitting the silver vote. They chose to support Bryan.
The Republicans appealed to workers with the promise that McKinley would provide a “full dinner pail.” Also most business leaders supported the Republicans, convinced that unlimited silver coinage would ruin the country. Many employers warned workers that if Bryan won, businesses would fail and unemployment would rise further. McKinley’s reputation as a moderate on labor issues and as tolerant toward ethnic groups helped improve the Republican Party’s image with urban workers and immigrants. When the votes were counted, McKinley had won with a decisive victory.
Evaluating Populism's Impact
Discouraged by defeat, the Peoples Party declined after 1896. The Populist goal of using the federal government to ease the economic hardships of farmers and regulate big business failed, primarily because of
graduated income tax
a tax based on the net income of an individual or business and which taxes different income levels at different rates
SKILLS PRACTICE
Work with a partner. Take turns explaining the problems that farmers faced in the late 1800s. Use the social studies terms you learned in this lesson to explain the issues.
Urban America 167
the party’s inability to appeal successfully to urban workers in the north Populist ideas, however, were not forgotten and continued to influence t political debate. In the years ahead many items on the Populist program would be realized, including the eight hour workday, restrictions on immigration, and a graduated income tax. Ironically, the key Populist gc of increasing the money supply came about almost immediately followii the election, as gold from the Klondike and new gold mines in South Af flooded into the world’s economy.
The Klondike Gold Rush
In August 1896, an American prospector discovered gold near the Klonc River in the Yukon territory of northern Canada. When the news reache San Francisco and Seattle the following year the last great gold rush in American history began. Within months, an estimated 100,000 peoples! out for the Klondike determined to strike it rich.
Physical geographic factors made getting to the Klondike very diffici The region was extremely remote. The most direct route was to book passage to the ports of Dyea or Skagway, then hike approximately 30 mil over the mountains before sailing the final 500 miles down the Yukon Ri to Dawson City, the nearest settlement to the gold fields. Prospectors we required to bring a year’s worth of supplies so as to ensure no one starve^ death in the remote region. To do that, each person had to bring in nearl ton of material. Boomtowns full of hotels, storehouses, saloons, and gent stores popped up. Prices soared as merchants sought to supply tools, foo shelter, transportation and entertainment to the prospectors pouring inti the region. Hundreds died; some from the cold, some from starvation, others from avalanches, accidents while climbing mountains or crossing frozen lakes, or from outbreaks of dysentery and typhoid fever.
By 1899, the gold rush was over, although companies using heavy equipment continued to expand gold production into the early 1900s. Fe than 40,000 people made it to the gold fields and only about 4,000 found gold. Of those, only a few hundred became wealthy. The gold rush helpei develop lower Alaska. It also poured millions of dollars into the nation’s money supply without requiring a return to silver coins or paper currenc Mild inflation set in; credit became easier to obtain, and farmers and workers were less distressed. In 1900, the United States officially adopted gold-based currency with the passage of the Gold Standard Act.
H READING PROGRESS CHECK
Evaluating Why did the Republicans win the election of 1896?
LESSON 4 REVIEW
Reviewing Vocabulary
1.	Explaining Explain the significance of: populism, greenbacks, inflation, deflation. 3B, 5C, 15E
Using Your Notes
2.	Comparing and Contrasting Use your notes to explain how the Farmers'Alliance contributed to the rise of a new political party.
3B
Answering the Guiding Questions
3.	Cause and Effect Why was civil service reform needed? 3A
4.	Describing What kinds of problems did farmers face? 3B
5.	Summarizing What were the goals ofthe People's Party? 5C
6.	Making Connections Why did the Populists support the Democratic candidate—William Jennings Bryan—in^896?
Writing Activity
NARRATIVE
Imagine you are a prospector just returned from Klondike. Write a short narrative describing your adventures, y1 struggle with the environment, and life in the boomtowns, 12 168
ietw@rks
here's More Online!
BIOGRAPHY W.E.B.
Du Bois BIOGRAPHY
Booker T. Washington zf VIDEO Ida B. Wells
zf INTERACTIVE SELF-CHECK QUIZ
LESSON 5
The Rise of Segregation
Reading HELPDESK
cademic Vocabulary discrimination
ontent Vocabulary
poll tax
segregation
Jim Crow laws
lynch
AKING NOTES:
ey Ideas and Details
rganizing Use a graphic organizer milar to the following to list the ways lat states disenfranchised African mericans and legalized discrimination.
K
EKS
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills 3C analyze social issues affecting women, minorities, children, immigrants, urbanization, the Social Gospel, and philanthropy of industrialists
continued on the next page
IONS • Why do people migrate? • How is urban
it matters because
After Reconstruction ended, Southern states began passing laws that weakened the rights of African Americans by introducing segregation and denying voting rights. African American leaders struggled to protect civil rights and improve their quality of life.
Resistance and Repression
guiding question Howdid African Americans resist radsm and try to improve their way of life following Reconstruction?
After Reconstruction, many African Americans in the rural South lived in poverty. Most were sharecroppers, landless farmers who gave their landlords a large portion of their crops as rent. Sharecropping usually left farmers in chronic debt. Many eventually left farming and sought jobs in Southern towns or headed west to claim homesteads.
In the mid-1870s, Benjamin “Pap” Singleton became convinced that African Americans would never be given a chance to get ahead in the South. He began urging African Americans to move west, specifically to Kansas, and form their own independent communities. His ideas soon set in motion a mass migration. In less than two months, approximately 6,000 African Americans left their homes in the rural South and headed to Kansas. The newspapers called it “an Exodus,” like the ancient Jews escape from Egyptian bondage referred to in the Bible. The migrants themselves came to be known as “Exodusters.” The first Exodusters, many possessing little more than hope and the clothes on their backs, arrived in Kansas in the spring of 1879.
While some African Americans fled the South, others joined poor white farmers who had created the Farmers’ Alliance. Alliance leaders urged African Americans to form a similar organization. In 1886 African American farmers established the Colored Farmers’ National Alliance, which numbered about 1.2 million members by 1890.
■-9(39
am
Urban America 169
In 1879 an estimated 6,000 to 15,000 African Americans known as Exodusters left the rural South and headed to Kansas.
CRITICAL THINKING
Examining Why did the Exodusters migrate to Kansas? When the Populist Party forme
HO	'/	in 1891, many African American
farmers joined the new organizatio This posed a major challenge to the Democratic Party in the South. Ifp whites joined African Americans ir voting for the Populists, the coalitk might be unbeatable. To win back t poor white vote, Democratic leader began appealing to racism. In addition, election officials began using various methods to make it harder and harder for African Americans to vote. As one Democr leader in the South told a reporter, “Some of our people, some editors especially, deny that [African Americans] are hindered fromvoti
but what is the good of lying? They are interfered with, and we are oblige to do it, and we may as well tell the truth.”
Q READING PROGRESS CHECK
Summarizing What did the Democratic Party do to prevent the Populists from gaining too much power?
(continued from p. 169)
TEKS
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills 5B evaluate the impact of muckrakers and reform leaders such as Upton Sinclair, Susan B. Anthony,
Ida B. Wells, and W. E. B. DuBois on American society
21A analyze the effects of landmark U.S. Supreme Court decisions, including Brown v. Board of Education, and other U.S. Supreme Court decisions such as Plessy v. Ferguson, Hernandez v. Texas, Tinker v. Des Moines, Wisconsin v. Yoder, and White v. Regester
26A explain actions taken by people to expand economic opportunities and political rights, including those for racial, ethnic, and religious minorities as well as women, in American society
poll tax a tax of a fixed amount per person that had to be paid before the person could vote
Imposing Segregation
guiding question What laws didSouthern states pass to impose segregation and deny African Americans their voting rights?
After Reconstruction ended in 1877, the rights of African Americans wei gradually undermined. Attempts to unify whites and African Americans failed. Instead, a movement to diminish the civil rights of African Americans gained momentum as the century ended.
Taking Away the Vote
The Fifteenth Amendment prohibits states from denying citizens the rigl to vote on the basis of “race, color, or previous condition of servitude? However, it does not bar states from denying the right to vote on other grounds. In the late 1800s, Southern states began imposing restrictions. Though they did not mention race, they were meant to make it hard or impossible for African Americans to vote.
In 1890 Mississippi began requiring all citizens registering to votetc pay a poll tax of $2, a sum beyond the means of most poor African Americans or poor whites. Mississippi also instituted a literacy test, requiring voters to read and understand the state constitution. Few African Americans born after the Civil War had been able to attend sch< and those who had grown up under slavery were largely illiterate. Even those who knew how to read often failed the test because officials deliberately picked passages that few people could understand. Other Southern states adopted similar restrictions. The number of African Americans registered to vote in Southern states fell drastically between 1890 and 1900.
Election officials were far less strict in applying the poll tax and literacy requirements to whites, but the number of white voters also fell
significantly. To let more whites vote, Louisiana introduced the
grandfather clause. This allowed any man to vote if he had an ancestor who could vote in 1867. This provision, adopted in several Southern states, exempted most whites from voting restrictions.
Legalizing Segregation
African Americans in the North were often discriminated against, but segregation/ or the separation of the races, was different in the South. Southern states passed laws that rigidly enforced discrimination. These laws became known as Jim Crow laws.
In 1883 the Supreme Court set the stage for legalized segregation when it overturned the Civil Rights Act of 1875. That law had prohibited keeping people out of public places on the basis of race and barred racial discrimination in selecting jurors. The Supreme Court, however, ruled that the Fourteenth Amendment provided only that “no state” could deny citizens equal protection under the law. Private organizations, such as hotels, theaters, and railroads, were free to practice segregation.
Encouraged by the Supreme Court’s ruling and by the decline of congressional support for civil rights, Southern states passed a series of laws establishing racial segregation in virtually all public places. Southern whites and African Americans could no longer ride together in the same railroad cars or even drink from the same water fountains.
In 1892 an African American named Homer Plessy challenged a Louisiana law that forced him to ride in a separate railroad car from whites.
segregation the separation or isolation of a race, class, or group
discrimination different treatment or preference on a basis other than individual merit
Jim Crow laws statutes enacted to enforce segregation
iiTiiiii ANALYZING SUPREME COURT CASES
PLESSY v. FERGUSON, 1896
Background to the Case
When Homer Adolph Plessy, a light-skinned man who was one-eighth African American, took a seat in the whites-only section of an East Louisiana Railway train and refused to move, he was arrested. Convicted of breaking a Louisiana law enacted in 1890, Plessy appealed his case to the Louisiana Supreme Court, then to the United States Supreme Court. The incident was planned in advance to test the statute to emphasize the folly ofthe law.
A conductor orders an African American off a whites-only train car in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
How the Court Ruled
The Court upheld the right of states to make laws that sustained segregation. The majority of justices wanted to distinguish between political rights guaranteed by the Fourteenth and Fifteenth Amendments and social rights. Although the words separate but equal do not appear in the Court's responses, the ruling ofthe Court allowed forthe separation ofthe races in public facilities. This phrase came to describe a condition that persisted until 1954.
S"~ ..	. A
0 Identifying Central Ideas Why did
the words separate but equal become associated with the Supreme Court ruling against Homer Plessy?
0 Making Generalizations How do
you interpret the fact that it took the Supreme Court until 1954 to change the Plessy v. Ferguson ruling?
Urban America 171
BIOGRAPHY
Ida B. Wells (1862-1931)
Born in Holly Springs, Mississippi, Ida B. Wells is best known for her strong criticism of lynching, which she called "our country's national crime." Wells's political and reform activities included other issues such as segregation and women's suffrage. In 1913 she marched with an integrated group of suffragists in Washington, D.C. Wells married Chicago lawyer and editor Ferdinand L. Barnett in 1895. In 1910 she formed the Negro Fellowship League. She and her husband moved to an all-white Chicago neighborhood to challenge restrictive housing agreements.
CRITICAL THINKING
Describing How did Ida B. Wells try to stop the practice of lynching?
lynch to execute, by hanging, without lawful approval
He was arrested for riding in a “whites-only” car. In 1896 the Supreme Court in Plessy v Ferguson, upheld the Louisiana law and the doctrine “separate but equal” facilities for African Americans. The ruling establis the legal basis for discrimination in the South for more than 50 years. h public facilities for African Americans in the South were always separate they were far from equal.
BI READING PROGRESS CHECK
Summarizing What was the purpose of the grandfather clause ?
The African American Response
GUIDING QUESTION
How did African American community leaders respond to legalized segregation': Historian Rayford Logan characterized the last decade of the nineteenth century and the opening of the twentieth century as the nadir, or low pc of African American status in American society. The African American community responded to violence and discrimination in several ways. 1 B. Wells, Mary Church Terrell, Booker T. Washington, and W.E.B. Du Bi each used different approaches to address these issues.
Ida B. Wells
In the late 1800s, mob violence increased in the United States, particulai in the South. Between 1890 and 1899, there was an average of 154 peopl lynched—executed, by hanging, without a legal trial—each year.
In 1892 Ida B. Wells, a fiery young African American woman from Tennessee, launched a fearless crusade against lynching. After a mob dri Wells out of town, she settled in Chicago and continued her campaign. In 1895 she published a book denouncing mob violence and demanding “a fair trial by law for those accused of crime, and punishment by law af honest conviction.” Although Congress rejected an antilynching bill, the number of lynchings decreased significantly in the 1900s, due in part to efforts of activists such as Wells.
Mary Church Terrell
One lynching victim had been a close friend of Mary Church Terrell, a college-educated woman who had been born during the Civil War. This death, and President Benjamin Harrisons refusal to publicly condemn lynching, started Terrell on her lifelong battle against lynching, racism, and sexism. Terrell w orked with woman suffrage workers such as Jane Addams and Susan B. Anthony. She helped found the National Association for the Advancement < Colored People. She also formed the Women Wage Earner’s Association, wl assisted African American nurses, waitresses, and domestic workers.
Terrell led a boycott against department stores in Washington, D.C., tha refused to serve African Americans. In an address to the National Americar Woman Suffrage Association, Terrell said, “With courage, born of success achieved in the past, with a keen sense of the responsibility which we shall continue to assume, we look forward to a future large with promise and
ope. Seeking no favors because of our color, nor patronage because of c needs, we knock at the bar of justice, asking an equal chance.”
*•«■>» iur compromise
ne	most famous African Americans of the late nineteenth
was the influential educator Booker T. Washington. He proposed t i-. an, mer^ans concentrate on achieving economic goals rathe pohtical ones. In 1895 Washington summed up his views in a spee
172
a mostly white audience in Atlanta. Known as the Atlanta Compromise, the speech urged African Americans to postpone the fight for civil rights and instead concentrate on preparing themselves educationally and vocationally for full equality.
PRIMARY SOURCE
U
The wisest among my race understand that the agitation of questions of social equality is the extremest folly, and that progress in the enjoyment of all the privileges that will come to us must be the result of severe and constant struggle rather than of artificial forcing.... It is important and right that all privileges of the law be ours, but it is vastly more important that we be prepared for the exercises of these privileges. The opportunity to earn a dollar in a factory just now is worth infinitely more than the opportunity to spend a dollar in an opera-house. W
T.
Washington, from Up From Slavery, 1901 Du Bois Rejects Compromise
The Atlanta Compromise speech provoked a strong challenge from W.E.B. Du Bois, the leader of a new generation of African American activists. In his 1903 book The Souls of Black Folk, Du Bois explained why he saw no advantage in giving up civil rights, even temporarily. He was particularly concerned with protecting and exercising voting rights. “Negroes must insist continually, in season and out of season,” he wrote, “that voting is necessary to proper manhood, that color discrimination is barbarism.” In the years that followed, many African Americans worked to win the vote and end discrimination. The struggle, however, would prove to be a long one.
B READING PROGRESS CHECK
Describing What was the nature ofthe compromise urged by Booker T. Washington in the Atlanta Compromise speech?
With the help of Booker T. Washington, Tuskegee Institute was founded in 1881 to teach African Americans trades and agricultural skills. In this image, students are working in the Tuskegee Institute print shop.
CRITICALTHINKING
Drawing Conclusions What do you think was Booker T. Washington's economic goal for establishing the Tuskegee Institute? LESSON 5 REVIEW
Reviewing Vocabulary
1.	Explaining Explain the importance of Jim Crow laws and how these laws contributed to segregation. 3C
Using Your Notes
2.	Describing Use your notes on the forms of discrimination to describe the conditions in which many African Americans in the South lived after Reconstruction. 3C
Answering the Guiding Questions
3.	Identifying Cause and Effect How did African Americans resist racism and try to improve their way of life following Reconstruct!on?
4.	Identifying What laws did Southern states pass to impose segregation and deny African Americans their voting rights? 3C
5.	Differentiating What are the different ways African American community leaders responded to legalized segregation?
3C,5B,26A
Writing Activity
INFORMATIVE/EXPLANATORY
Imagine that you are living in the 1890s. Write a letter to the editor ofthe local newspaper explaining your view ofthe Supreme Court ruling in Plessy v. Ferguson, 21A Urban America 173
chapter 4 Assessment
Directions: Onaseparoteifxetofpapnanswarthequeitionsbelow. Make sure you read carefully and answer all parts ofthe questions.
Lesson Review
Lesson 1
0 Analyzing In the late nineteenth century many
native-born Americans, as well as labor unions, opposed immigration. What social issues shaped their concerns^
0 Summarizing What was the significance of the Immigration Act of 1882? 3C.13B
0 Explaining How did East European ethnic and religious groups contribute to American culture in the 1800s? 26C
0 Identifying Cause and Effect What economic and cultural issues led to protests against the Chinese immigrants in California and what foreign policy did the U.S. government adopt in response? 15C
Lesson 2
0 Analyzing Describe the social issues and problems that resulted from rapid urbanization. 3C
0 Analyzing What caused the growth of political machines and what effect did they have in cities? 3A
0 Analyzing Explain how the free enterprise system
improved the standard of living in the United States by
applying innovations in transportation to urban America.
28A
Lesson 3
0 Analyzing Explain the ideas ofthe Social Gospel and identify the issues that led to the movement. 3C
0 Explaining How did the Americanization movement seek to assimilate American immigrants into U.S. culture? 26B
0 Describing How did naturalism reflect the issues facing the United States in the late 1800s? Explain the positive and negative impact of naturalism in literature. 25A, 25B
0 Identifying Explain the social contributions of Andrew Carnegie and Jane Addams to American society. How did their actions help expand economic opportunities ofthe poor and ethnic minorities? 26A, 26D
Need Extra Help?
Lesson 4
© Analyzing Define patronage and explain the spoils system. Then explain why many Americans believed civil service reform was needed. 3A
© Explaining Why was deflation hard on farmers? 1
© Identifying Central Issues What were the goals of Populist Party? How did urban workers vote in the 18 elections and why? 5C
© Analyzing How did physical and human geographii factors impact the Klondike Gold Rush? 12A
Lesson 5
© Analyzing What issues faced African Americans in t South after the Civil War? How did they respond? 3(
© Analyzing What was the ruling in the Plessyv. ferg case, and what was its effect in the South? 3C, 21A
© Explaining What actions did Ida B. Wells, Mary Churi Terrell, Booker T. Washington, and W.E.B Du Boistaket expand political rights for African Americans? Explain; evaluate their impact. 3C, 5B, 26A
Exploring the Essential Questions
© Exploring Issues Analyze the push-pull factors affe immigration in the late 1800s. Draw a map and use il illustrate the push factors (the reasons people were t pushed out of their countries), and the pull factors (tl reasons the United States was pulling people to it) us detailed caption boxes. 13B
© Identifying Identify two ways that urban life is difl from rural life. 3C, 13A
1	2	3	4	5	6	7	8
9	10	11	12	13	14	15	16 i7 18	19
Go to page 11471147 [14611471154115S115311M
1601158115711631165116611681170117111721144
174
Critical Thinking
0 Analyzing Cause and Effect What caused the migration of millions of Americans from rural areas to urban areas in the years after the Civil War? What effects did this
migration have on the demographic patterns of America?
13A
0 Describing What philosophy did Andrew Carnegie introduce? Explain its impact on philanthropy. How did America's wealthy respond to Carnegie's ideas? 3C
© Describing Describe the positive and negative impact of Tin Pan Alley on music in America. 25B
Q
Evaluating What kind ofan impact did the Populist Party have on the political system? Was it successful and long-lasting? Explain your answer. 5C Analyzing Issues Describe how the relationship between the federal government and private business began to change with the passage ofthe Interstate Commerce Act.
Be sure to discuss both the costs and benefits ofthe act.
15B
Analyzing Cause and Effect What caused Europeans and Chinese to migrate to America in the late 1800s? How did this affect American demographic patterns? 13B
0 Describing How did the Realist movement in art and literature reflect the characteristics ofthe Gilded Age?
Social Studies Skills
Identifying Cause and Effect Relationships Analyze the problems and issues facing farmers in the late 1800s, and explain what caused the Populist movement to begin.
© Making Inferences Immigrants had to make a long difficult journey to reach America and were often confronted with racism and nativism when they arrived. Yet many remained very optimistic about the United States. Describe the reasons for their optimism. 3D, 29B
Comparing and Contrasting In what ways was life different depending upon the social class to which a person belonged? 3C.29B
Using Visuals Make a chart explaining the reasons minorities helped settle the West. 3C, 13A, 26A, 30C
Need Extra Help?
DBQ
Analyzing Primary Sources
Read the excerpt from industrialist Andrew Carnegie's article and answer the questions that follow.
PRIMARY SOURCE
< 6 The price which society pays for the law of competition, like the price it pays for cheap comforts and luxuries, is great; but the advantages of this law are also greater still than its cost—for it is to this law that we owe our wonderful material development, which brings improved conditions in its train. But, whether the law be benign or not, we must say of it; It is here; we cannot evade it; no substitutes for it have been found; and while the law may be sometimes hard for the individual, it is best for the race, because it ensures the survival ofthe fittest in every department. ? *
—Andrew Carnegie, from "The Gospel of Wealth," 1901
$ Identifying Bias in Written Material What ideas and words from Carnegie's article show his biases about the business world? 3C, 29F
(J) Identifying Points of View By the late 1800s, a major issue was whether laissez-faire and Social Darwinism was the best policy forthe nation. Summarize Carnegie's point of view of this question. 3B, 3C, 15B, 29G
Read the following excerpt from a speech by William Jennings Bryan and answer the question that follows.
PRIMARY SOURCE
a When you come before us and tell us that we shall disturb your business interests, we reply that you have disturbed our business interests by your action... Ah. my friends, we say not one word against those who live upon the Atlantic Coast; but those hardy pioneers who braved all the dangers ofthe wilderness, who have made the desert to blossom as the rose... are as deserving ofthe consideration of this party as any people in this country...
If they dare to come out in the open field and defend the gold standard as a good thing... we shall answer their demands for a gold standard by saying to them, you shall not press down upon the brow of labor this crown of thorns. You shall not crucify mankind upon a cross of gold.
—William Jennings Bryan, speech to the Democratic National Convention, 1896
	21	22	23	24	25	26	27	28	29	30	31	32	33
| Go to page	1152 1	p!57|			|H4|	144 | 160 1 165	| 148 1153 1169 1 157 | 157 |
Urban America 175
€ Identifying Bias in Oral Material Write a paragraph analyzing Bryan's speech and identifying his bias. What is Bryan's point of view? What is the context of the speech and how might that shape the language? What words and phrases does Bryan use in his speech that shows his biases? Who does he favor? 29F, 29G
Analyzing Visuals
Use the graph Why Did People Emigrate? to answer the following questions.
Source: Historical Statistics of the United States.
© Analyzing Geographic Patterns on Graphs What pattern on the map helps to explain why Congress passed the Chinese Exclusion Act when it did? 13B, 15C, 31B
© Analyzing Geographic Distributions on Graphs If the
trend on the graph from 1900-1914 continues, predict how the distribution of immigrants in the United States will change in the following decades. 13B, 31B
Extended Response Questions
© Drawing Conclusions Analyze the changes in the United States in the late 1800s. Write an essay that explains why the political and economic issues of the time led to political machines, civil service reform, problems for farmers and the beginnings of Populism. Identify how urbanization influenced social and political life during this time period.
The essay should contain an introduction, at least three
paragraphs, and a conclusion. 3A, 3B, 29B, 30A Need Extra Help?
34	35	36	37	38	39	40
[6o to page	f 167 1147 |147 | 141 | 165 | 146 I 154 1
© Exposition Define deflation and inflation and explain tl meaning of fiat currency. Based on what you know aboui the debate over the money supply in the late 1800s and the role of gold and silver coins, explain why you think bi companies and banks wanted to have a gold standard an why a government might want to control the money supply. Explain why the government might prefer fiat currency. 15E
Standardized Test Practice
© Which of the following statements accurately describes nativism? 3C, 13B
A
Nativism was a movement opposed to immigration B Nativism tried to encourage American Indians to preserve their culture.
C
Nativism opposed regulation of the economy. D
Nativism supported the election of Catholics. © Urbanization brought about which of the following changes in America? 3C, 13A
F
The passage of the 1882 Immigration Act. G
The creation of the I nterstate Commerce Commissic K The opening of Ellis Island. J
The emergence of political machines. 176
• v-iA’i linn*
’i’l • i g(«
Power
1872-1917
lowareempires built?
There's More Online about how the United States became a world power.
