The Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills (TEKS) for Social Studies Grade 8
On the following pages, you will find the TEKS. These are the concepts and skills that you should learn and be able to demonstrate as you take the course. You may want to preview the TEKS with your parents or caregivers. Many of the names and terms may be unfamiliar to you at first, but you and your parents or caregivers can design a plan to help you gain proficiency. You may also choose to review these TEKS from time to time during the course of your study.
Pilgrims aboard the Mayflower
History
8.1	The student understands traditional historical points of reference in U.S. history through 1877. The student is expected to:
A identify the major eras and events in U.S. history through 1877, including colonization, revolution, drafting of the Declaration of Independence, creation and ratification of the Constitution, religious revivals such as the Second Great Awakening, early republic, the Age of Jackson, westward expansion, reform movements, sectionalism, Civil War, and Reconstruction, and describe their causes and effects
B apply absolute and relative chronology through the sequencing of significant individuals, events, and time periods
C explain the significance of the following dates: 1607, founding of Jamestown; 1620, arrival of the Pilgrims and signing of the Mayflower Compact; 1776, adoption of the Declaration of Independence; 1787, writing of the U.S. Constitution; 1803, Louisiana Purchase; and 1861-1865, Civil War
8.2	The student understands the causes of exploration and colonization eras. The student is expected to:
A identify reasons for European exploration and colonization of North America
B compare political, economic, religious, and social reasons for the establishment of the 13 English colonies
George Washington
8.3	The student understands the foundations of representative government in the United States. The student is expected to:
A explain the reasons for the growth of representative government and institutions during the colonial period
B analyze the importance of the Mayflower Compact, the Fundamental
Orders of Connecticut, and the Virginia House of Burgesses to the growth of representative government
C describe how religion and virtue contributed to the growth of representative government in the American colonies
TEKS1
Valley Forge, Pennsylvania
8.4. The student understands significant political and economic issues of the revolutionary era. The student is expected to:
A analyze causes of the American Revolution, including the Proclamation of 1763, the Intolerable Acts, the Stamp Act, mercantilism, lack of representation in Parliament, and British economic policies following the French and Indian War
B explain the roles played by significant individuals during the American Revolution, including Abigail Adams, John Adams, Wentworth Cheswell, Samuel Adams, Mercy Otis Warren, James Armistead, Benjamin Franklin, Bernardo de Galvez, Crispus Attucks, King George III, Haym Salomon, Patrick Henry, Thomas Jefferson, the Marquis de Lafayette, Thomas Paine, and George Washington
C explain the issues surrounding important events of the American Revolution, including declaring independence; writing the Articles of Confederation; fighting the battles of Lexington, Concord, Saratoga, and Yorktown; enduring the winter at Valley Forge; and signing the Treaty of Paris of 1783
D analyze the issues of the Constitutional Convention of 1787, including the Great Compromise and the Three-Fifths Compromise
E analyze the arguments for and against ratification

8.5	The student understands the challenges confronted by the government and its leaders in the early years of the republic and the Age of Jackson. The student is expected to:
A describe major domestic problems faced by the leaders of the new republic such as maintaining national security, building a military, creating a stable economic system, setting up the court system, and defining the authority of the central government
B summarize arguments regarding protective tariffs, taxation, and the banking system
C explain the origin and development of American political parties
D explain the causes, important events, and effects of the War of 1812
E identify the foreign policies of presidents Washington through Monroe and explain the impact of Washington's Farewell Address and the Monroe Doctrine
F explain the impact of the election of Andrew Jackson, including expanded suffrage
G analyze the reasons for the removal and resettlement of Cherokee Indians during the Jacksonian era, including the Indian Removal Act, Worcester v. Georgia, and the Trail of Tears
The painting "American Progress" symbolized the idea of Manifest Destiny.
8.6	The student understands westward expansion and its effects on the
political, economic, and social development of the nation. The student is expected to:
A explain how the Northwest Ordinance established principles and procedures for orderly expansion of the United States
B explain the political, economic, and social roots of Manifest Destiny
C analyze the relationship between the concept of Manifest Destiny and the westward growth of the nation
D identify areas that were acquired to form the United States, including the Louisiana Purchase
8.7	The student understands how political, economic, and social factors led to the growth of sectionalism and the Civil War. The student is
General Ulysses S. Grant	expected to:
A analyze the impact of tariff policies on sections of the United States before the Civil War
B compare the effects of political, economic, and social factors on slaves and free blacks
C analyze the impact of slavery on different sections of the United States
D identify the provisions and compare the effects of congressional conflicts and compromises prior to the Civil War, including the roles of John Quincy Adams, John C. Calhoun, Henry Clay, and Daniel Webster
TEKS4
8.8	The student understands individuals, issues, and events of the Civil War.
The student is expected to:
A explain the roles played by significant individuals during the Civil War, including Jefferson Davis, Ulysses S. Grant, Robert E. Lee, and Abraham Lincoln, and heroes such as congressional Medal of Honor recipients William Carney and Philip Bazaar
B explain the causes of the Civil War, including sectionalism, states' rights, and slavery, and significant events of the Civil War, including the firing on Fort Sumter; the battles of Antietam, Gettysburg, and Vicksburg; the announcement of the Emancipation Proclamation; Lee's surrender at Appomattox Court House; and the assassination of Abraham Lincoln
C analyze Abraham Lincoln's ideas about liberty, equality, union, and government as contained in his first and second inaugural addresses and the Gettysburg Address and contrast them with the ideas contained in Jefferson Davis's inaugural address
General Robert E. Lee
& Photographs Division [LC-DIG-cwpbh-03115]
8.9	The student understands the effects of Reconstruction on the political, economic, and social life of the nation. The student is expected to:
A evaluate legislative reform programs of the Radical Reconstruction Congress and reconstructed state governments
B evaluate the impact of the election of Hiram Rhodes Revels
C explain the economic, political, and social problems during Reconstruction and evaluate their impact on different groups
D identify the effects of legislative acts such as the Homestead Act, the Dawes Act, and the Morrill Act
TEKS5
ii
Geography
8.10	The student understands the location and characteristics of places and regions of the United States, past and present. The student is expected to:
A locate places and regions of importance in the United States during the 17th, 18th, and 19th centuries
B compare places and regions of the United States in terms of physical and human characteristics
C analyze the effects of physical and human geographic factors on major historical and contemporary events in the United States
Arches National Park in southeast Utah
8.11	The student understands the physical characteristics of North America and how humans adapted to and modified the environment through the mid-19th century. The student is expected to:
A analyze how physical characteristics of the environment influenced
population distribution, settlement patterns, and economic activities in the United States during the 17th, 18th, and 19th centuries
B describe the positive and negative consequences of human modification of the physical environment of the United States
C describe how different immigrant groups interacted with the environment in the United States during the 17th, 18th, and 19th centuries
Economics
8.12	The student understands why various sections of the United States developed different patterns of economic activity. The student is expected to:
A identify economic differences among different regions of the United States
B explain reasons for the development of the plantation system, the transatlantic slave trade, and the spread of slavery
C explain the reasons for the increase in factories and urbanization
D analyze the causes and effects of economic differences among different regions of the United States at selected times in U.S. history
8.13	The student understands how various economic forces resulted in the Industrial Revolution in the 19th century. The student is expected to:
A analyze the War of 1812 as a cause of economic changes in the nation
B identify the economic factors that brought about rapid industrialization and urbanization
8.14	The student understands the origins and development of the free enterprise system in the United States. The student is expected to:
A explain why a free enterprise system of economics developed in the new nation, including minimal government intrusion, taxation, and property rights
B describe the characteristics and the benefits of the U.S. free enterprise system during the 18th and 19th centuries
TEKS7
Government
8.15	The student understands the American beliefs and principles reflected in the Declaration of Independence, the U.S. Constitution, and other important historic documents. The student is expected to:
A identify the influence of ideas from historic documents, including the Magna Carta, the English Bill of Rights, the Mayflower Compact, the Federalist Papers, and selected Anti-Federalist writings, on the U.S. system of government
B summarize the strengths and weaknesses of the Articles of Confederation
C identify colonial grievances listed in the Declaration of Independence and explain how those grievances were addressed in the U.S. Constitution and the Bill of Right
D analyze how the U.S. Constitution reflects the principles of limited
government, republicanism, checks and balances, federalism, separation of powers, popular sovereignty, and individual rights
8.16	The student understands the process of changing the U.S. Constitution and the impact of amendments on American society. The student is expected to:
Mount Rushmore in the Black	A summarize the purposes for and process of amending the U.S. Constitution
Hills of South Dakota	o ,	.,	, .	f
B describe the impact of 19th-century amendments, including the 13th, 14th,
and 15th amendments, on life in the United States
& Photographs
I

8.17	The student understands the dynamic nature of the powers of the national government and state governments in a federal system. The student is expected to:
A analyze the arguments of the Federalists and Anti-Federalists, including those of Alexander Hamilton, Patrick Henry, James Madison, and George Mason
B explain constitutional issues arising over the issue of states' rights, including the Nullification Crisis and the Civil War
8.18	The student understands the impact of landmark Supreme Court cases.
The student is expected to:
A identify the origin of judicial review and analyze examples of congressional and presidential responses
B summarize the issues, decisions, and significance of landmark Supreme Court cases, including Marbury v. Madison, McCulloch v. Maryland, and Gibbons v. Ogden
C evaluate the impact of selected landmark Supreme Court decisions, including Dred Scott v. Sandford, on life in the United States
William Penn, founder of Pennsylvania
TEKS9
Citizenship
8.19	The student understands the rights and responsibilities of citizens of the United States. The student is expected to:
A define and give examples of unalienable rights
B summarize rights guaranteed in the Bill of Rights
C explain the importance of personal responsibilities, including accepting responsibility for one's behavior and supporting one's family
D identify examples of responsible citizenship, including obeying rules and laws, staying informed on public issues, voting, and serving on juries
E summarize the criteria and explain the process for becoming a naturalized citizen of the United States
F explain how the rights and responsibilities of U.S. citizens reflect our national identity
The Statue of Liberty on
Liberty Island in New ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
York Harbor
8.20	The student understands the importance of voluntary individual participation in the democratic process. The student is expected to:
explain the role of significant individuals such as Thomas Hooker, Charles de Montesquieu, John Locke, William Blackstone, and William Penn in the development of self-government in colonial America
evaluate the contributions of the Founding Fathers as models of civic virtue
analyze reasons for and the impact of selected examples of civil disobedience in U.S. history such as the Boston Tea Party and Henry David Thoreau's refusal to pay a tax
*
8.21	The student understands the importance of the expression of different points of view in a constitutional republic. The student is expected to:
A identify different points of view of political parties and interest groups on important historical and contemporary issues
B describe the importance of free speech and press in a constitutional republic
C summarize a historical event in which compromise resulted in a peaceful resolution
8.22	The student understands the importance of effective leadership in a constitutional republic. The student is expected to:
A analyze the leadership qualities of elected and appointed leaders of the United States such as George Washington, John Marshall, and Abraham Lincoln
B describe the contributions of significant political, social, and military leaders of the United States such as Frederick Douglass, John Paul Jones, James Monroe, Stonewall Jackson, Susan B. Anthony, and Elizabeth Cady Stanton
The Lincoln Me Washington D.
©TongRo Image Stock/Alamy
Culture
8.23	The student understands the relationships between and among people from various groups, including racial, ethnic, and religious groups, during the 17th, 18th, and 19th centuries. The student is expected to:
A identify selected racial, ethnic, and religious groups that settled in the United States and explain their reasons for immigration
B explain the relationship between urbanization and conflicts resulting from differences in religion, social class, and political beliefs
C identify ways conflicts between people from various racial, ethnic, and religious groups were resolved
D analyze the contributions of people of various racial, ethnic, and religious groups to our national identity
E identify the political, social, and economic contributions of women to American society
8.24	The student understands the major reform movements of the 19th century. The student is expected to:
A describe the historical development of the abolitionist movement
B evaluate the impact of reform movements, including educational reform, temperance, the women's rights movement, prison reform, abolition, the labor reform movement, and care of the disabled
Mission San Jose, San Antonio, Texas
8.25	The student understands the impact of religion on the American way of life. The student is expected to:
A trace the development of religious freedom in the United States
B describe religious motivation for immigration and influence on social movements, including the impact of the first and second Great Awakenings
C analyze the impact of the First Amendment guarantees of religious freedom on the American way of life
8.26	The student understands the relationship between the arts and the times during which they were created. The student is expected to:
A describe developments in art, music, and literature that are unique to American culture such as the Hudson River School artists, John James Audubon, "Battle Hymn of the Republic," transcendentalism, and other cultural activities in the history of the United States
B identify examples of American art, music, and literature that reflect society in different eras
Poster from 1872 advertising land for sale
C analyze the relationship between fine arts and continuity and change in the American way of life
Science, Technology, and Society
8.27	The student understands the impact of science and technology on the economic development of the United States. The student is expected to:
A explain the effects of technological and scientific innovations such as the steamboat, the cotton gin, and interchangeable parts
B analyze the impact of transportation and communication systems on the growth, development, and urbanization of the United States
C analyze how technological innovations changed the way goods were manufactured and marketed, nationally and internationally
D explain how technological innovations brought about economic growth such as how the factory system contributed to rapid industrialization and the Transcontinental Railroad led to the opening of the west
TEKS13
„ a iW^SS)j|
8.28	The student understands the impact of scientific discoveries and
technological innovations on daily life in the United States. The student is expected to:
A compare the effects of scientific discoveries and technological innovations that have influenced daily life in different periods in U.S. history
B identify examples of how industrialization changed life in the United States
Harriet Tubman, famous "conductor" on the Underground Railroad
Social Studies Skills
8.29	The student applies critical-thinking skills to organize and use
information acquired through established research methodologies from a variety of valid sources, including electronic technology. The student is expected to:
A differentiate between, locate, and use valid primary and secondary sources such as computer software, databases, media and news services, biographies, interviews, and artifacts to acquire information about the United States
B analyze information by sequencing, categorizing, identifying cause-and-effect relationships, comparing, contrasting, finding the main idea, summarizing, making generalizations and predictions, and drawing inferences and conclusions
C organize and interpret information from outlines, reports, databases, and visuals, including graphs, charts, timelines, and maps
D identify points of view from the historical context surrounding an event and the frame of reference which influenced the participants
E support a point of view on a social studies issue or event F identify bias in written, oral, and visual material
G evaluate the validity of a source based on language, corroboration with other sources, and information about the author
H use appropriate mathematical skills to interpret social studies information such as maps and graphs
I create thematic maps, graphs, charts, models, and databases representing various aspects of the United States
J pose and answer questions about geographic distributions and patterns shown on maps, graphs, charts, models, and databases
JEKS14
8.30	The student communicates in written, oral, and visual forms. The student is expected to:
A use social studies terminology correctly
B use standard grammar, spelling, sentence structure, punctuation, and proper citation of sources
C transfer information from one medium to another, including written to visual and statistical to written or visual, using computer software as appropriate
D create written, oral, and visual presentations of social studies information
8.31	The student uses problem-solving and decision-making skills, working independently and with others, in a variety of settings. The student is expected to:
A use a problem-solving process to identify a problem, gather information, list and consider options, consider advantages and disadvantages, choose and implement a solution, and evaluate the effectiveness of the solution
B use a decision-making process to identify a situation that requires a decision, gather information, identify options, predict consequences, and take action to implement a decision
America's first transcontinental railroad
TEKS

NETWORKS contains a wealth of information. The trick is to know where to look to access all the information in the book. If you complete this scavenger hunt exercise with your teachers or parents, you will see how the textbook is organized and how to get the most out of your reading and studying time. Lets get started!
1
How many chapters are in this book?
2
Where in the front of the book can you find a political | map of the United States?
5
What time period does Chapter 4 cover?
What is the Social Studies Skills Activity for Chapter 6?
Where can you find the Thinking Like a Historian activity in each chapter?
What is the title of Chapter 10?
What Essential Questions will you answer in Chapter 12?
Q
What are the Academic Vocabulary words in Lesson 3, Chapter 13? 9
Where in the back of the book can you find the meaning of vocabulary words such as mercenary?
10
Where in the back of the book can you find page numbers for information about Frederick DouglassT


Exploring Social Studies
networks
There's More Online about exploring social studies.

AL QUESTIONS
• Why is history important? • How does geography way people live? ’Why do people make economic choices? - Why do people e do new ideas change the way people live? 'How do we learn 
CHAPTER I
Lesson 1
Studying History
Lesson 2
Studying Geography and Economics
Lesson 3
Government and Citizenship
Lesson 4
Culture, Science, and Society
Lesson 5
Social Studies Skills

The Story
Matters...
Images like this one can tell vivid stories about the past. To uncover these stories, we must ask questions. For instance: Who is this woman? Where is she from? When did she live? What was her life like? Why is she the subject of this art? Who made this portrait and why? Where is she travelling to and what does her future hold? Learning about social studies helps us gain the skills we need to ask the right questions—and the skills to find the answers!
Foldables
Before cars and airplanes, families travelled			"***"”’ ■
across tlie country in covered wqgons.	■ i		
North Wind Picture Archives .-»■■■	'■*&|			Z ■
			' 4 ' ■
Goto the Foldables® library in the back of your book to make a Foldable® that will help you take notes while reading this chapter.
Who		What	
			
		—	
			/
HoVaZ		Why	
1
CHAPTER 1
Place and Time: Expansion of the United States
Beginning in 1607, Americans took the gradual first steps toward taming a continent and building a nation.
Today that nation spans the continent, and the rights and freedoms its people enjoy are the envy of the world. American history is the story of those accomplishments.
Present-day state borders

500 miles I
0	500 kilometers
Lambert Azimuthal Equal-Area projection
Step Into the Place
MAP FOCUS
For more than a century after the American Revolution, the United States expanded as it acquired new territories. REGIONS
What natural feature formed much of the eastern border ofthe Louisiana Territory? ioa MOVEMENT
In general, what pattern did the land acquisitions follow? Why do you think that is? 3	;?.? b <!’ At
Drawing Inferences What challenges do you think new settlers in each area faced?
140c"W
0	100 miles
I—rS—'
0	100 kilometers
Albers Equal-Area ’ ■ 't _> conic projection
20' N
s....>
130'W
PACIFIC
OCEAN
Step Into the Time
TIMELINE
Look at the time line. It shows the eras that historians have created to organize the study of United States History. Based on 1607-1763	1789-W1
The Colonial Era	The Early Rtf
networks	MAP Explore the
interactive version of
There's More Online!	this map on
NETWORKS.


BR
networks
There's More Online!
Ef GRAPHS
•	Framers ofthe Constitution
•	Sizes ofthe Two Armies
•	Virginia City
Ef images
»The Calendar
•	Primary Sources
Ef MODEL Checks and Balances
PRIMARY SOURCE
The Letters of Abigail Adams
Bf self-check quiz bT video


Lesson 1
Studying History
BNTIAL QUESTION
Why is history important? It Matters because
History teaches us how and why things occurred in the past. History also helps us to understand what to expect for the future.
TtKS Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills
1B Apply absolute and relative chronology through the sequencing of significant individuals, events, and time periods.
29A Differentiate between, locate, and use valid primary and secondary sources such as computer software, databases, media and news services, biographies, interviews, and artifacts to acquire information about the United States.
29C Organize and interpret information from outlines, reports, databases, and visuals, including graphs, charts, timelines, and maps. 29D Identify points of view from the historical context surrounding an event and the frame of reference which influenced the participants. 29E Support a point of view on a social studies issue or event.
29F Identify bias in written, oral, and visual material.
29G Evaluate the validity of a source based on language, corroboration with other sources, and information about the author.
29H Use appropriate mathematical skills to interpret social studies information such as maps and graphs.
291 Create thematic maps, graphs, charts, models, and databases representing various aspects of the United States.
30C Transfer information from one medium to another, including written to visual and statistical to written or visual, using computer software as appropriate.
Thinking Like a Historian
guiding question Whydo we study history and sodal studies?
We study history for many reasons. We learn how the past has shaped our world today. Studying history also helps us develop the knowledge and skills we need to participate in public life as informed and responsible citizens.
History is one of the branches of knowledge of social studies. As you study history, you will also study other branches of social studies. These are:
•	Geography
•	Economics
•	Government
•	Citizenship
•	Culture
•	Science, Technology, and Society
Historians are people who study and write about history. Historians use a number of tools to collect and organize information.
O READING PROGRESS CHECK
Explaining How can knowing about the past help us to understand the present?
Reading HELPDESK
.....
Taking Notes: Describing
As you read, use a table like this one to describe different tools you will use as you study history.
Exploring Sodal Studies

Tools	Descriptions
	
	
	
Content Vocabulary
•	chronology
•	primary source
•	secondary source
point of view bias
frame of reference
Measuring Time
guiding question What tools help us measure time?
Studying history shows us when events took place. Which events happened first? How far apart in time did events take place? A variety of tools measure time.
Calendars
Historians rely on calendars, or dating systems, to measure time. A calendar breaks time into units and keeps track of those units. Cultures throughout the world have developed different calendars based on events in their history.
Chronology and Time Lines
The order in which events happen is chronology.
There are two types of chronology: absolute chronology and relative chronology. To apply absolute chronology, arrange events or individuals in order from the earliest to the latest. Here is an example:
•	Thomas Jefferson writes the Declaration of Independence, 1776;
•	The U.S. purchases the Louisiana Territory, 1803;
•	Andrew Jackson is elected president, 1828;
•	The Civil War begins, 1861.
It is not always possible to date an event precisely. We can only place approximate dates on events that take place over a long period of time. Examples are the Ice Age and the Industrial Revolution. In such cases, we can use relative chronology.
li Dagli Orti/Corbis
Throughout history, different cultures have developed different calendars. This calendar was developed by the Aztec people who lived in what is now Mexico.
1863 Emancipation Proclamation frees enslaved peopke 1861 Civil War begins ’
1859 Origin of Species published
modern genetics"
A time line is a diagram showing the order of events within a time period.
chronology the order of events
Academic Vocabulary
participate to take part in something
Lesson 1	5
SKILLS PRACTICE____________
Ask for help when you do not understand something during a lesson. Raise your hand or use some other signal.
Reading HELPDESK
To apply relative chronology, identify which time period, or era, came first, which came second, and so on. Here is an example using time periods from U.S. History. The Age of Exploration was the earliest of these four time periods, so it is listed first.
•	Age of Exploration
•	Reconstruction
•	Great Depression
•	Cold War Era
An easy way to keep track of chronology is to make a time line. A time line is a diagram showing the order of events within a period of time. As you study U.S. history, you will be expected to organize and interpret information from time lines. For practice, look at the time line on the previous page and think about how you would answer these questions:
•	Which event came first?
•	Which event was last?
•	During which century did these events take place?
H READING PROGRESS CHECK
Identifying What is the difference between absolute chronology and relative chronology?
Primary and Secondary Sources
GUIDING QUESTION
What is a primary source, and how does it differ from a secondary source? As you study social studies, you will often study and analyze information in primary sources and secondary sources. A primary source is a document or object that was created during the time being studied. For example, if you see a rocket launch and then write about it, you are creating a primary source. Examples of different types of primary sources are listed below.
•	Letters
•	Diaries
•	Official records
•	Photographs and paintings
•	Oral histories and interviews
•	Artifacts
Primary sources may be located in libraries, archives, or private collections. Many maybe viewed online. For example, the National Archives has images of the original U.S. Constitution on its Web site.


Build Vocabulary: Word Origins
primary source original material from a
----------—-----_______________ ■---------- < wwwib	U|
Primary comes from the Latin word primus, which means first. It is	period being studied
also the source for other English words such as primitive, prime and primarily.
Exploring Social Studies


Personal Records and Artifacts
■I
w

X
«
v
<
■' .
•£.
eF"*
*r^
r\
■■1






uh'
The letter from Abraham Lincoln is a primary source. Artifacts such as the Sioux deerskin bag, the mortar (a bowl in which ingredients are ground together), and the serpent figure are also primary sources.
A secondary source, on the other hand, usually comes from someone who was not present at an event. A book about the history of the space program is a secondary source. The writer of the book collected information from primary sources and other secondary sources. Some examples of secondary sources are:
•	Histories
•	Encyclopedias
•	Magazine articles
•	Textbooks
•	Biographies
Secondary sources are widely available online and in libraries. Encyclopedias can be a great resource for students studying the history of the United States or other countries.
Checking Your Sources
When you use primary or secondary sources to learn about an event, you need to analyze them to find out if they are reliable. You can evaluate a source by considering the language it uses, determining if the information in the source can be corroborated in other sources, and researching information about the author.
h


secondary source an account of an event written by someone who did not witness it
Lesson 1	7
This cartoon, drawn in the early 1900s, shows the Standard Oil Company as a giant octopus.
CRITICAL THINKING
Analyzing Primary Sources What can you infer about the cartoonist's point of view? Written, oral, and even visual accounts of events are often made from a point of view, or particular attitude about someone or something. The creator uses his or her point of view to decide which information is important, which people are key players, which details are worth recording, and which details are left out. Secondary sources are also often written from a point of view.
Most people have feelings and ideas that affect their point of view. Sometimes a point of view is expressed as a bias, or an unreasoned, emotional judgment about people and events. Here are some hints you can use to help uncover bias in secondary sources as well as in written, oral, or visual primary sources.
•	Identify the material’s creator. Examine his or her views and possible reasons for creating the material.
•	In written or spoken material, look for language that reflects an emotion or opinion—words such as all, never, best, worst, might, or should.
•	Is the creator showing bias? Bias reflects a personal and often unreasoned judgment about the subject.
point of view a particular attitude about someone or something
bias an unreasoned emotional judgment about people and events
8 Exploring Social Studies
Frame of Reference
When you are reading about a past event or interpreting a historical figure’s actions, you need to also think about frame of reference. Frame off reference refers to the experiences and beliefs that are influencing a person or group at a particular time.
Historical context is especially important when judging past events or writings. A person’s point of view must be considered within the frame of reference of his or her times. For example, we know that Abigail Adams wrote the letter that follows to her husband John Adams in the spring of 1776. As you read the letter, think about what was happening at the time.
PRIMARY SOURCE
M I
long to hear that you have dedared an independency.1 And, by the way, in the new code of laws which I suppose it will be necessary for you to make, I desire you would remember the ladies and be more generous and favorable to them than your ancestors.2 Do not put such unlimited power into the hands ofthe husbands. Remember, all men would be tyrants if they could. If particular care and attention is not paid to the ladies, we are determined to foment a rebellion, and will not hold ourselves bound by any laws in which we have no voice or representation.3 ** Abigail Adams
—Abigail Adams, 1776
1	John was attending the Continental Congress, which would soon declare the United States independent from Great Britain.
2	"Ancestors" refers to English rulers. In England, women had few rights.
3	Abigail points out that if women have no say in the matters ofthe country, then they should not be subject to laws passed by men.
Evaluating the Validity of Sources
The more times you can answer “yes” to the following questions about a primary or secondary source, the more reliable you may consider the source:
•	Are facts supported with evidence?
•	Is the language or image objective and not emotional?
•	Can the same information be found in another source?
•	Is the source’s creator reputable, or does he or she have credentials that would suggest credibility?
•	Does the author or speaker acknowledge other viewpoints?
z
I H READING PROGRESS CHECK
| Explaining Why is it important to consider point of view in evaluating £ primary and secondary sources?
frame of reference the experiences and beliefs that influence a person or group at a given time
Lesson 1
Using Charts, Graphs, Models, and Databases
GUIDING QUESTION
How do I create and interpret charts, graphs, models, and databases? Some social studies information is presented in various visual forms. These forms include charts, graphs, models, and databases. Charts and Databases
When you create a chart, you present information in an organized way. A chart arranges information, especially numbers, in rows and columns for easy reference. Charts help us categorize information in order to better understand it.
View the chart that shows information about monthly army salaries. The vertical column on the left shows the soldiers’ ranks. The row across the top identifies time periods in four major conflicts. Here are some questions to help you interpret this chart:
•	What was the monthly salary for a corporal during the Civil War?
•	Did a sergeant during the Vietnam War receive more or less pay than a sergeant during World War II? What was the difference in salary?
A database is a special kind of chart. When you create a database, you are collecting information that can be rapidly searched and retrieved. You can create your own database. By using special software developed for record keeping, you can easily add, delete, change, or update information. Let’s say that you wanted to build a database with information on events and people. First determine what facts you want to include. Then, follow the instructions to set up fields in the data management system that you are using. Enter each item of data in its assigned field. Determine how you want to organize the facts-by data, by person, or by topic. Finally, follow the instructions in your computer program to place the information in the order you selected.
A SOLDIER'S PAY
This chart shows information about	Army Salaries (			monthly)	
monthly army salaries.	r Rank ~	rCivil War1	rWorld War llT	TVietnam Warl	T Iraq War
CRITICAL THINKING
1 1942 1965 2007 Comparing What two types of	Private	*$13	$50	$85	$1,203 - 1,543.20
comparisons are possible using this chart?	Corporal	$14	$66	$210	$1,699.50
	Sergeant	$17	$78	$261	$1,854 - 2,339.10
	Sergeant Major	$21	$138	$486	$4,110
*Until 1864, African Americans in the Civil War were paid only $7.00 per month.
Source: Bureau of Economic Analysis- Princeton Review; www.militarvfactorv.com
10.
ring Social Studies
Graphs
A graph presents numbers visually. This makes the numbers easier to understand. The types of graphs are described below. Display each graph as you read the description.
•	Circle graphs show how the whole of something is divided.
•	Bar graphs use bars to compare numbers visually. They compare different items or groups. Bar graphs can also be used to compare items at different points in time.
•	Line graphs also show how something changes over time. Rather than showing data for only one specific point in time, line graphs show a continuous line of data.
When you create a graph, the first thing you do is decide which type of graph best presents the information visually. Read each of the following examples and decide which graph works best: a circle graph, bar graph, or line graph.
•	In the student council election, Noah received 15 votes, Maya received 20 votes, and Elizabeth received 5 votes.
•	To show how much time you spent on homework every day for a week
•	To show the statistical results of a poll
in which 100 students were asked: “What is your favorite sport?” Choose the type of graph that best visually displays the information in this chart:
CIRCLE GRAPH
Source: Fifty-Five Fathers: The Story of the Constitutional Convention
Judges
Physicians
Planters
Philosopher
Professor
Surveyor
BARGRAPH
Destruction Expenditures
Source: EH.Net Encyclopedia
LINE GRAPH
Football	25
Baseball	25
Track	20
Wrestling	10
Swimming	10
Basketball	10
Population of Virginia City, Nevada
*Estimate according to various Nevada historical sources Source: Nevada State Library and Archives, 2007.
Lesson 1	11
Checks and Balances
Checks on the Legislative Branch:
•	Can propose laws
•	Can veto laws
jLcall special sessions of Congress Mafeappointments to federal posts
► Negotiates foreign treaties
President Carries Out the Law
•	Can propose amendments to overrule judicial decisions
•	Approves appointments of federal judges
Checks on the Executive Branch:
•	Can override presidential veto
•	Confirms executive appointments
•	Ratifies treaties
•	Can declare war
•	Appropriates money
•	Can impeach and remove president
Checks on the Judicial Branch:
•	Appoints federal judges
•	Can grant pardons to federal offenders
Include this lesson's information in your Foldable®.
Who			
			
			/
Now		v/ny	
Models
Models are diagrams or drawings that display various kinds of information. Models can show the steps in a process, point out the parts of an object, or explain how something works. The visual “Checks and Balances” shows a process. It shows how each branch of government is able to check, or limit, the power of the others.
H READING PROGRESS CHECK
Organizing Information Which visual form would be best for presenting information about changes in the price of a movie ticket from 2004 to 2014?
LESSON 1 REVIEW
Review Vocabulary
1.	Use the following terms in a sentence that explains the relationship between them. 3oa
a. point of view b. bias
Answer the Guiding Questions
2.	Explaining Why do we study history and social studies?
3.	Contrasting What is a primary source, and how does it differ from a secondary source? 29a
4.	Analyzing View the image of several artifacts and a letter written by Abraham Lincoln. Are these likely to be primary sources or secondary sources? Explain, zsa
5.	Summarizing What kinds of information can be shown in charts, graphs, and diagrams? 29B;29C
PERSUASIVE WRITING
Write an e-mail to persuade a classmate that studying history can make people more responsible citizens. networks
There's More Online!
Ef GRAPH
Understanding Population
Pyramids
IMAGE
Cartography l?f MAPS Lesson 2
Studying Geography and Economics
•	Physical Map of the United States
•	Population of the United States, 1820
MODEL
Ethnic Populations of the United States SELF-CHECK QUIZ
gf video
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills
/ms
IAL QUESTIONS
How does geography influence the way people live? pie make economic choices? it Matters because

10C Analyze the effects of physical and human geographic factors on major historical and contemporary events in the United States.
14A Explain why a free enterprise system of economics developed in the new nation, including minimal government intrusion, taxation, and property rights.
14B Describe the characteristics and the benefits of the U.S. free enterprise system during the 18th and 19th centuries.
29C Organize and interpret information from outlines, reports, databases, and visuals, including graphs, charts, timelines, and maps.
29H Use appropriate mathematical skills to interpret social studies information such as maps and graphs.
|	29I Create thematic maps, graphs, charts,
e models, and databases representing various “ aspects of the United States.
29J Pose and answer questions about geographic distributions and patterns shown on maps, graphs, charts, models, and databases.
Geography helps us understand where we live and where others live. Knowing about economics helps us understand many of the actions taken by people and governments throughout history.
What Is Geography?
guiding question How does geography affect our lives?
The story of the United States begins with geography—the study of Earth and its people. Geography describes Earth’s land, water, and plant and animal life. To understand the link between geography and history, keep in mind the following themes:
Location: “Where is it?” Absolute location is one exact spot on Earth. Relative location tells where a place is, compared with one or more other places.
Place: “What is it like?” Place describes the features that make an area unique, or different. Physical features include landform and climate. Cultural, or human-made, features include language and architecture.
Movement: “Why do people, things and ideas move from place to place?” For example, many early colonists came to America seeking religious freedom.
Region: “What common characteristics does an area share?” A
region is an area that is defined by common features. For example, the South during the 1800s was a largely agricultural region.
Reading HELPDESK
Taking Notes: Listing	Maps	Free Enterprise	Content Vocabulary	
Use a graphic organizer like this one to identify	1.	1.	• latitude	• entrepreneur
and describe three types of maps and list three	2.	2.	• longitude	• incentive
characteristics of a free enterprise system.	3.	3.	• economics	• ethics
Exploring Social Studies
Lesson 2	13
Human-Environment Interaction: “What is the relationship between people and their surroundings?” People affect the environment by using it or changing it to meet their needs. Environmental factors that people cannot control, such as natural disasters, influence and affect how they live.
On August 29, 2005, Hurricane Katrina struck the Gulf of Mexico coast, destroying buildings, roads, and electrical lines from central Florida to Texas. Katrina caused huge economic problems from food shortages to the disruption of gas supplies. Because Louisiana and Texas are producers of oil and gas, energy needs all across the nation were affected.
Humans also change their environment to meet their needs.
As the nation grew during the 1800s, the need for better and more transportation systems also grew. The need for railroads, like roads and canals before, came from industry and trade. The growth of railroads, in turn, created thousands of jobs, and stimulated new industries, such as those for iron and steel. When the automobile became the most popular form of travel in the 1900s, the need grew
Ethnic Population ofthe United States
I I
Less than 1.0% I I
I I
2.5-5.0% I	1	5.01-13.0%
Over 13.0%
Asians &
r 1 Less than 2.5%
IZ I
2.5%-5.0% L...I 5.01-15.0%
■■ 15.01-40.0% ■I Over 40.0%
Hispanics
Reading HELPDESK
Academic Vocabulary
Native Americans
I I
Less than 0.5% I '	I	0.5%-1.0%
I	;	1.01-2.5%
■i 2.51-5.0%
H
Over 5.0% Over 20.0%
CLJ
Less than 2.5% □ 2.5%-5.0% CO 5.01-10.0% IZS 10.01-20.0% African Americans
SOURCE: U.S.
Census Bureau, M environment one's surroundings formula a method or procedure for doing something
14	Explodggtfdal Studies
SKILLS PRACTICE
Look at visuals such as graphs, charts, and diagrams in your text. Compare the information in them with the information in the paragraphs.
for an extensive highway system. Under the Federal Highway Act of 1956 and other laws, states receive billions of dollars every year to build and improve the Interstate Highway system. Today, about 50,000 miles of 4-to-8 lane superhighways crisscross the nation.
IB READING PROGRESS CHECK
Making Connections If you were describing where you live—the people, the sights to see—which of the five themes of geography would you be applying?
Globes and Maps
GUIDING QUESTION
What kinds of information do maps provide? The tools of the geographer include maps and globes.
These help us to learn more about Earth. Globes and maps serve different purposes, and each has its advantages and disadvantages.
A globe is a round model of Earth that shows its shape, lands, bodies of water, and directions as they truly relate to one another. A map is a flat drawing of all or part of Earth’s surface. Cartographers, or mapmakers, use mathematical formulas to transfer information from the round globe to a flat map. Still, all maps distort the shapes of the places they show.
Maps can show small areas such as a school campus. They can show the streets in a city. Or, they can show whole continents or even the entire world. They can show places as they exist now. Historical maps can show the features of a place at some time in the past.
Studying geography helps us to understand Earth—its people, its natural features, and the way they interact with each other.
Different Kinds of Maps
Maps differ because they serve many purposes and show various kinds of information. A physical map shows the physical features of an area, such as its mountains and rivers. Physical maps use color and shading to show relief— how flat or rugged the land surface is. Colors also are often used to show elevation—the height of an area above sea level. Political maps generally show Earth’s human-made divisions. These include cities and the boundaries of states and countries.
Another kind of map is the thematic map. Thematic maps show more specialized information than physical or political maps do. For instance, a thematic map might display the kinds
| of crops that grow in different areas. Or it might show where i ranching or mining take place.
Maps and globes do similar things, but each has advantages and disadvantages.
0 Comparing Do maps or globes give a more accurate representation ofthe shape, size, and location on places on Earth?
CRITICAL THINKING
Explaining Why are maps, in many cases, able to show information in greater detail than globes?
Lesson 2	15
^Af.,
Vancouver I$‘
Cape J Mendocinoix
~'sand ._ HtCLS
Point R San Francisct
Channel
Islands
PACIFIC
OCEAN
ATLANTIC (
o	400 km
Lambert Azimuthal Equal-Area projection
B®
Gulf of Mexico



A
A physical map calls out landforms and water features. This physical map of the United States shows rivers and mountains. The colors used on physical maps include brown or green for land and blue for water.
As you study U.S. history, you will create and analyze thematic maps. For practice, create a personal thematic map that tells something about you. Your map might show your route to school, where your friends live, or identify the cities in your state you have visited.
Parts of a Map
The map key explains the lines, symbols, and colors used on a map. The key shows what population numbers each color represents.
Map keys can also show political divisions such as cities.
A measuring line, often called a scale bar, helps you determine distance on the map. The map scale tells you what distance on Earth is represented by the measurement on the scale bar. The scale bar on this map shows what measurement on the map equals a certain distance on Earth.
An important first step in reading any map is to find the direction marker. A map has a symbol called a compass rose. The compass rose tells you the positions of north, south, east, and west.
Latitude and Longitude
Lines on globes and maps provide information that helps us easily locate places on Earth. Most maps show these lines, which are called latitude and longitude. They cross one another, forming a grid pattern.
Lines of latitude circle Earth parallel to the Equator. The lines measure the distance north and south of the Equator in degrees. The Equator is located at 0°. The North Pole lies at 90°N (north).
Social Studies
This map is a special-purpose, or thematic, map. It provides historical information. The map also uses colors to show population patterns.
Lines of longitude circle Earth from the North Pole to the South Pole. These lines measure distances east or west of the starting line, which is at 0° longitude and is called the Prime Meridian. The Prime Meridian runs through the Royal Observatory in Greenwich, England.
The grid formed by the lines of latitude and longitude makes it possible to find the absolute location of a place. Only one place can be found at the point where a specific line of latitude crosses a specific line of longitude.
Posing and Answering Questions About Geography
In your studies, you often answer questions about what you have read or studied. You will also take part in another kind of activity in which you generate and answer questions about geographic distributions and patterns shown on maps. You will also sometimes be asked to pose questions shown on other geographic representations, such as graphs, charts, models, and databases.
To practice this skill using maps, view the U.S. population map. Then read the examples of typical questions that can be posed about the geographic patterns shown on the map.
latitude the distance of a place north or south of	longitude the distance of a place east or
the Equator, measured in degrees	west of the Prime Meridian, measured in
degrees
Lesson 2	17
r
JVIap reading: Is a legend with symbols or colors included. What does the legend show?
Interpreting the map: Why does the map show only part ofthe current United States?
Making Inferences: How might a population map ofthe states and major cities today differ from this map?
For practice in posing questions, find a visual that shows geographic patterns or distributions. The visual may be a map, graph, chart, model, or database. Search for the geographic visual in this chapter. You can look in other chapters as well. Write at least three questions about the visual.
Throughout your study of U.S. history, you will not only pose questions, you will also answer questions that appear in your textbook and worksheets. In addition, you will answer questions posed by your teacher and by your classmates. For practice in answering questions, choose a geographic visual such as a graph, chart, model, or database from the chapter.
Use the visual to answer these questions:
•	Does the visual have a title? What does the visual show?
•	Could the information in this visual be presented in another type of visual (map, chart, graph, model, or database)? Explain.
•	Did I learn anything new from the visual? Explain.
D READING PROGRESS CHECK
Applying Which type of map would most likely show the Great Plains?
Population statistics are sometimes shown on a graph called a population pyramid. A population pyramid can be drawn for any area, such as a continent, a country, or a city.
Q
Describing What statistics does this population pyramid show? CRITICAL THINKING
Comparing Which age group has the most females? the most males?
oe
MALES
POPULATION (IN MILLIONS)
6 8
FEMALES
Source: U.S. Census Bureau,
Statistical Abstract ofthe United States: 2012
18_ Exploring Social Studies
Lines on globes and maps provide information that can help you locate places on Earth. These lines—called latitude and longitude—cross one another, forming a pattern.
What Is Economics?
guiding question What economic choices must every society make?
Economics is the study of how individuals and nations make choices about ways to use scarce resources to meet their needs and wants. Economics is also the study of how things are made, bought, sold, and used. There are four factors of production necessary to produce goods and services: natural resources, entrepreneurs, capital, and labor.
Natural resources: These are all the “gifts of nature” that make production possible. Natural resources include land and water, as well as fish, animals, trees and vegetation, and mineral deposits.
Entrepreneurs: An entrepreneur is a person who organizes and operates a business. Entrepreneurs assume risks in order to make a profit.
Capital: The machines, buildings, and tools that are used to make goods and services are known as capital. Economists also often think of money as a form of capital.
economics the study of how individuals make entrepreneur a person who
choices about ways to use scarce resources to meet	organizes and operates a business
their needs and wants
Lesson 2	19
I
The nation's workforce, labor, is its human resources. Labor includes anyone, such as these workers at a Garland, Texas, factory, who works to produce goods and services.
Labor: Labor includes anyone who works to produce goods and services. To put it simply, labor is the nation’s workforce. Goods are products that are created in factories or grown on farms. Goods include bicycles, jackets, and ears of corn. Services are actions people perform for others, such as cutting hair, repairing cars, or teaching.
Scarcity is a problem that all societies face. There are not enough resources to produce all the goods and services people want. Scarcity requires people to make choices. Because of scarcity, every society must make three important choices: what to produce, how to produce, and for whom to produce.
P READING PROGRESS CHECK
Contrasting What is the difference between goods and services?
The U.S. Free Enterprise Economy
guidingquestion IWiflf freedoms do people have in a free enterprise system?
To help make economic decisions, every country has its own economic system. Economic systems are different ways people use resources to make and exchange goods and services. Economic systems are often defined by their characteristics. In a free enterprise economy, the characteristics are:
20	Exploring Social Studies
Private property: Private property is anything owned by individuals or groups rather than by the government. The right to own private property is guaranteed by the Constitution of the United States. Property includes money, land, buildings, machines, and personal possessions. As an individual, you are free to buy whatever you can afford. You also control how, when, and by whom your property is used.
Choice: Each of us can choose the type of work or job we do. We choose the products we buy. If we think the price of a product is too high, we can shop elsewhere or choose not to buy it. Businesses can choose which products to make or sell and choose the price at which to sell them.
Voluntary exchange: Under free enterprise, buying and selling is based on the principle of voluntary exchange. A buyer voluntarily exchanges money for goods or services. The seller voluntarily exchanges goods or service for money. If you purchase a game at a flea market, your transaction is an example of voluntary exchange. You are choosing to buy the game and the seller is willing to sell it to you at the price you are willing to pay.
Competition: Under free enterprise, people are free to compete with one another. As a consumer, you benefit from sellers’ competing offers. Competition for land, jobs, and natural resources has shaped much of the nation’s history. Businesses also compete for customers. This competition has been another major force in U.S. history.
Economic incentives: An incentive is something that causes a person to act. For example, money acts as an incentive for people to work. Money is also an incentive for businesses to produce goods and services and sell them for profit. Have you ever bought something you wanted because it was on sale? Have you ever not bought something you wanted because it cost too much? Both are examples of how price is an incentive.
The Beginnings of Free Enterprise
Colonial Americans were inspired by the work of British philosopher and economist Adam Smith. His book, The Wealth of Nations, was published in 1776, the same year the Declaration of Independence was written.
In his book, Smith set forth the basic principles of free enterprise—that people are free to buy, sell, and produce what they want with little or no government restriction.
incentive something that causes a person to act
Lesson 2	21
i
As trade takes place, the trading partners become interdependent. Each trading partner depends on the other to help provide his or her wants and needs. This interdependence occurs between international trading partners and also between partners within countries such as the United States.
The term laissez-faire economics (from the French “to let alone”) came to describe this idea. Smith s ideas influenced the founders ofthe United States, who limited the role of government mainly to national defense and keeping the peace.
A free enterprise economic system also developed in the nation because the people had fought a war for independence to escape English control. The British government had restricted the people’s right to trade with other nations, imposed taxes on the colonists without their consent, and held the power to quarter troops in the homes of colonists. The founders established a nation in which the government played a limited role in the economy. Trade was subject to few restrictions. Taxes were levied, but only through representatives elected by the citizens. Property rights were protected: Owners have the right to use their land, homes, and any other goods they possess as they see fit.
Ethics and Free Enterprise
Ethics are the principles of conduct against which actions are determined to be right or wrong, good or bad, fair or unfair.
The U.S. free enterprise economy is an ethical system because its characteristics promote economic freedom by:
•	letting individuals pursue the occupation of their choice;
•	providing goods and services for various groups in society;
•	bestowing rewards on producers who make goods preferred by buyers;
•	supporting the liberty of individuals;
•	and allowing individuals to develop their skills and talents.
John Locke was a British philosopher who inspired colonial Americans. Locke argued for economic freedom and private property rights. He wrote that “[a]s every man has a property in his own person, the labour of his body, and the work of his hands are properly his.”
Locke also believed that it was the duty of the government to protect the life, liberty, and property of its citizens. His ideas influenced the writers of our nation’s founding documents—the
Declaration of Independence, the U.S. Constitution, and the Bill of Rights.
ethics principles against which actions are determined to be right or wrong
Exploring Sodal Studies
Historic events can bring about great economic change. Nearly 100,000 people came to California to search and pan for gold in the late 1840s. Agriculture, shipping, and trade expanded to meet the need ofthe growing population for food and other goods. Cities also flourished during the gold rush.
i
i
These documents guarantee the economic freedoms we all enjoy. Preserved in these documents are the freedoms of private property, choice, and competition. These three documents also help preserve the political freedoms that we enjoy as Americans.
Q READING PROGRESS CHECK
I
Making Connections How might competition among grocery stores help 1 you as a consumer? HFoldables
[Study Organizer
Include this lesson's information in your Foldable®
	
Mio	V/tat
k-	
Now	
I.
LESSON 2 REVIEW

i
Review Vocabulary
1.	Using the map in this lesson, write two sentences that describe the absolute location and the relative location of Philadelphia. 29c
Answer the Guiding Questions
2.	Listing What are the five themes of geography? j«a
3.	Analyzing Models View the model entitled Ethnic Populations. This model shows distorted maps of the United States. The colors indicate the population distribution. Study the model and write two questions about any ofthe maps. Exchange your questions with a partner and write answers to your partner's questions. 29J
4.	Identifying How did industrialization change life in the United States? m
5.	Identifying What economic choices must every society make? 3oa
6.	Describing What freedoms do people have in a free enterprise system? 3oa
EXPOSITORY WRITING
Write a paragraph that explains how minimal government intrusion, taxation, and property rights contributed to the development of a free enterprise system in the United States. 14A Lesson 2	23
networks
There's More Online!
Ef primary sources
. The Declaration of Independence
•	The Mayflower Compact
•	The U.S. Constitution
Ef self-check quiz sf VIDEO
.......f t
.J'	:

a* <


Lesson 3
Government and Citizenship
LQUESTION
Whydopeopieformgonmments? £ Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills
15A Identify the influence of ideas from historic documents, including the Magna Carta, the English Bill of Rights, the Mayflower Compact, the Federalist Papers, and selected Anti-Federalist writings, on the U.S. system of government.
15D Analyze how the U.S. Constitution reflects the principles of limited government, republicanism, checks and balances, federalism, separation of powers, popular sovereignty, and individual rights.
19A Define and give examples of unalienable rights.
19B Summarize rights guaranteed in the Bill of Rights.
19C Explain the importance of personal responsibilities, including accepting responsibility for one's behavior and supporting one's family.
19D Identify examples of responsible citizenship, including obeying rules and laws, staying informed on public issues, voting, and serving on juries.
19E Summarize the criteria and explain the process for becoming a naturalized citizen of the United States.
19F Explain how the rights and responsibilities of U.S. citizens reflect our national identity.
2OA Explain the role of significant individuals such as Thomas Hooker, Charles de Montesquieu, John Locke, William Blackstone, and William Penn in the development of self-government in colonial America.
IT MATTERS BECAUSE
Understanding the foundations of American government helps us to recognize the values, beliefs, principles, and ideals that have been and still are important to the people of the United States.
Beliefs and Principles of a Nation
GUiDiNGQUESTiON What American beliefs and principles are reflected in the Declaration of Independence and the U.S. Constitution?
A government is the ruling authority tor a community or society. Any organization that has the power to make and enforce, or carry out, laws and decisions tor its members acts as a government. Most governments are based on constitutions. A constitution is a detailed, written plan of government.
The United States is a constitutional republic. I bis is a system of government in which the people are the ultimate source of governmental power. The United States is the oldest constitutional republic in the world.
Foundations of American Government
Abraham Lincoln described our system of government as a “government of the people, by the people, for the people.” Lincoln’s words make three important points. First, the power of government comes from the citizens. Second, Americans themselves, acting through their representatives, make the decisions of government. Third, the purpose of the government is to make the United States a better place for those who live here.
Reading HELPDESK
Taking Notes; Summarizing
Use a graphic organizer like the one shown here to take notes about government and citizenship
Coring Social Studies
Government and Citizenship		
beliefs and Principles	Citizenship	Rights and Responsibilities
		
		
		
PRINCIPLES OF THE U.S. CONSTITUTION
Poplular Sovereignty Republicanism Limited Government
Federalism
Separation of Powers Checks and Balances
People are the source of the government's power.
People elect their political representatives.
The Constitution limits the actions of government by listing power it holds and does not hold.
In this government system, power is divided between national and state governments.
Each of the three branches of government has its own responsibilities.
Each branch of government holds some control over the other two branches.
Our nation’s founding documents—the Declaration of Independence, the U.S. Constitution, and the Bill of Rights— express important principles. These are:
•	All people are created equal.
•	All people possess certain basic rights.
•	The purpose of government is to secure these rights.
•	The authority of governments is derived from the people.
Many of the principles outlined in these founding documents were first formed during a movement of the 1700s called the Enlightenment. Many leaders of Britain’s American colonies were familiar with the writings of John Locke of England and the Baron de Montesquieu of France, two thinkers of the Enlightenment.
Locke believed that all people were born equal, with certain natural rights. These included the right to life, to freedom, and to own property. According to Locke, people form governments and choose leaders to protect these natural rights. Montesquieu developed the idea that the power of government should be divided among branches in order to prevent any person or group from becoming too strong.
Our English and Colonial Heritage
Our nation’s founding documents were also influenced by earlier documents and agreements that promoted freedom and liberty. The Magna Carta and the English Bill of Rights were essential building blocks for political principles found in the Declaration of Independence, the U.S. Constitution, and the Bill of Rights.
!
The Constitution sets forth the six basic principles upon which the U.S. system of government rests.
21A Identify different points of view of political parties and interest groups on important historical and contemporary issues.
23D Analyze the contributions of people of various racial, ethnic, and religious groups to our national identity.
25C Analyze the impact of the First Amendment guarantees of religious freedom on the American way of life.
i

				
Content Vocabulary		Academic Vocabulary	natural right a basic right to which all	
•	natural right •	Magna Carta •English Bill of Rights	•	Mayflower Compact •	unalienable right •	U.S. Bill of Rights	source the place from which something comes or is obtained	humans are entitled	Lesson 3	25
On November 21,1620,41 colonists aboard the Mayflower drafted an agreement. The Mayflower Compact was the first plan of self-government ever put in force in the English colonies.
In 1215 English nobles forced the king to sign an agreement called the Magna Carta. This document limited the power of the monarch by guaranteeing that no one would be above the law, not even a king or queen.
In 1689 Parliament drew up the English Bill of Rights.
This document further restricted the monarch’s power. It also guaranteed free elections to Parliament (England’s legislature), the right to a fair trial, and the elimination of cruel and unusual punishments.
The Mayflower Compact, signed by the Pilgrims in 1620, stands as the first example of many colonial plans for self-government. In 1639, representatives of several Connecticut towns wrote a plan of government for their colony. 'That plan, called the Fundamental Orders of Connecticut, was the first constitution in the colonies.
The Influence of Our Founding Documents
In 1776 the American colonists began a revolution to defend their belief in equality, natural rights, and self-government. They made their beliefs clear in the Declaration of Independence, which stated the reasons they were seeking freedom. These beliefs later influenced France’s Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen, a statement of principles that accompanied a revolution in that country in 1789.
Inspired by American ideals of equality and freedom, enslaved Africans took up arms in the French-held Caribbean island of
Magna Carta 1215 document that limited the power of England's monarch
English Bill of Rights 1689 document that limited the monarch's power and guaranteed free elections, the right to a fair trial, and the elimination of cruel and unusual punishment
Mayflower Compact 1620 document that was the first plan for self-government in the colonies
Exploring Social Studies
Saint Dominique—present-day Haiti. In 1804 Haiti became the second country in the Americas, after the United States, to gain independence. Over the next three decades, Mexico and other nations in Central and South America also revolted against their European rulers and gained self-government.
Political Parties and Interest Groups
A political party is an organization of individuals with common interests who organize to win elections, to operate the government, and to thereby influence government policy.
In the 1790s, the first two rival political groups organized in the United States. Secretary of State Thomas Jefferson led one group, the Democratic-Republicans. Secretary of the Treasury Alexander Hamilton led the other group, the Federalist Party.
They disagreed strongly about how the U.S. government should operate.
In the United States today, the two major parties are the Republican Party and the Democratic Party. Competing political parties are a necessary part of democratic government. They are a key link between citizens and their elected officials. They give voters a choice between candidates and ideas. A basic difference between the major parties is their view on the role of government. Democrats tend to believe that the federal government should be more directly involved in regulating the economy and in providing housing, education, and jobs. Republicans tend to favor less regulation of the economy as a way to help the nation’s economy grow. Other political parties, called third parties, have been part of the American political scene since the early days of the republic.
An interest group is a group of people that have common aims and try to influence citizens and government officials to act in their favor. Interest groups represent a variety of causes. Many interest groups deal with economic interests, including groups like the National Association of Manufacturers and powerful labor organizations. Other interest groups deal with more specific causes. The National Taxpayers Union works for lower taxes and less wasteful spending. Mothers Against Drunk Driving (MADD) seeks to stop drunk driving and prevent underage drinking.
O READING PROGRESS CHECK
Identifying What document was the first plan for self-government in what is now the United States?
SKILLS PRACTICE________________
Look at the pictures, headings, and important words in your text. Retell the information using words you know.
Reading Strategy: Differentiating_______________________________________
When you differentiate, you highlight and describe the differences between
two related people, events, or concepts. Read about political parties and
interest groups and write a few sentences that differentiate the two.
Lesson 3	27
j What Is Citizenship?
| guiding question How is citizenship obtained?
1	A citizen is a person who owes loyalty to and is entitled to the
|	protection of a state or nation. How do you become a U.S. citizen?
j The U.S. Constitution establishes two ways to become a citizen:
| by birth and, for foreign-born people who choose to become I citizens, by a legal process called naturalization.
j	Citizenship by Birth If you were born in any of the 50 states
| or the District of Columbia, you became a U.S. citizen at birth.
| You also are a citizen if you were born outside the country s
(borders but in U.S. territory, such as Puerto Rico or Guam. Even if you were born elsewhere, you can claim citizenship if one of ? your parents is a U.S. citizen. Children born on American soil to non-U.S. citizens also acquire U.S. citizenship at birth.
Citizenship by Naturalization Immigrants who want to become citizens must meet certain requirements. They must be:
1	•	18 years old or older
I» a resident of the United States for five years • able to read, write, and speak English • of good moral character
To become citizens, applicants must also pass a citizenship test, which measures their understanding of U.S. history, government, and the legal system. The final step in naturalization is attending a ceremony and pledging an oath of allegiance. The applicant swears to be loyal to the United States and to obey the Constitution and other laws.
READING PROGRESS CHECK
Our government is based on the principle of "consent ofthe governed." Voting is one of American citizens' most important responsibilities. By voting, citizens have the chance to shape the future of our communities, states, and nation.
Specifying What two ways does the U.S. Constitution set forth for a person to become a citizen?
21
Coring Social Studies
Rights and Responsibilities
guidingquestion What are the rights and responsibilities of citizens ofthe United States?
As citizens of our nation, we hold many rights. However, we must also fulfill the responsibilities of citizenship.
Rights and the Declaration of Independence
Almost from the moment that the United States declared itself an independent country, Americans have valued and celebrated their rights and freedoms. Thomas Jefferson’s words in the Declaration of Independence made it clear that the citizens of the new country would never be denied certain basic rights—rights that belong to all people. These principles are brilliantly stated in the second paragraph of the Declaration:
James Madison introduced a set of amendments to the U.S. Constitution during the first session of Congress. The states ratified 10 of them in 1791. These first 10 amendments became known as the Bill of Rights.
PRIMARY SOURCE
M
We hold these Truths to be self-evident, that all Men are created equal, that they are endowed by their Creator with certain unalienable Rights, that among these are Life, Liberty and the Pursuit of Happiness—That to secure these Rights, Governments are instituted among Men, deriving their just Powers from the Consent ofthe Governed. 99 —Declaration of Independence, 1776
The Bridgeman Art Library/Getty Images
Jefferson stated that the principles he was identifying were “truths,” not just beliefs held by a few radicals. He also noted that these principles were “self-evident,” or obvious.
In saying that people have unalienable rights, or rights that cannot be taken away, Jefferson was borrowing from earlier thinkers such as William Blackstone and from Locke’s writings on natural rights. Natural (or unalienable) rights have several characteristics:
•	They belong to every human being regardless of gender, age, or nationality.
•	They cannot be taken away or interfered with by any government.
There are other kinds of rights besides natural rights. These rights are man-made and codified into law. Yet many of the individual rights that Americans enjoy and celebrate—such as the right to worship as one pleases, the right to assemble, and the right to fair treatment under the law—are based on the natural and unalienable rights of “Life, Liberty, and the Pursuit of Happiness.”
Academic Vocabulary	unalienable right a right that cannot be
consent agreement or permission	taken away
Lesson 3	29
During earlier periods in our nation's history, some people were not allowed to vote. Through the efforts of suffragists (above) and their supporters, women gained the right to vote with the passage of the Nineteenth Amendment in 1920.
Today, to be eligible to vote, you must be a citizen of the United States and at least 18 years of age.
r
I
Rights and the Bill of Rights
In the Declaration of Independence, Jefferson laid the foundation for many of the rights that later became part of the U.S. Constitution. The first 10 amendments, or changes, to the Constitution were added in 1791. They are known as the U.S. Bill of Rights, and they list Americans’ basic rights and freedoms.
The First Amendment to the Constitution protects five basic freedoms: freedom of religion, freedom of speech, freedom of the press, freedom of the assembly, and freedom to petition the government.
How does the First Amendment protect these freedoms? The amendment safeguards religious freedom in two ways. First, the amendment prohibits Congress from establishing an official religion in the United States. This makes the United States different from countries in which a state church is established. Second, the amendment guarantees Americans the right to practice their faith as they wish. The government may not favor one religion over another or treat people differently because of their personal beliefs.
Many of the people who braved the journey to the American colonies did so because they were not allowed to practice their religions in their home countries. The Framers of the U.S. Constitution wanted to be sure this would not happen in their new nation.
Our Responsibilities
With citizenship come responsibilities, things we are expected or are required to do. As individuals we have personal responsibilities, such as being accountable for how we behave and how we support our families. As citizens, we also have responsibilities. The responsibilities of citizenship include respecting the law, paying our taxes, and supporting and defending the U.S. Constitution. Rights
•	Right to a prompt, fair trial by jury
•	Right to vote in elections for public officials
•	Right to run for elected office
•	Right to privacy
Personal Responsibilities
Follow rules and laws at home, school, and in the community
•	Accept responsibility for your actions
•	Support your family
U.S.
Bill of Rights the first ten amendments to the U.S. Constitution that list Americans' basic rights and freedoms Exploring Social Studies
Art Library /Getty
Citizenship Responsibilities
•	Respect and obey federal, state, and local laws
•	Stay informed on issues affecting your community
•	Vote and serve on juries
Rules and laws help keep order. They protect the safety, property, and freedom of citizens. They also make it possible for people to live together peaceably. Our system of representative government makes it possible for citizens to work with elected leaders to change laws they do not like.
Paying taxes gives government money to use for a variety of purposes, such as defending the nation, providing services to citizens, and building roads and bridges.
Defending the Constitution means more than volunteering to serve in the military to protect the nation against enemies of freedom. It also means serving on juries when called to do so. Americans have the right to a trial by a jury. This right would be difficult to exercise if citizens neglected this responsibility. Jury duty is necessary to guarantee everyone a fair and speedy trial.
Our rights and responsibilities define who we are as Americans. Our national identity has been built through the nation’s history as a land of immigrants of many different racial and ethnic backgrounds. It is not based on our belonging to one ethnic group or religion but on our shared values—freedom, liberty, and | equality. We express our respect for these shared values through our patriotism and love of country; by respecting our history, traditions, and symbols; and by exercising our rights and responsibilities.
H READING PROGRESS CHECK
e Identifying In what part of the U.S. Constitution are many basic rights stated?
As citizens of the United States, we all have certain responsibilities, such as defending the nation.
Include this lesson's information in your Foldable®
V\/ho	V/hcft
a—	
—	
k-	
Nov/	vAy
LESSON 3 REVIEW
Review Vocabulary
1.	Write a sentence that uses the terms government and constitution and that describes their relationship. 3oa
2.	Identify each of following terms and explain how they influenced the U.S. system of government: isa
a.	Magna Carta
b.	English Bill of Rights
c.	Mayflower Compact
Answer the Guiding Questions
3.	Summarizing What American beliefs and principles are reflected in the Declaration of Independence and the U.S. Constitution? 29b
4.	Defining What are the characteristics of unalienable rights?
19A
5.	Explaining What does it mean to accept responsibility for your behavior and actions? How could it affect others if you do not fulfill this responsibility? 19c
EXPOSITORY WRITING
Part ofyour role as a citizen is the responsibility to be informed about issues in your community and the right to voice your opinion about them. Draft a speech you could give to your class outlining your views on an issue that your school or community is currently facing. 3od Lesson 3	31

networks
There's More Online!
GRAPHS	•
•	Immigration by Region	,
•	World Population by Religion
& IMAGE
Displayed in Fine Art
i |gf MAP Immigrants to the
4	United States
t : Ef self-check quiz
Ef SLIDESHOW Charts and Graphs & VIDEO
Immigrants by State

Lesson 4
Culture, Science, and Society
I
AL QUESTION
Howdonewideasdiangethtwayptoplelhfe? TEAS
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills 23A Identify selected racial, ethnic, and religious groups that settled in the United States and explain their reasons for immigration.
26A Describe developments in art, music, and literature that are unique to American culture such as the Hudson River School artists, John James Audubon, "Battle Hymn of the Republic," transcendentalism, and other cultural activities in the history of the United States.
26B Identify examples of American art, music, and literature that reflect society in different eras.
26C Analyze the relationship between fine arts and continuity and change in the American way of life.
27A Explain the effects of technological and scientific innovations such as the steamboat, the cotton gin, and interchangeable parts.
27B Analyze the impact of transportation and communication systems on the growth, development, and urbanization of the United States.
27D Explain how technological innovations brought about economic growth such as how the factory system contributed to rapid industrialization and the Transcontinental Railroad led to the opening of the west.
28A Compare the effects of scientific discoveries and technological innovations that have influenced daily life in different periods in U.S. history.
28B Identify examples of how industrialization changed life in the United States.
Reading HELPDESK
It matters because
We live in a nation and world very different from that of our ancestors. Culture and technology have played a major part in creating those differences. Learning more about culture and technology can help us better understand the changes that are shaping our world.
What Is Culture?
guiding question What influences have shaped American culture?
A culture is the way of life of people who share similar beliefs and customs. A particular culture can be understood by looking at various elements: what languages the people speak, what religions they follow, and what smaller groups are part of their society. The study of cultures also includes examining people’s daily lives, the history they share, and the art forms they have created.
Culture and Ethnic Groups
Culture is often understood by looking at dif ferent groups of people in a society. Each of us belongs to many social groups. Most social groups have rules of behavior that group members learn. Each member also has a certain status. Status refers to a person’s importance or rank. In all cultures, the family is the most important social group. Although family structures vary from culture to culture, most of us first learn how to behave from our families.
People also belong to an ethnic group. This is a group that shares a language, history, religion, and some physical traits. Some countries, like the United States, are multicultural, or made up of many different ethnic or cultural groups. Such
NUMBER OF IMMIGRANTS
(2010) Mill 100,000 or above 50,000-99,999
P—~1 10,000-49,999 I I 1,000-9,999 I -• ■■ I 999 or fewer
countries have a national culture that all their people share, as well as the many diverse ethnic cultures.
A
Nation of Immigrants The United States is a multicultural nation because immigration has shaped our history. From the first English adventurers who settled Virginia more than 400 years ago to the Latino, Asian, and other immigrants arriving today, immigration has been the story of America.
No matter when they have come, the nation’s immigrants have arrived for the same basic reasons. The main factors that pushed them from their homelands were a lack of economic opportunity, persecution for their religious or political beliefs, or the desire to escape war or political unrest.
The factors that pulled them to the United States have been equally timeless, such as the right to enjoy religious, political, and personal freedom; the lure of land, jobs, and other economic opportunities; and the chance to share in what is known worldwide as the “American Dream.”
The Arts
Through music, painting, sculpture, dance, and literature, people express what they think is beautiful and meaningful. The arts can tell stories about important figures and events in a culture’s past. The arts can also help us understand the issues of modern times.
Taking Notes: Summarizing
Use this graphic organizer to take notes about culture, science, and technology k32 Exploring Social Studies
New Ideas and Ways of Living	
Culture	Science and Technology
	
	
Content Vocabulary
•	culture
•	ethnic group
•	multicultural
•	immigration
•	discovery
•	innovation
Academic Vocabulary_____________
factor any ofthe things that causes or influences something
GEOGRAPHY CONNECTION
This map shows the number of immigrants in every state in the year 2010.
REGIONS
In what area of the United States do the fewest number of immigrants live? CRITICAL THINKING
Categorizing Find Texas on the map and study the key. What is the range of immigrant population in Texas?
Content Vocabulary_____________
culture the way of life of people who share similar beliefs and customs
ethnic group a group that shares a language, history, religion, and some physical traits
multicultural made up of many different ethnic or cultural groups immigration the process of coming to live in another country
Lesson 4	33
r
During the colonial era and early 1800s, items that could not be made at home were manufactured—by local blacksmiths, furniture makers, and other craftspeople. By the mid-1800s, more of America's manufacturing shifted to mills and factories. Industrialization brought work and workers together.
During the Colonial America era, art, music, and literature were modeled after British and other European styles. After the War of 1812, American writers, inspired by nationalism, began to develop their own literature. They used settings, characters, and humor that were typically American. One ofthe first authors to work on American themes was Washington Irving. In Rip Van Winkle” and “The Legend of Sleepy Hollow,” Irving wrote about life in the Hudson River valley.
Early American artists had traveled to Europe to study. Many followed the British style of painting. Most often they painted portraits. More often, the nation’s artists began painting scenes of America. George Catlin lived and worked among Native Americans. He painted scenes of their daily life. George Caleb Bingham painted vivid scenes of everyday life on the Missouri frontier.
Art styles were changing. But art also reflected the continuity and change in the American way of life. The painting of the blacksmith shows a traditional feature of rural life. The painting of the metal factory reflects change in America. Craftspeople, like the blacksmith, remained an important part of their communities. Many Americans, however, were moving to urban areas to find work in factories.
Americans also developed a new style of music. Stephen Foster combined African and European music to create uniquely American songs about life in the South. A Boston music teacher, Lowell Mason, started a music program in the public schools.
He also composed the music for more than 1,600 church hymns. Many, including “Nearer, My God, to Thee,” are often sung today.
For many enslaved African Americans, Christianity was a religion of hope and resistance. Their passionate beliefs found expression in the spiritual, an African American religious folk song. H READING PROGRESS CHECK
Contrasting What is the difference between an ethnic group and a culture?
Science and Technology
guidingquestion What effects have science and technology had on the nation's development?
Americans have felt the huge impact of science and technology in almost every part of our daily lives. Science and technology affect our home and school life, our work, our leisure pursuits, what we eat, and the clothes we wear.
Scientific Discoveries Influence Daily Life
Scientific and medical discoveries have changed the way people live.
1752 Ben Franklin experiments with electricity.
Franklin’s experiments with electricity led him to develop the lightning rod. When placed at the top of a building, it conducted huge amounts of the electricity in lightning bolts harmlessly into the ground, protecting the building. Franklin’s finding led to technology such as motors, computers, and light bulbs that harnessed and used electrical power.
1840s Anesthesia improves surgery.
An important advance in medicine is credited to two physicians from the United States. Working independently, Dr. Crawford W. Long of Georgia in 1842 and Dr. W. T. G. Morton of Boston in 1846 were the first physicians to use ether as an anesthetic during surgery. During the Civil War, ether and chloroform were widely used by military surgeons.
1955 Salk polio vaccine becomes widely available.
In the early 1950s, polio became the most-feared disease of the era because it left many of its victims paralyzed for life. In the mid-1950s, Dr. Jonas Salk, an American physician, developed an effective vaccine against polio. The threat of polio was almost completely eliminated.
Think about: Which of these scientific discoveries has had the greatest effect on your life?
Technology Influences Daily Life
In ways big and small, technology has changed the way people live. A technological innovation is a better way of doing things or improves on something that already exists. Many technological innovations from the past still affect our lives today.
SKILLS PRACTICE_______________
As you read, list the words you do not know well. Have a partner quiz you on the words until you know them by sight.




discovery the process of learning or finding Readng Strategy: Visualizing__________________________________________________________________
something new	When you visualize, you create pictures in your mind of what you are reading. Good readers
"see" the author's words, making it easier to remember details. As you read the page above, what do you visualize?
Lesson 4	35
1876 Alexander Graham Bell tests the telephone.
Bell’s telephone revolutionized communications. It replaced the telegraph’s time-consuming coded beeps with voice messages. People at great distances could have conversations as it they were together. 1879 Thomas Edison perfects the incandescent light bulb. Edison’s electric light bulb replaced oil and gas lamps and candles as a clean, safe, and reliable way to light homes, streets, and businesses. 1886 Josephine Cochrane invents a mechanical dishwasher. Cochrane saw the need for a way to save the labor and time involved in washing dishes by hand. The development ot home appliances made domestic chores much easier.
1903 Brothers Orville and Wilbur Wright make the first powered airplane flight.
The development of airplanes had a huge impact on American culture. The Wright brothers’ invention made the world seem smaller and encouraged the spread of cultures, ideas, and goods.
1908 Henry Ford’s assembly line turns out the first mass-produced automobile, the Model T.
The automobile revolutionized transportation and American life. The automobile changed where people could live, where they could work, and how easily they could travel to new places.
1975 Bill Gates and Paul Allen start a company called Microsoft to develop computer operating systems.
More than any other entrepreneurs, Gates and Allen made the computer age possible. Using our computers, we can instantly access information, ideas, and products from anywhere in the world.
innovation something that improves upon or makes a significant contribution to an existing product, process, or service
Academic Vocabulary
access to get at or obtain
36 Exploring Social Studies

Think About: Which of these technological innovations do you use often? Which innovation do you think has had the greatest effect on the daily life of Americans today?
Technology and Urbanization
New technology revolutionized transportation and
communications, and began the change of the United States from an agricultural to an urban, industrial nation. The telephone and telegraph enabled people to communicate with others at a distance. They shared ideas, news, and conducted business faster. These forms of communication also drew people to urban areas.
Industrialization drew thousands of people from farms and villages to cities in search of factory jobs with higher wages. To serve industry, facilities such as banks, insurance companies, and warehouses developed. These, in turn, attracted more industry and workers.
The promise of jobs and new opportunity was one reason why many people moved to the cities. Urban areas also had other advantages. In contrast to the isolation of farm life, cities had running water, modern plumbing, access to telephones and other forms of communication, museums, libraries, and convenient transportation.
Many city populations doubled or tripled. In 1820 only one American city had more than 100,000 residents. By 1860, eight cities had reached that size. Between 1860 and 1900, American urban areas grew twice as fast as the total population.
H READING PROGRESS CHECK
Categorizing Which persons' contributions have improved communications? Which have improved transportation?
Include this lesson's information in your Foldable®
	—
V/bo	wtat -4,
k-	
Hcw	wW
LESSON 4 REVIEW

Review Vocabulary
1.	Use the following words in a sentence that correctly shows the meaning of each and their relationship to each other. 3oa,3ob
a. ethnic group b. dialect
2.	Write a sentence that shows how the following words are related, joa
a. culture b. multicultural
Answer the Guiding Questions
3.	Specifying Why have various racial, ethnic, and religious groups immigrated to the United States? 23A
4.	Explaining What effects have science and technology had on the country's development? 2sb
5.	Analyzing View the paintings of the blacksmith and the metal factory. Which image represents continuity and tradition? Which represents change in the American way of life? Explain. 2«c
6.	Analyzing Why would forms of communication such as newspapers and telephones draw people to urban areas? 27b
EXPOSITORY WRITING
Which of the technology advancements you learned about was the most important for our nation? Write a short essay that explains the reasons for your opinion. 3od j H
Lesson 4	37


4
networks
There's More Online!
CHART
Virginia and New Jersey Plans GMte Identification MODEL
Division of Powers ef SELF-CHECK QUIZ Ef VIDEO
Safest

Lesson 5
Social Studies Skills
ITIAL QUESTION
How do we team aboutthepast? 
7EK5 Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills___________
1B Apply absolute and relative chronology through the sequencing of significant individuals, events, and time periods.
29B Analyze information by sequencing, categorizing, identifying cause-and-effect relationships, comparing, contrasting, finding the main idea, summarizing, making generalizations and predictions, and drawing inferences and conclusions.
29C Organize and interpret information from outlines, reports, databases, and visuals, including graphs, charts, timelines, and maps. 29E Support a point ofview on a social studies issue or event.
30A Use social studies terminology correctly. 30B Use standard grammar, spelling, sentence structure, punctuation, and proper citation of sources.
30D Create written, oral, and visual presentations of social studies information.
31A Use a problem-solving process to identify a problem, gather information, list and consider options, consider advantages and disadvantages, choose and implement a solution, and evaluate the effectiveness ofthe solution.
31B Use a decision-making process to identify a situation that requires a decision, gather information, identify options, predict consequences, and take action to implement a decision.
Reading HELPDESK
it matters because
Critical thinking skills help you to analyze information and ideas. These skills are important to good citizenship because they allow you to exercise your civic rights and responsibilities.
Critical Thinking Skills
guidingquestion Howcan social studies skills help students organize and analyze information and ideas?
Studying history is more than reading sources and viewing pictures or graphs. Historians need many different skills to analyze, explain, and find patterns in the events of history. Here are some of the social studies skills you will use in your study of U.S. history. As you read, you will be able to practice these skills. Identifying Cause and Effect
A cause is an action that leads to an event. An effect is the result of that action. Look for “signal” words or phrases that alert you to cause and effect, such as so, because, as a result, therefore, produced, and for the following reasons.
Think about a personal achievement. The achievement might be scoring a winning goal, writing a funny story, or fixing a bicycle. What causes helped you accomplish this achievement? How might knowing those causes help you to achieve the same effect again? Making Predictions
One way to analyze information is to think about what might happen next. Predicting future events is difficult. Sometimes,


Taking Hotes: Summarizing
As you read, use a table like this one to describe different tools you will use as you study history.
Exploring Sodal Studies
Social Studies Skills		
Critical Thinking Skills	Problem-Solving Skills	Writing and Communication Skills
		
		
Native Americans who were forced from their land traveled west in the 1830s.
though, you can use knowledge of how certain causes led to certain effects in the past to make such a prediction. This is one benefit that comes from having a knowledge of history.
For example, in the 1830s, white Americans wanted the land on which the Cherokee and four other Native American peoples were living. The government forced all of these peoples to give up their land so that white settlers could have it. What do you think happened to these Native Americans in the West once the settlers took their land?
E
Drawing Inferences and Conclusions
Inferences and conclusions are two different types of explanations we form about things. An inference is something we assume based on what appears to be true. Drawing an inference means choosing the most likely explanation based on that evidence.
For example, you arrive at the school bus stop a little later than usual. No one is there. You draw the inference that you have missed the bus. You do not know that for sure, however. You did not see the bus pulling away, and there might be other reasons why no one is at the bus stop. But based on the evidence you have—that you were late and that no one is there—you assume (draw the inference) that you missed the bus.
Study the model of the division of powers between the national and state governments. What is a power that is shared? What inferences might you draw from this?

Content Vocabulary
•	cause
•	effect
•	inference
•	conclusion
•	generalization*
•	plagiarize
cause an action that leads to an event
effect the result of an action
inference something that we assume based on what appears to be true
Lesson 5	39
The Framers ofthe U.S. Constitution
divided the powers of government into three types. The powers granted to the national government are called enumerated powers, or expressed powers. Reserved powers are powers set aside for the states. Powers that both the national government and the state governments share are concurrent powers.
A conclusion is a logical explanation that is based on known facts. When you draw a conclusion, you use all available information to form the explanation. Conclusions are often developed from inferences as more information is gathered. These differences make conclusions more reliable explanations than inferences are. Once you have drawn a conclusion based on facts, you can persuasively support your point of view on an issue. For example, by studying a variety of sources about an election-such as news reports, polling data, and debates between the candidates—you can effectively draw a conclusion about why a candidate won.
Content Vocabulary
conclusion a logical explanation that is based on known facts
Academic Vocabulary
identify to find
Comparing and Contrasting
When making comparisons, you examine two or more ideas, objects, or events. You identify the similarities, or what the two things have in common. When you contrast, you are noting differences between ideas, objects, or events.
At times, you are asked to both compare and contrast. Signal words or phrases provide clues to what you need to do. Words such as similar and also tell you to compare. Words and phrases such as however and on the other hand tell you to contrast.
View the chart of the Virginia and New Jersey Plans on page 239. Which parts of the two plans are similar? Which parts are different?
Sequencing
Sequencing involves putting events in the order in which they occurred. Using this skill will help you to see and understand relationships between events. You can sequence events in two ways:
^0 Exploring Social Studies
•	absolute chronology When you sequence events in this way, you are paying attention to the dates of the events.
•	relative chronology When you sequence events this way, you only need to know which event came first, which came second, and so on, without paying attention to their dates.
Sequence the following events using relative chronology.
Then identify the relationship between slavery and the Civil War.
•	1860: Abraham Lincoln is elected president of the United States.
•	1850: Some Southern senators oppose compromising with the North over slavery.
•	1861: Southern states leave the Union and the Civil War begins.
•	1858: Northerner Abraham Lincoln rises to leadership in a political party that opposes slavery.
Finding the Main Idea
When you look for the main idea of a selection, you look for the most important idea. The examples and information that explain the main idea further are called supporting details.
Some main ideas are clearly stated—often in the first sentence of a paragraph or sometimes, in the last sentence of a passage. Other times, the writer does not directly state the main idea. Instead, he or she provides details that help readers figure out what the main idea is.
To help you find the main idea, ask yourself:
•	What is each sentence about?
•	Is there one sentence that tells about the whole passage or that is more important than the other sentences?
•	What main idea do the supporting details point out?
Summarizing
When you summarize, you reduce a large amount of information into short and simple form. A summary is a short restatement of the information’s important content. Summarizing helps you digest and remember the main points in what you have read.
Categorizing
As a student, it is important that you know how to organize | large amounts of information in an understandable way.
| Categorizing helps you arrange facts and information into 1 groups that have the same characteristics. Putting things into | categories can make it easier to see similarities and differences 5 among them.
HJttRISOX!
AW©
REFORM!!
¥•« are, »»e aad all, in t iled to attead « meeting of (he friend* »f
W.wtsw * ortw.
At the OLD t tH KT BOOM, (Rile,’, Building,)
On Saturday Evening next,
T» perfect the Arrangement* neeemary fer the
dprtngfitU emtmtim,
And al*a to attend (a ether important hmdne**.
.HMSMWt,
Jt. A. XOBLK,
- Altna, Map !•» 1841.	See*ry Cent. ef Armage.
This is a presidential campaign poster from an election in 1840. Follow these steps to identify the main idea:
•	Who is the candidate?
•	What does the poster tell you about the candidate?
•	Who is the poster addressing?
•	What main idea is presented?
Lesson 5	41
Anne Hutchinson
Making Generalizations
Generalizations are statements that are generally true, based on the facts available. For example, by saying “Our school has great athletic teams,” you are making a generalization. That s because great is probably not true of all your school’s teams but just most of them, which makes your statement generally true.
In studying history, you may need to put bits and pieces of information together in order to see the overall picture.
To make an accurate generalization, you must first collect facts about the subject. Then identify similarities among facts and use those similarities to form some general ideas about the subject.
The Puritans came to America in 1630 and started a colony called Massachusetts. Make a generalization about them from the following pieces of information:
. The Puritans left England because they wanted religious freedom.
•	The Puritans drove Baptists and other non-Puritans from their colony.
•	Puritan Anne Hutchinson was expelled from Massachusetts for challenging church teachings.
•	The Puritans expelled Roger Williams because he challenged the church’s authority.
Q READING PROGRESS CHECK
Identifying Which skill helps identify similarities in two or more things?
Problem-Solving Skills
GUIDINGQUESTION
How are decision making and problem solving similar? You will sometimes be called on to investigate a topic in depth. You might be assigned to complete a project on your own. Your teacher will also assign group projects.
For some topics, you will need to solve a problem or make a decision based on the evidence you gather. A set process—a series of steps can help you make the decision or solve the problem. Making Decisions
People make decisions every day. Some decisions affect other people, can have serious results, and must be made quickly. You might be a person who requires a lot of information to make your decision. Or you may feel very comfortable relying on your instinct when making your decision.
Whatever the decision and whatever your style, decision making should generally follow a process similar to this:
42	Exploring Social Studies
When your group is working to solve a problem, a first step is to understand the problem. Ask the questions:
*	What do we know about the problem?
*	Do we have enough information to solve the problem?
*	If not, what information do we need?
•	Determine if others should be involved in the decisionmaking process.
•	Gather information to help you make the decision.
•	Identify options/alternatives.
•	Weigh each option and predict the consequences of each.
•	Choose the best option.
•	Put your decision into action.
Solving Problems
A planned and careful approach will assist you in arriving at a solution to a problem. Choosing not to deal with a problem is one option. However, problems very rarely go away by themselves.
Here is a process that should help you solve a problem:
•	Identify the problem.
•	Gather information about the problem.
•	List and consider solutions to the problem.
•	Consider the advantages and disadvantages of each possible solution.
•	Choose a solution and put it into action.
•	Evaluate the effectiveness of the solution.
Doing Research
I
When you research a topic, you must determine what you 1 want or need to learn about it. Create six questions to help you I find out the who, what, when, where, why, and how of the topic. Academic Vocabulary_____________ Content Vocabulary_____________
create to make something new or original generalization a statement that is generally true, based on the facts available
Lesson 5	43
SKILLS PRACTICE_________________
When the language spoken in the classroom is challenging, list the words you do not know. Use a dictionary to look them up after the lesson.
If you are working in a group, decide which member is doing which part.
After you create six questions, the next step is to gather your research materials. Begin with general reference books, such as encyclopedias and textbooks, or your notes from class. Looking for information on the Internet can be quick and rewarding. However, it can be a challenge to find out if the information you locate is true. It is important to apply the following standards to information on the Internet.
jf you answer no to any of the questions below, the Web site is probably not a reliable source:
. Is the authorship of the information clear?
•	Can you easily find out who is responsible for the Web site?
•	Has the Web site been updated recently?
•	Does the writing seem balanced, or does it contain a bias toward one point of view?
You must also organize the information you gather. Outlines and reports can be a great resource when doing research. For example, you could use an outline—such as the table of contents for this book—to organize information about U.S. history for a presentation. Similarly, reports can help you organize data. If you look at a government report on a topic such as the environment or education, the level of detail devoted to certain topics can help you identify the most important subjects to address in an essay.
Once you have organized your information, you need to interpret, or assign meaning, to it. Again, the organization of material in outlines and reports can provide insight on a topic. How is the data organized? In what order is information presented? The structure of an outline or a report can help you interpret the relative importance of different pieces of data.
H READING PROGRESS CHECK
Making Decisions Why is it important to decide what you want to find out before beginning your research?
Writing and Communication Skills
guiding question How do we communicate information?
We communicate information in three main ways. One way is in written form, as in a report, a letter, or an e-mail. Another way is by voice, as in a conversation, a speech, a song, or a presentation at work or in class. The third way we communicate is visually.
otographs, film or video, art, maps, and graphs are all forms of visua communication. Sometimes our communications involve two o t ese means. For example, this textbook uses writing and images to provide information about our nation’s history.
44 Exploring Social Studies
Writing Skills
Good writing meets certain standards. It shows correct use of grammar—the rules for how the words and other parts of a language are used. The words chosen clearly convey the writer’s information and ideas. All words are properly used and their spelling is correct.
It is also important that you use the special words of social studies correctly. As you read the lessons, you will see many special words and phrases identified as content vocabulary or academic vocabulary. Examples of special vocabulary include free enterprise and unalienable right. Sentences are complete and properly punctuated. They also are not so long that they are confusing.
The sentences in good writing are organized into paragraphs. A paragraph is a group of sentences about one idea or topic. Paragraphs are the building blocks of
o	Deliberate Plagiarism	Unintentional Plagiarism
	Passing off as one’s own	Omitting or not properly
	or rewriting books,	citing original sources
	articles, or works of others	Poor paraphrasing or summarizing
	Copying and pasting from web sites or	Assuming something is
o	online sources without	“common knowledge”
	citation	when it is not
	Buying, borrowing, or	Recycling your own work
	downloading the work of others	from an old paper
o		
most written communication.	Keep these tips in mind to avoid
The first paragraph of a composition usually introduces the	plagiarism.
topic. The next paragraphs present information about the topic in
a logical, easy-to-follow sequence. Then the final paragraph states
the writer’s conclusion about the topic.
A very important standard of good writing is that the work be
the writer’s own. To plagiarize is to present the ideas or words of
another person as your own without giving credit to the source.
Plagiarism is similar to forgery, or copying anything else that is
not yours, and violates the law. If you copy an idea or a written
text word for word, that is plagiarism.
To avoid plagiarism, follow these rules:
•	Put information in your own words.
•	When you restate an opinion from something you read, include a reference to the author—for example, “According to Smith and Jones,...”
•	Always include a footnote when you use a direct quotation from another author.
If you are writing a report, you may be required to include a bibliography. A bibliography is a list of the books, articles, Internet sources, and other sources you used to do your research. These are listed at the end of your report and should include:
•	the author of the source
•	the title of the source
plagiarize to present someone else's ideas or
words as your own
Lesson 5	45
President George W. Bush addresses members ofthe U.S. Border Patrol about policy issues. Communication skills are important to make sure the audience understands your message. When you plan an oral presentation, ask yourself:
•	Who is your audience?
•	What does your audience already know about the topic?
•	What do you want your audience to know?
•	What details and vocabulary will help you accomplish this?
. the publisher of the source or the Web site and Internet address (URL) where it can be found
•	the date the source was published or the Web site was accessed
Writing a Paragraph
Writing a good paragraph involves stating information clearly and arranging it in a logical order. Knowing how to write a well-organized paragraph helps you express your ideas clearly. To write a good paragraph, follow these steps:
•	Decide on the main point you want the paragraph to express. Write the idea in a sentence. This sentence will become the topic sentence or main idea ot the paragraph.
•	Next, write detail sentences to support the main idea. These sentences should add information that explains or expands the main idea stated in the topic sentence. They may be facts, examples, or reasons. They should be arranged in a logical order.
Use transition words such as next, then, also, finally, because, however, and as a result to link sentences within the paragraph. Transitions can also be used to link two paragraphs together.
Good Writing Checklist
When you finish your writing, check to make sure your work is free from errors. This checklist can help you:
•	Have I avoided run-on sentences and sentence fragments?
•	Have I punctuated sentences correctly?
•	Have I used every word correctly, including plurals and possessives?
46 Exploring Social Studies
•	Have I correctly used social studies terminology?
•	Do verbs and subjects agree?
•	Have I spelled every word correctly? Have I checked unfamiliar ones in the dictionary?
•	Are my paragraphs clear and arranged in a logical order?
•	Are the words my own?
Finally, evaluate the paragraph you have written. Does the topic sentence state the main idea clearly? Do the other sentences support the main idea?
Creating Presentations
Many of the standards and skills that make for good written communication apply to voice communication too. Whether you are giving a speech, oral report, or other presentation, your grammar should be correct. Your sentences should be complete, short, and in an order that makes your meaning clear.
These skills are especially important when you are delivering information orally. It is often more difficult for people to understand something they listen to than something they read.
To help your audience understand, you can ask key questions about the information you are presenting and then answer them in your presentation. Also, allow your audience time at the end of your presentation to ask questions.
Most social studies presentations are more interesting if they include visuals such as photographs, slide shows, videos, maps, graphs, or diagrams. Multimedia is the combination of text, images, video, audio, and animation in an interactive computer program. To create multimedia presentations, use special software on your computer.
H READING PROGRESS CHECK
Describing What are the elements of a good paragraph?
Include this lesson's information in your Foldable®
Who	wUt
	
k- How	Why
LESSON 5 REVIEW
Review Vocabulary
1.	Explain the difference between the following terms: 3oa
a.	inference
b.	conclusion
2.	Use multimedia in a sentence that explains how it can benefit presentations. 3ob
Answer the Guiding Questions
3.	Explaining How can social studies skills help students understand information and ideas?
4.	Comparing How are decision making and problem solving similar? 29b
5.	Specifying How do we communicate information?
EXPOSITORY WRITING
Choose a research topic that interests you. Create six questions to ask yourself to guide you in your research. Lesson 5	47
i Activities
Directions: Write your answers using standard grammar, spelling, sentence structure, and punctuation.
OUse your (£330® to explore the Essential Questions.
expository WRITING The principles of our nation were expressed in the Declaration of Independence, the Bill of Rights, and the U.S. Constitution. Scan the chapter for information about these documents. Organize the information by focusing on who, what, why, and how these documents came to be created. Use the information to write three paragraphs describing the significance of these documents. 3od
© Social Studies Skills
ANALYZING SOURCES
Go to your school library or a public library and search for publications about U.S. history. Locate one valid primary source and one valid secondary source. Write the titles and the names of authors. Then, explain how you identified one publication as a valid primary source and one as a valid secondary source. 29* © Thinking Like a Historian
INTERPRETING A DATABASE
With a partner, link to and view the U.S. Census Bureau Quickfacts page (http://quickfacts.census.gov/qfd/index.html). Select two states you want to find out more about. Create a chart that compares the states in two different categories such as Population and Persons per square mile. Under the chart, write two questions about the information in your chart. Exchange your chart with another team and answer the questions they wrote about their charts. 29C,29J
0 Geography Activity
ANALYZING MAPS
Use this map showing the physical geography ofthe United States to answer the questions below. 29c
A.
Along what major body of water is Texas located? B.
Where are the Great Plains located? c.	Name two mountain ranges in the United States.
PACIFIC " SanCX/4 OCEAN Dle9°7
MEXICOJ
5 Sj	Gulf of Mexico	n,
' \ V ?	>*«•»)»*»
s sk*.'	'''"x?,;...	.
’a,-.
A?
48 Exploring Social Studies
Assessment
Directions: Write your answers using standard grammar, spelling, sentence structure, and punctuation.
CHECKING FOR UNDERSTANDING
0 Using the Place and Time time line in this chapter, identify the following eras in U.S. history. Research to find and list at least one major event for each era. ia
A.
Colonization B.
American Revolution C.
Early Republic D.
Age of Jackson E.
Westward Expansion F.
Age of Reform G.
Sectionalism H.
Civil War I.
Reconstruction REVIEW THE GUIDING QUESTIONS
0 Identifying What are the five themes of geography? 0 Contrasting How do graphs differ from diagrams?
O
Analyzing Effects Describe the effects Hurricane Katrina had on the people and the land. ioc 0 Identifying What are some characteristics of a free enterprise system? 3oa
0 Making Connections Our nation's founding documents share important principles. What principles do they share?
0 Explaining Naturalization is the legal process by which foreign-born people can become U.S. citizens. Explain the qualifications and procedures for naturalization. i$e
0 Defining Why isthe United States considered a multicultural country? 3oa
0 Identifying What purpose do laws and rules serve in a free society? What can we do if we believe a law is wrong? ud
0 Explaining Why is it important to know how to categorize information? 2$b
0 Comparing Compare the discoveries of Benjamin Franklin, Crawford Long and W. T. G. Morton, and Jonas Salk. Which has had the greatest effect on daily life? Which do you think has had the biggest impact on human health and well-being? Explain. 2ba
CRITICAL THINKING
0 Drawing Conclusions Why is it important to recognize bias in primary and secondary sources?
0 Analyzing Effects In your opinion, what were important effects that resulted from building the nation's modern highway system? ioc
0 Interpreting What are some ways a free enterprise system supports the liberty of individuals? mb
0 Contrasting How do personal responsibilities differ fromdie responsibilities of citizenship? Give examples.
0 Explaining Thomas Edison perfected the electric lightbulb in 1879. How did this invention change the way people lived and worked? 2za
0 Assessing What are some ofthe standards used to assess good writing?
0 Identifying Identify which contemporary political party, Republican or Democratic, is most associated with the following points ofview: 2ia
a.	The federal government should regulate the economy more.
b.	There should be less regulation ofthe economy by the federal government.
0 Identifying Interest groups share common goals and organize to influence government. Interest groups today include the League of Women Voters, the Wildlife Conservation Society, Veterans of Foreign Wars, and the AARP (formerly the American Association of Retired Persons). Which of these interest groups is most likely to work for: 2ia
a.	higher Social Security benefits
b.	protecting endangered species
c.	better health care for military veterans
d.	citizen participation in government
0 Analyzing How have the First Amendment's guarantees of religious freedom influenced the American way of life? 25c
Need Extra Help?
IfYou've Missed Question	O	O	O	O	0	O	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0
Review Lesson	1	1	1	2	2	3	3	4	3	5	4	1	2	2	3	4	5	3	3	3
49
Assessment
(continued)

IWl SHORT RESPONSE
"[I]n the new code of laws which I suppose it will be necessary for you to make, I desire you would remember the ladies and be more generous and favorable to them than your ancestors. Do not put such unlimited power into the hands of the husbands. Remember, all men would be tyrants if they could."
—Abigail Adams, 1776
© Identifying Points of View What do you suppose Adams meant by "remember the ladies ?
4B,29D '	’
$ Drawing Inferences What might Adams want her husband to include when drafting the new laws? 4b,23e,29b
EXTENDED RESPONSE
© Persuasive Writing The Bill of Rights outlines the basic rights and freedoms people have in the United States. Which of the amendments in the Bill of Rights do you think is the most essential to protecting freedom? Write a short essay explaining your choice. 19B, 3od
STANDARDIZED TEST PRACTICE
ANALYZING DOCUMENTS
Read this excerpt from the Declaration of Independence.
Wf hold these truths to be self-evident, that all men are created equal, that they are endowed by their Creator with certain unalienable Rights, that among these are Life, Liberty and the pursuit of Happiness.
That to secure these rights, Governments are instituted among Men, deriving their just powers from the consent of the governed."
—Declaration of Independence, 1776
& Defining What does Thomas Jefferson mean by "unalienable Rights"? i9a,3oa
A.
Governments give people rights. C. Rights only extend to citizens. B.
All people are born with natural rights. 0. People can choose to have rights. © Explaining Why does Jefferson say that governments derive "their just powers from the consent of the governed"? 29B
F.
He believes that governments should serve the people. G.
He thinks that governments are the best way to ensure justice. H.
He wants people to better serve their governments. I.
He wants to increase the power of governments. Need Extra Help?
IfYou've Missed Question	©	©	©	©	©
Review Lesson	1	1	3	3	3
50 Exploring Social Studies

The First Americans
Prehistory to 1492
networks
There's More Online about the peoples of the Americas in the time before Europeans arrived.	__
