CHAPTER 19
Place and Time: United States 1970-1979

When President Nixon took office, he decided to take a new approach to American relations with the Soviet Union and the People's Republic of China. The United States had been at odds with these Communist countries for decades. Nixon's new approach was one of detente, or easing of tensions, with the two nations. The Cold War was still on, but Nixon believed that only by redefining American foreign policy and forming partnerships with his "opponents" could anything be gained.
Detente: U.S. Relations with the Soviet Union and China


DBQ
PRIMARY SOURCE
Step Into the Place
Read the quote and look at the information presented on the map.
E01OA, 29A, 31B
Analyzing Historical Documents How do the quote and the information on the map confirm President Nixon's role in establishing relations with China? “ Now, with regard to the situation we now face, what is it that brings China and the U.S. together? For example, we have differences on Taiwan, not in my opinion so significant over the long run but difficult in the short run. We have differences over Southeast Asia. We have different attitudes toward Japan. We have different attitudes toward Korea. Now we say, and most of our rather naive American press buys this line, that the new relationship between China and America is due to the fact we have a basic friendship between our peoples.**
—President Richard Nixon, from a meeting with Chinese leader Zhou Enlai, February 22,1972

NTIC
C.AN
s MAP Explore the interartive vorcim
More Online!
interactive version of this map on Networks.
TIMELINE
Explore the interactive version ofthe time line on Networks. N
W-^~E
s
30" E
60"E
90" E
12O"E
uary1973 AIM and
rnnnent dash at Wounded '■> South Dakota ' ^73 Senate Watergate *n9s begin
August 9,1974
Nixon resigns
August 1,1975
President Ford signs Helsinki Accords, easing Cold War tensions.
Ford
1974-1977
Carter
1977-1981
November 1979 Iranian revolutionaries seize U.S. embassy in Tehran
I
networks
There's More Online!
IMAGE 1968 Election Cartoon IMAGE Ping Pong Diplomacy
ef IMAGE Nixon Visits China gf MAP Presidential Election of 1972 Ef VIDEO The Election of 1968 Ef interactive self-check
IN
10

LESSON 1
The Nixon Administration
QUIZ
Reading HELPDESK


BWSWW
Academic Vocabulary • welfare • liberal
Content Vocabulary
•	revenue sharing
•	impound
•	detente
•	summit
TAKING NOTES:
Key Ideas and Details
Organizing As you read, complete a graphic organizer similar to the one below by listing Nixon's domestic and foreign policies.
Nixon’s Administration
| Domestic Policy | Foreign Policy |

TEKS
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills 
10A describe Richard M. Nixon’s leadership in the normalization of relations with China and the policy of detente
21C evaluate constitutional change in terms of strict construction versus judicial interpretation
* How do youthinkthe Nixon administration How does society
It Matters Because
After he won the 1968 election, President Richard Nixon sought to restore law and order at home. His greatest accomplishments, however, were in foreign policy, where he worked to ease Cold War tensions with China and the Soviet Union.
Appealing to Middle America
guiding question What were Nixon's keys to victory in the 1968 presidential election?
Many Americans longed for an end to the turmoil that seemed to be plaguing the nation. In 1968 these frustrated citizens turned to Republican presidential candidate Richard Nixon. He aimed his campaign messages at this group, whom he referred to as “Middle America” and the “silent majority.” Nixon promised “peace with honor” in Vietnam and law and order at home. He also promised a more streamlined government and a return to more traditional values.
In the election, Nixon faced President Johnson’s vice president, Democrat Hubert Humphrey. He also went up against a strong third-party candidate, George Wallace, an experienced Southern politician and avowed supporter of segregation. Wallace captured 13.5 percent of the popular vote. Yet Nixon managed to win with 43.4 percent of the popular vote to Humphrey’s 42.7, and 301 electoral votes to Humphrey’s 191.
The Southern Strategy
Nixon partially owed his victory to a surprisingly strong showing in the South. The South had long been a Democratic stronghold, but Nixon worked hard to get its support. He had met with powerful South Carolina senator Strom Thurmond and won his support by promising several things. Nixon agreed to appoint only conservatives to the federal courts and to name a Southerner to the Supreme Court. He also promised to oppose court-ordered busing and to choose a vice-presidential candidate that the South could support. (Nixon chose Spiro Agnew, governor of the state of Maryland.)
Nixons efforts paid off on Election Day. Large numbers of white Southerners left the Democratic Party. Humphrey’s only Southern victory was in Lyndon Johnsons home state of Texas. Wallace claimed most ofthe states in the Deep South, but Nixon captured Virginia, Tennessee, Kentucky, and North Carolina. Thurmond’s support delivered his state of South Carolina for the Republicans as well.
After his victory, Nixon set out to attract more Southerners to the Republican Party. This effort became known as the Southern strategy.
He took steps to slow desegregation and worked to overturn civil rights policies. He also reversed a program that had cut off funds for racially segregated schools.
A
Law-and-Order President Nixon had promised to uphold law and order, and his administration went after antiwar protesters. Attorney General John Mitchell warned that he stood ready to prosecute anyone who crossed state lines to start riots.
His deputy, Richard Kleindienst, declared, “We’re going to enforce the law against draft evaders, against radical students, against deserters, against civil disorders, against organized crime, and against street crime.”
President Nixon also attacked the recent Supreme Court rulings that expanded the rights of accused criminals. Nixon openly criticized the Court and its chief justice, Earl Warren. The president promised to fill vacancies on the Court with judges who would support the rights of law enforcement over the rights of suspected criminals.
Warren retired soon after Nixon took office. The president replaced him with respected conservative judge Warren Burger. He placed three other conservative justices on the Court, including one from the South. The Burger Court did not reverse Warren Court rulings on suspects’ rights, but it refused to expand those rights. For example, in Stone v. Powell (1976), it limited defendants’ rights to appeal state convictions to the federal judiciary. The Burger Court also reaffirmed capital punishment.
GEOGRAPHY CONNECTION
Republican Richard Nixon defeated Democrat Hubert Humphrey and third-party candidate George Wallace in the election of 1968.
PLACES AND REGIONS
In which region did Nixon receive the mostsupport?
Presidential Election of 1968
THE WORLD IN SPATIAL TERMS
Which states'electoral votes went wholly or in part to Wallace? 43.42%
42.72%	31,785,480
31,275,166
IMI
Nixon (Republican) Ml Humphrey (Democrat)
Wallace (American Independent) ■■I Other
kX? Mixed
ELECTORAL VOTE TOTAL:
POPULAR VOTE TOTAL:
73,211,865 * Twelve electors in North Carolina voted for Nixon and one voted for Wallace.
revenue sharing federal tax money that is distributed among the states
impound to take possession of
welfare aid in the form of money or necessities for those in need, especially disadvantaged social groups
liberal a person who generally believes the government should take an active role in the economy and in social programs but should not dictate social behavior
Connections to
TODAY
Removal of U.S. Troops From Iraq
Just as Vietnamization called for the South Vietnamese military to take over duties from American troops, the gradual close of American involvement in Iraq has seen American troops give increased responsibility to Iraqi security forces. Although American combat troops officially left Iraq in August 2010, some 50,000 soldiers remained in the country. Their primary duty was to help the Iraqi army as it assumed full control over the nations security.
SKILLS PRACTICE
Write down vocabulary terms your teacher uses when teaching about President Nixon. Look up those terms in the text. Write down words that have similar meanings to help you remember the terms. Draw a picture if it helps you remember the vocabulary. Think of the words and pictures the next time you hear or see one ofthe new vocabulary words.
The New Federalism
Nixon had also promised to reduce the size of the federal government. He planned to end several federal programs and give more control to state and local governments. Nixon called this the “New Federalism.” He argued that such an approach would make government more effective. I reject the patronizing idea that government in Washington, D.C., is inevitably more wise, more honest and more efficient than government at the local or State level,” Nixon declared. “The idea that a bureaucratic elite in Washington knows what’s best for people ... is really a contention that people cannot govern themselves.”
Under Nixon’s New Federalism plan, Congress passed a series of revenue-sharing bills granting federal funds to state and local agencies. As states came to depend on federal funds, the federal government could impose conditions on states. Unless states met those conditions, funds would be cut off.
As part of the New Federalism, Nixon wanted to end many of Johnson’s Great Society programs. He vetoed funding for the Department of Housing and Urban Development. He eliminated the Office of Economic Opportunity, and tried unsuccessfully to shut down the Job Corps.
When Congress appropriated money for programs he opposed, Nixon impounded, or refused to release, the funds. By 1973, it was estimated that he had impounded as much as $18 billion. The Supreme Court eventually declared the practice of impoundment unconstitutional.
The Family Assistance Plan
One federal program Nixon wanted to reform was the nation’s welfare system—Aid to Families with Dependent Children (AFDC). The program had many critics. In 1969 Nixon proposed replacing the AFDC with the Family Assistance Plan. The plan called for providing needy families a yearly grant of $1,600, which could be supplemented by outside earnings. Many liberals applauded the plan as a significant step toward expanding federal responsibility for the poor.
Although the program won approval in the House in 1970, it soon came under harsh attack. Welfare recipients complained that the federal grant was too low. Conservatives disapproved of guaranteed income. Such opposition led to the program’s defeat in the Senate.
gREADING PROGRESS CHECK
Explaining What were Nixon's first priorities when coming into office?
Nixon's Foreign Policy
guiding question What do you think was Nixon's greatest foreign policy achievement?
Despite Nixon’s domestic initiatives, a State Department official later recalled that Nixon had a “monumental disinterest in domestic policies.” Nixon once expressed his hope that a “competent cabinet” of advisers could run the country, allowing him to focus on foreign affairs.
Nixon and Kissinger
In a move that would greatly influence his foreign policy, Nixon chose as his national security advisor Henry Kissinger, a former Harvard professor. Kissinger had served under Presidents Kennedy and Johnson as a foreign policy consultant. Although Secretary of State William Rogers outranked him, Kissinger soon took the lead in helping shape Nixon’s foreign policy.
542
The Nixon Doctrine Nixon and Kissinger shared many views. Both believed abandoning the war in Vietnam would damage the nation’s position in the world. Thus, they worked toward a gradual withdrawal while also training the South Vietnamese to defend themselves.
This policy of Vietnamization, as it was called, was extended globally in what came to be known as the Nixon Doctrine. In July 1969, only six months after taking office, Nixon announced that the United States would honor all ofthe alliances it had signed. The nation would continue to provide military aid and training to allies. Yet, it would no longer “conceive all the plans, design all the programs, execute all the decisions and undertake all the defense of the free nations of the world.” America’s allies would have to take responsibility for maintaining peace and stability in their own areas of the world.
The New Policy of Detente The Soviet Union was not pleased when Nixon became president. He was known to be strongly anti-Communist. Yet Nixon and Kissinger believed the United States needed to adjust to the growing role of China, Japan, and Western Europe. This emerging “multipolar” world demanded a different approach to American foreign policy.
Both Nixon and Kissinger wanted to continue to contain communism, but they believed that negotiation with Communists was a better way for the United States to achieve its international goals. They developed a new approach called detente, or relaxation of tensions, between the United States and its two major Communist rivals, the Soviet Union and China. Nixon said that the nation had to build a better relationship with its main rivals for world peace:

detente a policy that attempts to relax or ease tensions between x nations
PRIMARYSOURCE
K
We must understand that detente is not a love fest. It is an understanding between nations that have opposite purposes, but which share common interests, including the avoidance of a nuclear war. Such an understanding can work—that is, restrain aggression and deter war—only as long as the potential aggressor is made to recognize that neither aggression nor war will be profitable. ** —quoted in The Limits of Power, 1992
The successes of detente were diminished due to upheavals in smaller nations. In Chile, President Salvador Allende was killed during a coup supported by the American CIA. Similarly, the Angolan Civil War, which began in 1975, featured secret aid from the United States. The conflicts in Chile and Angola were examples of proxy wars—conflicts during the Cold War that did not directly involve the United States and the Soviet Union but pursued Cold War aims of the two superpowers.
Nixon Visits China
Detente began with an effort to improve American-Chinese relations. Since 1949, when Communists took power in China, the United States had refused to recognize the Communists as the legitimate rulers. Instead, the U.S.
3 government recognized the exiled : regime on the island of Taiwan as ’ the Chinese government. Having 5 long supported this policy, Nixon E now set out to reverse it.
Mao Zedong, leader of China, greets President Nixon in Beijing on February 21,1972.
CRITICALTHINKING
Identifying Central Ideas What was the primary goal ofthe policy of detente? Henry Kissinger (1923-)
After a series of highly secret negotiations between Kissinger and Chinese leaders, Nixon announced that he would visit China in February 1972. During the historic trip, the leaders of both nations agreed to establish “more normal” relations between their countries. In a statement Nixon told his Chinese hosts during a banquet toast:
PRIMARY SOURCE
Henry Kissinger and his family left Germany for the United States in 1938 to escape Nazi anti-Jewish restrictions. Kissinger served in U.S. military intelligence during World War II, then attended J Harvard University, later joining its faculty. He was a consultant on national security under Presidents i Kennedy and Johnson, before becoming Nixon's national security advisor and later secretary of state, i He helped establish the policy of j detente with the Soviet Union and ■ China. Kissinger negotiated the cease-fire with North Vietnam and was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize : in 1973. In 1977 Kissinger received j the Presidential Medal of Freedom, j
k CRITICAL THINKING Drawing Conclusions How did
Henry Kissinger influence foreign policy in the 1970s?
ii [S]o let us, in these next five days, start a long march together. Not in lockstep, but on different roads leading to the same goal: the goal of building a world structure of peace and justice in which all may stand together with equal dignity.w
—quoted in the New York Times, February 22,1972
United States-Soviet Tensions Ease
Nixon’s strategy toward the Soviet Union worked. Shortly after the public learned of American negotiations with China, the Soviets proposed an American-Soviet summit, or high-level diplomatic meeting, to be held in May 1972. On May 22, President Nixon flew to Moscow for a weeklong summit. Nixon was the first American president since World War II to visit the Soviet Union.
During the historic Moscow summit, the two superpowers signed the first Strategic Arms Limitation Treaty, or SALT I, a plan the two nations had been working on for years. The treaty temporarily froze the number of strategic nuclear weapons. Nixon and Soviet premeir Leonid Brezhnev also agreed to increase trade and the exchange of scientific information. Detente had helped ease tensions between the two countries. One Soviet official admitted that by the end of Nixon’s presidency, “the United States and the Soviet Union had their best relationship of the whole Cold War period.”
Another highlight of detente was a series of meetings that created the Helsinki Accords. In 1975 the United States, Canada, and most of the countries of Eastern and Western Europe committed to three sets of recommendations focusing on security, economic, and human rights issues. In one section, the signing states agreed to “respect human rights and fundamental freedoms, including the freedom of thought, conscience, religion or belief, for all without distinction as to race, sex, language or religion.”
President Nixon indeed had made his mark on the world stage. However, a scandal was about to engulf his presidency and plunge the nation into one of its greatest constitutional crises.
H READING PROGRESS CHECK
Defining What was the policy of Vietnamization, and how did it relate to the Nixon Doctrine?
summit a meeting between heads of government
LESSON 1 REVIEW
Reviewing Vocabulary
1.	Explaining How does revenue sharing work?
2.	Identifying What takes place at a summit? 10A
Using Your Notes
3.	Summarizing Review the notes that you completed throughout the lesson to summarize Nixon's major domestic and foreign policy initiatives. 10A
Answering the Guiding Questions
4.	Stating What were Nixon's keys to victory in the 1968 presidential election?
5.	Evaluating What do you think was Nixon's greatest foreign policy achievement? 10A
Writing Activity
INFORMATIVE/EXPLANATORY
Take on the role of a journalist assigned to cover the 1972 Moscow summit. Write a newspaper article about the events and outcomes of this meeting. 10A 544
Carl Bernstein
CHART/GRAPH
Watergate's Key Figures IMAGE
Watergate Political Cartoon PRIMARY SOURCE
Excerpts from United States v. Nixon
VIDEO
Watergate j INTERACTIVE SELF-CHECK QUIZ
Reading HELPDESK
icademic Vocabulary
incident • challenger
intent Vocabulary executive privilege special prosecutor
AKING NOTES:
fey Ideas and Details Outlining Use the headings in this esson to create an outline similar to the >ne below by recording information ibout the Watergate scandal.
The Watergate Scandal
!• The Roots of Watergate
A.
B.
A.
B.

ietw@rks
here's More Online!
BIOGRAPHY
John Dean ?f BIOGRAPHY Bob Woodward and TEKS
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills * 19C describe the effects of political
scandals, including Teapot Dome,
Watergate, and Bill Clinton’s impeachment, on the views of U.S. citizens concerning trust in the federal government and its leaders
!
LESSON 2
The Watergate Scandal
z: 7.
to you think the Nixon administration 'government? • How does society
It matters Because
Despite a successful first term, Richard Nixon and his supporters worried about reelection. The tactics they resorted to led to the Watergate scandal, one ofthe nation's great constitutional crises.
The Roots of Watergate
guiding question Why did Nixon's advisers order a break-in at the Democratic Party's headquarters?
The Watergate scandal led to the only time in the nations history when the president of the United States was forced to resign from office. It began on the morning of June 17, 1972, when a young Washington Post reporter named Bob Woodward was assigned to cover a seemingly insignificant but bizarre incident. Early that morning, five men had broken into the Democratic National Committee (DNC) headquarters in the city’s Watergate apartment office complex. Woodward attended the arraignment. He was asked to go to see if there was a story worth reporting.
As Woodward sat near the back of the courtroom listening to the bail proceedings for the five defendants, the judge asked each man his occupation. One of the men, James McCord, answered that he was retired from government service. “Where in government?” asked the judge. “CIA,” McCord whispered. Woodward sprang to attention. Why was a former CIA agent involved in what seemed to be just a burglary? Over the next two years, Woodward and another reporter, Carl Bernstein, investigated this question. They uncovered a scandal that helped trigger a constitutional crisis and eventually forced Nixon to resign.
Mounting a Reelection Fight
The Watergate scandal directly involved the Nixon administration’s efforts to cover up its involvement in the break-in at the Democratic National Committee headquarters. It also included other illegal actions. Many scholars believe the roots of the scandal, however, lay in Nixon’s character and the atmosphere of the White House.
sasstl
Politics and Economics 545
incident single occurrence of a happening or situation
challenger one who enters a competition
James McCord shows the Senate Watergate Committee the bugging device he installed.
CRITICALTHINKING
Identifying Central Ideas What made the Watergate scandal so damaging to the Nixon administration?
Richard Nixon had fought hard to become president, battling back from numerous political defeats. Along the way, he had grown defensive, secretive, and often resentful of his critics. He became president amid race riots, war protests, and other turmoil. He became so consumed with his opponents that he made an “enemies list” of people whom he considered a threat to his presidency.
As the 1972 presidential election approached, Nixons reelection prospects seemed promising, but not certain. He had just finished triumphant trips to China and the Soviet Union. Former governor George Wallace had dropped out ofthe race after an assassins bullet paralyzed him. And many considered Democratic challenger Senator George McGovern too liberal. But the Vietnam War still raged, and staffers remembered the close 1968 election. Determined to win, they began spying on opposition rallies and spreading rumors about opponents.
Trying to help the president, Nixons advisers ordered five men to break into the Democratic Party’s headquarters at the Watergate complex and steal sensitive campaign information. They were also to place wiretaps on the office telephones. While the burglars worked, a security guard spotted a piece of tape holding a door lock. The guard removed the tape, but when he passed the door later, he saw that it had been replaced. He quickly called police, who arrived shortly and arrested the men.
The Cover-Up Begins
After the break-in, the media discovered that one burglar, James McCord, was not only an ex-CIA officer but also a member of the Committee for the Re-election of the President (CRP). Reports surfaced that the burglars had been paid from a secret CRP fund controlled by the White House.
Nixon may not have ordered the break-in, but he did order a cover-up. White House officials destroyed incriminating documents and gave investigators false testimony. With Nixon’s consent, administration officials asked the CIA to stop the FBI from investigating the source of money paid to the burglars. The CIA told the FBI that the investigation threatened national security. FBI deputy director W. Mark Felt then secretly leaked information about Watergate to the Washington Post.
Meanwhile, Nixon’s press secretary dismissed the incident, and the president told the American public, “The White House has had no involvement whatever in this particular incident.” It worked. Most Americans believed Nixon. Despite efforts by the media to keep the story alive, few people paid much attention during the 1972 presidential campaign. Nixon won reelection by one of the largest margins in history.
D READING PROGRESS CHECK
Explaining What effect did the CIA have on the FBI's investigation ofthe burglars in the Watergate break-in?
The Cover-Up Unravels
guidingquestion How much power can a president wield to ensure national security?
In early 1973, the Watergate burglars went on trial. Under relentless prodding from federal judge John J. Sirica, McCord agreed to cooperate with the grand jury investigation and to testify before the newly created Senate Select Committee on Presidential Campaign Activities. The chairman of the committee was Democratic senator Sam J. Ervin from North Carolina.
A
Summer of Shocking Testimony McCord’s testimony opened a floodgate of confessions. Presidential counsel John Dean who had testified in June 1973, confessed that former attorney general John Mitchell had ordered the Watergate break-in and that Nixon had taken part in the cover-up.
The Nixon administration strongly denied the charges. Dean had no evidence, and the Senate committee spent weeks trying to determine who was telling the truth. The answer appeared on July 16. White House aide Alexander Butterfield testified that Nixon had ordered a taping system installed in the White House to record all conversations to help him write his memoirs after leaving office. The tapes would tell the committee what Nixon knew and when he knew it—if the president released them.
The Case of the Tapes
At first, Nixon refused to hand over the tapes, pleading executive privilege, the principle that White House conversations should remain confidential to protect national security. Special Prosecutor Archibald Cox took Nixon to court in October 1973 to make him give up the tapes. Nixon ordered Attorney General Elliot Richardson to fire Cox, but Richardson refused and resigned. Nixon then ordered Richardson’s deputy to fire Cox, but he, too, resigned. Nixon’s solicitor general, Robert Bork, finally fired Cox, but the incident badly damaged Nixon’s reputation.
The fall of 1973 proved disastrous for other reasons as well. Vice President Spiro Agnew resigned in disgrace after investigators found that he had taken
executive privilege
principle stating that communications of the executive branch should remain confidential to protect national security
special prosecutor a lawyer from outside the government
iSi ANALYZING SUPREME COURT CASES
UNITED STATES
v. NIXON, 1974 Background to the Case In 1974 Special Prosecutor Leon Jaworski issued a subpoena to gain access to audio tape recordings President Nixon had made of conversations. Jaworski believed that the tapes would prove the active involvement of the president in the Watergate cover-up. Nixon filed a motion to prevent the subpoena, claiming executive privilege. The case went to district court, but that court withheld judgment pending the decision of the Supreme Court.
The Senate committee overseeing the Watergate investigation, chaired by Senator Sam Ervin (fourth from left at the table), wanted access to Nixon's White House tape recordings.
How the Court Ruled
In a unanimous 8-to-0 decision (Justice Rehnquist did not take part), the Supreme Court found that executive privilege did not protect Nixon's tape recordings. The ruling stated that while the president has a right to protect military secrets and other sensitive material and has a right to some confidentiality, the needs of a criminal trial must take precedence. In the Court s opinion Chief Justice Warren Burger wrote, "We conclude that when the ground for asserting privilege as to subpoenaed materials sought for use in a criminal trial is based only on the generalized interest in confidentiality, it cannot prevail over the fundamental demands of due process of law in the fair administration of criminal justice....
DBQ
Analyzing Historical Documents 0 Identifying Central Ideas What was the purpose or central issue of the case?
0 Defending Do you agree with the Supreme Court's decision in this case? Explain.
Politics and Economics 547
Rose Mary Woods was Nixon's personal secretary. She claimed that an 1816 minute gap in the Watergate tapes was the result of an accidental erasure.
CRITICAL THINKING
Drawing Conclusions Why might Woods's explanation of the gap in the tapes have been doubted? bribes while governor of Nf3.ryl3.nci 3nd while serving in office in Washington. Gerald Ford, Republican leader of the House of Representatives, became the new vice president.
Nixon Resigns
Nixon tried to quell outrage by appointing a new special prosecutor, Leon Jaworski, who also proved determined to obtain the tapes. In July the Supreme Court ruled that Nixon had to surrender them. He complied. Days later, the House Judiciary Committee voted to impeach Nixon, or officially charge him with misconduct. Charges included obstructing justice, misusing federal agencies to violate the rights of citizens, and defying the authority of Congress. Then new evidence emerged: a tape revealed that Nixon had ordered the CIA to stop the FBI probe into the Watergate burglary on June 23, 1972. Impeachment and conviction were inevitable. On August 9, 1974, Nixon resigned in disgrace.
Vice President Gerald Ford took office as president of the United States after Nixon’s resignation. He urged Americans to put the scandal behind them, saying, “Our long national nightmare is over.” On September 8, 1974, Ford announced a full pardon for Nixon. Ford’s pardon of Nixon drew public criticism and diminished his popularity.
The Impact of Watergate
The constitutional crisis led to new laws intended to limit the power of the executive branch. The Federal Campaign Act Amendments of 1974 limited campaign contributions and set up an independent agency to enforce strict election laws. The Ethics in Government Act required financial disclosure by high government officials throughout all branches of government. The FBI Domestic Security Investigation Guidelines Act restricted the FBI’s political intelligence-gathering activities. Congress also laid out a means to appoint an independent counsel to investigate and prosecute wrongdoing by high government officials.
Many Americans developed a distrust of public officials. Others, such as Bob Woodward, believed the affair proved that no one is above the law: “Watergate was probably a good thing for the country. . . . The problem with kings, and prime ministers, and presidents, is that they think . . . that they have some special rights. . . . We have our laws and believe them, and they apply to everyone, [which] is a very good thing.”
B READING PROGRESS CHECK
Assessing What role did the Nixon tapes play in discovering the truth about the Watergate scandal?
LESSON 2 REVIEW
Reviewing Vocabulary
1.	Defining What is executive privilege? 19C
2.	Stating What do special prosecutors do? 19C
Using Your Notes
3.	Sequencing Use your notes to write a description of the major events of the Watergate scandal in order. 19C
Answering the Guiding Questions
4.	Explaining Why did Nixon's advisers order a break-in at the Democratic Party's headquarters? 19C
5.	Analyzing Ethical Issues How much power can a president wield to ensure national security? 19c
Writing Activity
ARGUMENT
Shortly after taking office, President Ford granted Nixon a full pardon for any crimes he may have been involved in or committed. Use the Internet to find two or more reactions to this action and identify the author and time period when the reaction was written. Evaluate the validity, reliability, and bias of the reactions and write a paragraph comparing which is the best source to understand Ford's actions. 19c 548
Israeli prime minster Yitzhak Rabin (left) and Palestinian leader Yasir Arafat shake hands after signing the 1993 Declaration of Principles.
CRITICALTHINKING
Defending Do you think that the United States should intervene in world conflicts? Why or why not? plan emerged on both sides. Radical Palestinians exploded bombs in Israel, killing 256. In 1995 a right-wing Israeli assassinated Prime Minister Rabin.
In 1994, with help from the United States, Jordan and Israel signed a peace treaty. In 1998 Israeli and Palestinian leaders met with President Clinton at the Wye River Plantation in Maryland. The agreement they reached, however, did not address the contested status of Jerusalem or the ultimate dimensions of a projected Israeli withdrawal from the West Bank and Gaza.
In July 2000, President Clinton invited Arafat and Israeli prime minister Ehud Barak to Camp David to discuss unresolved issues. Barak agreed to the creation of a Palestinian state in all of Gaza and over 90 percent of the
I
West Bank, but Arafat rejected the deal. In late September 2000, a Palestinian | uprising began. The region was as far from peace as ever. P READING PROGRESS CHECK
| Drawing Conclusions Why did the Clinton administration intervene in conflicts such £	as Haiti, the former Yugoslavia, and the Middle East?
LESSON 1 REVIEW
Reviewing Vocabulary
1.	Defining How is perjury different from lying? 19C
2.	Identifying For what purpose did Bosnian Serbs practice ethnic cleansing? 11A
Using Your Notes
3.	Evaluating Review the notes you took during the lesson. Write a paragraph telling whether President Clinton was more successful in domestic policy or in foreign policy. Support your opinion with specific details from the lesson. 11A, 11B
Answering the Guiding Questions
4.	Identifying During his first presidential term, what domestic policy areas did Clinton focus on? 11B
5.	Describing How did the Republican Party respond to the victory in the 1994 midterm elections? ioe
6.	Assessing Why was President Clinton's domestic agenda less aggressive during his second term? 10E, 11B
7.	Explaining How did the Clinton administration provide foreign aid to areas of conflict around the world? 11A
Writing Activity
ARGUMENT
Suppose that you are a member of Congress. Write a speech in which you attempt to persuade other lawmakers to vote for or against Clinton's impeachment. 19C A
Time of Change 60 
• 1
networks

There's More Online!
Jgf CHART/GRAPH Illegal Border Crossing Deaths
sf IMAGE Jorge Urbina
PRIMARY SOURCE
Citizenship Challenged Igf VIDEO Illegal Immigration
INTERACTIVE SELF-CHECK QUIZ

LESSON 2
A
New Wave ofl mm ig rat ion ' ' “ • How have immigration, technology,
Reading HELPDESK
Academic Vocabulary
illegal
allocate
resident
it Matters because
In the late twentieth century, the number of immigrants tc the United States hit an all-time high. Large numbers of non-European immigrants changed the nation's ethnic composition. Immigration, both legal and illegal, became a difficult political issue.


Content Vocabulary
•	migration chains
•	refugee
•	amnesty
TAKING NOTES:
Key Ideas and Details
Determining Cause and Effect As
you read the lesson, complete a graphic organizer similar to the one below to list the effects ofthe Immigration Act of 1965.	I
TEKS
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills 10F describe significant societal issues of this time period
11B identify significant social and political advocacy organizations, leaders, and issues across the political spectrum
continued on p. 606
Changes in Immigration Law
guidingquestion How have important immigration laws affected legal and illegal immigration to the United States?
After the introduction of the national origins quota system in the 1920s, the sources and character of immigration to the United States changed dramatically. For the next few decades, the total number of immigrants arriving annually remained markedly lower. The quota system, which favored immigrants from northern and western Europe, remained largely unchanged until the mid-1960s.
The Immigration Act of 1965 abolished the national origins quota system. It gave preference to skilled persons and persons with close relatives who are U.S. citizens—policies that remain in place today. The preference given to the children, spouses, and parents of U.S. citizens meant that migration chains were established. As newcomers became citizens, they could send for relatives in their home country. Also, the legislation introduced the first limits on immigration from the Western Hemisphere. The act further provided that immigrants could apply for U.S. citizenship after five years of legal residency.
At the time of its passage, few people expected that the new law would cause much change in the pattern or volume of immigration to the United States. Supporters of the law presented it as an extension of America’s growing commitment to equal rights for all people, regardless of race or ethnicity. As U.S. Representative Philip Burton of California explained:
604
PRIMARYSOURCE
«Just as we sought to eliminate discrimination in our land through the Civil Rights Act, today we seek by phasing out the national origins quotas to eliminate discrimination in immigration to this Nation composed ofthe descendants of immigrants.”
—from a speech before Congress, August 25,1965
Supporters of the new law also assumed that the new equal quotas for non-European nations would generally go unfilled. In fact, immigration from non-European countries soared. Some newcomers arrived in the United States as refugees. Beginning in 1948, refugees from countries ravaged by World War II were admitted, although they were counted as part of their nation’s quota. The Cold War brought more refugees. According to the McCarran-Walter Act of 1952, anyone who was fleeing a Communist regime could be admitted as a refugee. The Refugee Act of 1980 further broadened U.S. policy by defining a refugee as anyone leaving his or her country due to a “well-founded fear of persecution on account of race, religion, nationality, membership in a particular group, or political opinion.”
The growing problem of illegal immigration also prompted changes in immigration law. During the Reagan administration, Congress passed the Immigration Reform and Control Act of 1986, which established penalties for employers who knowingly hired unauthorized immigrants. This law strengthened border controls to prevent illegal entry into the United States. It also set up a process to grant amnesty, or a pardon, to any undocumented alien who could prove that he or she had entered the country before January 1,1982, and had since lived in the United States.
migration chains the
process by which immigrants who have acquired U.S. citizenship can send for relatives in their home country to join them
refugee someone leaving his or her country due to a well-founded fear of persecution on account of race, religion, nationality, membership in a particular group, or political opinion
illegal not according to or authorized by law
amnesty the act of granting a pardon to a large group of people
GEOGRAPHY CONNECTION
In 2000 there were an estimated 8.4 million unauthorized residents in the United States.
PLACES AND REGIONS
According to the map, which states have the largest numbers of unauthorized residents?
Aiiag
Illegal immigration has long been a divisive issue.
CRITICALTHINKING
Using Context Clues In what sense is this woman using the term aliens? allocate to set apart for something specific
resident one who lives in a place for some length of time
SKILLS PRACTICE
Before reading this lesson on Immigration, look through the lesson and write down all the bold-faced terms. Find their definitions, either in the text or in the glossary. Then use a thesaurus to find and write down other meanings for the words.
(continued from p. 604)
TEKS
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills 13B analyze the causes and effects of changing demographic patterns resulting from legal and illegal immigration to the United States
26C explain how the contributions of people of various racial, ethnic, gender, and religious groups shape American culture
Despite these changes, illegal immigration persisted, and the number c unauthorized immigrants grew. By 1990 an estimated 3.5 million unauthorized immigrants resided in the United States. By the mid-1990s, Congress was debating new ways to combat illegal immigration. It passed the Illegal Immigration Reform and Immigrant Responsibility Act of 1996, which made several changes to American immigration law.
First, it required families sponsoring an immigrant to have an income above the poverty level. Second, it allocated more resources to stop illegal immigration, authorizing an additional 5,000 U.S. Border Patrol agents am calling for the construction of a 14-mile fence along the border near San Diego. Third, the law toughened penalties for smuggling people or providing fraudulent documents. Finally, the law made it easier for immigration authorities to deport undocumented aliens.
Another change in immigration law was spurred by the terrorist attacks of September 11,2001. The USA PATRIOT Act of 2001 put immigration under the control of the newly created Department of Homeland Security. It also tripled the number of Border Patrol agents, Customs Service inspectors, and Immigration and Naturalization Service inspectors along the Canadian border.
H READING PROGRESS CHECK
Sequencing How did the Immigration Reform and Control Act of 1986 attemptt control illegal immigration?
Recent Immigration
guiding question Howhasthe federal government addressed immigration reform in the twenty-first centu
Certain states experienced a larger influx of immigrants than others. In 19? California, Texas, New York, New Jersey, and Florida had the largest populations of foreign-born residents. High numbers of immigrants also increased the ethnic diversity of these states, as their Latino and Asian populations grew. Among the immigrants who arrived during the 1990s, just over 10 percent came from Europe. More than half of new immigrants came from Latin America, while about another 25 percent came from Asia. By 2001 the top five countries of origin for legal immigrants to the United States were Mexico, India, China, the Philippines, and Vietnam.
Refugees added to the growing immigrant population. In the 25 years following the Cuban Revolution of 1959, more than 800,000 Cubans arrived in the United States. So many settled in the Miami, Florida, area that the only city that is home to more Cubans is Havana, Cuba. Also, the Vietnam War
CHARTS/GR
ILLEGAL BORDER CROSSING DEATHS
After the attacks of September 11,2001, border security became a greater concern for many Americans.
Source: United States Government Accountability Office. Congressional Research Service.
1 Analyzing Information What year saw the 2 Determining Cause and Effect Why do you most people die while crossing the border	think the government's attempts to control border
ilfega I ly ?	crossings have not reduced the number of deaths?
606
created refugees. Some 600,000 immigrants from Vietnam, Laos, and Cambodia arrived in the decade after 1974.
Other immigrants arrived without official permission. The largest number of unauthorized immigrants came from Mexico, El Salvador, and Guatemala. The amnesty program established in 1986 had been designed to solve the problem of illegal immigration. Yet, over the next 20 years, the number of unauthorized immigrants more than tripled. Americans were divided over whether unauthorized immigrants should be able to obtain driver’s licenses or send their children to public schools and receive other government services.
Some believed that unauthorized immigrants should be deported. Others favored allowing them to apply for temporary work visas so the government could keep track of them. Some supported permitting them to earn permanent residence if they learned English, paid back taxes, and had no criminal record.
In 2006 President George W. Bush made immigration reform a top priority, but members of Congress strongly disagreed over how to solve the problem. A bipartisan majority of the Senate favored legislation that blended tougher enforcement of immigration laws with some form of earned citizenship.
The Senate bill included a provision that allowed undocumented aliens who grew up in the United States and graduated from high school to apply for citizenship. Conservative Republicans who held the majority in the House objected that this would reward illegal behavior. “Granting amnesty to people who broke the law penalizes the millions of people who are waiting to come to America legally,” argued Republican senator Phil Gramm of Texas.
The House rejected any form of amnesty and called for the United States to build a wall along its Mexican border. By this time, the United States had already tripled the size of its border patrol without reducing illegal immigration. As Congress debated a bill that would subject undocumented aliens to criminal prosecution, Latinos held rallies across the country, carrying signs that read:
“We are not criminals.”
Advocates of immigration reform promoted alternatives such as expanding quotas through a guest-worker program and establishing a legalization process for those already in the country. Some undocumented immigrants had lived in the United States for years and had raised families. Deporting them would mean separating husbands, wives, and children. Some had arrived as children and had lived in the United States most of their lives.
Their own children, born in the United States, were native-born citizens even though their parents lacked legal status. Among those who became legal citizens, most wanted other family members to join them.
a READING PROGRESS CHECK
Hypothesizing How would you solve the problem of illegal immigration?
LESSON 2 REVIEW
Reviewing Vocabulary
1.	Defining Why were people who came to the United States as a result of World War II and the Cold War considered refugees? 1OF, 138
2.	Explaining How might migration chains affect the immigration patterns or numbers of immigrants entering the country? 10F, 13B
Using Your Notes
3.	Summarizing Review the notes that you completed during the lesson. Then write a paragraph summarizing the effects ofthe Immigration Act of 1965. 10F, 13B
Answering the Guiding Questions
4.	Evaluating How have important immigration laws affected legal and illegal immigration to the United States? 10F, 11B, 13B
5.	Describing How has the federal government addressed immigration reform in the twenty-first century? iof, 11B, 13B
Writing Activity
ARGUMENT
After reading about the problem of illegal immigration, write a letter to your representative in Congress explaining what you feel he or she should do about the problem. 138 A
Time of Change 607 I % 1 i W I I % I tsJ MsJ?	I W lbs
The New Immigrants ,n
the decades since the Immigration Act of 1965 was enacted, the number of immigrants in the United States has risen dramatically. By 2010, immigrants comprised more than 12 percent of the population. The largest group of these new immigrants came from Latin America and Asia. Immigration has become a topic of political debate. Should the United States make it easier to immigrate legally? Should the United States decrease the number of persons allowed to immigrate? How should unauthorized immigrants be treated?
13B, 26A, 29A, 29E
Ttlto
VOCABULARY
buzzword
a trendy or popular word or phrase
illegals
foreign people living in a country without having official permission to live there
mesa
a flat hill or plateau with steep sides
maneuverability
moves around objects easily
smuggled
to take or bring in secretly
upheaval
a time of violent disorder or change
ORAL INTERVIEW
On our third attempt, my wife, children, and I escaped by boat from Vietnam and arrived in Hong Kong, where we remained for three months. Then my brother, who came to America in 1975, sponsored us, and we arrived in America in 1978....
Neither I nor anyone in our family spoke any English before our arrival in America. I realized that I must study to communicate.... For nine months we lived in one town, where my children went to school. My wife and I also attended school to learn English....
[W]e still have the need to return to Vietnam one day. This is our dream. In Vietnam, before the Communists came, we had a sentimental life, more [mentally] comfortable and cozy, more joyful....
Here in America, we have all the material comforts, very good. But... In Vietnam ... when we were out from the home, we laughed, we jumped. And we had many relatives and friends to come to see us at home. Here in America, I only know what goes on in my home; my neighbor knows only what goes on in his home. We have a saying, ‘One knows only one’s home.’ In America, when we go to work, we go in our cars. When we return, we leave our cars and enter our homes [and do not meet neighbors],... That’s why we do not have the kind of being at ease that we knew in Vietnam.
Everything is very smooth for us in America, and we have quickly adapted to our new life here.... This is our fourth home. When we le our previous place, our neighbors cried, for they liked us very much. We used to visit one another and exchange gifts at Christmas. When we came to this place, two or three of our neighbors came to see us. Since that day they like us. Thanks to God, I have that thing, that kind of nature.
—Vietnamese immigra
ORAL INTERVIEW
The buzzword is diversity. It’s on TV, politics, and this school [university], but then people like me are seen as foreigners and worst, illegals. The logic is if you look Mexican you are an immigrant, don’t speak English and arc illegal. I get tired of saying that’s not me, oh well, except for the Mexican part. I don’t look an Anglo with an Italian name and say, ‘Hey, c you speak Italian and when did you come to the United States?’
—Diana, second-generation Mexican Americ<
608

ORAL INTERVIEW
Usually we catch young men, who are looking for work to support their families back in Mexico. But more and more we are seeing entire families. They start coming around 7:30 P.M. over the mesa near Cristo Rey Mountain. A steady stream of people all night. We use our night vision “infrared” equipment to spot a lot of illegals who would otherwise go unnoticed.
Sometimes border patrolmen ride horseback to patrol these hills. It’s an interesting contrast-high-tech infrared machines directing cowboys on horseback. Other times we patrol in small trucks, which provide maneuverability. Before we begin using night-vision equipment, aliens had an easier time coming through this area without getting caught. Now we can sit on top of a hill, spot undocumented aliens, then radio for patrol vehicles to come apprehend the groups or individuals after they enter into Texas or New Mexico.
This time of year, in late winter, the aliens try to find work on farms in the Upper Rio Grande Valley. This is the time when farm laborers start pulling weeds and preparing the ground for planting. Between New Year and June ... many ofthe aliens we apprehend are usually agricultural workers or people heading for cities further north, like Denver or Chicago. Perhaps our greatest concern is the trafficking of drugs tied to the smuggling of illegal aliens. Smuggling of all sorts has become big business in the border regions....
We catch illegal immigrants who come from as many as eighty-five countries around the world. Even people from Eastern Europe, who are smuggled in for large fees through South America and Mexico City.
It’s a pretty lonesome feeling out here at night, alone or with a partner. We do get the feeling that we’re outnumbered.... I’ve jumped into a boxcar or a freight-train gondola, turned on my flashlight, and seen twenty-five or thirty aliens. What can I do? Surround them? I can only tell them to get off the train. If they want to fight,
I’m in trouble. That does happen from time to time but, fortunately, not very often. Most of the freight-yarders are from farther down south in Mexico. They’re real docile. There have been times I’ve jumped off a moving train while chasing people, stepped in a hole, and fallen face down. The guy I was chasing stopped and came back to help me. He said, ‘Gee, did you hurt yourself? I’m sorry.’
... The great majority of them are decent people coming here to look for work. Their families’ economics conditions are pretty bad in Mexico. You have to sympathize with them to a point. But if you open the border wide up, you’re going to invite political and social upheaval. Our job is to prevent illegal entry to our country, but we know that they’re going to keep coming as long as our grass is greener. And we also know that we can’t catch them all.”
—Michael Teague, U.S. Border Patrol
O
Analyzing Historical Documents 1.	Answering Historical Questions Based on the information provided in these excerpts, why
are the new immigrants coming to the United States?
2.	Evaluating Validity What are the contradictions in the Vietnamese immigrant’s story? How would you explain them?
3.	Making Inferences By looking at her use of language, how might you infer that Diana is second-generation?
4.	Acquiring Information According to Michael Teague, what is the greatest concern for the border patrol concerning illegal activity?
5.	Evaluating Frames of Reference How would you evaluate Michael Teague’s perspective on immigration? How does his frame of reference affect his reliability as a source?
60S
Using a Database
Why Learn This Skill?
Do you have a large collection of MP3 music files or a collection of digital photos? Do you have a list of email addresses, phone numbers, or SMS contacts on your phone or computer? If so, you have created a database. In the world today, there a literally millions of databases and if you want to be successful, you will almost certainly need to know how to use a database.
Learning the Skill
A database is simply information that has been collected and arranged so that it is easy to find information. A database can hold any kind of information—photos, maps, text, data, music, etc. A database is not the same thing as the Internet. The information in a database is usually more reliable and better organized because it is "curated." Someone reviewed the data to make sure it was accurate and appropriate.
A database can be created entirely on paper. An old printed phone book is a database. But the term is generally used to refer to information stored on a computer. Programmers create software called database management systems (DBMS) that let people store, organize, search, and retrieve data. Modern database software allows users to display the data visually. Instead of just presenting lists of facts and numbers, the software takes the information you want from the database and presents it as a graph, or chart, or table, or even sets it as a layer over top of a map so you can see the relationship between the data and geographical locations. Database software also allows users to easily add, delete, change, or update information.
When searching a database, it is helps to understand how a database is structured. A database is made up of records. A record represents one item of data, such as a photo, 01 song, or an article, etc. Each record has standa; fields of information. For example, there is usually a title field, a subject field, and a field with a date, and usually there are many other fields as well. Think of a database as a giant table of information made up of columns and rows. The words used to describe each item in the cells of the table are the fields. The words p into fields and the words used to label the columns and rows are called metadata. Metad< is what the computer searches when you ask it find information in a database.
Follow these steps to use a database:
1.	Determine what information you want t access. Be as specific as possible.
2.	Databases typically have a number of fields where you can select words or categories for a specific search. Think about what you already know about the information. Use that knowledge to decide what terms you want in the field! for your search.
3.	If there is not a field that fits with what you want to find, you often can use a keyword search. This is similar to using search engine on the Internet. Keyword searching allows you to combine terms and concepts to find exactly what you ar looking for. Most databases let you use Boolean operators. Boolean operators are connecting words that give commands t< the computer. Boolean operators are the words "AND" "OR" and "NOT." They le you combine search words and shape your search more effectively.
4.	Create a search string with keywords using Boolean operators that matches what you are trying to find.
5.	Review the records or information retrieved from the database to determine if it is what you wanted. If not try a new search.
610

Practicing this Skill
In recent years, databases have become an extremely popular way to display geographic information. The databases take the geographic information requested and draw it on a map so that it is easy to visualize. These kind of databases can be used to see geographic distributions and geographic patterns. A geographic distribution shows where things are located and how much is located in each area. A geographic pattern shows how things change geographically over time or over distance.
The United States Census Bureau now has online many database systems for looking up geographic information. Go to www.census.gov. Locate the Census Data Mapper and launch it. Select "Population and Race" for the data theme field, "Percent Hispanic" for the data table field, and 5 classes. Have the database make your map then answer the following questions:
1.	Analyzing Geographic Distributions What states have the highest percentage of Hispanics?
2.	Analyzing Geographic Patterns What pattern do you see in how Hispanic Americans are distributed in the United States?
3.	Posing Questions about Geographic Distributions Based on the areas where Hispanic populations are highest, what three countries do you think might be the source for most Hispanic immigrants? What questions do you need to ask about the geographic distribution to be able to know for sure where most Hispanic immigrants originated?
4.	Posing Questions about Geographic Patterns Now change the data table field to Percent Asian. How is the geographic pattern of Asian Americans similar to Hispanic Americans? How is it different? What questions do you need to ask to understand why the Asian pattern is different from the Hispanic pattern?
■hHMS

J
Applying the Skill
Now change the fields on the Data Mapper. Select Age and Sex for a data theme and median age for a data table. Keep the setting at 5 classes. Make your map, then answer the following questions:
1. What parts ofthe country have the oldest average age? Which parts have the youngest average age? Write down some possible reasons for the distribution and pattern. Write down the questions you need answered to know if your reasons are correct.
6
o
i

611
Academic Vocabulary
•	cited
•	awareness
Content Vocabulary
have improvements in science and How have immigration, technology,
IT MATTERS BECAUSE
Since the 1980s, computer technology has advanced greatly, with the creation of home computers and the expansion of the Internet. Trade barriers have fallen, and the environment has become a global concern.
The Computer Changes Society
guiding question How did the computer revolution change the workplace?
•	telecommute
•	euro
•	global warming
TAKING NOTES:
Key Ideas and Details
Organizing As you read the lesson, complete the graphic organizer below to show ways new technology and trade brought the world closer together during the 1990s.
Globalism


TOB
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills 11B identify significant social and political advocacy organizations, leaders, and issues across the political spectrum
14A identify the effects of population growth and distribution on the physical environment
continued on the next page
The first electronic digital computer began operation in 1946 and was the size of a small house. In 1959 Robert Noyce designed the first integrated circuit—a whole electronic circuit on a single silicon chip. In 1968 Noyce’s company, Intel, put several integrated circuits on a single chip. This made circuits much smaller and easy to manufacture.
By the late 1960s, manufacturers were making microprocessors, or single chips with many integrated circuits containing both memory and computing functions. These microprocessors made computers even smaller and faster.
Using microprocessor technology, Steve Jobs and Stephen Wozniak set out to build a small computer suitable for personal use. They founded Apple Computer in 1976. The following year they launched the Apple II, the first practical and affordable home computer. In 1981 International Business Machines (IBM) introduced the “Personal Computer, or PC. In 1984 Apple put out the Macintosh, which used on-screen symbols called icons that users could manipulate with a hand-operated device called a mouse.
As Jobs and Wozniak were creating Apple, Bill Gates cofounded Microsoft. In 1980 IBM hired Microsoft to make an operating system for its new PC. The system was called MS-DOS. Microsoft came out with the “Windows” operating system in 1985. Computers became essential tools in almost all businesses. By the late 1990s, many workers were able to telecommute, or work from home via computer.
Telecommunications also underwent a revolution. In 1996 Congress passed a law allowing phone companies to compete with one another and to send television signals. It also allowed cable companies to
612
offer telephone service. Soon wireless digital technology made it possible to make small, inexpensive satellite dishes for home use. Cell phones, invented in the 1940s, became popular as wireless digital technology made phones smaller and service cheaper. As this technology became more advanced, companies developed interconnectable digital music players, cameras, radios, televisions, and music and video recorders.
Breading progress check
Describing What advantage did microprocessors give to computers?
The Rise of the Internet
guiding question How have advances in telecommunications and the rise ofthe Internet affected the U.S. standard of living?
The Internet began as a system of networked computers of a U.S. Defense Department agency that linked to a system of networked supercomputers ofthe National Science Foundation. Similar networks grew across the world, and this communications system became known as the Internet.
As personal computer ownership rose, individuals—rather than just government agencies—began connecting to the Internet. By 2007, more than 1 billion people around the world were regularly using the Internet. Birth of the World Wide Web
In 1990 researchers in Switzerland developed a new way to present information on Internet-linked computers. Known as the World Wide Web, this system used hypertext, or “links,” and was accessed with Web browser software. Users could post information on Web pages and use links to move between sites.
Enthusiasm for the World Wide Web spawned a “dot-com” economy. The stock of Internet-related companies helped fuel the prosperity of the 1990s. It fell dramatically in 2000 when many unprofitable online companies failed. A few “dot-com” companies were very successful. This new economy also required American workers to acquire new skills. This retraining increased productivity as well as the nations GDP. Driven by the information technology industry, the GDP rose more than 20 percent during the mid- to late 1990s.
The Internet Changes Society
For many people, the World Wide Web builds a sense of community. People with common interests visit the same Web sites to post comments and interact with one another. They share stories and photos about themselves on blogs— short for Web logs. “People read and publish blogs because they recognize that there is a way to put themselves into this virtual world and interact within it. With every new sign-up ... our world gets a little smaller and the web gets more character,” explained Internet entrepreneur Biz Stone.
Breading progress check
Analyzing How has digital technology affected the U.S. economy?
The New Global Economy
guidingquestion How did NAFTA and other regional trading blocs affect the global economy?
In the 1990s, economies of individual nations were becoming more interdependent as new technology helped link the world together economically and culturally. Also, many world leaders were convinced that free trade and the global exchange of goods contributed to prosperity and economic growth. This idea that the world is becoming increasingly interconnected is called globalism, and the process is globalization.
telecommute to work at home by means of an electronic linkup with a central office
(continued from p. 612)
TEKS
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills 17E describe the dynamic relationship between U.S. international trade policies and the U.S. free enterprise system such as the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) oil embargo, the General Agreement of Tariffs and Trade (GATT), and the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA)
18A discuss the role of American entrepreneurs such as Bill Gates, Sam Walton, Estee Lauder, Robert Johnson, Lionel Sosa, and millions of small business entrepreneurs who achieved the American dream
19E evaluate the pros and cons of U.S. participation in international organizations and treaties 27A explain the effects of scientific discoveries and technological innovations such as electric power, telephone and satellite communications, petroleum-based products, steel production, and computers on the economic development of the United States
27C understand the impact of technological and management innovations and their applications in the workplace and the resulting productivity enhancements for business and labor such as assembly line manufacturing, time-study analysis, robotics, computer management, and just-in-time inventory management
28A analyze how scientific discoveries, technological innovations, and the application of these by the free enterprise system, including those in transportation and communication, improve the standard of living in the United States
28C understand how the free enterprise system drives technological innovation and its application in the marketplace such as cell phones, inexpensive personal computers, and global positioning products
ATimeofChange 613
euro the basic currency shared by the countries ofthe European Union since 1999
cite to point out as an example in an argument or debate
GEOGRAPHY CONNECTION
Global trading blocs have formed to increase international trade.
THE WORLD IN SPATIAL TERMS
What large countries make up the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation? HUMAN SYSTEMS
Why might it be beneficial for countries within a region to join in a free-trade agreement?
Selling American-made goods abroad had long been important to U.S. prosperity. American businesses make money selling goods abroad, and consumers benefit by having the option to buy cheaper imported goods. Opponents, however, argued that global trade could cost American workers jobs. The debate became an important part of American politics. Regional Blocs
Regional trade pacts, like the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA), increase international trade. Approved by Congress in 1993, NAFTA linked Canada, the United States, and Mexico in a free-trade zone. Many Americans feared that NAFTA would cause industrial jobs to move to Mexico, where labor costs were lower. Although some jobs were lost, the U.S. unemployment rate fell as wages rose. Many American businesses upgraded their technology, and workers shifted to more skilled jobs or to the service industry.
In 1993 the European Union (EU) was created to promote economic and political cooperation among many European nations. It created a common bank, encouraged free trade, and created a common currency called the euro. The Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) came together in 1989 to promote economic cooperation and lower trade barriers. Major political differences, however, kept its members from acting together.
The World Trade Organization
In 1995 the World Trade Organization (WTO) formed to represent some 120 nations in efforts to negotiate international trade agreements and trade disputes. Supporters of the WTO cited benefits for American consumers, including cheaper imports, new markets, and copyright protection. Opponents argued that the United States would have to accept the WTO’s rulings in trade disputes even if they hurt the American economy.
APEC
Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation E3 ASEAN
Association of Southeast Asian Nations I | CACM Central American Common Market
MM CAEU
Council of Arab Economic Unity CAN
Andean Community of Nations CARICOM Caribbean Community
and Common Market
BMi CEMAC Economic and Monetary Community of Central Africa
I 1 CIS Commonwealth of Independent States
I 1 EFTA European Free Trade Association
EU
European Union G8
Group of Eight MERCOSUR
Southern Cone Common Market
NAFTA
North American Free Trade Agreement
A OPEC
Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries SADC Southern African
Development Community
614
Trade With China
China presented a huge potential market for American goods, but some were wary of trading with China due to its poor record on human rights President Clinton urged Congress to grant China permanent normal trade relation status to bring it into the world community. Although many groups objected, Congress passed the bill in late 2000.
H READING PROGRESS CHECK
Identifying What trade agreements and organizations promoted globalization?
Global Environmentalism
guiding question How have the United States and other nations responded to global environmental concerns?
The rise of a global economy also increased awareness of environmental issues. Environmentalists began thinking of the environment as a global system and addressing issues they believed were of global concern. In the 1980s, scientists discovered that chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) were affecting the layer of ozone in Earth’s atmosphere. Ozone blocks many of the sun’s ultraviolet rays. At that time, CFCs were widely used in air conditioners and refrigerators. In that same decade, scientists documented a large hole in the ozone layer over Antarctica. In 1987 the United States and many other nations agreed to phase out CFCs and other chemicals that might be weakening the ozone layer.
During this time, another environmental issue emerged when some scientists warned that global warming could lead to more droughts and other forms of extreme weather. Many experts concluded that carbon dioxide emissions from factories and power plants caused global warming, but others disagreed. The issue became controversial because of the cost of controlling emissions. Industries would have to pay the cost of reducing emissions, and these costs would be passed on to consumers. Developing nations trying to industrialize would be hurt the most. Economic growth in wealthier nations would be hurt as well. Concern about global warming led the EU and many other nations to sign the Kyoto Protocol in 1997, promising to reduce emissions. President Clinton did not submit the protocol for ratification because most senators opposed it. President George W. Bush withdrew the United States from the agreement entirely, citing flaws in the treaty.
awareness the state of having or showing realization, perception, or knowledge
global warming an increase in average world temperatures over time
H READING PROGRESS CHECK
What scientific data encouraged nations to protect the environment?
TEKS]
LESSON 3 REVIEW
Reviewing Vocabulary
1.	Defining How can telecommuting be an easier option for some employees? 27C, 28A, 28C
2.	Explaining Why are scientists concerned about the effects of global warming? 14A
Using Your Notes
3.	Explaining Review the notes you took during the lesson and explain why many people felt that the world came closer together during the 1990s. 17E.27A.28C
Answering the Guiding Questions
4.	Analyzing How did the computer revolution change the workplace?
27A, 27C, 28A, 28C
5.	Determining Cause and Effect How have advances in telecommunications and the rise of the Internet affected the U.S. standard of living? 27A, 27C, 28A, 28C
6.	Making Connections How did NAFTA and other regional trading blocs affect the global economy? 17E
7.	Describing How have the United States and other nations responded to global environmental concerns? 19E
Writing Activity
NARRATIVE
Imagine what your life would be like without technological developments such as the Internet and the cell phone. Write a short narrative in which you describe how your typical day would be different without this type of technology. 28A, 28C A
Time of Change 615 ■
V
chapter 21 Assessment
Directions: On a separate sheet of paper, answer the questions below. Make sure you read carefully and answer all parts ofthe questions.
Lesson Review
Lesson 1
0 Summarizing Summarize the legislation during Clinton's term that impacted families and communities. 11B
0 Explaining Why mightthe political situation in Clinton's second term be referred to as "divided government?"
0 Interpreting Significance What was the significance of the Brady Bill? 11B
0 Identifying Cause and Effect How did the United States respond to the process of ethnic cleansing in the Balkan Crisis? 11A
Lesson 2
0 Summarizing What were two key points ofthe Illegal Immigration Reform and Immigrant Responsibility Act of 1996? How do the measures of this act reflect changing views on the societal issue of illegal immigration since the Immigration Act of 1965? 10F.13B
0 Analyzing Why did many refugees from Europe come to the United States in the late 1940s and early 1950s?
0 Explaining Why was a grant of amnesty so important to the immigrant community? 1OF, 13B
Lesson 3
0 Explaining How have innovations in computer technology since the 1980s improved the standard of living in the United States? How have different technology companies continued to drive these innovations? 27A, 28A, 28C
0 Evaluating How has the involvement ofthe United States in trade agreements and globalization affected the average American? 29B
0 Sequencing What role has Bill Gates played in the development ofthe technology industry? 18A
0 Evaluating In what way has the Internet shifted the way people participate in and think of communities? How has it affected the nation's economic development? 27A, 28A
Exploring the Essential Questions
© Exploring Issues Write a short report that could be published as a Web page. The report should explain the global impact of technology, immigration, or international trade. Underline four words that could be made into hypertext links. Include four footnotes to describe what the viewer would see by clicking on the hypertext.
© Exploring Issues Write a short report to answer the question: How have improvements in science and technology helped change society? 28A
Critical Thinking
© Evaluating What are the contributions of Newt Gingrich to the Contract with America? Explain the social and political impact of this conservative pledge, ioe, 11B
© Considering Advantages and Disadvantages What were the advantages and risks of opening trade with China in 2000?
0 Identifying Perspectives How did the Immigration Act of 1965 reflect the issues and concerns ofthe time?
© Identifying Cause and Effect What was the effect of an increase of unauthorized immigrants on efforts that both limited and supported immigrants? 13B
0 Researching Research one social advocacy organization and one political advocacy organization ofthe 1990s. Include a description ofthe group, its leader, and its methods of gaining public support. 11B
Need Extra Help?
7	8	9	10	11	12	13	14	15	16	17	18
| Gotopage	| 597 | 600 | 597 | 602 | 606 | 60S | 60S [ 612 | <14 | 612 | 613 | 605 | 612 | 599 [ 615 | 604 | 606 [ 598J
616
© Analyzing Explain the technological and management progress that was made when just-in-time inventory management systems were put in place in businesses during the technological revolution ofthe 1990s. Include information about how the system is applied in the workforce to enhance business and labor. 27C
Social Studies Skills
© Analyzing Geographic Distributions on a Database
Go to the U.S. Census Bureau online, locate the Thematic Map database, and then choose the Census Data Mapper link. Launch the database and select the "Population and Race" theme and "Percent Hispanic" for the data table field. Have the database make your map, and then answer the following questions: What areas ofthe country have the lowest distribution of Hispanics? What questions do you need to ask to be able to explain why Hispanics have not migrated to these regions? Make a prediction as to what you expect to learn. 31B
© Analyzing Geographic Patterns on a Database Goto the U.S. Census Bureau online, and locate the Census Data Mapper database. Launch the database and select "Age and Sex" and "Percent Male" for the data table field. Have the database make your map, and then answer the following questions: Are the number of men and women equally distributed in the United States? What pattern do you notice about the percentage of men? What questions do you need to ask to be able to explain the pattern? 31B
0 Explaining Continuity and Change What does the acronym CFCs stand for, and how did was it thought they affected the ozone layer?
© Sequencing List the following developments in computer technology in chronological order: Apple II, integrated circuit, and wireless digital technology. Then explain the role of entrepreneurship and innovation in the development of computer technology.
© Understanding Relationships Among Events How was
perjury a factor in the impeachment of President Clinton? How did the impeachment affect the trust citizens of the United States have in the federal government? 19C
© Analyzing Arguments What was one advantage of President Clinton's decision to appoint Hillary Rodham Clinton to head a task force on health care? What was one disadvantage of appointing her? 24B
© Identifying Perspectives From a manufacturer's perspective, what are the advantages and disadvantages of trying to reduce a factory's carbon dioxide emissions?
© Creating a Thematic Map Create a map that shows national borders of Yugoslavia prior to 1991, during the civil war in Bosnia and Herzegovina, and the region as it is in present day. Include a key that indicates information about the ethnic groups in that region.
© Research Skills Use multiple sources to learn about how the Internet is both open internationally and restricted nationally. Present how Europe, Africa, Asia, and North and South America participate in the global exchange by means ofthe Internet and social networks. What restrictions exist, who is impacted by such restrictions, and what are the prospects for an even freer Internet?
EH3
Analyzing Primary Sources Use the 2000 quotation by Bill Clinton to answer the following question.
PRIMARYSOURCE
M...
Even as people take pride in their national independence, we know we are becoming more and more interdependent. The movement of people, money, and ideas across borders, frankly, breeds suspicion among many good people in every country. They are worried about globalization because of its unsettling and unpredictable consequences.» —Bill Clinton in 2000
© Analyzing Primary Sources What impact do agreements such as NAFTA have on the free enterprise system in the United Sates? What are the pros and cons of U.S. participation in free trade treaties? 17E
Need Extra Help?
ATimeofChange 6
Understanding Relationships Among Events How was
the onset of globalization a by-product of new technology and business innovations, and why might it have signaled the course for future international economic relationships?
DBQ
Analyzing Visuals Use the graph to answer the following questions.
@ Posing Questions Make a chart that represents the data in the graph. Then use the Internet to research the geographic distribution of each group at any time during the 21st century. Record the information in your chart. Use the chart to write your own three-question quiz about the distribution patterns, and include the corresponding answers. 31A, 31B
* Percentages add to more than 100 percent because Hispanics may be of any race. Source: U.S. Census Bureau,
Extended Response Question
© Informative/Explanatory Television commentators often use this expression: "The world is getting smaller." Write an essay explaining how globalization, computer technology, and immigration have made the world seem like a "smaller" place. Use examples from the chapter to support your argument. 29G, 30A
Standardized Test Practice
Which of the following is an environmental advocacy organization? 11B
Analyzing Visuals Which group accounted for the smallest percentage of the total population in 2005?
A.
African American B.
Hispanic C.
Asian and Pacific Islander D.
Native American A.
Greenpeace B.
La Raza C. ACLU
D. NRA
© Which of the following is a conservative political advocacy organization? 11B
$ Making Predictions How are increases in legal
immigration changing demographic patterns in the United
States? How will these changes impact the United States?
13B, 29B
F.
Move On G.
National Right to Life H. AARP J. PETA
Need Extra Help?
-	30	31	32	33	34	35	36
| Go to page	I	i618!	606	| 618			|598|
8
America's Challenges for a New Century
2001-Present
netw®rks
There's More Online about the challenges America faces in the new century.
CHAPTER



Lesson 2
Focusing on Afghanistan and Iraq
Lesson
Domestic

Lesson 4
The Obama Presidency
The Story Matters...
As the United States entered the twenty-first century, a new collection of challenges emerged. Terrorists launched devastating attacks on September 11,2001 that led to wars in Afghanistan and Iraq. The economy slowed and then crashed. In 2008 Barack Obama became the first African American to be elected president ofthe United States. His campaign promised hope to a country swept up in a time of great challenges.
◄ Barack Obama took office in January 2009. His first tasks were leading two wars, improving a declining economy, and reshaping a political system filled with partisanship.
PHOTO:
Pete Souza/Obama Transition Team/Handout/ Corbis News/CORBIS
■
619
CHAPTER 22
Place andTime: United States 2000-2012
As the United States entered the twenty-first century, combating terrorism at home and abroad became a national priority. The attacks on the World Trade Center and the Pentagon resulted in wars in Afghanistan and Iraq, where Islamic fundamentalist militants trained to use terrorism to overthrow pro-Western governments. The wars as well as new security policies led to great controversy in American politics.
Step Into the Place
Read the quote and look at the information presented on the map. MM ha, 29a
Analyzing Historical Documents According to President Obama, what strategy will help the United States win the wars in Afghanistan and Iraq?
DBQ
PRIMARYSOURCE
«I think there are achievable goals in Afghanistan.... Our goal in the region is to keep the American people safe. And I think that the more we can accomplish that through diplomacy, and the more we can accomplish that by partnering with actors in the region, rather than simply applying U.S. military forces, the better off we're going to be....
A lot ofthe ultimate outcome in Iraq now is going to depend on how the political issues that have dogged Iraq for a very long time get resolved.... There are a whole host of political issues between the various factions and between Sunni, Shia and Kurd in Iraq that still have to be worked on.... We've got to redouble our efforts when it comes to the diplomatic side if we're going to be successful.w
—Barack Obama, Interview with Jim Lehrer, February 27,2009
Step Into the Time
Predicting Consequences
Choose an event from the time line and explain how that event
U.S. PRESIDENTS
November 2000
A close vote in Florida causes a contested presidential election
September 11,2001
Terrorists attack the World Trade Center and the Pentagon
2003 The United States invades Iraq
^iricane Katrina ites parts of Louisiana iSlSsippi, causing 9 of New Orleans
October 2008 Emergency Economic Stabilization Act passed in response to mortgage crisis
November 2008 Barack Obama elected as nation's first African American president
Obama
2009
2009 U.S. economic	August 2010 The	December
recession pushes poverty	United States	2011 United
level over 14.3%, its	withdraws all but	States removes all
highest point in 15 years	50,000 troops from Iraq	troops from Iraq
+•
T
networks
There's More Online!
Ef BIOGRAPHY George W. Bush gf BIOGRAPHY AI Gore
BIOGRAPHY
Ralph Nader Ef IMAGE Patriotic Rally Ef image Pentagon Damage MAP 2000 Presidential Election
gf PRIMARYSOURCE Florida
Stinkeye" Political Cartoon Ef VIDEO Bush's Global Challenges
INTERACTIVE SELF-CHECK
QUIZ



LESSON 1
Bush's Global Challenges
i American culture shaped by a set of v have disputes over ideas, values, and

Reading HELPDESK
Academic Vocabulary
•	resolve • obtain
•	interpretation
Content Vocabulary
it Matters because
After a disputed outcome in the election of2000,
George l/K Bush became president. On September 11,2001, terrorists attacked the United States. In response, Bush and Congress launched a war on terrorism.
The Election of 2000
guiding qu estion Why was the presidential election of2000 controversial?
•	chad
•	terrorism
•	state-sponsored terrorism
•	anthrax
TAKING NOTES:
Key Ideas and Details
Organizing Use the following graphic organizer to show causes of terrorism.
TEKS
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills 2D explain the significance of the following years as turning points: 1898 (Spanish-American War), 1914-1918 (World War I), 1929 (the Great Depression begins), 1939-1945 (World War II), 1957 (Sputnik launch ignites U.S.-Soviet space race), 1968-1969 (Martin Luther King Jr. assassination and U.S. lands on the moon), 1991 (Cold War ends), 2001 (terrorist attacks on World Trade Center and the Pentagon), and 2008 (election of first black president, Barack Obama)


continued on the next page
In the election of 2000, the division between liberals and conservatives widened. The election itself was one of the closest in American history.
The Candidates Campaign
The Democrats nominated Vice President AI Gore for president. For his running mate, Gore chose Senator Joseph Lieberman, the first Jewish American to run for vice president on a major party ticket. The Republican candidate was Texas governor George W. Bush, son of former president George H. W. Bush. For his vice-presidential candidate, Bush chose Dick Cheney, who had served as George H. W. Bush’s secretary of defense. Well-known consumer advocate Ralph Nader also entered the race on the Green Party ticket.
The election campaign revolved around the question of what to do with surplus tax revenues. Both Bush and Gore agreed that Social Security needed reform, but they disagreed on the details. Both promised to cut taxes, to improve public education, and to support plans to help senior citizens pay for prescription drugs.
A
Close Vote No candidate won a majority in the 2000 election, but Gore received the most votes, with 48.4 percent of the popular vote compared to 47.9 percent for Bush. To win the presidency, however, candidates must win a majority of votes in the Electoral College.
The election came down to the results in Florida—both men needed its 25 electoral votes to win. The counts in Florida were so close that state law required a recount of the ballots using vote-counting
machines. There were, however, thousands of ballots the machines could not read. Gore then asked for a recount of ballots in several strongly Democratic counties. After the machine recount showed Bush still ahead, a battle began over the manual recounts.	6
Most Florida ballots required voters to cast a vote by punching a small piece of cardboard out of the ballot beside the candidate’s name. This small piece is called a chad. Vote counters had to determine how to count a ballot if the chad was still partially attached. On some, the chad was still in place, and the voter had left only a dimple on the ballot’s surface. Vote counters thus had to determine what the voter intended—and different counties used different standards.
Under state law, Florida officials had to certify the results by a certain date. When it became clear that not all of the recounts could be finished in time, Gore went to court to challenge the deadline. The Florida Supreme Court agreed to set a new deadline. At Bush’s request, the U.S. Supreme Court intervened to decide whether the Florida Supreme Court had acted constitutionally. The hand recounts continued, but not all ofthe counties were able to meet the new deadline. On November 26, Florida officials certified Bush the winner by 537 votes.
chad a small piece of cardboard produced by punching a data card
(continued from p. 622)
TEKS
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills 11A describe U.S. involvement in world affairs, including the end ofthe Cold War, the Persian Gulf War, the Balkans Crisis, 9/11, and the global War on Terror
11B identify significant social and political advocacy organizations, leaders, and issues across the political spectrum
continued on the next page
iiiiiiii ANALYZING SUPREME COURT CASES
BUSH v. GORE, 2000
Background ofthe Case
The outcome ofthe 2000 presidential election hinged on Florida's 25 electoral votes. When the polls closed on November 7, the vote in Florida was so close that it triggered an automatic recount. Bush led by only 1,784 out of more than 6 million votes cast. When ballots were again run through tabulation machines, Bush's lead shrank to fewer than 200 votes. Gore requested hand recounts of ballots in four predominantly Democratic counties where thousands of punch-card ballots had recorded no vote for president. Bush asked the U.S. District Court to block any further recounts.
While the manual recount was still in progress, the Florida secretary of state certified Bush as the winner by 537 votes. Gore appealed this action, and the Florida Supreme Court authorized manual recounts of disputed ballots to begin immediately. Bush appealed the ruling to the U.S. Supreme Court, which ordered the recount to stop.
How the Court Ruled
The Florida Supreme Court ordered any recounts to use a general standard set forth in Florida law to discern the "clear intent ofthe voter." In a 7-2 ruling, the U.S. Supreme Court declared that because different vote counters used different standards, the recount did not treat all voters equally.
In addition, both federal law and the Constitution require the electoral votes for president to be cast on a certain day. If Florida missed that deadline, its electoral votes would not count. The Court ruled 5-4 that there was not enough time left to conduct a manual recount that would pass constitutional standards.
An election worker inspects a ballot during the Florida recount.
DBQ
Analyzing Historical Documents 0 Identifying Central Ideas If it is the ;
electoral votes that count in the election ’ ofthe president, why is it important to count the popular vote?
0 Drawing Conclusions What made the decision in Bush v. Gore controversial?
i......................' ......r .............
America's Challenges for a New Century 623
(continued from p. 623)
TEKS
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills 11D analyze the impact of third parties on presidential elections
18B identify the impact of international events, multinational corporations, government policies, and individuals on the 21st century economy
19B explain constitutional issues raised by federal government policy changes during times of significant events, including World War I, the Great Depression, World War II, the 1960s, and 9/11
continued on the next page
Bush v. Core
Gore’s lawyers returned to court, arguing that thousands of ballots remained uncounted. The Florida Supreme Court ordered all state counties to begin a hand recount of ballots rejected by the machines. As counting began, the U.S. Supreme Court ordered the recount to stop until it had issued its ruling. On December 12 in Bush v. Gore, the U.S. Supreme Court ruled 7-2 that because identical ballots might be treated differently by different vote counters, the recount violated the U.S. Constitution’s equal protection clause. Bush remained the certified winner in Florida.
H REAPING PROGRESS CHECK
Expressing Do you think that Gore winning the popular vote but not the electoral vote is controversial? Why?
resolve fixity of purpose, or resoluteness
terrorism the use of violence by nongovernmental groups against civilians to achieve a political goal by instilling fear and frightening governments into changing policies
interpretation the act or
process of explaining or telling the meaning of
President George W. Bush visits the site of the collapsed World Trade Center, in the days after September 11,2001.
September 11,2001
guiding question What contributed to the rise in terrorist groups, and why did these groups resort to violent attacks?
On September 11, 2001, two passenger jets slammed into the two towers of the World Trade Center in New York City. Soon afterward, a third plane crashed into the Pentagon in Washington, D.C. Within about two hours, the World Trade Center collapsed in a billow of dust and debris, killing nearly 3,000 people. The airplanes did not crash accidentally. Hijackers deliberately flew them into the buildings. Hijackers had also seized a fourth airplane. Passengers on that flight had cell phones and had learned of the earlier attacks. Four passengers decided to fight the hijackers, and the plane crashed in a field in Pennsylvania.
A
National Emergency The attacks shocked Americans. Citizens donated food, money, supplies, and their own time toward the recovery effort. They rallied together to show their unity and resolve. On September 14, President Bush declared a national emergency. Congress authorized the use of force to fight whoever had attacked the nation. Osama bin Laden and his organization, al-Qaeda (al KY*duh), were soon identified as the plotters behind the attacks.
Middle East Terrorism and the United States
The 9/11 attacks were acts of terrorism, the use of violence by nongovernmental groups to achieve a political goal. Most terrorist attacks on Americans since World War II have been carried out by Middle Eastern groups.
In the 1920s, the United States invested in Middle East oil. The ruling families in some kingdoms grew wealthy, but most other people remained poor. Many Muslims feared their traditional values were weakening as the oil industrialists also brought Western ideas into the region. New movements arose calling for a strict interpretation of the Quran—the Muslim holy book—and a return to traditional religious laws. Some militant supporters began using terrorism to achieve their goals.
The United Statess support of Israel also angered many in the Middle East. In 1947, as a response to global outrage over the Holocaust, the UN proposed to divide the British Mandate of Palestine into an Arab state and a Jewish state. The Jews accepted the UN plan and established Israel in 1948. Arab states responded by attacking Israel. The territory that the UN had proposed as an Arab state came under the control of Israel, Jordan, and Egypt. In the 1950s, Palestinians began staging guerrilla raids and terrorist attacks against Israel. Since the
Terrorism is a worldwide threat that usually occurs without any warning and harms innocent people.
THE WORLD IN SPATIAL TERMS
On what continents have attacks occurred? HUMAN SYSTEMS
Whatcanyou infer about terrorist networks by the many targets that have been attacked? United States gave aid to Israel, it became the target of Muslim hostility.
In the 1970s, several Middle Eastern nations realized they could fight Israel and the United States by providing terrorists with money, weapons, and training. This is called state-sponsored terrorism. The governments of Libya, Syria, Iraq, and Iran have all sponsored terrorists.
The Rise of Al-Qaeda
In 1979 the Soviet Union invaded Afghanistan, and Muslims from across the world headed there to help fight the Soviets. Among them was Osama bin Laden. In 1988 bin Laden founded the organization called al-Qaeda or the Base.” This organization carried out attacks on U.S. embassies and other targets in the years leading up to the 9/11 attacks.
B reading progress check
Determining Cause and Effect Why did Muslim hostility grow against the United States in the Middle East?
f
I
i
I
i
I
state-sponsored terrorism violent acts against civilians that are secretly supported by a government in order to attack other nations without going to war (continued from p. 624)
TEKS
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills 19D discuss the role of contemporary government legislation in the private and public sectors such as the Community Reinvestment Act of 1977,
USA PATRIOT
Act of 2001. and the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 continued on the next page
America's Challenges for a New Century 625
Three-year old Alana Milawski waves the flag at a candlelight vigil in Las Vegas on September 12,2001. In the weeks following the 9/11 attacks, Americans all across the nation held prayer vigils, put up flags, donated blood, raised money, and collected food, blankets and supplies for victims of the attacks.
The War on Terrorism Begins
guiding question What major actions marked the beginning of the United States's war on terrorism?
On September 20, 2001, President Bush demanded that the Taliban regime in Afghanistan turn over bin Laden and his supporters and shut down all terrorist camps. The United States began building international support against terrorism and began deploying troops to the Middle East. The war would not end quickly, but it was a war the nation had to fight:
PRIMARY SOURCE
(continued from p. 625)
TEKS
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills 20B evaluate the impact of relationships among the legislative, executive, and judicial branches of government, including Franklin D. Roosevelt’s attempt to increase the number of U.S. Supreme Court justices and the presidential election of 2000.
obtain to gain possession of
Great harm has been done to us. We have suffered great loss. And in our grief and anger we have found our mission and our moment.... Our Nation—this generation—will lift a dark threat of violence from our people and our future. **
—President George W. Bush, Address to Joint Session of Congress, September 20,2001
Homeland Security and the USA PATRIOT Act
One effective way to fight terrorist groups is to cut off their funding. On September 24, President Bush issued an executive order freezing the financial assets of individuals and groups suspected of terrorism. He asked other nations to help, and soon some 80 nations had issued orders freezing the assets of the organizations and individuals on the American list.
To protect against further attacks, Bush created the Office of Homeland Security and asked Congress to pass legislation to help law enforcement agencies locate terrorist suspects. Congress had to balance Fourth Amendment protections against unreasonable search and seizure with the need to increase security, but in October 2001, Bush signed into law the antiterrorist bill called the USA PATRIOT Act. The law made it easier to wiretap suspects, track Internet communications, and seize voice mail. Authorities were permitted to conduct secret searches and were allowed to obtain a nationwide search warrant usable in any jurisdiction. In June 2002, Bush asked Congress to combine the agencies responsible for public safety into a new cabinet department, the Department of Homeland Security. This agency worked to coordinate efforts to fight terrorism.
k626
Bioterrorism Strikes the United States On October 5, 2001, a new threat arose when a newspaper editor in Florida died from an anthrax infection. Anthrax, a type of bacteria, has been used to create biological weapons Antibiotics can cure anthrax, but if left untreated, it can quickly become lethal. Anthrax was also found in offices in New York and Washington, D.C It became clear that these anthrax attacks were being delivered via the postal service. As a result of these attacks, 5 people died and 17 were sickened.
The War in Afghanistan Begins On October 7, 2001, the United States began bombing al-Qaeda camps and Taliban military forces in Afghanistan. Addressing the nation, Bush explained that Islam and the Afghan people were not the enemy, and that the United States would send aid to refugees. He also declared that the war on terrorism would continue until victory was achieved. An Economic Crisis
Even before the terrorist attack on September 11, the American economy had been weakening. The attacks triggered an economic crisis. Stock markets plunged and the Dow Jones Industrial Average suffered its biggest one week loss in history up to that point. Unemployment, which had already begun to rise, became even worse.
With the United States facing a new war and a great deal of uncertainty, President Bush knew he had to act quickly to prevent the mild recession that had already begun from turning into a serious economic downturn. In his address to the nation on September 20, he asked Americans for their “continued participation and confidence in the American economy” and he stressed that while “terrorists attacked a symbol of American prosperity; they did not touch its source.”
Three months earlier, the president had convinced Congress to pass a major tax cut in order to help the economy. The Bush tax cuts reduced tax rates for all Americans and cut the capital gains tax. The economy remained weak throughout 2002, however, in part because of the uncertainty caused by the war on terror. Bush pushed Congress to pass a second tax cut in 2003 that accelerated the tax cuts passed in the first bill. By mid-2003, the economy was in full recovery and unemployment had begun to fall. Critics argued that cutting taxes while funding the war on terrorism helped turn the budget surpluses of the late 1990s into a deficit by the end of 2002.
Supporters argued that the tax cuts prevented the recession from becoming much worse and causing even greater deficits.
H READING PROGRESS CHECK
Identifying What was the purpose of the Office of Homeland Security?
Although many people were sickened and some died from a bioterrorist anthrax attack, no suspects were ever arrested.
CRITICALTHINKING
Making Inferences Why did law enforcement officials determine that the appearance of anthrax was a terrorist attack?
anthrax a bacteria causing serious infection or death used to create biological weapons
SKILLS PRACTICE
Ask a question about September 11 or the War on Terror. When you ask questions in class and do not know the right words, use other words that mean almost the same thing. Point at pictures and use gestures to explain your question.
Reviewing Vocabulary
1.	Stating Why is anthrax a bioterrorism threat? 11A
Using Your Notes
2.	Explaining Review the notes that you took during this lesson and write a paragraph explaining why some groups in the Middle East disagree with U.S. foreign policy. 2D, 11A
Answering the Guiding Questions
3.	Interpreting Why was the presidential election of 2000 controversial? 11D, 20B
4.	Listing What contributed to the rise in terrorist groups, and why did these groups resort to violent attacks? 2D, 11A
5.	Identifying What major actions marked the beginning ofthe United States's war on terrorism? 2D, 11A
Writing Activity
ARGUMENT
The USA PATRIOT Act gave law enforcement new ways to fight terrorism. Write a letter to a newspaper explaining why you are either for or against giving up some freedoms in exchange for increased security. 19D America's Challenges for a New Century 627
networks
There's More Online!
IMAGE
Desolate Iran Sf TIMELINE The Globa, War on Terrorism
Ef video Focusing on Afghanistan and Iraq
INTERACTIVE SELF-CHECK QUIZ
LESSON 2
Focusing on Afghanistan and Iraq

is American culture shaped by a set of disputes over ideas, values, and

Reading HELPDESK
Academic Vocabulary
•	inspectors • eliminate
•	significantly
Content Vocabulary
•	weapons of mass destruction (WMD)
TAKING NOTES:
Key Ideas and Details
Organizing As you read, use the following graphic organizer to show the different groups in Iraq.

TEKS
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills 11A describe U.S. involvement in world affairs, including the end of the Cold War, the Persian Gulf War, the Balkans Crisis, 9/11, and the global War on Terror
11B identify significant social and political advocacy organizations, leaders, and issues across the political spectrum
IT MATTERS BECAUSE
After the attacks of September 11, 2001, U.S. forces invaded Afghanistan, the Central Asian nation that had sheltered many al-Qaeda members. In 2003, troops invaded Iraq and toppled the regime of Saddam Hussein.
The Taliban and WMD
guiding question Why did the United States want to overthrow the Taliban regime?
Soon after the September 11 attacks, the United States launched a war in Afghanistan to bring down the Taliban regime that had sheltered Osama bin Laden and other members of al-Qaeda. U.S. warplanes bombed Taliban forces as the United States began sending military aid to the Northern Alliance, a coalition of Afghan groups that had been fighting the Taliban for several years. The U.S. bombing campaign quickly shattered the Taliban’s defenses, and the Northern Alliance launched a massive attack. In December 2001, the Taliban government fell, and surviving members fled to the mountains of Afghanistan. Afghanistan slowly began to recover from decades of war. Rebuilding Afghanistan
After the Taliban fled, the United States and its allies helped local Afghan leaders create a new government. Meanwhile, thousands of U.S. and allied troops arrived to act as peacekeepers. In 2003 NATO took command of the peacekeeping. Afghanistan held its first nationwide democratic election in December 2004, and Hamid Karzai was elected president. One year later, the Afghan people elected a National Assembly. Despite these successes, Afghanistan continued to suffer from violence. The U.S. military has remained in Afghanistan in an effort to help stabilize the country.
The Search for Bin Laden
U.S. intelligence agencies believed Osama bin Laden had fled to Pakistan. Reports in the summer of 2010 suggested he was hiding north of Pakistan’s capital city of Islamabad. In May 2011, bin Laden’s
628

exact location was verified and President Obama ordered U.S. troops to attack m Laden was killed after a brief fight and DNA tests verified his identity President Obama announced to the nation that “justice has been done”
fracking Down Al-Qaeda
Former President George W. Bush responded to bin Laden’s death by reminding the nation that “the fight against terror goes on, but [nlo matter how long it takes, justice will be done.” During the almost decade-long search for bin Laden, the U.S. and its allies captured or killed hundreds of al-Qaeda members. In 2003 Pakistani and U.S. forces captured Khalid Shaikh Mohammed, the man suspected of planning the September 11 attacks. Between 2002 and 2006, the U.S. government believes to have prevented at least 10 major al-Qaeda attacks, including at least three on the United States and two on Great Britain.
Iraq and Weapons of Mass Destruction
The terrorist attacks ot 9/11 showed that groups such as al-Qaeda were determined to kill as many Americans as possible. President Bush and his advisers were deeply concerned that terrorists might acquire weapons of mass destruction (WMD)—including nuclear, chemical, and biological weapons—that could kill large numbers of people all at once.
During the Cold War, the United States relied upon a policy of deterrence to prevent the use of such weapons. The rise of state-sponsored terrorism created a new problem. If a nation secretly gave weapons to terrorists who then used them against the United States, the U.S. military might not know whom to attack in response to their use.
The "Axis of Evil"
In his 2002 State of the Union address, President Bush warned that an “axis of evil” made up of Iraq, Iran, and North Korea posed a grave threat. Each nation had been known to sponsor terrorism and was suspected of developing weapons of mass destruction. Bush warned that the United States “will not permit the world’s most dangerous regimes to threaten us with the world’s most destructive weapons.”
The president and his advisers believed Iraq to be the most immediate danger. It had used chemical weapons against the Kurds, an ethnic group in northern Iraq. After the 1991 Gulf War, UN inspectors found evidence that Iraq had developed biological weapons and had been working on a nuclear bomb. Between 1991 and 1998, Iraq appeared to be hiding weapons of mass destruction from UN inspectors. In 1998 the Iraqi government expelled the inspectors. In response, President Clinton ordered a massive bombing attack on Iraq to destroy its ability to make such weapons. Despite the attack, intelligence agencies continued to believe Iraq was hiding weapons of mass destruction.
Hamid Karzai (1957-)
Hamid Karzai was elected president in Afghanistan's first democratic election on October 9,2004. He had worked to remove the Taliban and its supporters from Afghanistan. In 2001, participants ofthe UN-sponsored Bonn Conference elected him Chairman ofthe Interim Administration. He was then elected President ofthe Transitional Government on June 13,2002, by members of the Emergency Loya Jirga (grand council). Karzai had been a strong proponent of establishing a Loya Jirga, believing it to be the only way to resolve the differences among the various Afghan factions. Though there have been charges of corruption in his administration, as president, Karzai has been an advocate of human rights and has appointed several women to his cabinet.
CRITICAL THINKING
Drawing Conclusions Why do you think Hamid Karzai was elected president of Afghanistan?
An Ultimatum to Iraq
In 2002 President Bush decided to deal with Iraq. On September 12, he asked the United Nations for a new resolution against Iraq. If Iraq s dictator, Saddam Hussein, wanted peace, he would have to give up Iraqs weapons of mass destruction, readmit the UN weapons inspectors, stop supporting terrorism, and stop oppressing his people. A t oug e was asking the United Nations to pass a resolution, the presi ent ma e it c e that the United States would act with or without UN support. Bush asked
weapons of mass destruction (WMD)
weapons—including nuclear, chemical, and biological—capable of killing large numbers of people all at once
inspector a person appointed to examine facilities, usually in search of specific items, in regard to safety or quality
America's Challenges for a New Century 629
significantly in a way that is important enough to have an effect
Congress to authorize the use of force against Iraq, which it did. Later, the United Nations approved a new resolution against Iraq that threatened “serious consequences” if Iraq did not comply.
gREADING PROGRESS CHECK
Identifying Why did President Bush call Iraq, Iran, and North Korea the "axis of evil"?
Confronting Iraq
guiding question What factors led to the U.S. invasion of Iraq?
The war in Iraq relied heavily on advanced technology. U.S. forces used new tools such as remote-controlled drone bombers and laser-guided pointers to precisely target enemy bunkers.
CRITICAL THINKING
Interpreting What advantages does this soldier seem to have over the enemy? In November 2002, Iraq agreed to readmit UN weapons inspectors. It then submitted a statement admitting it had weapons of mass destruction before the Gulf War, but denying it currently had them. Secretary of State Colin Powell said that Iraq’s declaration contained lies and was in “material breach” of the UN resolution.
As the United States and a coalition of some 30 nations prepared for war with Iraq, others in the UN Security Council argued that the inspectors should be given more time to find evidence of Iraq’s WMD programs. By March 2003, inspectors still had found nothing, and the United States began pressing the United Nations to authorize the use of force.
France and Russia, two UN Security Council members with veto power, refused to back such a resolution. As war became imminent, world opinion divided between those who supported the United States and those who opposed an attack on Iraq. Around the world, antiwar protesters staged rallies and marches. Several nations that had supported the United States in its war on terror and had sent troops to Afghanistan—including France, Germany, and Canada—refused to join the coalition against Iraq. Saudi Arabia and Turkey—both American allies—refused to allow the United States to attack Iraq from their territories. The only nation bordering Iraq that granted permission to use its territory was Kuwait.
The Invasion Begins
On March 20, 2003, the U.S.-led coalition forces attacked Iraq. More than 150,000 U.S. troops, some 45,000 British troops, as well as a few hundred special forces from Australia and Poland took part in the invasion. Much of the Iraqi army dissolved as soldiers refused to risk their lives for Saddam Hussein. A few fierce battles took place, but the Iraqis were unable to slow the coalition advance significantly. On May 1, President Bush declared that the major combat was over. About 140 Americans and several thousand Iraqis had died. Hussein was captured in late 2003. After a prolonged trial, an Iraqi court found him guilty of ordering mass executions. He was executed in 2006. Insurgents and Reconstruction
Soon after the coalition took control of the country, small groups of Iraqis began staging bombings, sniper attacks, and sporadic battles against coalition forces. Some carrying out the attacks were former members of Saddam Hussein’s military. Others were affiliated with al-Qaeda and other radical Muslim groups who believed the invasion offered a chance to build support in the Muslim world by organizing resistance to the United States. Militias belonging to the different religious and ethnic groups in Iraq also carried out some attacks.
The majority of Iraq’s population is Shia Muslim, but there is also a large Sunni Muslim minority. The Sunni are themselves divided between Sunni Arabs, who ruled the country under Saddam Hussein’s leadership, and Sunni Kurds. The collapse of Hussein’s dictatorship renewed old hostilities among these groups, forcing coalition troops to protect them from attacks from each other’s militias.
Having aimed to overthrow a tyrant and eliminate the possibility of weapons of mass destruction being given to terrorists, the United States found itself trying to suppress an insurgency, prevent a civil war, and establish a new Iraqi government. The United States and its allies spent more than $30 billion to improve infrastructure, but insurgent attacks slowed these efforts. Despite the problems, Iraq’s economy began to grow rapidly and a substantial improvement in living standards took place.
U.S. policy makers now faced a dilemma. If they pulled troops out too soon, Iraq might fall into civil war and provide a safe haven and breeding ground for terrorist groups. At the same time, the longer the United States stayed, the more its presence might stir resentment and support for terrorist groups. The best solution seemed to be to get a functioning, democratic Iraqi government in place as quickly as possible and then train its forces to take over the country’s security. To do this, in January 2005, the Iraqi people went to the polls in huge numbers for the first free elections in their country’s history. After much debate, voters then overwhelmingly approved a new constitution in October 2005. Problems in Iraq
Many Americans were encouraged when large numbers of Iraqis turned out to vote in democratic elections, but hope for peace in Iraq soon faded. Many Americans had expected the war to end quickly, but between 2003 and 2006, insurgents killed more than 3,000 U.S. soldiers. As the fighting dragged on, support for the war began to decline. Also, the failure to find any WMD added to growing controversy as to whether the war had been a mistake.
The elections were followed by a rise in sectarian violence as Sunni and Shia militias turned against each other. Ongoing suicide bombings, kidnappings, and attacks on U.S. soldiers set a majority of Americans against the war. As a New York Times editorial argued:
[PRIMARY SOURCE
eliminate to remove or get rid of
In 2005 Iraqis were able to vote in their first free elections.
CRITICALTHINKING
Predicting Consequences Will regular elections lead to a more stable national government in Iraq? Iraq is becoming a country that America should be ashamed to support, let alone occupy. The nation as a whole is sliding closer to open civil war. In its capital, thugs kidnap and torture innocent civilians with impunity, then murder them for their religious beliefs.... The stories about innocent homeowners and storekeepers who are dragged from their screaming families and killed by... militias are heartbreaking,
as is the thought that the United States, in its hubris, helped bring all this to pass.
—from the New York Times, April 2,2006
Despite problems of lingering violence and uncertainty, many began to rebuild a shattered Iraq.
CRITICALTHINKING
Defending What was the most important U.S. accomplishment in Iraq? Why? 631
A U.S.
Army soldier plays soccer with Iraqi children while on patrol in Baghdad. CRITICALTHINKING
Defending Was Operation Iraqi Freedom a success? Why or why not? Democrats demanded the president set a timetable for withdrawing U.S. troops, a policy that President Bush described as “cut and run.”
Troops Surge to Iraq
In 2006 Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld resigned, and President Bush appointed Robert Gates to replace him. Bush then announced a plan to send a “surge” of some 20,000 more troops to Iraq to restore order in Baghdad, where the violence was concentrated. With the additional surge of troops, General David Petraeus began clearing and holding areas of Baghdad that had been plagued by crime and insurgent attacks. His forces also began reaching out to Sunni groups in western Iraq that had been opposed to the American presence.
In the western province of Anbar, a militant group known as al-Qaeda in Iraq (AQI) was trying to impose a militant version of Islam through murder and intimidation. The Sunni groups in that area began working with U.S. forces to fight AQI. These actions helped change the course of the war.
By the fall of 2008, violence in Iraq had been dramatically reduced. Coalition forces had handed over control of 12 of Iraq’s 18 provinces to the Iraqi government and coalition casualties were lower than at any time since the war began in 2003. In August 2010, Operation Iraqi Freedom officially ended as the number of U.S. troops remaining in Iraq was reduced to about 50,000. Their job was primarily to train Iraqi troops.
P REAPING PROGRESS CHECK
Summarizing What dilemmas did the United States face if troops were pulled out of Iraq too soon?
LESSON 2 REVIEW
Sil
Reviewing Vocabulary
1.	Defining What are weapons of mass destruction? 11A
2.	Comparing and Contrasting What is the difference between terrorism and state-sponsored terrorism? 11A
Using Your Notes
3.	Explaining Review the notes you have taken describing the different groups in Iraq. Then explain why the fighting continued in Iraq after President Bush declared the major combat was over. 11A
Answering the Guiding Questions
4.	Summarizing Why did the United States want to overthrow the Taliban regime? 11A
5.	Identifying What factors led to the U.S. invasion of Iraq? 11A
Writing Activity
NARRATIVE
Suppose that you are an Iraqi who has recently voted in your first election. Write a journal entry that explains how you feel following your vote. 11A Ok
letwrks
here's More Online!
BIOGRAPHY
Condoleezza Rice BIOGRAPHY Nancy Pelosi IMAGE PATRIOT Act Protests i IMAGE Hurricane Katrina
f VIDEO Domestic Challenges
f INTERACTIVE SELF-CHECK QUIZ
1:-
' \
wtti
, PLEK
Heip
LESSON 3
/T f

Reading HELPDESK
ademic Vocabulary controversial
ntent Vocabulary swing vote
KING NOTES:
Videos and Details
tlining Use the following graphic anizer to create an outline using the ior headings of the lesson.
Domestic Challenges Security vs. Liberty
3.
S
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills_________ 11A describe U.S. involvement in world affairs, including the end of the Cold War, the Persian Gulf War, the Balkans Crisis,
9/11, and the global War on Terror 11B identify significant social and political advocacy organizations, leaders, and issues across the political spectrum 11F discuss the solvency of long-term entitlement programs such as Social Security and Medicare
continued on the next page
rishmeritan culture shaped by a set of low have disputes over ideas, values,
It Matters because
After a close campaign, President Bush was reelected in 2004, but scandals and continued difficulties in Iraq helped Democrats win control of Congress in 2006.
Security vs. Liberty
guiding question Howdid the September 11th terrorist attacks and the wars in Afghanistan and Iraq increase tension between the need for national security and protecting civil liberties?
In early 2004, President Bushs approval ratings began to fall. The ongoing war in Iraq and the failure of inspectors to find any weapons of mass destruction weakened his support, as did the scandal at the Iraqi prison of Abu Ghraib, where some prisoners were abused by American soldiers. These events gave Democrats the opportunity to mount a serious challenge in the 2004 election.
President Bush and Vice President Cheney were renominated by the Republicans. The Democrats nominated Massachusetts senator John Kerry for president and North Carolina senator John Edwards for vice president. Despite the problems in Iraq, voters felt it safer to stay with the incumbent. Nationwide, Bush won both the popular and the electoral vote.
Prisoners at Guantanamo
The war on terror heightened the tension between national security and civil liberties. People questioned whether terrorist attacks justified limits on civil liberties and whether captured terrorists had any rights at all.
In 2004 President Bush decided to hold captured members of al-Qaeda at the American military base in Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, where they could be interrogated. This decision was very controversial. Some people argued that the prisoners should have the right to a lawyer, formal charges, and a proper trial. The Bush administration insisted that the prisoners were enemy combatants, not suspects charged with a crime, and did not have the right to appeal their detentions to an American court. The administration also declared
America's Challenges for a New Century 633
- Analyzing — Supreme Court cases
Hamdan v. Rumsfeld
Al-Qaeda associate Salim Ahmed Hamdan was captured in 2001 and was moved to Guantanamo Bay in 2002. President Bush later determined that Hamdan was eligible for a military trial on counts of committing war crimes. Writing for the Supreme Court, Justice John Paul Stevens argued that the military commission created to conduct the trial violated the Uniform Code of Military Justice and the Geneva Conventions. Stevens stated: “It is not evident why the danger posed by international terrorism ... should require ... any variance from the courts-martial rules.”
CRITICAL THINKING
Drawing Conclusions How did the ruling affect the policy on detainees? controversial given to controversy, disputable
that the procedures regarding the treatment of prisoners, as specified in the Geneva Conventions, did not apply to terrorists since they were not part of any nations armed forces.
The Supreme Court disagreed. In Rasul v. Bush (2004), the Court ruled that foreign prisoners who claimed that they were unlawfully imprisoned had the right to have their cases heard in court. In response, the Bush administration created military tribunals to hear detainee cases. The Supreme Court struck this plan down in 2006 in Hamdan v. Rumsfeld.
Bush then asked Congress to establish new tribunals that met the Court’s objections. Congress passed the Military Commissions Act, which stated that noncitizens captured as enemy combatants had no right to file writs of habeas corpus. In 2008, in Boumediene v. Bush, the Supreme Court ruled that the detainees had a right to habeas corpus and declared that section of the Military Commissions Act unconstitutional.
Domestic Surveillance
As part of the war on terror, the National Security Agency (NSA) began wiretapping domestic telephone calls made to overseas locations when they believed one party in the call was a member of al-Qaeda or affiliated with al-Qaeda. When the monitoring program became public in 2005, it created a controversy. Civil rights groups argued that the program violated the Fourth Amendment. In 2006 a federal judge declared the wiretapping to be unconstitutional, but the following year an appeals court overturned the judge’s decision. When Congress began drafting legislation to address the issue, the Bush administration suspended the program and announced that future wiretaps would require a warrant from the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Court.
P READING PROGRESS CHECK
Reasoning Do you agree with the Supreme Court's decision about the rights of detainees at Guantanamo Bay? Why or why not?
(continued from p. 633)
HKS
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills 12A analyze the impact of physical and human geographic factors on the settlement ofthe Great Plains, the Klondike Gold Rush, the Panama Canal, the Dust Bowl, and the levee failure in New Orleans after Hurricane Katrina
14C understand the effects of governmental actions on individuals, industries, and communities, including the impact on Fifth Amendment property rights
continued on the next page
A
Stormy Second Term guiding question What were the successes and failures ofPresident George W. Bush's second term?
President Bush’s reelection convinced him that he had a mandate to continue his policies. He explained in a press conference: “[W]hen you win, there is a feeling that the people have spoken and embraced your point of
President Bush's second term was marked by several disputes over the nation's domestic policy goals, such as how to operate national security investigations.
CRITICALTHINKING
Making Inferences What civil liberties did opponents ofthe national security program believe were being violated? 6:
Hurricane Katrina ravaged New Orleans, Louisiana. During the flooding, people wrote messages on their roofs in the hope that rescuers would see them.
CRITICALTHINKING
Identifying Central Ideas Why were Americans angered over President Bush's response to Hurricane Katrina? view. And thats what I intend to tell the Congress. ... I earned capital in the campaign, political capital. And now I intend to spend it.”
Debating Social Security
One priority of Bushs second term domestic policy was Social Security reform. He proposed that workers be allowed to put 4 percent of their income in private accounts rather than in Social Security. He believed that private accounts would grow rapidly and help cover the expected shortfall in Social Security accounts. Democrats argued that privatizing any part of Social Security was dangerous. With the public unenthusiastic, the plan was never brought to a vote in Congress. Although this plan failed, Bush did convince Congress to enact a new prescription drug program for seniors. Under the new program, provided by Medicare, people age 65 and older can sign up for insurance that helps cover the cost of prescription drugs.
Hurricane Katrina
On August 29, 2005, Hurricane Katrina smashed into the Gulf Coast of the United States, spreading devastation from Florida to Louisiana. The fierce winds, rain, high tides, and storm surges destroyed buildings, roads, and electrical lines, left thousands of people homeless, and cost at least 1.200 lives. After the hurricane had passed, rising waters breached levees protecting New Orleans and flooded the low-lying city, causing thousands to flee to rooftops and for shelter in the convention center and at the Superdome. Waiting for days with little food, clean water, or information from authorities, survivors were shown on television news in deplorable conditions.
Reporters asked why the government was not responding more quickly. The mayor of New Orleans was faulted for not issuing a mandatory evacuation until the storm was less than a day away and for having failed to provide public transportation. The Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) seemed unprepared in its response. With polls showing a sharp drop in confidence in his administration, President Bush fired the head of FEMA and traveled to New Orleans to pledge federal funds for rebuilding the city. Congress approved $200 billion for the massive task.
(continued from p. 634)
TEKS
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills 18B identify the impact of international events, multinational corporations, government policies, and individuals on the 21st century economy
19B explain constitutional issues raised by federal government policy changes during times of significant events, including World War I, the Great Depression, World War II, the 1960s, and 9/11
America's Challenges for a New Century
swing vote a vote that may sometimes lean conservative and other times liberal
Kelo v. City of New London
The Fifth Amendment states that the government cannot take property for public use without giving property owners just compensation. In 2000, the city of New London, Connecticut, seized property from several homeowners and gave the land to a corporation in order to have it redeveloped as part of a plan to rejuvenate the city’s economy. The homeowners challenged the taking of their land, arguing that it was not being seized for public use, as specified in the Constitution.
In 2005, in a 5-4 decision, the Supreme Court interpreted the term “public use” in a broad way. The Court interpreted the phrase “public use” to mean the government can take property if it serves a public purpose, even if it is not truly for public use. In other words, if government wants to promote development in a community so as to create new jobs, or increase tax revenue, it can take property from one private owner and give it to another.
The case outraged people across the political spectrum. Many conservatives saw it as example of the Court violating rights by going beyond what they believed was the actual meaning of the Constitution. Many liberals were outraged that government could take land from individual homeowners and give it to large corporations. After the decision, more than 40 states passed laws restricting the ability of state and local jurisdictions to take land away from homeowners for “economic development” by businesses.
New Supreme Court Judges
In 2005 President Bush filled two vacancies on the Supreme Court. In the spring of 2005, Justice Sandra Day O’Connor announced her retirement. Although appointed by President Reagan, Justice O’Connor had been a pivotal swing vote on the Court, sometimes siding with conservatives, sometimes with liberals. As her replacement, Bush nominated federal judge John G. Roberts, Jr., a conservative who was well regarded in the Senate. Before the Senate could act, however, Chief Justice William Rehnquist died. Bush then named Roberts to replace him. Again attempting to fill Justice O’Connor’s vacancy, President Bush nominated federal judge Samuel Alito, Jr., a well-known conservative justice. Roberts and Alito were confirmed by the Senate.
The 2006 Midterm Elections
The first two years of President Bush’s second term had not gone well. At the same time, Americans had also grown frustrated with Congress. The Republican majority seemed awash in scandals. Two Republicans had resigned from Congress after being convicted of corruption, and House majority leader Tom DeLay had resigned after being indicted for violating campaign finance laws. Congress seemed unable to control spending, partly because Republicans and Democrats had been adding an increasing number of special funding requests to spending bills.
Voters expressed their unhappiness with the president and the Republican Congress in 2006. The Democrats won a majority in both the House and the Senate for the first time since 1992. House Democrats then elected California representative Nancy Pelosi to be the first female Speaker of the House of Representatives. She summed up Democrats’ interpretation of their victory:
PRIMARYSOURCE
“The election of 2006 was a call to change, not merely to change the control of Congress, but for a new direction for our country.... Our Founders envisioned a new America driven by optimism, opportunity, and courage.... Now it is our responsibility to carry forth that vision of a new America into the 21st century. W
—from a speech to the House of Representatives, January 4,2007
Despite promises to end the war and change how Congress operated, Speaker Pelosi and other Democrats were not able to get enough votes to cut funding, set a deadline for pulling troops out of Iraq, or reduce spending.
The American economy was on a downturn.
Economic Recession
By 2008, the American economy was in crisis. In 2007 many people with low incomes or poor credit began defaulting on their mortgage payments. At the same time, housing prices began to fall. People could no longer borrow against their home values, and banks across the country that had relied on mortgage-backed investments did not know what their investments were worth. Without adequate “real” funds to lend, banks reduced the amounts they lent, and many businesses feared they could not borrow enough money to keep operating. This led to a long recession and caused a number of well-known investment banking firms to face bankruptcy and collapse. Companies began laying off workers in response to the financial crisis. By January 2009, the unemployment rate was up to 7.2%. The country was in an economic recession. P READING PROGRESS CHECK
Making Inf erences What effect did Hurricane Katrina have on the Bush administration?
Evaluating Information
Suppose you needed to write a report about an election. The Internet might be the first place you would look for information. How do you evaluate if the information you find is valid and unbiased? You should check to see if the organization or author is identified. If you are unable to verify the creator of the site, be wary of trusting the information. If a site refers to sources, that is a clue that the information is reliable. Also, the information should be presented factually and objectively, without bias.
LESSON 3 REVIEW "
Reviewing Vocabulary
1.	Explaining What is meant by the term swing vote!
Using Your Notes
2.	Summarizing Review your notes and write a summary ofthe major domestic events of President Bush's second term. 11B, 11F
Answering the Guiding Questions
3.	Making Connections How did the September 11th terrorist attacks and the wars in Afghanistan and Iraq increase tension between the need for national security and protecting civil liberties?
4.	Evaluating What were the successes and failures of President George W. Bush's second term? 12A
Writing Activity
NARRATIVE
Write a journal entry describing President Bush's second term that will be read by students 50 years in the future. Be clear and concise with your descriptions of these events. 11A America's Challenges for a New Century 637
networks
There's More Online!
S CHART/GRAPH GOP
S CHART/GRAPH S&P
500 Stock P Index S CHART/GRAPH
Unemployment SLIDESHOW BP Oil Spill S MAP
2008 Presidential Election VIDEO
The Obama Presidency INTERACTIVE SELF-CHECK QUIZ
IVIN
10 wi 10

LESSON 4
The Obama Presidency
Reading HELPDESK
W
Academic Vocabulary • monitor • procedure
Content Vocabulary • earmark
TAKING NOTES:
Key Ideas and Details
Outlining As you read about key events in the Obama candidacy and presidency, use the major headings of the lesson to create an outline similar to the one below.
The Obama Presidency
I.
The Election of 2008 A. 8.
II.
A.
it Matters Because
The 2008 election of Barack Obama as the nation's first African American president was a watershed event. The nation became increasingly polarized, however, as he began to carry out his agenda. After the 2010 midterm elections, the Republicans regained control of the House.

The Election of 2008
guiding question What issues and events attracted support for Barack Obama's presidential campaign?
In 2007 a major financial crisis developed. Millions of Americans found themselves unable to make payments on their home mortgages. Financial institutions failed. As the 2008 election approached, the economy had replaced the war in Iraq as the most important issue for most Americans.
Choosing the Candidates
Senator John McCain of Arizona, a widely admired hero of the Vietnam War, won the Republican nomination for president. He chose Sarah Palin, the conservative governor of Alaska, as his running mate.
Illinois senator Barack Obama bested New York senator Hillary Clinton to win the Democratic nomination. Obama had delivered the keynote address at the 2004 Democratic National Convention. His speech impressed Democrats and made him a national political figure. Senator Joe Biden of Delaware was his running mate. Bidens 35 years in the Senate helped balance criticism of Obamas relative inexperience.
Obama Wins
In October 2008, President Bush and Congress passed a $700 billion bailout for the nation’s financial institutions, intended to help the worsening crisis. Americans opposed it. With the approval ratings of the president and Congress at all-time lows, McCain and Obama both promised change. Obama made good use of the Internet and formed a strong grassroots network of young supporters. On Election Day, Obama won 53 percent of the popular vote and 365 electoral votes.
638
Barack Obama waves to the crowd in Chicago's Grant Park on election night in November 2008.
It was the biggest victory for a Democratic candidate since 1964. Obama, the first African American to win the presidency, exulted:
PRIMARY SOURCE

« This is our moment... to put our people back to work and open doors of opportunity for our kids; to restore prosperity and promote the cause of peace; to reclaim the American Dream and reaffirm that fundamental truth—that out of many, we are one; that... where we are met with... those who tell us that we can't, we will respond with that timeless creed that sums up the spirit of a people: Yes We Can. »
—from the Address at Grant Park, November 4,2008
Q READING PROGRESS CHECK
TEKS
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills 2D explain the significance of the following years as turning points: 1898 (Spanish-American War), 1914-1918 (World War I), 1929 (the Great Depression begins), 1939-1945 (World War II), 1957 (Sputnik launch ignites U.S.-Soviet space race), 1968-1969 (Martin Luther King Jr. assassination and U.S. lands on the moon), 1991 (Cold War ends), 2001 (terrorist attacks on World Trade Center and the Pentagon), and 2008 (election of first black president, Barack Obama)
Analyzing How did the passing of the $700 billion bailout affect the 2008 election?
Financial Meltdown
g u i d i n g q u e st i o n How did the economic recession and housing crisis affect Obama's domestic goals?
11A describe U.S. involvement in world affairs, including the end of the Cold War, the Persian Gulf War, the Balkans Crisis, 9/11, and the global War on Terror
11B identify significant social and political advocacy organizations, leaders, and issues across the political spectrum
When Americans voted President Obama into office, many expected him to improve the shaky economy. Obamas domestic agenda proposed to create jobs, relieve suffering families, assist home owners, and ease the financial crisis. Yet as the economy worsened, Obamas specific plans to solve the nations problems drew criticism. Some people believed he was not doing enough, while others argued that he was misusing government authority by doing too much.
continued on the next page
SKILLS PRACTICE
The Economy in 2009
Despite the Bush administration’s bailout of financial institutions and insurance companies, the American economy continued to weaken. More Americans lost their homes, and banks closed. Many large companies reported record losses. They laid off workers, contributing to a spike in unemployment. With fewer workers, less money went into Social Security, threatening the sustainability of the program. As the crisis spread worldwide, global trade lessened and the world economy shrank.
Obama's Response
In response to the failing economy, Obama signed the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act in February 2009. The act aimed to stimulate the economy
Imagine you are running for president in 2008. Write a speech describing the nation’s problems and what you will do if elected. As you prepare the speech, think about different sentence types you can use.
You want the voters excited and want them to support you. Use sentence types that are most effective for each idea in the speech.
America's Challenges for a New Century 639
CHARTS/GRAPHS
Foreclosures averaged between 4-6% for many years.
*1 Evaluating What was the percentage increase in foreclosures between 2007 and 2009?
2 Making Generalizations Why was
there a steady rise in foreclosures beginning in 2007?
The weak economy caused many people to struggle financially. As a result, many Americans either sold their homes or lost them to foreclosure.
HOME FORECLOSURES
Mortgage Delinquencies and Foreclosures by Period Past Due, All Loans
■ 30Day(SA) BeODayfSA) » 90 Day (SA) ■ Foreclosure Process
2005	2006	2007
Source: Mortgage Bankers Association; U, S. Department ofthe Treasury
2008
2009
2010
monitor to observe, oversee, or regulate
(continued from p. 639)
TEKS
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills 11C evaluate efforts by global organizations to undermine U.S. sovereignty through the use of treaties
11E discuss the historical
significance ofthe 2008 presidential election
11F discuss the solvency of long-term entitlement programs such as Social Security and Medicare
18B identify the impact of international events, multinational corporations, government policies, and individuals on the 21st century economy
19D discuss the role of contemporary government legislation in the private and public sectors such as the Community Reinvestment Act of 1977, USA PATRIOT Act of 2001, and the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
continued on the next page
procedure a particular way of conducting or engaging in an activity
by providing tax cuts to working families and small businesses. It allocated federal funds for growth and investment as well as for education, health, and other entitlement programs. Many Americans were still angry about Bushs bailout plan. They believed it favored large businesses at the expense of ordinary people. To counter this anger, the act set up a system to monitor how the recovery money was spent. Obama pushed additional legislation through the Democrat-controlled Congress in July 2010. Among other things, this financial reform bill provided protection for consumers. It also called for more government oversight of financial institutions and large companies.
By the end of 2009, there were signs that some of Obamas measures were working. The nations gross domestic product (GDP) had climbed. Some of the large businesses that had accepted stimulus funds were reporting gains. The unemployment rate, however, continued to rise, as did the federal deficit. And many Americans were uncomfortable with what they viewed as a rapidly growing role for the federal government in the economy.
P READING PROGRESS CHECK
Identifying Central Ideas Do you think the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act helped stimulate the economy?
Health Care Reform, Energy,
and the Environment
guidingquestion What other major domestic events defined Obama's first years as president?
As a candidate and president-elect, Obama stressed many other domestic issues. Two priorities were to reform and expand the health care system and to solve the nation’s energy and environmental problems.
Health Care Reform
Obama’s health care reform plan aimed to lower health care costs, introduce better procedures for delivering care, and insure all Americans. In a speech to Congress delivered in 2009, he said, “We are the only advanced democracy
640
„„ E,rth-the only wealthy nation-that allows such hardships for millions of Its people. There are now more than thirty million American citizens who cannot get coverage.”
Obama wanted to pay for the plan through higher taxes on the wealthy and by reducing wasteful spending. Yet some Americans opposed what they saw as another expensive government intrusion. Months of heated partisan debate took place within Congress. No Republican voted for the final bill that passed in March 2010, and many vowed to overturn it. Though Obama had promised to reform the system of earmarks, the bill contained many.
The bill extended coverage to about 32 million more Americans who could not previously afford it. It prevented insurers from denying insurance to people who had preexisting medical conditions. It also gave tax credits to small businesses that provide health care to their employees. According to the White House, it would lower costs, strengthen the Medicare program, and expand the Medicaid program.
Interpreting Significance
Energy Policy and the Environment
President Obama’s energy plan enforced limits on the amount of pollution companies could emit. Conservatives who opposed the idea stalled the bill in Congress. Then, an environmental disaster struck the Gulf of Mexico in April 2010. A British Petroleum (BP) oil rig exploded, sending nearly 5 million barrels of oil into the Gulf. It was the worst marine oil spill in history. Commercial fishing and tourism in the Gulf region suffered. Obama required BP to create a $20 billion fund to assist people affected by the oil spill. Federal agencies directed the recovery, which lasted through October. H READING PROGRESS CHECK
Drawing Conclusions How did the British Petroleum disaster in the Gulf of Mexico affect the environment?
When President Obama chose Sonia Sotomayor and Elena Kagan to fill vacancies on the U. S. Supreme Court, he became the first president to successfully nominate two women to the nations highest court. These women are now the third and fourth female justices in the nations history. Born and raised in a Puerto Rican family in the Bronx, New York, Sotomayor is the nations first justice of Latin American descent. Determining the significance of both womens service to the Supreme Court will be based on their interpretations of the legal questions that come before the Court.
earmarks specifications added by both Republicans and Democrats for the expenditure of federal money for particular projects
2010 Midterm Elections
guiding qu estion IV/wf did the results of the elections say about the mood of the nation at that time?
As the 2010 midterm elections approached, Obamas approval rating was at a low point. Many Americans felt that the stimulus and health care bills had been too expensive and had not strengthened the economy. A grassroots movement called the “Tea Party” sprang up to protest the Obama administration. The movement took its name from a reference to the Boston Tea Party protests against British taxation. Most in the movement opposed what they called “big government”—including taxes, the health care program, and the economic stimulus plans of Bush and Obama. Yet they disagreed on many other issues.
Republicans gained a rousing win in the midterm elections. Republicans gained 60 seats in the House of Representatives and took back control of that House of Congress. It was the biggest shift in power in over 60 years. The Republicans also captured six Senate seats, though the Democrats maintained the majority. It was clear that Americans of all political beliefs needed to work together to solve the issues facing the nation. In a White House conference a day after the election, President Obama said, “Over the last two years, we ve made progress. But, clearly, too many Americans haven t felt that progress yet, and they told us that yesterday.” The United States had obstacles to overcome, the worst economic depression in 70 years and two ongoing wars. Yet opportunities to innovate in the nations economic system gave new challenges. The commitment remained to strengthen the nations political institutions as a foundation to address any future conflict.
(continued from p. 640)
TEKS
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills 23A identify and analyze methods of expanding the right to participate in the democratic process, including lobbying, non violent protesting, litigation, and amendments to the U.S. Constitution
24B evaluate the contributions of significant political and social leaders in the United States such as Andrew Carnegie, Thurgood Marshall, Billy Graham, Barry Goldwater, Sandra Day O’Connor, and Hillary Clinton
25C identify the impact of popular American culture on the rest of the world overtime
25D analyze the global diffusion of American culture through the entertainment industry via various media
26A explain actions taken by people to expand economic opportunities and political rights, including those for racial, ethnic, and religious minorities as well as women, in American society
continued on the next page
America's Challenges for a New Century 641
Occupy Wall Street protesters claimed that the high salaries and bonuses for corporate and banking executives were excessive. Coverage in the social media helped the protest in New York gain support, and similar protest movements spread to a dozen major cities.
H READING PROGRESS CHECK
Synthesizing What issues were raised by the Tea Party movement?
(continued from p. 641)
TEKS
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills 26C explain how the contributions of people of various racial, ethnic, gender, and religious groups shape American culture
26D identify the political, social, and economic contributions of women such as Frances Willard, Jane Addams, Eleanor Roosevelt, Dolores Huerta, Sonia Sotomayor, and Oprah Winfrey to American society
27B explain how specific needs result in scientific discoveries and technological innovations in agriculture, the military, and medicine, including vaccines
28B explain how space technology and exploration improve the quality of life
Polarized Politics
guiding question How did Americans react to the slow economic recovery from the recession?
The Income Gap
The recession widened the gap between income levels in America. The economy slowly recovered, but slow wage growth and high unemployment hit those in middle and lower incomes the hardest. As wealthier individuals recovered from the recession faster, their share of the nation’s total income increased. The 2010 Census showed that the middle-income families’ share of income had fallen to 45 percent, while the wealthiest’s share of income has risen to 46 percent.
Middle income Americans cut back on their spending, which further restrained the recovery. These families were hurt by the decline in manufacturing jobs. The family home was usually their biggest investment. When housing values fell sharply during the recession, some people found themselves paying higher mortgages than their homes were worth. Rising costs of health care and college tuition also hurt those in the middle incomes.
Occupy Wall Street
The widening gap between income groups helped spark a movement that called itself “Occupy Wall Street.” Protesters claimed that they represented “the 99 percent” of the population against the wealthiest one percent. They began by occupying a park in New York City’s financial district. Occupy Wall Street drew attention to economic inequality, tax breaks for the wealthy, and corporate greed.
Most of the protesters were young and identified themselves as political independents. They were critical of both major parties. President Obama acknowledged that the movement expressed people’s frustration with the financial crisis. After police moved demonstrators out of the parks they had occupied, the movement dwindled. Although the Occupy Wall Street movement expressed popular anger, it suffered from a lack of leadership and specific solutions to the nation’s economic problems.
The Tea Party in Congress
Public anxiety over the rising national debt was also reflected in a political protest group known as the Tea Party. Some leaders of the Tea Party
642
movement won seats in Congress during the 2010 midterm election They were determmed to cut federal spending and prevent taxes from rising. As a large bloc of members of the House of Representatives, these freshmen politicians favored confrontation rather than cooperation.
Republicans called for deep cuts in federal spending while Democrats called for raising taxes for the wealthy. House Speaker John Boehner attempted to negotiate a budget compromise with President Obama, but the large Tea Party faction was dissatisfied with the agreement they reached and refused to support it. A deadlock developed between the House controlled by Republicans and the Senate by Democrats, which kept either party from effecting economic growth.
As public disapproval of polarized politics rose, the number of Americans who called themselves independents grew. In some areas independents outnumbered registered Republicans or Democrats. Political independents told pollsters that they favored cooperation. These independents increasingly played a role in determining election outcomes.
New Civil Rights Issues
The first decades of the 21st century have seen several different civil rights issues emerge. In 2008, President Obama signed the Matthew Shepard and James Byrd Hate Crimes Prevention Act, a new federal law prompted by the 1998 murders of Matthew Shepard, a gay man, and James Byrd, an African American. In both cases, the savage nature of the murders attracted national attention, and began to build support for new hate crimes legislation. A decade later, the new law was signed. It expanded the definition of hate crimes, provided funds to state and local authorities to encourage investigation of hate crimes, and gave federal authorities greater power to examine possible hate crimes when local authorities choose not to follow up.
Another civil rights issue that emerged in the 1990s also gained momentum in the early 21st century. The gay and lesbian civil rights movement began to push for the right to same-sex marriage in several states. In 2003, the state of Massachusetts became the first state to legalize same-sex marriage. Laws regulating marriage have historically been a responsibility of state governments. As a result, the push for same-sex marriage took place largely at the state level.
The problem facing gay and lesbian couples was that while they might be married in one state, if they moved to another state where the laws were different, their marriage might not be considered valid. In 1996 Congress, with the support of President Clinton, had passed the Defense of Marriage Act, defining marriage for federal purposes as a union between one man and one women and specifying that states can refuse to recognize same-sex marriages allowed in other states.
In 2012, in Windsor v. United States, the Supreme Court struck down part of the Defense of Marriage Act, saying that the federal government could not limit marriage to one man and one woman. Doing so deprived people of their Fifth Amendment rights under the due process clause because it meant treating people from different states in different ways. It also violated the rights of states to have different legislation on the issue.
The Court’s decision, however, did not overturn state laws regarding marriage. In early 2014, 17 states allowed same-sex marriage and 28 states had amended their constitutions to define marriage as between one man and one woman. Also in early 2014, in eight different states, judges had overturned state bans on same-sex marriage and efforts were underway to bring the issue to the Supreme Court for final resolution.
America's Challenges for a New Century 643
Clarifying Second Amendment Rights
Another major development involving the Bill of Rights came in 2008, in the case of District of Columbia v. Heller. For the first time, the Supreme Court ruled that the Second Amendment of the Constitution gives individuals the right to own firearms.
The Second Amendment states: “A well regulated militia, being necessary to the security of a free state, the right of the people to keep and bear arms, shall not be infringed.” For decades, supporters of gun control had pointed to the reference to a well-regulated militia as evidence that the right did not extend to individuals, but only to militias organized by state and federal governments. In Heller, the Supreme Court found for the first time that an individual right to bear arms exists.
In 2010, in McDonald v. Chicago, the Court incorporated the Second Amendment, ruling that it also applies to the states, and that state laws must recognize the right of individuals to bear arms. For many conservatives, and organizations such as the NRA, the decisions represented a major victory in their decades-long effort to assert individual rights under the Second Amendment.
P READING PROGRESS CHECK
Identifying Central Issues What were the causes of disagreement over setting economic policies?
Political and Economic Issues
guidingquestion Why was it so difficult for Congress and the president to reach agreement on ways to improve the economy?
Despite the president’s stimulus plan, the national economy suffered from persistently high rates of unemployment. At the same time that federal funding expanded, many state and local governments cut back on their spending and laid off teachers and other public workers. Young people who were just entering the workforce found the worst job market since the Great Depression. The National Debt, Spending and Taxes
The national debt grew alarmingly high. Among the causes of the increased debt were President Obama’s stimulus plan, President George W. Bush’s tax cuts, the two wars in Iraq and Afghanistan, an expansion of Medicare to cover prescription drugs, the housing crisis, and the recession. Unemployment was a significant factor because those who lost their jobs or took lower-paying employment paid less in taxes. Federal deficits required more borrowing, which meant that the government had to pay more for the interest on its debts.
The issues of deficit spending, the national debt, and taxes, drove the two political parties further apart. The president appointed a commission to reach a compromise, but its proposed solutions of cutting spending and raising taxes won little support in Congress. Rather than confronting economic problems, Congress delayed these problems for future consideration. Significant Supreme Court Decisions
Like Congress, the Supreme Court was deeply divided over the issues facing the nation, and it reached major decisions with 5 to 4 margins. In the case of Citizens United v. the Federal Elections Commission (2010), the Supreme Court lifted many of the limits Congress had set on campaign financing as a restriction on freedom of speech. As a result, corporations could make political contributions, and wealthy individuals were free to make unlimited
donations. This ruling sent both political parties scrambling to raise campaign finances. The ruling also allowed non-party groups to spend massive amounts on media advertising. The resulting onslaught of negative political advertising further propelled political polarization.
Since conservative justices held a narrow majority on the Supreme Court, there were doubts that it would uphold President’s Obama’s healthcare law as constitutional. Four of the justices believed that the government could not mandate that individuals must purchase health insurance or face a penalty. Four of the justices believed equally strongly that the government had constitutional authority to require insurance under its power to regulate interstate commerce. Chief Justice John Roberts cast the deciding vote in 2012. In another 5-4 decision, the Court determined that Congress could not legally command people to buy insurance, but the federal government did have the power to tax those who did not buy insurance.
The 21 st Century Economy
Despite the wars and recessions that have affected the world since 2001, globalization has continued and the world’s economy has become increasingly interconnected. Contributing to this was the ongoing revolution in digital technology and communications. The use of cell phones, the Internet, and the computer has converged in a way that allows people to connect, interact, research, create, and work from anywhere, at any time, using a wide range of devices.
This new level of interactivity, sometimes called hyperconnectivity, has begun to transform society and the economy. As Christine Lagarde, the head of the International Monetary Fund observed: “If the previous revolutions were about using machines for brawn, this is about using machines for brains.”
Multinational corporations rapidly adopted the new Information and communications technology. This allowed them to integrate their operations worldwide to a degree that was not possible in previous decades. Global financial corporations also used this technology to enable the worlds capital to flow rapidly to new opportunities. Yet these interconnections also posed a danger. The world learned in 2008 that economic problems in one part of the world could affect other parts of the world very quickly.
The members of the Supreme Court in 2014; bottom: Clarence Thomas, Antonin Scalia, John G. Roberts Jr., Anthony Kennedy, Ruth Bader Ginsburg; top: Sonia Sotomayor, Stephen G. Breyer, Samuel Anthony Alito, Jr., Elena Kagan
America's Challenges for a New Century 645
Several new corporations led by innovative entrepreneurs found ways tc profit from the new interconnectivity. Steve Jobs led Apple Corporation to enormous success through the introduction of new digital devices, includim the iPhone, introduced in 2007, and the iPad, a tablet computer introduced in 2010. Another key entrepreneur in the early 21st century was Jeff Bezos, who founded Amazon.com in 1995 as an online bookstore. Amazon revolutionized online retailing and rapidly became one of the top 500 companies in the world selling almost any product through its website. Amazon has also helped drive the adoption of eBook readers and tablets.
Google is another major multinational corporation that arose because o] the Internet. Founded in 1998 by Sergey Brin and Larry Page, Google began as a search engine for the Internet. The company had the goal of organizing the world’s information, and making it accessible and useful. Google rapidly became the most widely used search engine in the world, and as the company grew, it expanded its research and development into other areas of software. Google Maps revolutionized online map use and navigation. Google also financed, and later acquired, the Android operating system, widely used on smart phones and tablets. Google continues to fund research into new applications of digital technology, including artificial intelligence, self-driving cars, robotics, translation software, renewable energy, and biotechnology.
Although the digital revolution has led to the rise of many new technology companies, many of the largest multinational corporations shaping the world’s economy predate the digital revolution. Of the 25 largest companies in the world in 2013, eleven were oil companies, and four were car companies. The need for energy and transportation continues to drive much of the world’s economic growth.
Efforts are underway to develop alternative energy sources, but the primary sources of the world’s energy remain fossil fuels: oil, coal, and natural gas. In the 1990s, an oil and gas company run by entrepreneur George P. Mitchell developed a new technology—hydraulic fracturing, also known as fracking—to extract gas from shale. The technology triggered what has been called the “shale boom”—the rapid growth of the gas and oil industry in parts of the United States where large shale formations exist.
Fracking technology has helped reduce American dependence on foreign energy, and played an important role in the economy’s recovery from the recession of 2008. After critics raised concerns about its environmental impact, political debates erupted in several states as to whether or not to allow fracking operations to proceed.
B READING PROGRESS CHECK
Identifying Central Issues What economic solutions did liberals and conservative propose?
A
Troubled World guidingquestion How did international issues affect the United States?
U.S.
Wars in Iraq and Afghanistan President Obama came to office determined to follow a more international approach to foreign policy. His foreign policy therefore relied more on the United Nations and sought to build consensus among American allies.
The Obama administration ended the American combat mission in Iraq and reduced the number of U.S. troops stationed there. At the same time,
rk“
Arab citizens in several North African nations conducted political protests against their dictator governments during President Obama's first term. This resulted in several regime changes in the regions, raising some hopes that democracy might take hold in parts of the Middle East.
the president expanded the American combat role in Afghanistan. Its mission was to fight the Taliban until Afghan forces could defend the country on their own. In 2011, a Navy SEAL team located and killed Osama bin Laden, the leader of al-Qaeda who had planned the 9/11 attacks on the United States. The U.S. also made increased use of pilotless drone aircraft to track and eliminate other militant leaders of al-Qaeda. While the drones reduced the chances of American and NATO casualties, they raised protests when they caused injury and death to innocent civilians near the target. Critics warned that the drone attacks would work against U.S. policy by alienating civilians who felt threatened by them.
Between the Iraq and Afghanistan wars, including military operations, foreign aid, and wounded veterans’ health care costs, the United States paid more than a trillion dollars a year. These costs helped fuel the deficits and national debt.
The Arab Spring
The wars in Iraq and Afghanistan heightened tension between the United States and Muslims around the world. Violent extremists sought to exploit this situation. President Obama went to Egypt to speak at Cairo University in 2009. He called for a “new beginning” between the U.S. and the Muslim world, based on mutual respect. He pledged to pursue a peaceful settlement of long dispute between Israelis and Palestinians, and also to promote democracy and human rights against ruthless governments.
In 2011, popular unrest in the Middle East led to a series of revolutions against oppressive governments. The movement, known as the Arab Spring,” overthrew dictators in Tunisia, Libya, and Egypt. Since American troops were engaged in combat in Afghanistan, President Obama was reluctant to provide American military support to the rebels in these nations. Instead, he relied on other NATO nations to provide the air support that helped rebels remove Muammar Qaddafi from power in Libya.
Overthrowing dictators caused political instability that posed serious problems for U.S. policy in the Middle East. Some of the government that fell had been security partners with the U.S. There was a danger that religious extremists might gain power, which would complicate relations with the U.S.,
America's Challenges for a New Century 647
make compromise with Israel more difficult, and jeopardize the supply of oil and other commerce from the Middle East. Another uncertain danger was the possibility that Iran could develop nuclear weapons.
The Euro Crisis
A
European debt crisis affected the American economy. Like the United States, European nations had also experienced a collapse of their real estate markets, bank failures, and recession. Some of these governments, including Greece, Spain, Portugal, Italy, and Ireland, struggled with high deficits and national debt. High unemployment in these countries diminished their ability to trade with the U. S., which further slowed the American recovery. Many European countries share a common currency—the Euro—so nations in the Euro bloc that had economic problems looked for loans from other nations with stronger economies. Germany boasted the most prosperous economy in Europe, but Germans were unhappy about “bailing out” those nations that mismanaged their finances. In order to get financial support from the wealthier nations, the debtor governments had to agree to reduce their government spending, even though this triggered higher unemployment and further depressed their economies.
Trade and investments closely connected the United States economy to Europe. Uncertainties over Europe’s economic future worried American investors. American official encouraged European leaders to stabilize their economies. Debating UN Treaties
From the moment the United Nations was founded in 1945, it had critics in the United States. Some Americans have been disappointed with the UN’s inability to act collectively to preserve peace and advance human rights. Others have worried that UN treaties and rules might pose a danger to national sovereignty and American freedom.
Frustration with the UN has continued in the 21st century. The Bush administration found it very difficult to rally the UN to support its war in Iraq. At the same time, others have been concerned that new international treaties developed by the UN endangered the nation’s sovereignty. Two recent issues have been the Law of the Sea treaty and the Arms Trade Treaty
The Law of the Sea treaty defines the rules and responsibilities of nations in their use of the world’s oceans. Various versions of the treaty have been debated for decades. Supporters argue that the treaty clearly establishe. rules for the use of the ocean and resolving disputes. Opponents argue that it undermines national sovereignty by creating an international organization—the Seabed Authority—to resolve disputes. They also point out that the treaty forces businesses to buy licenses to extract resources fron the seabed—a form of taxation without representation. Although the Unitec States signed the treaty, the United States Senate has not approved it.
Another point of contention has been the Arms Trade Treaty. The treaty establishes international rules for the sale and transfer of arms between nations. The proposed treaty was a result of growing concern that much of the violence and human rights violations in the world were a result of the illegal arms trade.
The treaty has been controversial. Many UN members have argued that it is an infringement of national sovereignty. Within the United States, opposition to the treaty has been strong. The NRA and Heritage Foundation, as well as other political advocacy groups, have argued that the treaty would infringe on the Second Amendment right to bear arms.
Supporters of the treaty argue that it specifically pertains to international arms sales, and would have no effect on the right to own
Many international treaties proposed by the UN have been controversial and a subject of debate in American politics.
weapons within a nation. Critics point out the requirements of the treaty to monitor and track sales across borders necessarily means nations have to register the ownership of guns within their borders. Although the Obama administration signed the treaty in September 2013, a majority of Senators indicated they would not vote to approve it.
H READING PROGRESS CHECK
Drawing Conclusions What economic consequences did international issues have?
The Election of 2012
guidingquestion What issues defined the campaigns of Barack Obama and Mitt Romney?
Having been elected president in 2008 by promising hope and change, President Obama found his reelection jeopardized by the disappointingly slow recovery from the recession. His opponents proposed a different route to economic revival.
The Republican Nomination
After Republicans won control of the House of Representatives in 2010, the party’s chances of defeating President Obama seemed stronger. The campaign for the Republican nomination began more than a year before the election. From the start, former Massachusetts Governor Mitt Romney was the front-runner. As a former business executive, he promised to apply his business leadership skills to improving the economy and putting more people back to work.
Romney faced a large number of more conservative Republican rivals. Although his rivals appealed to the Tea Party protest movement, they could not match Romney’s organization and financial resources. They portrayed Romney as more liberal, pointing out that he had signed into law a state healthcare bill that was strikingly similar to the president’s plan.
Romney won the nomination, in large part because Republicans felt that he had the best chance of beating President Obama. Romney selected
| Wisconsin Representative Paul Ryan for vice president. As chair of the 1 House Budget Committee, Ryan appealed to conservatives for budget plans I for cutting government spending and reducing the budget. The most 1 controversial provision of Ryan’s budget plan would convert Medicare into a ' system of vouchers.
America's Challenges for a New Century 649
GEOGRAPHY CONNECTION
THE WORLD IN SPATIAL TERMS
What commonalities can you identify that united the states that voted for Mitt Romney? PLACES AND REGIONS
Why do you think President Obama won Upper Midwest states such as Ohio andMichigan?
A
Choice of Different Paths Mitt Romney asked voters if they were better off after four years of Obama’s leadership. Because the economy had collapsed before Obama took office, however, Romney could not blame the recession on him. Instead, Romney had to convince voters that he could do a better job leading the nation to economic recovery.
Republicans believed that government controlled too much of citizens’ lives and that people should take care of themselves. Democrats argued that government had to do more to help citizens in need and raise living standard
Republicans saw the deficit as holding back economic development. Democrats said that deficit spending would stimulate the economy and create jobs. Republicans warned that government regulations were keeping business from being more productive and hiring more people. Democrats responded that after the economic collapse government should be more vigilant in regulating business to prevent further abuse. Republicans pledged to make further cuts in taxes. Democrats called for the wealthy to pay a larger share ol
the taxes.
Economic issues dominated the campaign. The two parties also disagreed over such social issues as same-sex marriage and abortion, with Republicans defending traditional moral values and Democrats calling for greater tolerance. On international issues, by contrast, the differences between the parties were less stark.
Politics and the New Media
The Internet increasingly played a role in American politics. By the 2012 elections, two-thirds of all Americans were using social networks. Unlike the traditional media, social networks created more interaction by encouraging people to respond and to share information. Studies showed that many people were likely to vote if they learned through social network that their friends were voting. Political parties recognized that social networking had become a new way of getting their messages out. Pollsters
650
began charting public interest in the campaign by the number of tweets sent during the conventions and other political events. The parties also made much use of email for fundraising.
Presidential campaigns still relied largely on web sites to raise funds, recruit volunteers, and provide lengthier discussions of their positions on the issues. Independent bloggers, commentators, and satirists were also active, much of it anonymously. A popular tool was to post videos. The candidates were the subjects of the videos, and the traditional media made the videos, but they were posted and spread online because of average citizens, creating more democracy in the media. This allowed ordinary citizens rather than politicians and the established media to frame the stories that the public will see and discuss.
Obama Wins a Second Term
After a long, expensive, and hard-fought campaign, President Obama won a second term in 2012. The polls showed that the weakened economy remained the leading issue for the voters. While people expressed disappointment over the slow recovery, they credited the president’s efforts to rebuild the economy and restore employment.
A devastating hurricane also affected the campaign. In October, a major storm hit the Atlantic coast, flooding portions of New Jersey and New York. President Obama took charge of the government’s response to the crisis. His actions earned him some bipartisan support in the final days of the election and may have played a role in convincing some undecided voters. As Americans debated the role of government in their lives, the storm showed how essential effective government could be during an emergency.
The election left Congress divided between a Republican majority in the House of Representatives and a Democratic majority in the Senate. Major issues of deficits, taxes, immigration, and the environment remained unresolved. They challenged both parties to break the partisan divide and legislative gridlock. On election night, however, President Obama spoke to the nation in hopeful terms, suggesting that whatever the challenges ahead, the nation would continue to move forward.
PRIMARY SOURCE
661 have always believed that hope is that stubborn thing inside us that insists, despite all the evidence to the contrary, that something better awaits us so long as we have the courage to keep reaching, to keep working, to keep fighting.&
—President Barack Obama, November 7,2012
LESSON 4 REVIEW
Reviewing Vocabulary
1.	Making Inferences Why did Obama sign a bill with earmarks when he had opposed them at one time?
Using Your Notes
2.	Summarizing Use your notes to write a paragraph summarizing the main domestic issues of the Obama presidency. 11B, 18B
Answering the Guiding Questions
3.	Identifying Central Issues What issues and events attracted support for Barack Obama's presidential campaign? 2D, 11B
4.	Identifying Cause and Effect How did the economic recession and housing crisis affect Obama's domestic goals? 18B, 19D
5.	Specifying What other major domestic events defined Obama's first years as president? 11B
6.	Interpreting What did the results of the elections say about the mood of the nation at that time? 2D
Writing Activity
NARRATIVE
Write a journal entry describing current events that will be read by students 50 years in the future. Be clear and concise with your description of these events. America's Challenges for a New Century 651
chapter 22 Assessment
■
Directions: On a separate sheet of paper, answer the questions below. Make sure you read carefully and answer all parts ofthe questions.
Lesson Review
Lesson 1
0 Drawing Conclusions What impact might Ralph Nader and the Green Party have had on the results ofthe 2000 presidential election? 11D
0 Explaining Why might the year 2001 be considered a turning point in American history? 2D, 11A
0 Describing What was the military response to 9/11 called? What Middle Eastern nation was the primary focus of this war? Why was it chosen as the war's focus? 11A
Lesson 2
0 Explaining Why did the United States invade Iraq?
0 Describing Describe the conflicting viewpoints regarding the United States' entry into war with Iraq in 2003 without United Nations' confirmation of weapons of mass destruction. What were the positions of other nations?
0 Analyzing What was the impact ofthe 9/11 attack on the U.S. economy? What policies did the president push through Congress in response? 18B
0 Explaining Describe the shifting roles of American and other coalition troops stationed in Iraq between 2003 and 2010.
Lesson 3
0 Analyzing Why did the National Security Agency wiretap domestic phone calls, and why was this action controversial in the global War on Terror? 11A
0 Listing Which members ofthe Supreme Court were added during President Bush's second term as president?
0 Stating What was the outcome ofthe Supreme Court case Kelo v. City of New London! How does the decision impact Fifth Amendment property rights of individuals, businesses and communities? 14C
Lesson 4
0 Evaluating What are two aspects ofthe recession that the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 was designed to combat, and how did it affect the private sector? 19D
0 Identifying What were the goals and concerns ofthe Tea Party movement and the Occupy Wall Street movement? Which movement has had more success? Explain why. 11B
0 Identifying Cause and Effect Why is 2008 a turning point in American political history? 2D, 11E
0 Evaluating What is the significance of Sonia
Sotomayor's appointment to the Supreme Court? 26D
Exploring the Essential Questions
0 Evaluating Counterarguments Write the text for a short debate on a political or legal issue. Describe two conflicting views on the issue, and
present counterarguments.
0 Evaluating Write a paragraph about the role of disputes in creating change, and the ways in which American culture is shaped by a set of common values and practices.
Critical Thinking
0 Exploring Issues Describe some ofthe civil rights struggles ofthe 21st century. 9A
0 Evaluating Identify a significant social leader and a significant political leader and describe the central issues concerning your selections. 11B
0 Assessing Evaluate ways in which global organizations such as the UN undermine the sovereignty of the United States through the use of treaties. 11c
0 Identifying Central Issues What were key issues tied to the experience of and response to Hurricane Katrina? 12A
Need Extra Help?
10	11	12	13	14	15	16	17	18	19 20
I
Co to page 1500150115031504150215051503150715081510151015131512 j 5031515,5171519151815171519 652
0 Drawing Conclusions Discuss the solvency of long-term entitlement programs such as Social Security and how they are affected by problems such as long-term unemployment during the 21st century recession, hf
© Sequencing Identify and sequence key events of the war on terror during President Bush's and Obama's terms of office.
0 Organizing Create a chart listing major multinational corporations and individual entrepreneurs who have shaped the 21st century economy and the contributions each has made. 18B
Social Studies Skills
$ Explaining Continuity and Change How did the
September 11 attacks lead to the USA PATRIOT Act, and how did it lead to the expansion of the NSA? What constitutional issues have been raised by these developments? 19B,19D
Explaining What were the major political issues of President Obama's first term? Identify the policies the president supported to address these issues. 11B
Explaining How did the constitutional roles of the executive, legislative, and judicial branches of the federal government impact the outcome of the presidential election of 2000? 2OB
0 Create and Analyze Arguments How was the levee failure in New Orleans after Hurricane Katrina due to factors of physical geography? How were the failures due to factors of human geography? 12A
© Economics Explain the connection between credit and the housing crisis that began in 2007. 18B
© Identifying Cause and Effect How did the financial crises in Greece and the European Union affect the United States economy? 18B
© Research Skills Research the process of rebuilding New Orleans after Hurricane Katrina. Share information about the work that needed to be done, the changes that followed for communities, and the condition of the city today. Incorporate images with text to create a presentation that communicates the impact of the natural disaster. 30A
DBQ
Analyzing Primary Sources
Use the comments below about the controversial USA PATRIOT Actto answer the following questions.
PRIMARY SOURCE
“ If we were to take the position, reflected in provisions in the USA PATRIOT Act, that the government can invade our privacy and gather evidence that can be used against us based on no suspicion whatsoever that we've done anything wrong, but simply because the government wants to gather evidence... then we will have rendered that Fourth Amendment principle essentially meaningless.”
—Congressman Bob Barr (R-GA), from "Problems with the USA PATRIOT Act," December 6,2005
PRIMARYSOURCE
« Zero. That's the number of substantiated USA PATRIOT Act civil liberties violations. Extensive congressional oversight found no violations.”
—Congressman James Sensenbrenner (R-WI), from "No rights have been violated," March 1,2006
0 Analyzing Primary Sources Compare the quotes. Which Congressman is most successful in defending his position? Why? 29A
0 Evaluating Arguments What is Congressman Sensenbrenner's response to the accusation that the PATRIOT Act violates civil rights? 29A
Need Extra Help?
	21	22	23	24	25	26	27	28	29	30	31	32
[Goto page	| 498 |	502		| 515	518	506 |	518	507	|5i5|	503	|5OO	M
America's Challenges for a New Century 653
Analyzing Visuals
Use the map and pie charts to answer the following question. (J) Analyzing Visuals Choose the question that summarizes
election results for Al Gore. 31B
A.
Which candidate received 27.13 percent of the popular vote? B.
Which candidate received 47.88 percent of the popular vote? C.
Which candidate received 50.3 percent of the electoral vote? D.
Which candidate's 266 electoral votes included the entire west coast? Extended Response Question
Informative/Explanatory Write an essay that describes upheaval in U.S. domestic and foreign policy in the twenty-first century. How have controversial events challenged both political leaders and the general public?
Standardized Test Practice
What did the Hamdan v. Rumsfield case state about the right of political detainees at Guantanamo Bay? 19B
A.
They have a right to be heard by a court to challenge their detention. B.
They do not have a right to be heard by a court to challenge their detention. C.
They have all of the same rights as American citizens. D.
They must be held until the nation is no longer considered to be "at war" against terror. © What democratic process was instrumental in passing the McCain-Feingold campaign finance reform of 2002? 23A
F.	litigation
G.	protesting
H.	lobbying
J. passing amendments
* One Gore elector from Washington, D.C., abstained from casting an electoral vote.
