CHAPTER 2
TIAL QUESTIONS
• What are characteristics that make up a culture? mlizations rise and fall? • What makes a culture unique? Lesson 1
Migration to the Americas
Lesson 2
Cities and Empires
Lesson 3
North American Peoples
The Story
Matters...
The year is 1905, but this woman and the rest of her Acoma community are living much as their people did in 1305. The Acoma's culture is shaped by the environment that surrounds them. Their mesa-top village provides natural protection from ancient enemies they have outlasted. Their artwork—in particular their finely crafted pottery—shows the influences of the shapes and colors of the American Southwest that is their home.
The Acoma are just one example of the hundreds of Native American cultures that developed in the time before Europeans arrived. Their story is part of the rich history of the Americas.
e This Acoma woman lived in whqf is today * western New Mexico.
# "w
Buye^arge/ Archive Photos/oettv Images
a
* 1
If ’l
Foldables
Goto the Foldables® library in the back ofyour book to make a Foldable® that will help you take notes while reading this chapter.
l°- - -	o	o
Canada/\\ I United t | States	Mexico/ \\ I Central i J America	South America
CHAPTER 2
Place and Time: The Americas c. 1492
By the late 1400s, Native American groups had spread out across most of North America. Groups adapted to the different climates and conditions to form unique cultures.
I
i
I
Step Into the Place
MAP FOCUS
Each Native American group had its own
features, yet groups within certain
areas often shared similar
characteristics.
REGIONS
How many different culture groups are shown on	A
the map? 29C
PLACE
According to this map, which part of North America was not populated by Native Americans? 29C A
VKBiWiWi iso° Speculating What geographic factors do you think might have defined the different culture areas shown on this map?
0
0
◄|
Step Into the Time
TIMELINE
Look at the time line. Had human beings reached North America before the end of f	1 Arctic I	1 Subarctic II	Northwest Coast |	1 Plateau BBi Great Basin	P"	"‘1	California	■ 1	1	Southwest	■ 1	1	Great Plains	1 1	i	Northeast Woodlands I )	Southeast	1
	
A A (■S', PACIFIC
oa 500 miles
-J
500 km
Lambert Azimuthal Equal-Area projection
c. 18,000 B.C. Humans have likely reached the Americas
160 W
Hawaiian Islands
(Settled by Polynesians)
A
C.1200B.C.
Olmec civilization develops in Mexico networks ef MAP Explore the interactive version of
There's More Online!	this map on
NETWORKS.
ef TIMELINE Explore the interactive version ofthis time line on NETWORKS.
40”W
60“W
lAMPANOAG
EQUOT
RRAGANSETT
120“W
c.A.D. 1300s Hohokam civilization begins to decline c.A.D.1438 Inca Empire begins to expand
ATLANTIC
OCEAN
IROQUOIS LEAGUE:
CAYUGA MOHAWK
kTAN ONEIDA ONONDAGA SENECA
c.A.D.700 Maya Empire reaches its peak
c. A.D. 1200s Drought strikes Ancient Puebloan (Anasazi) communities
| A.D. 1492 Christopher j Columbus arrives in West Indies
networks
There's More Online!
GAME
Tic-Tac-Toe gf GRAPHIC
ORGANIZER	ft,
Reasons Early Peoples Migrated
IMAGE
The Wooley Mammoth MAP Routes to the Americas SELF-CHECK QUIZ & VIDEO
NORTH
AMERICA
Lesson 1

■O '3

Migration to the Americas
NT1AL QUESTION
What are characteristics that make up a culture? fWS Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills
10A Locate places and regions of importance in the United States during the 17th, 18th, and 19th centuries.
30A Use social studies terminology correctly.
Reading HELPDESK
IT MATTERS BECAUSE
Human history in the Americas began thousands of years ago.
The Migration Begins
GUIDING QUESTION
Who were the first Americans, and how did they live? The written history of the Americas is several hundred years old, yet human beings have been living on these continents for thousands of years. Where did these people come from? How and when did they get here? How did the different corners of North and South America get settled?
Today, scientists are still seeking answers to these questions. Experts in archaeology (AHR«kee»ah«luh»jee), the study of ancient peoples, continue to piece together evidence that tells the story of the first Americans.
Archaeologists have learned a lot about the past from artifacts (AHR«tih»fakts)—the tools, weapons, and other objects that early people left behind. Based on this and other types of evidence, archaeologists have offered some possible answers to questions about the first Americans. A widely held theory of recent times is that the first humans might have come to the Americas 20,000 or more years ago. This theory maintains that early people traveled along a strip of land that once linked Asia and the Americas.
A
Land Bridge Revealed Throughout Earth s history, the climate has changed. Several periods of extreme cold have occurred. The most recent of these ice ages began 100,000 years ago and ended about 10,000 years

Taking Notes; Identifying
As you read, use a chart like this one to record reasons early peoples migrated from place to place.
The First Americans
Reasons Early
Peoples Migrated

1.
Content Vocabulary
•	archaeology • migration • carbon dating
•	artifact • nomad • culture
•	strait	•	maize
ARCTIC OCEAN
Greenland
EUROPE
2000 miles
J------1
I---1—*-T
0	2000 km
Miller projection
	
	PACIFIC
	- OCEAN
	
	
	
KEY - Extent of ice sheet	
, Land now underwater	
Possible migration routes	
GEOGRAPHY CONNECTION
Over thousands of years, prehistoric people migrated to and then throughout the Americas.
MOVEMENT
Based on this map, how did prehistoric people get to North America from Asia? CRITICAL THINKING
Analyzing Why do you think prehistoric people moved from one place in the Americas to another?
ago. During these years, a large share of Earth’s water formed huge sheets of ice, or glaciers. The glaciers held so much water that ocean levels were lower. The lower sea level exposed a strip of land—a “land bridge”—connecting northeastern Asia to what is now Alaska. Scientists today call this land bridge Beringia. It now lies beneath the Bering Strait, a body of water named for explorer Vitus Bering. A strait is a narrow body of water that connects two larger ones.
Many scientists believe early people traveled from Asia to North America across the land bridge. Yet not all scientists agree on how or when this might have happened. For example, some think people might have come to the Americas by boat. This might have allowed humans to spread faster throughout the Americas. As archaeologists discover new artifacts and evidence, new theories emerge to challenge old ones.
Searching for Hunting Grounds
It is clear, of course, that humans arrived in the Americas.
Long ago, they traveled throughout both continents. In time, settlements stretched as far east as the Atlantic Ocean and as far south as the tip of South America.
SKILLS PRACTICE
When you see a new word, think about it. Do you already know something about it?

archaeology the study of the material	strait a narrow passage of water between
remains of ancient peoples	two larger bodies of water
artifact a tool, weapon, or other object left
behind by early peoples
Lesson 1	55
What is the reason for this migration (my.GRAY.shuhn), or movement of people from one area to another? Why did these early Americans travel such distances? The answer may lie in the search for food. Early peoples were nomads (NOH.madz), people who moved from place to place in search of hunting grounds. Although they also ate wild grains and fruits, they depended on hunting for much of their food.
The first Americans did, indeed, find huge mammals to hunt. These included giant, shaggy beasts that resembled modern elephants: mastodons and mammoths. Early Americans were
skilled at hunting these and other animals. They stalked herds of bison, mastodons, or mammoths, charging at the animals with spears.
r
A single mammoth, which averaged 12 feet (3.7 m) tall, could provide tons of meat, enough to feed a group of people for months.
Earth Warms
About 15,000 years ago, the last ice age began to end. Temperatures started to rise, and the glaciers began to melt. Ocean levels rose, and Beringia disappeared beneath the waves, cutting off the land route between Asia and the Americas.
Around the same time, the large mammals on which humans depended for food began to disappear. This might have been the result of overhunting or changes in the climate. The decline in game populations meant that early Americans had to find other sources of food.
READING PROGRESS CHECK
Explaining How did the Ice Age expose a land bridge between Asia and the Americas?
Settlement
guidingquestion How did agriculture change the way of life for early Americans?
Reading HELPDESK
The constant search for food meant trying new methods. Early Americans caught fish and hunted smaller animals, while also gathering berries and grains. Farming was another new option that began to emerge. Its development would change the nomadic way of life of many groups.

migration the movement of people from one area to another
nomad
to place
a person who moves from place
The First Americans
maize a variety of corn
carbon dating a scientific method of determining the age of an artifact culture a people's shared values, beliefs, traditions, and behaviors
Academic Vocabulary
source a supply estimate a rough calculation of a number
Learning to Farm
Around 10,000 years ago, people in the area now known as Mexico learned to plant an early form of maize (MAYZ), which is a type of corn. These early farmers also planted pumpkins, beans, and squash. The crops provided a steady, reliable source of food. The farming people no longer had to move from place to place to find things to eat. Farming also allowed the people to spend time on activities other than finding food. This resulted in an improvement in the lives of early Americans. In the 1600s, Native Americans taught the Pilgrims of Plymouth Colony how to grow maize as well as beans and pumpkins.
Establishing Unique Cultures
Studying artifacts such as this antler or bone tool helps scientists learn about early cultures. Items such as these give important clues about the way ancient people lived. For example, scientists may be able to use a tool to infer how early people worked, what foods they ate, and what other tools they may have used.
Although some early Americans remained nomadic hunters, many others began to settle down. They built permanent shelters from clay, stone, or wood. They also made pottery and cloth.
Scientists have a method of determining how old an artifact is. Using a process called carbon dating, scientists can measure the amount of radioactive carbon in an
artifact. They can use this measurement to come up with an estimate of the artifact’s age. Carbon dating has helped scientists to date some settled North American villages to about 5,000 years ago.
Through the study and dating of artifacts from these villages, scientists know that agriculture changed the lives of early Americans. Common customs and beliefs also grew over time. Eventually, the groups of people living in the Americas developed their own cultures (KUHL*churz), or shared traditions and behaviors.
B READING PROGRESS CHECK
Identifying What were some changes that affected the nomadic way of life?
By studying tools such as this, archaeologists can learn about the skills and ways of living of the people who made it.
Include this lesson's information in your Foldable®
i Canada/Yt Mexico/\ l United \\ Central
States 1 America
South
America
LESSON 1 REVIEW
Review Vocabulary
1.	Examine the three terms below. Then write a sentence explaining what the terms have
in common.3OA;3OB
a.	archaeology
b.	artifact
c.	carbon dating
2.	Use the following terms in a sentence about the ancient history of the Americas. 3oa;3ob
a. nomad b. migration
Answer the Guiding Questions
3.	Explaining Why might people have migrated from Asia to the Americas?
4.	Explaining What factors likely led some early Americans to change from hunting to farming?
5.	Summarizing How does carbon dating help scientists learn about early cultures?
EXPOSITORY WRITING
Write a short essay describing how farming changed the lives of early people. Include examples of the types of food they grew.3oo Lesson 1	57
networks
There's More Online!
BIOGRAPHY
Malinche eT graphic organizer I ”	1
Native American	tr®
Civilizations
gf IMAGE The Aztec Calendar	; Lesso
Ef maps	fS*ii
. Civilizations of Mexico and	VlUt
Centra I America
eT SELF-CHECK QUIZ	^^^ENTi

Lesson 2
Cities and Empires
fcfffrrmi rmccTirtM unu,/in civilizations rise and faltt

TCKS
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills 2A Identify reasons for European exploration and colonization of North America.
27A Explain the effects of technological and scientific innovations such as the steamboat, the cotton gin, and interchangeable parts.
30A Use social studies terminology correctly.
Reading HELPDESK
It matters Because
Early Americans developed rich cultures and complex civilizations in several locations.
Great Civilizations of Mexico, Central America, and South America
guiding question What civilizations in Mexico, Central America, and South America predated the arrival of Europeans?
Centuries before the Europeans arrived, great civilizations (sih* vuh«luh«ZAY*shuhnz), or highly developed societies, thrived in Mexico, Central America, and South America. The largest and most advanced of these were the Olmec, Maya, Aztec, and Inca.
Each of these civilizations controlled areas covering hundreds of square miles. They included millions of people and lasted for several centuries. The accomplishments of the Olmec, Maya, Aztec, and Inca rivaled any of the great civilizations in other parts of the world. Their people built grand cities in dense forests and on high mountains. They created spectacular works of art and developed advanced tools. They also came up with complex methods for tracking time, counting, and writing. The Olmec
Along the Gulf Coast of what is now Mexico, a people called the Olmec (OHL»mehk) once flourished. Between 1200 b.c. and 800 b.c., the Olmec built stone houses, monuments, and drainage systems. Their farmers grew food for thousands of people. For

Taking Notes: Listing
As you read, use a chart like this to make note of the features of each of the following civilizations. Include when and where they existed, what they accomplished, and other features of their societies.
'8	The First Americans
OLMEC MAYA AZTEC INCA
			
Content Vocabulary
•	civilization
•	theocracy
•	hieroglyphic
•	terrace
(t)©Gianni Dagli Orti/Corbis, (b)Manuel
reasons that are not fully understood, the Olmec civilization declined. By about 300 b.c., it had collapsed. Yet the Olmec had a strong influence on the cultures that followed.
The Maya
The Maya (MY*uh) civilization followed the Olmec and reached its peak between a.d. 250 and a.d. 900. Maya farmers planted maize, beans, squash, and other vegetables. These crops helped feed a large population, which may have peaked at 2 million people. These people lived in the many large cities the Maya built in the steamy rain forests of present-day Mexico, Guatemala, Honduras, and Belize.
Maya civilization was a theocracy (thee»AH«kruh«see), a society ruled by religious leaders. Powerful Maya priests believed the gods were visible in the stars, sun, and moon. Their understanding of astronomy and their advanced mathematics helped them predict eclipses and develop a 365-day calendar.
The Maya also developed a system of writing that used hieroglyphics (HY •ruh«glih«fihks), symbols or pictures that represent things, ideas, and sounds.
Maya Transport and Trade
The Maya were active traders. Farmers brought maize and vegetables to city markets. They exchanged their goods for items such as cotton cloth, pottery, deer meat, and salt.
Without wheeled vehicles or horses, the Maya carried goods on their backs. Traders traveled on a network of roads that were carved out of the jungle. They also used canoes to ship goods, such as jade statues, turquoise jewelry, and cacao beans used for making chocolate, up and down Mexico’s east coast.
Maya Civilization Declines
In time the Maya civilization declined. By about 1200, its once-great cities were nearly deserted. The reason is a mystery.
Recent studies indicate that overpopulation, drought, and warfare are possible reasons for the Maya decline.
Though their civilization declined, the
Maya people did not disappear entirely.
Descendants of this great civilization still live in parts of Mexico and Central America today.
This Aztec calendar played an important role in religious as well as daily life. The Maya also had complex calendars.
Each Maya city had at least one stone pyramid, some of which reached about 200 feet (61 m)—the height of a 20-story building. The temples on top of the pyramids were religious and governmental centers.
CRITICAL THINKING
Drawing Conclusions What can you conclude about Maya society based on their ability to build such large structures?
Academic Vocabulary
complex highly detailed
civilization a highly developed society theocracy a society that is ruled by religious leaders hieroglyphic a form of writing that uses symbols or pictures to represent things, ideas, and sounds
Lesson 2	59
i
Malinche (c. 1501-1550)
Much of what we know about individual Native Americans comes from Europeans. Malinche is one example. In 1519 she was enslaved and living under harsh Aztec rule. When the Spanish arrived in 1519, she gave them information about Aztec culture. She also learned Spanish quickly and served as a translator for the Spanish, who called her Doha Marina. Malinche helped build ties between the Spanish and the many unhappy Aztec subjects in the region.
CRITICAL THINKING
Drawing Inferences Why might Malinche have been willing to help the Spanish? r
The Aztec Empire
In 1325, centuries after the fall of the Maya, a group of hunters called the Aztec (AZ-tehk) were wandering through central Mexico. They were searching for a permanent home for their people. One day, they came upon an island in Lake Texcoco (tehs-KOH-koh). There they saw what they thought was a sign from their god: an eagle with a snake in its beak sitting on a cactus. According to Aztec legend, this sign indicated that the island was to be their home. It was on this site that the Aztec would build their capital city, Tenochtitlan (tay-NAWCH-teet-LAHN). Today it is the site of Mexico City.
At its height, Tenochtitlan was the largest city in the Americas-and one of the largest in the world. The city was a center of trade, attracting thousands of merchants to its outdoor marketplaces.
Tenochtitlan’s construction was a marvel of building skill, knowledge, and human labor. Workers toiled day and night under the direction of priests and nobles. They dug soil from the bottom of the lake to make causeways, or bridges of earth. These causeways linked the island and the shore. Elsewhere, they used earth to fill in parts of the lake, creating fields for growing crops.
Aztec Culture
The Aztec created a military empire. In the 1400s, the Aztec army conquered many neighboring communities. Conquered people had to pay tribute in food and other goods. Some were also forced to work as slaves in Aztec cities and villages.
Like Maya culture, Aztec culture revolved around its religious beliefs. The Aztec believed they must perform human sacrifices to please the gods and ensure abundant harvests. They sacrificed prisoners of war by the thousands for this purpose.
A
Great City Remembered The Aztec Empire was still going strong when Europeans arrived in the Americas in 1492. The first Europeans to see Tenochtitlan were awed by its splendor. In 1519 Hernan Cortes led 550 Spanish soldiers into the Aztec capital. Cortes wrote:
PRIMARY SOURCE
There are forty towers at the least, all of stout construction and very lofty.... The workmanship both in wood and stone could not be bettered anywhere.99

Reading HELPDESK
-from Five Letters
Academic vocabulary
link to connect
60	The First Americans
GEOGRAPHY CONNECTION
The civilizations that developed in modern-day Mexico and Central America rivaled those that grew in other parts of the world.
PLACE
Which of the empires shown covered the largest area? CRITICAL THINKING
Drawing Conclusions Given what you have read about the Aztec, what do you think is the explanation for the small areas within the Aztec Empire that were not under Aztec control?
Bernal Diaz del Castillo, one of the soldiers, marveled at the “great towers and cues [temples] and buildings rising from the water.” Some of the Spanish soldiers thought Tenochtitlan was more magnificent than Rome and the other great European capitals of the time. Spanish leaders eagerly made plans to explore the Americas and establish colonies.
B READING PROGRESS CHECK
Identifying What was the capital of the Aztec Empire, and where was it located?
The Great Inca Civilization
guidingquestion Why were the Inca considered a highly developed culture?
In the western highlands of South America, the largest of all early American civilizations grew—the Inca. The Inca people founded their capital city of Cuzco (KOOS*koh) around 1200.
In 1438 the emperor Pachacuti (PAH • chah • KOO • tee) came to the throne. He and his son, Topa Inca, expanded the empire by conquering others with their
powerful army. At its peak, the Inca Empire stretched for more than 3,000 miles (4,828 km), from present-day Colombia to northern Argentina and Chile.
This double-headed serpent is an Aztec wood carving covered in turquoise tiles. It may have been worn as a chest decoration during important occasions.

Lesson 2	61
GEOGRAPHY CONNECTION
The Inca Empire was divided into four provinces along the western coast of South America. Modern-day countries are bordered and labeled in black.
LOCATION
In which modern-day countries did the Inca Empire have territory? CRITICAL THINKING
Analyzing How do you think the Andes Mountains shaped and affected the Inca Empire?
750 mites
___I
0	750 km
Lambert Azimuthal Equaf~Area projection
20QS
The Inca Empire 1532
jmbiaJ ~"
w,
BRAZIL
)LIVIA* l
1
> i
TROPIC
Qf CAPRICORN. PACIFIC OCEAN
CHI;
PARAGUAY
I "I
Chinchaisuyo | I	~|	Antisuyo
I	]	Collasuyo
I	"|	Contisuyo
^ARGENTINAc
1OO°W
80°W
'60’W
40°W
V
Fearsome Warriors
The Inca state was built around war. All men between 25 and 50 years old could be drafted to serve in the army for up to five years. Their weapons included clubs, spears, and spiked copper balls on ropes. Using slings, Inca soldiers could throw stones 30 yards (27 m).
Rather than fight this fearsome force, many neighboring areas accepted Inca rule. The Inca allowed those who cooperated to take part in the empire’s government. Those who resisted or rebelled faced harsh treatment.
Inca Culture
The Inca people believed their emperor was a descendant of the sun god. The Inca made magnificent gold jewelry and temple ornaments as gifts to the sun god. Inca workers also built great cities devoted to religious ceremonies, including Machu Picchu (MAH«choo PEE*choo), a site hidden high in the Andes.
Reading HELPDESK
terrace a broad platform of flat land SKILLS PRACTICE _________________________________
cut into a slope	Work with a partner. Use one of your vocabulary words in a question you ask your
partner. Have your partner use another vocabulary word in the answer.
62 Th^iu^mericans
■ & Society Pic
X
■rift
Incas used quipus to track resources, such as food supplies. Different colors and lengths of string and different types of knots made up the system for recording important information.
Include this lesson's information in your Foldable®.
Supporting the large Inca population required a lot of food. In order to farm their mountainous lands, the Inca cut terraces, or broad platforms, into steep slopes. Stone walls on the terraces held the soil and plants in place. Inca farmers grew maize, squash, tomatoes, peanuts, chili peppers, cotton, and potatoes.
Managing and ruling over such a large territory was a great challenge. The Inca built at least 10,000 miles (16,093 km) of stone-paved roads to link distant parts of their empire.
The roads crisscrossed mountains, deserts,
and dense forests. To cross deep canyons or river valleys, the Inca built rope bridges. Runners carried messages from the emperor in Cuzco to outposts throughout the empire. The Inca language, Quechua (KEH • chuh • wuh), became the official language for the entire empire. The Inca had no written language, but they did develop a system of record-keeping using string called quipus (KEE • poos).
By knotting different colors of string in special patterns, the Inca used quipus to record and keep track of information about resources
Like the Aztec, the Inca were thriving in the early 1500s. They, too, would soon come face to face with Spanish soldiers and experience a dramatic change in fortunes.
D READING PROGRESS CHECK

Explaining How did the Inca Empire grow so large?
1°	o	0
\ Canada/^	1 Mexico/\\	[ South 1 America
\ United	| Central \	
J
States ] America LESSON 2 REVIEW
Review Vocabulary
1.	Use the following terms in a paragraph about the Maya. 3oa,-3od
a.	civilization
b.	theocracy
c.	hieroglyphic
Answer the Guiding Questions
2.	Sequencing In what chronological order did the great civilizations of Mexico, Central America, and South America appear? 29b
3.	Describing What key features did the great civilizations of Mexico, Central America, and South America have in common?
4.	Contrasting In what ways were the great civilizations of Mexico, Central America, and South America different? 29b
EXPOSITORY WRITING
Consider each of the four civilizations detailed in the lesson. Write a short essay discussing what life might have been like in one of these societies. Use facts from the chapter to add details to your writing. 3od Lesson 2	63
networks
There's More Online! flLi Ef biography
Dekanawida
Ef game Crossword	IksJE
Puzzle
eT graphic organizer
Ancient Native Americans
Ef MAP Significant Adena, Hopewell, and Mississippian Sites
eT self-check quiz
Lesson 3
North American Peoples
I *' ’ i eT video
QUESTION
What makes a culture unique? Mg




TEK5
Texas Essentia! Knowledge and Skills 10A Locate places and regions of importance in the United States during the 17th, 18th, and 19th centuries.
10B Compare places and regions of the United States in terms of physical and human characteristics.
23C Identify ways conflicts between people from various racial, ethnic, and religious groups were resolved.
30A Use social studies terminology correctly.
Reading HELPDESK
IT MATTERS BECAUSE
Early Native American groups of North America adapted to their environments.
Early North American Cultures
GUIDING question What did the Adena, Hopewell, Mississippian, Hohokam, and Ancient Puebloan cultures have in common?
As in Mexico, Central America, and South America, advanced cultures developed in parts of North America that are now the United States long before Europeans arrived in the 1500s. Among these cultures were the Adena, Hopewell, and Mississippians in the central and eastern regions of the present-day United States. The Hohokam and the Ancient Puebloans emerged in the southwestern region.
The Adena, Hopewell, and Mississippian Cultures
In central and eastern North America, prehistoric Native Americans built thousands of earthen mounds, or earthworks. The earthworks were not created by a single group, but by many different peoples. Scientists have sometimes referred to these different peoples together as the Mound Builders.
The ancient earthworks take many different forms. One famous example is in the shape of a serpent. Some resemble the pyramids of the Maya and the Aztec. Some contained burial chambers, and others were topped with temples. This seems to indicate that cultures of Mexico and Central America, such as the Maya and Aztec, may have influenced some of these cultures.
Archaeologists have classified these earthwork-building cultures into three groups: the Adena, Hopewell, and

Taking Holes: Describing
As you read, use a chart like this one to make notes about each of the ancient cultures given.
54 The First Americans
Adena, Hopewell, and Mississippians	Hohokam	Ancient Puebloans
		
Content Vocabulary,
•	irrigate
•	federation
•	clan
Mississippian cultures. Modern-day scientists named the groups. No one knows what these early peoples called themselves.
The Adena were hunters and gatherers who lived in the Ohio River valley from about 800 b.c. to a.d. 100. The Hopewell people came later, between 200 b.c. and a.d. 500. The Hopewell were farmers and traders who built huge burial earthworks in the shapes of birds, bears, and snakes. Within these earthworks, archaeologists have discovered freshwater pearls, shells, cloth, and copper. These finds indicate that the Hopewell trade networks extended for hundreds of miles.
Cahokia
Sometime after a.d. 900, a people now called the Mississippians built the largest known earthworks complex in present-day Illinois. Later named Cahokia (kuh*HOH»kee«uh), the complex might have had 20,000 or more residents. Surrounded by farms and settlements, Cahokia became the center of Mississippian culture.
Cahokia appears to have resembled the ancient cities of Mexico. A great pyramid-shaped earthwork dominated Cahokia. Known as Monks Mound, it rose nearly 100 feet (30 m).
A temple crowned the summit of Monks Mound. A legend of the Natchez people, descendants of the Mississippians, hints at a direct link to Mexico:

7


^Cahckia
-Kings
\ Mounds a j
L ...
Iggfgggggl
ATLANTIC
OCEAN
Adena site Hopewell site Mississippian site I
GEOGRAPHY CONNECTION
The Adena, Hopewell, and Mississippian peoples lived throughout much of the eastern half of the present-day United States.
REGIONS
Which of the three cultural groups was spread over the widest area? CRITICAL THINKING
Analyzing Visuals What geographic feature is common to most of the Mississippian sites shown?



IN:
1 :i
300 miles
0	300 km
Lambert Azimuthal	OK,
Equal-Area projection 3° 1
k 8O*W
U ° U’*
PRIMARY SOURCE
Ancient diff dwellings are preserved at Mesa Verde National Park in Colorado. The largest cliff dwelling is Cliff Palace, which could shelter up to 250 people.
« Before we came into this land, we lived yonder, under the sun. (thespeaker pointed toward Mexico]... Our entire nation extended along the great water [the Gulf of Mexico] where this great river (the River St. Louis) loses itself.«
—Natchez legend
As the Mississippian culture spread, it led to the rise of at least three other large cities: at present-day Etowa, Georgia; Moundsville, Alabama; and Spiro, Oklahoma. In the 1700s and 1800s, the sites of these ancient cities became cities of the United States.
The Hohokam
From about a.d. 200 to a.d. 1400, the Hohokam (hoh«hoh»KAHM) culture flourished in the dry, hot desert of present-day Arizona. As with the Adena, Hopewell, and Mississippian cultures, the name Hohokam was given to this culture in modern times.
As desert dwellers, the Hohokam were experts at maximizing their few sources of water. They irrigated (IHR»uh»gayt*uhd), or brought water to, their corn, cotton, and other crops by digging hundreds of miles of channels. The Hohokam also produced pottery, carved stone, and etched shells with acid. The shells serve as evidence of trade with coastal peoples.
The Ancient Puebloans
The Four Corners is the place where the modern-day states of Utah, Colorado, Arizona, and New Mexico meet. It was in this region that the Ancient Puebloans (PWEH*bloh»uhnz) lived at about the same time as the Hohokam—from about a.d. 1 to
4
Reading HELPDESK
a.d. 1300. In the past, these people were called the Anasazi, but descendants of the Ancient Puebloans dislike that name.
The Ancient Puebloans built great stone dwellings that Spanish explorers later called pueblos (PWEH.blohs), or villages. Visitors to New Mexico today can still see one of the most spectacular of these ancient settlements, Pueblo Bonito. The huge structure was at least four stories high and had hundreds of rooms. Around Pueblo Bonito, archaeologists have found traces of a complex network of roads. These roads linked the pueblo with other villages. They suggest that Pueblo Bonito may have been a center for trade or religion.
irrigate to supply water to crops by artificial means
Academic Vocabulary
channel a long, narrow gutter or groove through which water can flow structure a building
Visual Vocabulary___________
pueblo a communal Native American structure with a flat roof; a type of Native American village
The Ancient Puebloans also built dwellings in the walls of steep cliffs. Cliff dwellings were easy to defend and offered protection from winter weather. One of the largest cliff dwellings is Mesa Verde (MAY»suh VUHR«dee) in Colorado. This ancient, complex structure was home to several thousand people.
The Ancient Puebloans began leaving their pueblos and cliff dwellings for smaller communities in about 1300. They might have abandoned their large villages when drought, a long period of little rainfall, destroyed their crops.
D READING PROGRESS CHECK
Describing Name two types of dwellings for which the Ancient Puebloans are known.
The Native Americans Circa 1492
guidingquestion Howdid early Native Americans adapt to their environment?
While the Hohokam, the Ancient Puebloan, and the Adena, Hopewell, and Mississippian civilizations eventually faded away, other Native American cultures arose to take their place. In the time before European arrival in the late 1400s, many unique societies flourished throughout North America. Within different regions, different groups shared common features. These features reflected the conditions within each region.
SSPL/Getty
Northern Peoples
A people called the Inuit (IH*noo»wuht) settled the frigid lands at the northernmost part of North America, near the Arctic Ocean. Some scientists believe the Inuit were the last migrants to come from Asia to North America.
The Inuit may have originally come from the Asian region of Siberia, bringing with them the skills needed to survive the cold climate. In the winter, the Inuit built igloos, low-lying structures of snow blocks, which protected them from severe weather.
The early Inuit were skilled hunters and fishers.
In the coastal waters, they hunted whales, seals, and walruses in small, skin-covered boats called kayaks.
On land they hunted caribou, large deer-like animals that live in the far North. The Inuit made warm, waterproof clothing from caribou skins and seal skins.
They burned seal oil in lamps.
Build Vocabulary: Word Origins
The words igloo and kayak are two examples of the many English-language words that come from Native American languages. Other examples include the words tomahawk, moose, and moccasin.
The Inuit people of the far North developed tools and techniques for living in a frozen and watery land.
k
Totem poles are carved wooden pillars made by Native American groups of the Pacific Northwest. Totem poles typically include symbols that represent the history and experience of a family or clan.
Reading Strategy: Categorizing
Western Peoples
The western coast of North America has a mostly mild climate and dependable food sources. Such favorable conditions helped many native groups in this region thrive.
The Tlingit (TLIHNG.kuht), Haida (HY.duh), and Chinook (shuh.NUK) lived on the northwestern coast of North America in what are now Canada, southern Alaska, Washington, and Oregon. The cultures of this region depended on the forest and the sea for food and materials needed for living. Forests provided wood for houses and canoes as well as tree bark for making baskets and clothing. The rivers and coastal waters were filled with salmon, a main food source. Native Americans preserved salmon by smoking it over fires.
The area between the Cascade Mountains and the Rocky Mountains is known as the plateau region. There, the Nez Perce (NEHZ PUHRS) and Yakima (YAH.keh.muh) peoples also depended on the land, fishing the rivers, hunting deer in forests, and gathering roots and berries. The Native Americans of the plateau region lived in earthen houses.
Present-day California was home to a great variety of cultures. Along the northern coast, Native Americans fished for their food. In the central valley of California, the Porno (POH.moh) gathered acorns and pounded them
into flour. In the more barren southern deserts, nomadic groups collected roots and seeds.
Between the Sierra Nevada and the Rocky Mountains lies the Great Basin region. There, the soil was too hard and rocky for farming. Thus, peoples such as the Ute (YOOT) and Shoshone (shuh.SHOHN) hunted and gathered small game, nuts, berries, roots, and some insects. They built temporary shelters from branches and reeds.

Southwestern Peoples
In the Southwest region, descendants of the Ancient Puebloans formed the Hopi (HOH.pee), the Acoma (uh.KOH.muh), the Zuni (ZOO.nee), and other groups. Farming was central to their cultures, with maize serving as their basic food source. They built their homes from dried mud bricks called adobe (uh.DOH.bee). They also used irrigation to grow beans, squash, melons, pumpkins, and fruit. Their trade network spread throughout the Southwest and into Mexico. Another group, the Jumano (JU.MAH.noh), were farmers as well as hunters and

Wh®" y°UAcate9°rize information, you	As
°"Nat.veAmeriCanGroupSCirca1492Jde^^
Western, or Southwestern peoples. Use these headings to organize notes you take as you read the material. The First Americans
gatherers. They traveled and traded throughout a territory that included Texas, New Mexico, and Northern Mexico.
The Apache (uh*PAH*chee) and the Navajo (NAH.vuh.hoh) settled in the Southwest region about 1,000 years ago. These new groups were primarily hunters and gatherers. In time, however, the Navajo settled in villages and built square houses called hogans. They also began to grow maize and beans, and they raised sheep as well.
Plains Peoples
The peoples of the Great Plains were nomadic. Their villages were temporary, lasting only for a growing season or two. The women planted maize, squash, and beans, while the men hunted antelope, deer, and buffalo. When the people moved from place to place, they dragged their homes—cone-shaped skin tents called tepees—behind them.
Buffalo were central to the lives of the people of the Plains. Native Americans used buffalo to supply many basic needs.
Buffalo meat was a good source of food, and people used the bones to make tools and weapons. Buffalo skins provided shelter and clothing.
After the Spanish introduced horses to Mexico in the 1500s, Native Americans captured and tamed the wild horses. The Comanche, the Dakota, and other Plains peoples became skilled riders. They hunted and fought on horseback, using spears, bows and arrows, and clubs while riding. The Great Plains, with its vast open grasslands, was well-suited to raising cattle. In the 1800s, ranchers moved rapidly into the region. Farmers on the Great Plains broke up the densely packed sod to grow crops.
Eastern Peoples
Complex societies existed in the woodlands of eastern North America. The people of the region relied on a combination of farming, hunting, and fishing. Farmers grew corn, beans, and squash.
Those who lived near water used hooks and nets to fish in the regions rivers and streams. A similar language connected the many Algonquian (al»GAHN»kwee»uhn) groups. The Cherokee (CHEHR»uh»kee) and Iroquois (IHR • uh • kwoy) had formal law codes and formed federations, agreements among different groups to join together.
Connections to
TODAY
Native American Languages
Many Native American groups still speak their native languages today, though the number of native-language speakers is small. It is estimated that approximately 150,000 people still speak Navajo (NAH*vuh«HO), while only about 2,000 still speak Cherokee.
For centuries, Native American groups of the Great Plains hunted buffalo. Native Americans often painted buffalo skins and made them into robes.

federation a government that links and unites different groups
Lesson 3	69
The Iroquois lived in bark-covered longhouses. Each building could shelter several families.
The Iroquois lived in what is now northern New York State. The original five Iroquois groups were the Onondaga (ah*nuhn»DAW«guh), the Seneca (SEH*nih»kuh), the Mohawk (MOH«hawk), the Oneida (oh«NY«duh), and the Cayuga (kay«YOO«guh).
These groups often warred with each other. Then, in the 1500s, they established an alliance called the Iroquois League. According to tradition, Dekanawidah (deh»kah«nuh»WEE»duh), a tribal elder, and a chief of the Mohawk named Hiawatha (hi*uh*WAH*thuh) founded the league. They urged the Iroquois to unite in the spirit of friendship and peace.
The five nations agreed to the Great Binding Law, an oral constitution that defined how the league worked and established the Grand Council. This group of leaders met regularly to settle disputes among the various peoples.
Reading HELPDESK

clan a group of people who have a common ancestor
SKILLS PRACTICE
Work with a partner. Point to a picture in a section of text you just
read. Retell the part of the text that goes with the picture.
7(C—Zfie First Americans
Although Grand Council members were men, women played an important part in choosing delegates to the council.
The different members of the Iroquois League were organized according to clans, or groups of related families. The women in each clan chose a clan mother. These clan mothers then chose the male members of the Grand Council.
Southeastern Peoples
The Southeast was also a woodlands area, but with a warmer climate than the Eastern Woodlands. The Creek, Cherokee, and Chickasaw (CHIH»kuh»saw) lived in the Southeast. Farming was essential for each of these groups. In what is now Georgia and Alabama, the Creek lived in farming communities, growing corn, squash, tobacco, and other crops. The Cherokee farmed in the mountains of what is now Georgia, Tennessee, and the Carolinas.
With soil and climate well suited for agriculture, the English colonists who settled the region in the 1600s and 1700s also farmed. Tobacco and cotton became important crops, as did indigo and rice. In northern Carolina, products used in shipbuilding were manufactured from pine trees.
A
Changing World Native Americans developed rich and varied cultures and ways of living that were suited to their environments. In the 1500s, however, Europeans arrived and introduced vastly different cultures and ways of life. Their arrival would change the Native Americans’ world forever.
H READING PROGRESS CHECK
Citing Text Evidence How did location affect the cultures of different native peoples? Give examples from the text to support your answer.
BIOGRAPHY
Dekanawidah (1500s)
Legend has it that a leader named Dekanawidah founded the Iroquois League. A Huron by birth, Dekanawidah sought an end to the terrible fighting among Native Americans in the Northeast. He drew up the "Great Law," which created a system for making decisions and settling disputes in an orderly manner. The agreement helped the Iroquois become one of the most powerful Native American groups in North America.
CRITICAL THINKING
Drawing Conclusions Why do you think Iroquois groups were willing to join together in a federation?
Include this lesson's information in your Foldable®.
	0	6
\ Canada/^ 1 United ] States	t Mexico/\\ | Central , America	> South \ America
LESSON 3 REVIEW
Review Vocabulary
1.	Examine the two terms below. Then write a sentence explaining how the words are related.
30A;3«B
a. federation b. clan
Answer the Guiding Questions
2.	Describing Describe the cliff dwellings of the Ancient Puebloans, and explain the advantages those dwellings may have offered.
3.	Explaining How did the Puebloan peoples adapt to the arid environment of the Southwest?
4.	Identifying What was the purpose of the Iroquois Great Binding Law and the Grand Council?
NARRATIVE WRITING
Consider the different groups discussed in the lesson. Write a paragraph that describes what life might have been like for a young member of one of these groups. Use details from the lesson to illustrate how your chosen group adapted to the environment where they lived. 3od Lesson 3
%,s :3¥ in
Activities A3
Directions: Write your answers using standard grammar, spelling, sentence structure, and punctuation.
OUse your flHEHSl to explore the Essential Questions.
expository WRITING Geography played an important part in the development of North America's Native American cultures. Write an essay in which you explain how the factors of geography helped shape cultures. Use specific examples from the chapter in your discussion.
3OD
© Social Studies Skills
SYNTHESIZING
Find the text of the Iroquois constitution on the Internet. Read parts 1 and 2 only. Then rewrite these parts of the constitution in your own words. Use standard grammar and cite the sources you used in your research. Share and compare your rewrites with those of other members of the class. How are they similar? How do they differ? 29A;3ob;3od © Thinking Like a Historian
creating databases If you have collected information and kept some sort of list or file, then you have created a database. An electronic database is a collection of facts that are stored in files on the computer. The information is organized in fields. For example, fields could be the name of a group, where the group lived, and information about their way of life. Create a database about three of the groups from the chapter. Create the fields and organize information in the fields. Share the information in your database. 291
© Visual Literacy
INTERPRETING IMAGES
Paintings or carvings on rock are called petroglyphs. This particular petroglyph was created by early Americans who lived in what is now southern Utah. What inferences can you draw about the culture that created this painting? 29B 
[2 The First Americans
Assessment
Directions: Write your answers using standard grammar, spelling, sentence structure, and punctuation.
CHECKING FOR UNDERSTANDING
0 Identify three groups that lived in different regions of North America. Write a paragraph describing where the groups lived and how they obtained food. 300
© Using Standard Punctuation Choose the correct punctuation—a period, question mark, or exclamation point—for each of the sentences. 3ob
A.
On October 12,1492, a lookout shouted, "Land_Land_" B.
Mali, one of the new kingdoms, grew very powerful- C.
Why did nations want to find a Northwest Passage_ REVIEW THE GUIDING QUESTIONS
0 Explaining How did farming change the lives of nomadic people?
O
Describing What does it mean to say that the Maya civilization was a theocracy? 3oa 0 Specifying List reasons the Maya, Aztec, and Inca were considered advanced civilizations.
0 Comparing In what way did Cahokia resemble Native American cities in Mexico? 29b
© Finding the Main Idea What was the Iroquois League? What was its purpose? 29b
CRITICAL THINKING
0 Analyzing How did an Ice Age make it possible for people from Asia to migrate to the Americas? ioc
0 Making Generalizations Why would towns and complex societies tend to grow up among farmers rather than among hunter-gatherers? 29b
0 Identifying Use the Place and Time map in this chapter, Native American Cultures c. 1492, to identify five geographic regions in North America and the Native American groups who lived there in 1492. 291
Need Extra Help?
0
Sequencing Place the following events in chronological order: ib Pachacuti expands Inca empire.
Asian hunters cross Beringia.
People in Mexico learn to grow maize.
Maya civilization begins to decline.
Iroquois League forms.
0 Comparing What should the people in a free society expect from its leaders? The Iroquois Constitution describes the virtues of a good leader, including honesty, fairness, and compassion. The welfare of the people must always be on the leader's mind. The leader's words and action should come from calm deliberation, not anger or fury. In what ways are the virtues desired for Iroquois leaders similar to or different from those desired for our political leaders today? Do any of the virtues not apply to political leaders today? Are there other virtues that you would include? 29b
0 Analyzing In what ways did the Aztec use war to increase their power?
0 Making Connections What does carbon dating measure, and how can it be helpful for understanding history?
0 Summarizing Why did the Inca build terraces? 29b
0 Identifying Cause and Effect How did the
introduction of the horse change the way of life for peoples ofthe Great Plains? 29b
0 Drawing Conclusions Think about what you have read about the great Native American civilizations that existed in the Americas prior to the arrival of Europeans. What became of those civilizations? What conclusions can you draw about the nature of civilizations and cultures based on the history ofthe Native American civilizations?	29b
IfYou've Missed Question	o	o	0	o	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0
Review Lesson	3		1	2	2	2,3	3	1	1	3	1,2,3	3	2	1	2	3	2,3
73
Assessment (continued)
E33 SHORT RESPONSE
Spaniard Bernal Diaz del Castillo was among the first Europeans to meet Montezuma, the ruler of the Aztec Empire. This excerpt describes how Montezuma was treated by his subjects.
PRIMARY SOURCE
“[T]here were... Lords who walked before the Great Montezuma, sweeping the ground where he would tread and spreading cloths on it, so that he should not tread on the earth. Not one of these chieftains dared even to think of looking him in the face, but kept their eyes lowered with great reverence.
—from The True History of the Conquest of New Spain
© Drawing Inferences Why did the lords spread cloths on the ground where Montezuma was to walk? 29B
© Interpreting How did the Aztec people apparently feel about Montezuma? Give specific details. EXTENDED RESPONSE
© Descriptive Writing Choose one of the Native American peoples of North America and write two or three paragraphs describing a typical day in the life of a member of that group. Be sure to include details about the environment and the way of life of the group.
STANDARDIZED TEST PRACTICE
BEE1 ANALYZING DOCUMENTS
This excerpt is from the Iroquois constitution.
30D
PRIMARY SOURCE
"I am Dedanawidah and with the Five Nation's Confederate Lords J plant the Tree of Great Peace.... Roots have spread out from the Tree of the Great Peace, one to the north, one to the east, one to the south, and one to the west."
—from the Iroquois constitution
© Determining Word Meanings What do you think the roots mentioned in the excerpt represent?
A.	a peace that grows and spreads out in all directions
B.	each of the Five Nations'confederate lords
C.	the desire to start wars with other peoples in different areas
D.	the separation that keeps the Five Nations apart
© Finding the Main Idea What is the main purpose ofthe Iroquois constitution? 29b
F.	to appoint the leader ofthe confederate lords
G.	to plant trees that will create a forest
H.	to establish peace among the Five Nations
I.	to begin a war with other cultures Need Extra Help?
’4 The First Americans
Exploring the Americas
1400-1625
networks
There's More Online about how the Europeans explored and colonized the Americas.	_
