CHAPTER 7
Place and Time: United States 1914-1920
Political conflicts in Europe sparked the beginning of World War I. The United States attempted to keep its long-standing policy to remain neutral in Europe's wars until events eroded US, neutrality and finally led to the nation's involvement. World War I was the first time in US. history that the United States sent troops to fight in Europe. After the war, the United States suffered economic uncertainty and social tensions as many Americans became anti-immigrant, anticommunist, and antiunion.
Step Into the Place
Read the quotes and look at the information presented on the map. £29 4C, 4F, 29A
DBQ
Analyzing Historical Documents How do the concerns addressed in the quotes reflect conflicting opinions about the United States becoming involved in World War I?
PRIMARYSOURCE
WNe have been neutral not only because it was the fixed and traditional policy of the United States to stand aloof from the politics of Europe and because we had had no part either of action or of policy in the influences which brought on the present war, but also because it was manifestly our duty to prevent, if it were possible, the indefinite extension ofthe fires of hate and desolation kindled by that terrible conflict and seek to serve mankind by reserving our strength and our resources for the anxious and difficult days of restoration and healing which must follow...." —President Woodrow Wilson, Wilson Accepts His Renomination, speech delivered at Long Branch, New Jersey, September 2,1916
PRIMARYSOURCE
w It is to be expected that nations will continue to arm in defense of their respective interests, as they are conceived, and nothing will avail to diminish this burden save some practical guaranty of international order. We, in this country, can, and should, maintain our fortunate freedom from entanglements with interests and policies, which do not concern us. But there is no national isolation in the world ofthe twentieth century."
Charles Evans Hughes, quoted in The Official Report of the Proceedings of the Sixteenth Republican National Convention, June 1916
Step Into the Time
Making Connections roUdMIMn
Wilson
1913-1921
Making Connections
Choose an event from the time line and write a paragraph
urn di n

May 7,1915 German submarine sinks the Lusitania


MAP
Explore the 
Balkan Nationalism
Southeastern Europe is known as the Balkans.
In the 1800s the Austro-Hungarian Empire and the Ottoman Empire controlled this region As the idea of nationalism spread across Europe, the people in the region fought a
series of wars to gain their independence. By 1914 most ofthe Balkan people were free, except for the Slavs living in Bosnia.
United States declares war
Congress passes Selective
May 16,1918 Sedition Act enacted November 11,1918 Armistice ends fighting
1919 Race riots and strikes take place in Northern cities
1920 Red Scare and Palmer Raids occur

T
S L
k t iwil L? If I* 2

ifcW*.
networks
There's More Online!
IMAGE
Selective Service Poster MAP Presidential Election of 1916 Ef VIDEO The Dawn of World War I
INTERACTIVE SELF-CHECK QUIZ
MEN OP
BpiTAJN’ < WILL YOU STAND THIS V , ft


Reading HELPDESK
Academic Vocabulary
emphasis • erode
Content Vocabulary
•	militarism
•	nationalism
•	propaganda
•	contraband
TAKING NOTES:
Key Ideas and Details
Organizing As you read, identify the factors that contributed to World War I by completing a graphic organizer similar to the one below.

TEKS
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills 4C identify the causes of World War I and reasons for U.S. entry
4F analyze major issues such as isolationism and neutrality raised by U.S. involvement in World War I, Woodrow Wilson’s Fourteen Points, and the Treaty of Versailles
continued on the next page

LESSON 1
The United StatesEnters World War I	/

I
nations goto war?
IT MATTERS BECAUSE
Through the late 1800s and early 1900s, imperialism, shifting national boundaries, old alliances, and nationalist sentiment: among European nations set the stage for World War I. Attack on U.S. ships and American support for the Allies eventually caused the United States to enter the war.
The Causes of World War I
guiding question What political circumstances in Europe led to World Warl?
In 1914 tensions were building among European nations, stemmin from events that dated to the 1860s. In 1864, while Americans fought the Civil War, the German kingdom of Prussia launched th first of a series of wars to unite the various German states into one nation. By 1871, Prussia had united Germany and established the German Empire, which became one of the most powerful nations i the world, transforming European politics.
Militarism and Alliances
In 1870, as part of its plan to unify Germany, Prussia forced Fran« to give up territory along the German border. As a result, France and Germany became enemies. To protect itself, Germany signed alliances with Italy and with the huge empire of Austria-Hungary which controlled much of southeastern Europe. This became known as the Triple Alliance.
The new alliance alarmed Russian leaders, who feared that Germany intended to expand eastward. In addition, Russia and Austria-EIungary were competing for influence in southeastern Europe. A common interest in opposing Germany and Austria-Hungary led Russia and France to sign the Franco-Russia Alliance in 1894. Under the alliance, the two nations promised to come to each other s aid in a war against the Triple Alliance.
Such alliances fostered militarism—the strong buildup of armed forces to intimidate and threaten other nations. Over time, German militarism led Britain to become involved in the alliance
232
system. Britain s policy was to try to prevent one nation from controlling all of Europe. By the late 1800s, Germany had clearly become Europe’s strongest nation.
In 1898 Germany began building a large modern navy. The buildup threatened the British, who rushed to build warships. By the early 1900s, Britain and Germany were engaged in an arms race. The race convinced Britain to build closer ties with France and Russia. The British refused to sign a formal alliance, so the relationship became known as an entente cordiale, or friendly understanding. Britain, France, and Russia became known as the Triple Entente.
Imperialism and Nationalism
By the late 1800s, nationalism, or a feeling of intense pride in ones homeland, had become a powerful idea in Europe. Nationalists place primary emphasis on promoting their homeland’s culture and interests. They believe in the right of self-determination—the idea that those who share a national identity should have their own country and government. In the 1800s, nationalism led to a crisis in the Balkan region of southeastern Europe.
In the 1700s and 1800s, imperialism—the ruling or controlling of other peoples or nations through annexation, military conquest, or economic domination—was how European powers built empires. For years the Ottoman Empire and the Austro-Hungarian Empire had ruled the Balkans. But as nationalism spread in the late 1800s and early 1900s, national groups such as the South Slavs—Serbs, Bosnians, Croats, and Slovenes—began to press for independence. The Serbs, who were the first to gain independence, formed a nation called Serbia between the two empires. Serbia believed that its mission was to unite the South Slavs.
Russia supported the Serbs, but Austria-Hungary worked to limit Serbia’s growth. In 1908 Austria-Hungary annexed Bosnia, which had belonged to the Ottoman Empire, outraging the Serbs. The annexation demonstrated that Austria-Hungary had no intention of letting the Slavic people in its empire become independent.
An Assassination Brings War
In June 1914, Archduke Franz Ferdinand, heir to the Austro-Hungarian throne, visited the Bosnian capital of Sarajevo. As he and his wife rode through the city, Bosnian revolutionary Gavrilo Princip rushed their car and shot them dead. The assassination occurred with the knowledge of Serbian officials who hoped to start a war that would damage Austria-Hungary.
Austria-Hungary decided the time had come to crush Serbia in order to prevent Slavic nationalism from undermining its empire. Knowing an attack on Serbia might trigger a war with Russia, the Austrians asked their German allies for support. Austria-Hungary then issued an ultimatum to the Serbian government. The Serbs counted on Russia to back them up, and the Russians, in turn, counted on France.
On July 28, Austria-Hungary declared war on Serbia. Russia immediately mobilized its army, including troops stationed on the German border. Within days Germany declared war on Russia and France. World War I had begun.
Germany immediately launched a massive invasion of France, hoping to knock the French out of the war, so it
(continued from p. 232)
TEKS
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills 15D describe the economic effects of international military conflicts, including World War I, on the United States
militarism a policy of aggressive military preparedness
nationalism loyalty and devotion to a nation
emphasis a special importance given to an object or idea
The assassination of Archduke Franz Ferdinand in late June 1914 spurred Austria-Hungary to declare war on Serbia, beginning World War I.
CR5TKAL THINKING
Identifying Central Ideas How did the conflict between the policy of imperialism and the principle of nationalism lead to war between Austria-Hungary and Serbia?


''--! *?WS^XS:
could turn its attention east to Russia. But the German plan required the forces to advance through Belgium and the British had signed a treaty v Belgium guaranteeing the country’s neutrality. When German forces crossed into Belgium, Britain declared war.
Those fighting for the Triple Entente were called the Allies. Italy joined them in 1915 after being promised part of Austro-Hungarian territory after the war. Germany and Austria-Hungary joined with th Ottoman Empire and Bulgaria to form the Central Powers. German) plan to defeat France before Russia could mobilize failed. When Rus
invaded Germany, the Germans were forced to move some troops eastward to thwart the attack. The Western Front became a bloody stalemate along hundreds of miles of trenches, with British and Fre: forces on one side and German forces on the other.
Q READING PROGRESS CHECK

Evaluating How did the complex web of European alliances contribu to the outbreak of World War I?
During World War I, both Britain and Germany produced propaganda posters. German propaganda was mostly anti-Russian and did not appeal to Americans, however, while British propaganda did.
CRITICALTHINKING
Analyzing Primary Sources What message does this poster want to convince the viewer to believe? propaganda the
spreading of ideas about an institution or individual for the purpose of influencing opinion
-Thinking Like a -n
HISTORIAN
Determining Cause and Effect
Propaganda is a powerful force to influence opinion.
In wartime, propaganda can be used to convince people to take sides or participate for a particular cause or reason.
As a historian, how much do you think the British propaganda swayed the United States to support the Allies in World War I, or were other reasons, such as business, more of a deciding factor?
The United States Enters the War
guiding question What events motivated the United States tojoin the war?
When World War I began, President Wilson was determined to keep the United States out of a European conflict. He immediately declared the United States to be neutral and asked all Americans “to be impartial in thought as well as in action.” Despite Wilsons hopes for neutrality, events gradually drew the United States into the war on the side of the Allies. The Neutrality Debate
Despite the president’s plea, most Americans supported one side or the other. Many German Americans supported their homeland, and many Iri Americans harbored hostility toward Britain, but in general public opinic favored the Allies. Many Americans valued the heritage, language, and political ideals they shared with Britain. Others treasured America’s links with France, a great friend to America during the Revolutionary War.
For more than two years, the United States remained neutral. During this time a great debate began over whether the country should prepare f war. Supporters of the “preparedness” movement believed that preparing was the best way to make sure the United States was not forced into the conflict. Others disagreed. In 1915, Carrie Chapman Catt and Jane Addams—leaders of the women’s suffrage movement—founded the Women’s Peace Party. This organization, along with others such as the League to Limit Armament, worked to keep America out of the war.
One select group of Americans was decidedly pro British: President Wilsons cabinet. Only Secretary of State William Jennings Bryan favored neutrality. The other cabinet members argued forcefully on behalf of Brit Many U.S. military leaders also backed Britain, believing an Allied victor was the only way to preserve the world’s balance of power.
British officials worked diligently to win American support. One method they used was propaganda, or information designed to influenc opinion. The British cut the transatlantic telegraph cable from Europe to United States so most war news would be based on British reports. The American ambassador to Britain endorsed many of these reports, and American public opinion swayed in favor ofthe Allies.
234
Companies in the United States also had strong ties to the Allies, and many American banks invested heavily in an Allied victory. By 1917, American loans to the Allies totaled over $2 billion. Although other banks, particularly in the Midwest where pro-German feelings were strongest, lent some $27 million to Germany, the country’s prosperity was intertwined with the Allies. If the Allies won, the investments would be paid back; if not, the money might never be repaid.
Moving Toward War
A series of events gradually eroded American neutrality and drew the United States into the war. Shortly after the war began, the British blockaded German ports. They forced neutral merchant ships sailing to Europe to land at British ports to be inspected for contraband, or goods prohibited from shipment to Germany and its allies. Although the U.S. government protested Britain’s decision, the German response angered Americans even more. In February 1915, the Germans announced that they would use submarines called U-boats to sink without warning any ship they found in the waters around Britain. This decision violated an international treaty signed by Germany that banned attacks on civilian ships without warning.
erode to wear away at something until it disappears
contraband goods whose importation, exportation, or possession is illegal
ANALYZING PRIMARY SOURCES
Should the United States Stay Neutral in World War I?
Many Americans were divided about whether the United States should remain neutral. Voices spoke out loudly on both sides.
--------YES----------	--------NO
« Germany is not moving against this country. She has not been guilty of any aggression against us. She has taken the lives of a few of our citizens, because they got in the way when she was prosecuting a war against another nation and fighting to preserve her existence. If the German Government should make aggressive warfare against the United States you would not need
any exhortation in the Senate of the United States to arouse the patriotism ofthe American people. You would not be holding open your enlisting stations without getting any soldiers.99
—from the Congressional Record, March 4,1917
«I have come to the conclusion that the German Government is utterly hostile to all nations with democratic institutions because those who compose it see in democracy a menace to absolutism and the defeat ofthe German ambition for world domination....
... Germany must not be permitted to win this war and to break even, though to prevent it this country is forced to take an active part. This ultimate necessity must be
constantly in our minds in all our controversies with the belligerents. American public opinion must be prepared for the time, which may come, when we will have to cast aside our neutrality and become one ofthe champions of democracy."
—from War Memoirs ofRobert Lansing, July 11,1915
Robert Lansing, Secretary of State
DBQ
Analyzing Historical Documents |	0 Summarizing When does Senator Works believe war
I	against Germany would be justified?
E
I © Supporting A Point of View Which side ofthe neutrality I	issue do you think was correct? Use historical evidence to
I	explain your point of view.	________
! i .......................	.■	'1.....1.
0 Creating an Oral Presentation Using correct social studies terminology, prepare a lecture for your class explaining the causes of World War I and the reasons America did not stay neutral. Be sure to explain key historical concepts including nationalism, imperialism, and militarism.
World War I and Its Aftermath 235
BEBESIB®® i
ItHE ‘UISfflMftB
■	— iiibva verdict ***** . 1
it is *®S9 JKKE*
On May 7, 1915, a U-boat sank the British passenger ship Lusitani killing over 1,000 passengers—including 128 Americans. The attack gave credibility to British propaganda and changed American attitude about the war. Wilson sent an official protest to Germany, but in Mari 1916, a U-boat torpedoed a French passenger ship. Wilson then decided to issue one last warning demanding that the German
government abandon its methods or risk war with the United States. Germany did not want to strengthen the Allies by drawing the
United States into the war. It promised with certain conditions to stc sinking merchant ships without warning. President Wilson’s success played an important part in his reelection bid in 1916. His campaigi slogan, “He kept us out of war,” helped him win a narrow victory.
„„ r- 1	... .
The United States Declares War
In January 1917, German official Arthur Zimmermann sent a telegrai to the German ambassador in Mexico promising Mexico the return o its “lost territory in Texas, New Mexico, and Arizona” if it allied with Germany. British intelligence intercepted the Zimmermann telegram and it ran in American newspapers. Furious, many Americans concluded tl
The sinking ofthe Lusitania angered many Americans and proved to be a turning point in the war.
k CRITICAL THINKING Determining Cause and Effect What were two long-term effects ofthe sinking ofthe Lusitania!
war with Germany was necessary.
Then, on February 1, 1917, Germany resumed unrestricted submarin warfare. German military leaders believed that they could starve Britain into submission if U-boats began sinking all ships on sight. They did not believe that the United States could raise an army and transport it to Europe in time if it decided to enter the war. Between February 3 and March 21, U-boats sank six American ships. Roused to action, President Wilson asked Congress to declare war on Germany on April 2, 1917:
PRIMARY SOURCE
«lt is a fearful thing to lead this great peaceful people into war.... But the right is more precious tl peace, and we shall fight forthe things which we have always carried nearest to our hearts—for democracy, forthe right of those who submit to authority to have a voice in their own governments, the rights and liberties of small nations....»
—quoted in the Congressional Recorc
Within days the Senate and the House had voted for the resolution, a Wilson signed it. The United States was at war.
READING PROGRESS CHECK
Summarizing How did Germany's use of unrestricted submarine warfare bring t United States into World War I?
LESSON 1 REVIEW
Answering the Guiding Questions
4.	Identifying Cause and Effect What political circumstances Europe led to World War I? 4C
5.	Summarizing What events motivated the United States to j the war? 4C.4F
Writing Activity
ARGUMENT
Suppose you are an American survivor ofthe sinking of the Lusitania. Write a letter to President Wilson a what you think he should do. 4C,4F Reviewing Vocabulary
1.	Explaining Explain how militarism contributed to the beginning of World War I. 4C
2.	Monitoring How did British propaganda influence American public opinion? 4C,4F
Using Your Notes
3.	Comparing and Contrasting Use your notes to write a short essay comparing and contrasting the factors that caused European nations and the United States to become involved in World War I. 4C.4F
236
networks
There's More Online!
BIOGRAPHY
Eugene V. Debs BIOGRAPHY
Oliver Wendell Holmes 
IMAGE
Military Recruitment Poster IMAGE
Victory Garden Poster VIDEO
America Joins the War eT interactive self-check QUIZ
LESSON 2
The Home Front
Why do nations go to war?
Reading HELPDESK
Academic Vocabulary
it matters Because
To fight World War I, the U.S. government used progressive ideas and new government agencies to mobilize the population and organize the economy.
•	migrate • draft
Content Vocabulary
•	victory garden
•	espionage
TAKING NOTES:
Organizing the Economy
guiding question What did Congress doto prepare the economy forwar?
When the United States entered the war in April 1917, progressives controlled the federal government. Their ideas about planning and management shaped how the government organized the war effort.
Key Ideas and Details
Organizing As you read, use the major headings of this lesson to create an outline similar to the one below.
The Home Front I. Organizing the Economy
i
FFJB
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills 4F analyze major issues such as isolationism and neutrality raised by U.S. involvement in World War I, Woodrow Wilson’s Fourteen Points, and the Treaty of Versailles
15D describe the economic effects of international military conflicts, including World War I, on the United States
continued on the next page
Wartime Agencies
As part of the war effort, Congress created new agencies staffed by business executives, managers, and government officials to coordinate mobilization and ensure the efficient use of national resources. These agencies emphasized cooperation between big business and government.
The War Industries Board (WIB) coordinated the production of war materials. Early problems convinced President Wilson to expand the Board s powers. The WIB told manufacturers what they could produce, allocated raw materials, ordered new factory construction, and sometimes set prices.
The Food Administration, run by Herbert Hoover, was responsible for increasing food production while reducing civilian consumption. The agency encouraged families to conserve food and grow their own vegetables in victory gardens. “Eat more corn, oats and rye products—fish and poultry—fruits, vegetables and potatoes, baked, boiled and broiled foods.... Eat less wheat, meat, sugar and fats to save for the army and our allies,” urged Food Administration posters.
The Fuel Administration managed use of coal and oil. To conserve energy, it introduced the first usage of daylight saving time, shortened workweeks for civilian goods factories, and encouraged Heatless Mondays.
World War I and Its Aftermath 237
victory garden a garden planted by civilians during war to raise vegetables for home use, leaving more of other foods for the troops
(continued from p. 237)
ma Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills
19B explain constitutional issues raised by federal government policy changes during times of significant events, including World War I, the Great Depression, World War II, the 1960s, and 9/11
21C evaluate constitutional change in terms of strict construction versus judicial interpretation
26A explain actions taken by people to expand economic opportunities and political rights, including those for racial, ethnic, and religious minorities as well as women, in American society
migrate to move from one location to another
By the end ofthe war, the United States had spent about $32 billion. To fund the war effort, Congress raised income tax rates, placed new taxes on corporate profits, imposed an extra tax on the profits of arms factories, and borrowed over $20 billion through the sale of Liberty Bonds and Victory Bonds. Americans who bought bonds were lending money to the government to be repaid with interest in a specified number of years. Mobilizing the Workforce
The war effort also required the cooperation of workers. To prevent strikes from disrupting the war effort, the government established the National War Labor Board (NWLB) in April 1918. The NWLB often pressured industry to improve wages, adopt an eight-hour workday, and allow unions the right to organize and bargain collectively. In exchange, labor leaders agreed not to disrupt war production. As a result, membership in unions increased by over one million between 1917 and 1919.
With so many men in the military, employers were willing to hire women for jobs traditionally held by men. Some 1 million women joined the workforce for the first time, and another 8 million switched to better industrial jobs. Women worked in factories, shipyards, and railroad yards and served as police officers, mail carriers, and train engineers. When the war ended, however, most women returned to their previous jobs or stopped working. Yet the changes demonstrated that women were capable of holding jobs that many had believed only men could do.
Desperate for workers, Henry Ford sent agents to the South to recruit African Americans. Other companies quickly followed suit. Promises of high wages and plentiful work convinced between 300,000 and 500,000 African Americans to move north. This massive population movement became known as the Great Migration. The racial makeup of such cities as Chicago, New York, Cleveland, and Detroit changed greatly. Eventually, so did politics in the Northern cities, where African Americans were able to vote.
The war also encouraged other groups to migrate. Between 1917 and 1920, more than 100,000 Mexicans migrated into the Southwest, providing labor for farmers and ranchers. Mexican Americans also found new
CHARTS/GRAPHS
To pay for the war, the U.S. government raised taxes and issued bonds. The government printed posters, organized parades, and asked movie stars to help promote war bonds. Here, actor Douglas Fairbanks urges Americans to buy Liberty Bonds at a rally in New York City in 1918.
1	Making Inferences What can you infer about government finances by the disparity between the amount of revenue raised through loans versus taxation?
2	Predicting Consequences What consequence might result from the way the war was paid for?
PAYING FOR WORLD WAR I
238
Eugene V. Debs, leader of the American Socialist Party, was arrested and sentenced to 10 years in prison under the Espionage Act for giving an antiwar speech in Canton, Ohio.
CRITICALTHINKING
Interpreting What did the sentencing of Debs and others show about wartime freedom? ipportunities in factory jobs in many American cities, ake other immigrant groups before them, they faced lostility and discrimination. Mexican Americans tended o settle in separate neighborhoods, called barrios, where hey could support one another.
Shaping Public Opinion
Progressives did not think that organizing the economy was enough to ensure the success of the war effort. They also believed the government needed to shape public opinion. Soon after Congress declared war, Wilson created the Committee on Public Information (CPI) to “sell” the war to the American people. Headed by
journalist George Creel, the CPI recruited advertising executives, artists, authors, songwriters, entertainers, public speakers, and motion picture companies to help sway public opinion in favor ofthe war.
The CPI distributed pamphlets and arranged for thousands of “four-minute speeches” to be delivered at movie theaters and other public places. Some 75,000 speakers, known as Four-Minute Men, urged audiences to support the war in various ways, from buying war bonds to reporting draft dodgers to the authorities. Nongovernmental groups also helped raise awareness and funds for the war. For example, the American Jewish Joint Distribution Committee raised $63 million in relief funds. The Jewish Welfare Board set up centers at home and abroad for Jewish servicemen.
The Supreme Court Limits Free Speech
In addition to using propaganda, the government passed legislation to limit opposition to the war and to fight espionage, or spying to acquire government information. The Espionage Act of 1917 made it illegal to aid the enemy, give false reports, or interfere with the war effort. The Sedition Act of 1918 made it illegal to speak against the war publicly. In practice, it allowed officials to prosecute anyone who criticized the government. These two laws led to more than 2,000 convictions.
Despite protests, the Espionage and Sedition Acts were upheld by the Supreme Court. Although the First Amendment states that Congress shall make no law . . . abridging the freedom of speech, or of the press, the Supreme Court departed from a strict interpretation of the Constitution. In Schenck v. United States (1919), Justice Oliver Wendell Holmes wrote the unanimous opinion. The Court ruled that the government could restrict speech when the speech constituted a “clear and present danger.
espionage spying, especially to gain government secrets
PRIMARYSOURCE
M
The most stringent protection of free speech would not protect a man in falsely shouting fire in a theatre and causing a panic.... The question in every case is whether the words used are used in such circumstances and are of such a nature as to create a clear and present danger that they will bring about the substantive evils that Congress has a right to prevent. It is a question of proximity and degree. When a nation is at war, many things that might be said in time of peace are such a hindrance to its effort that their utterance will not be endured so long as men fight, and that no Court could regard them as protected by any constitutional right.** —from United States Supreme Court Reports, 1920.
B READING PROGRESS CHECK
Explaining What were some new agencies that Congress established to help manage the wartime economy?
World War I and Its Aftermath 239
draft to select a person at random for mandatory military service
Building the Military
guiding question How were progressive ideals used in preparing the military for war ?
Progressives did not abandon their ideas when it came to building up the military. Instead, they applied those ideas to develop a new system for recruiting a large army
Volunteers and Conscripts
When the United States entered the war in 1917, the army and the National Guard together had slightly more than 200,000 troops. Many men quickly volunteered, but many more were still needed.
Many progressives believed that forced military service was a violation of democratic and republican principles. Believing a draft was necessary, however, Congress, with Wilsons support, created a new system called selective service.
Instead of having the military run the draft from Washington, D.C., the Selective Service Act of 1917 required all men between 21 and 30 to register for the draft. A lottery randomly determined the order in which they were called before a local draft board in charge of selecting or exempting people from military service. The thousands of local boards were the heart ofthe system. The members of the draft boards were civilians from local communities. Progressives believed local people, understanding community needs, would know which men to draft and would do a far better job than a centralized government bureaucracy. Eventually, about 2.8 million Americans were drafted.
Not all American soldiers were drafted. Approximately 2 million men volunteered for military service. Some had heard stories of German atrocities and wanted to fight back. Others believed democracy was at stake. Many believed they had a duty to respond to their nation’s call.
Although the horrors of war soon became apparent to the American troops, their morale remained high, helping to ensure victory. More than 50,000 Americans died in combat, and over 200,000 were wounded. Another 60,000 soldiers died from disease, mostly from the influenza epidemic of 1918 and 1919. The flu epidemic was not limited to the battlefield. It spread around the world and made more than a quarter of all Americans sick. The disease killed an estimated 25 to 50 million people worldwide, including more than 500,000 Americans.
The U.S. Army kept many African American soldiers from combat, assigning them to work as cooks, laborers, and laundrymen. The 369th Regiment, however, was assigned to the French Army and spent 191 days in the frontline trenches. The entire regiment was awarded the French Croix de Guerre for gallantry in combat.
CRITICALTHINKING
Comparing and Contrasting Why do you think the experiences ofthe 369th Regiment differed from those of other African American soldiers during World War I? 
240
Of the nearly 400,000 African Americans who were drafted, about 42,000 served overseas as combat troops. African American soldiers encountered discrimination and prejudice in the army, where they served in racially segregated units, almost always under the supervision of white officers. Despite these challenges, many African American soldiers fought with distinction. For example, the African American 92nd and 93rd Infantry Divisions fought in bitter battles along the Western Front. Many ofthe soldiers in those divisions won praise from the French commander, Marshal Philippe Petain, and the United States commander, General John Pershing.
An estimated 12,000 Native Americans and about 20,000 Puerto Ricans served in the armed forces. Thousands of Mexican Americans also served in the war, volunteering for service more than any other minority group in the United States. Some Asian immigrants fought on the side of the United States even before they were citizens. Though they faced discrimination, many Asians served in the U.S. Army with distinction, being granted citizenship in recognition of their contributions.
Women Join the Military
World War I was the first war in which women officially served in the armed forces, although they served only in noncombat positions. As the military prepared for war in 1917, it faced a severe shortage of clerical workers because so many men were assigned to active duty. Early in 1917, the navy authorized the enlistment of women to meet its clerical needs.
Women serving in the navy wore a standard uniform and were assigned the rank of yeoman. By the end of the war, more than 11,000 women had served in the navy. Although most performed clerical duties, others served as radio operators, electricians, pharmacists, chemists, and photographers. Unlike the navy, the army refused to enlist women. Instead, it began hiring women as temporary employees to fill clerical jobs. The only women to actually serve in the army were in the Army Nurse Corps.
Women had served as nurses in both the army and the navy since the early 1900s, but as auxiliaries. They were not assigned ranks and were not technically enlisted in the army or navy. More than 20,000 nurses served in the Army Nurse Corps during the war, including more than 10,000 overseas. g READING PROGRESS CHECK
Synthesizing How did progressive ideas influence the roles of women during World War I?
Connections to
Today
Women in the Military
Although womens roles in the military during World War I were limited, their entry into service paved the way for many advances. Today, about 5 percent of general officers in the U.S. Army, including the Army Reserve and the Army National Guard, are women. In 2008 Ann E. Dunwoody became the first female four-star general in army history.
LESSON 2 REVIEW
Reviewing Vocabulary
1.	Explaining How did victory gardens help civilians contribute to the war effort? 15D
Using Your Notes
2.	Summarizing Use the notes you completed during the lesson to write a short summary of how World War I affected life on the home front. 4F,15D
Answering the Guiding Questions
3.	Making Generalizations What did Congress do to prepare the economy for war? 4F,15D
4.	Synthesizing How were progressive ideals used in preparing the military for war? 4F.15D
5.	Explaining What constitutional issues were raised by federal policies during the war? 19B
Writing Activity
NARRATIVE
Suppose that you are a woman entering the workforce for the first time during World War I. Write a letter to a friend in which you explain why you have decided to go to work and what type of job you are doing. Share your feelings about your new job. 26A World War I and Its Aftermath 241
R
./■ r
TEKS 29A.29E.29F
All of the warring nations in World War I used propaganda to boost support for their side. Many Americans believed the propaganda coming from Europe, particularly from the British government and press. When the United States entered the war, the American government also began using propaganda in an attempt to unite Americans behind the war effort.
For Home and Country
VOCABULARY
This 1918 poster is one of many used to drum up support for America’s involvement in World War I.
ethical
conforming to accepted standards of conduct, good behavior
prestige
admiration and respect because something is successful or important
Propaganda in World War I
U.S. GOVERNMENT PAMPHLET,
1918 Q23
Analyzing Historical Documents 1.	Differentiating What do you think the American soldier meant by the statement “Germans, and a German—so different?”
2.	Contrasting What words does the American soldier use to describe the German soldier that contrasts to the perception of “Germans” on
the American home front?
3.	Identifying What does the U.S. pamphlet claim is an important element to be bred in the population?
4.	Evaluating Validity Examine the language and point of view ofthe U.S. Government pamphlet. Do you think its opinion can be trusted? Why or why not?
5.	Detecting Bias How could this 1918 World War I poster be used to support the claims of the American soldier?
242
“Fear, perhaps, is rather an important element to be bred in the civilian population. It is difficult to unite a people by talking only on the highest ethical plane. To fight for an ideal, perhaps, must be coupled with thoughts of self preservation. So a truthful appeal to the fear of men, the recognition ofthe terrible things that would happen if the German Government were permitted to retain its prestige, may be necessary in order that all people unite in the support ofthe needed sacrifices.”
—Pamphlet for speakers from the Committee on Public Information, quoted in the New York Times,
February 4,1918.
AMERICAN SOLDIER’S DIARY,
1918 “Germans, and a German—so different. Fishing through the poor, torn pockets of shabby German body, drooping over wreck of machine gun, to find wellthumbed photograph of woman and little boy and little girl—so like one’s own ... impossible to hate what had been that body. Nothing so revolting as bitter, pitiless cruelty of those who know nothing of reality of it all. Those ... Germanobaiters at home, so much more cruel than those who have the right—and are not.”
—Diary of Lieutenant Howard V. O’Brien, October 6,1918
ietw©rks
here's More Online!
BIOGRAPHY
Henry Cabot Lodge ?f BIOGRAPHY John Pershing BIOGRAPHY
Eddie Rickenbacker CHART/GRAPH
Military v. Civilian Dead IMAGE
Trench Warfare SLIDESHOW
World War I Technology LESSON 3
A
Bloody Conflict 1

network • resolve adequately
Combat in World War I
guiding question How did new technologies increase the number of casualties compared with previous wars?
By the spring of 1917, World War I had devastated Europe. Old-fashioned strategies and new technologies resulted in terrible destruction. Many Americans believed, however, that their troops would make a difference and quickly bring the war to an end.
Trench Warfare
Early offensives demonstrated that warfare had changed. Powerful artillery guns placed far behind the front lines hurled huge explosive shells onto the battlefield. More people were killed by artillery fire than by any other weapon. As one American noted in his diary:
intent Vocabulary
convoy
armistice
national self-determination reparations
IKING NOTES:
’y Ideas and Details
ganizing As you read, complete a aphic organizer similar to the one below listing the kinds of warfare and zhnology used in the fighting.
PRIMARY SOURCE
« Many dead Germans along the road. One heap on a manure pile.... Devastation everywhere. Our barrage has rooted up the entire territory like a plowed field. Dead horses galore, many of them have a hind quarter cut off—the [Germans] need food. Dead men here and there."
—quoted in The American Spirit, November 3,1918
To protect themselves from artillery, troops began digging trenches. On the Western Front—where German troops fought French, British, and Belgian forces—the troops dug a network of trenches that stretched from the English Channel to the Swiss border. Both sides used barbed wire and a new weapon, the machine gun, to guard against the enemy. Attacks usually began with a massive artillery barrage. Soldiers then raced across the rough landscape
World War I and Its Aftermath 243
toward enemy trenches. Troops used any weapon available to kill the enemy. The new style of fighting, which both sides eventually utilized, resulted in the loss of hundreds of thousands of men and a stalemate on the Western Front. Offensive and defensive moves by the Allies and the Germans failed to be particularly successful.
To protect against poison gas attacks, troops carried gas masks similar to these masks worn by American soldiers in 1917.
network an interconnected system
New Technology
Breaking through enemy lines required new technologies. The Germans first used poison gas in 1915, and the Allies soon followed. Gas caused vomiting, blindness, and suffocation. Both sides developed gas masks to counter fumes. In 1916 the British introduced the armored tank, which could crush barbed wire and cross trenches. But there were still too few of the slow, unreliable machines to revolutionize warfare.
World War I also marked the first use of aircraft in war. Early in the war, the Germans used giant rigid balloons called zeppelins to drop bombs on British warships in the North Sea. At first, airplanes were used to spy on enemy troops and ships. Then the Allies equipped them with machine guns and rockets to attack the German zeppelin fleet. Other aircraft carried small bombs to drop on enemy lines. As technology advanced, airplanes shot down other airplanes in battles known as dogfights. But early military aircraft were difficult to fly and easy to destroy. A combat pilot had an average life expectancy of about two weeks.
H READING PROGRESS CHECK
Describing What new technologies were introduced in World War I, and how did they impact the war?

The Americans Arrive
guiding question Why was the arrival ofU.S. forces so important to the war effort?

Nearly two million American troops marched into the bloody stalemate in the Western Front. Although the American " doughboys” were inexperienced, they were fresh and eager to fight. As the Americans began to arrive, many in Germany concluded that the war was lost.
Winning the War at Sea
American admiral William S. Sims proposed that merchant ships and troop transports travel in groups called convoys. Small, maneuverable warships called destroyers protected convoys across the Atlantic. If a ship was sunk, other ships in the convoy could rescue survivors. Convoys greatly reduced shipping losses and ensured that American troops arrived safely in time to help the Allies on the Western Front.
TEKS
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills 2D explain the significance of the following years as turning points: 1898 (Spanish-American War), 1914-1918 (World War I), 1929 (the Great Depression begins), 1939-1945 (World War II), 1957 (Sputnik launch ignites U.S.-Soviet space race), 1968-1969 (Martin Luther King Jr. assassination and U.S. lands on the moon), 1991 (Cold War ends), 2001 (terrorist attacks on World Trade Center and the Pentagon), and 2008 (election of first black president, Barack Obama)
4D understand the contributions of the American Expeditionary Forces (AEF) led by General John J. Pershing
continued on p. 247
Russia Leaves the War
In March 1917, riots broke out in Russia. Czar Nicholas II, the leader of the Russian Empire, abdicated his throne, and the Russian Revolution began. A temporary government took command whose leaders wanted Russia to stay in the war. However, the government was unable to deal adequately with the problems afflicting the nation, so Vladimir Lenin’s Bolshevik Party seized power and established a Communist government in November 1917.
Germany’s military fortunes improved with the Bolshevik takeover.
Lenin pulled Russia out of the war to concentrate on establishing a Communist state. He explained:
convoy a group that travels with something, such as a ship, to protect it
adequately sufficiently; completed to its minimum requirements
PRIMARYSOURCE
(([l]t is necessary with particular thoroughness, persistence and patience to... prove without overthrowing capital it is impossible to end the war by a truly democratic peace.**
—from The April Theses, 1917
Air battles first occurred during World War I. These early planes, however, were hard to fly and easy to destroy during dogfights.
Lenin agreed to the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk with Germany on March 3,
1918.	Under this treaty, Russia gave up the Ukraine, its Polish and Baltic territories, and Finland. With the Eastern Front settled, Germany could concentrate its forces in the west.
Americans Enter Combat
At the time World War I began, many Americans believed they owed the French a debt for their help in the American Revolution. General John J. Pershing, commander of the American Expeditionary Force (AEF), arrived in Paris on July 4, 1917. British and French commanders wanted to integrate American troops into their armies. Pershing refused, and eventually only one unit, the 93rd Infantry Division an African American unit—was transferred to the French.
Germany's Last Offensive On March 21,1918, the Germans launched a massive gas attack and artillery bombardment along the Western Front. Strengthened by reinforcements from the Russian front, the Germans pushed deep into Allied lines. By early June, they were less than 40 miles (64 km) from Paris. In late May, as the
CRITICALTHINKING
Making Generalizations How did the use of aircraft change battle during World War I?
BIOGRAPHY
Alvin York (1887-1964)
Alvin York grew up poor in the mountains of Tennessee. After being drafted, he tried to avoid military service as a conscientious objector due to his pacifist Christian beliefs. York later became convinced that he could fight for a just cause. During the Battle ofthe Argonne Forest, German machine guns on a fortified hill fired on York's platoon and killed nine men. York took command and charged the machine guns. He went on to kill several Germans, capture the machine guns, and take 132 prisoners. For his actions, he received the Medal of Honor and the French Croix de Guerre.
CRITICAL THINKING
Describing How did York contribute to the American victory at the Argonne? armistice a temporary agreement to end fighting
SKILLS PRACTICE
There are many new words in this section, including legitimate, disarmament, self-determination, reparations, and arbitration. As you read, list the words you do not know. Then ask for help with the words.
offensive continued, the Americans launched their first major attack, quickly capturing the village of Cantigny. On June 1, American and French troops blocked the German drive on Paris at the town of Chateau-Thierry. On July 15, the Germans launched one last massive attack in an attempt to take Paris, but American and French troops held their ground.
The Battle of the Argonne Forest With the German drive stalled, French marshal Ferdinand Foch, supreme commander of the Allied forces, ordered massive counterattacks. In mid-September American troops drove back German forces at the battle of Saint-Mihiel. On September 26, 1918, the most massive offensive for the American Expeditionary Force was launched in the region between the Meuse River and the Argonne Forest. Although the Germans inflicted heavy casualties, their positions slowly fell to the advancing American troops. By early November, the Americans had opened a hole on the eastern flank of the German lines. All across the Western Front, the Germans began to retreat.
The War Ends
Meanwhile, a revolution had engulfed Austria-Hungary. In October 1918, Poland, Hungary, and Czechoslovakia declared independence. By early November, the governments of the Austro-Hungarian Empire and the Ottoman Empire had surrendered to the Allies.
In late October, sailors in Kiel, the main base of the German fleet, mutinied. Within days, groups of workers and soldiers seized power in other German towns. The German emperor stepped down, and on November 9, Germany became a republic. Two days later, the government signed an armistice—an agreement to stop fighting. On November 11,1918, the fighting stopped.
H READING PROGRESS CHECK
Determining Cause and Effect How did the arrival of American troops affect German attitudes about the war?
A
Flawed Peace guiding question Why did President Wilson's ideas for peace negotiations differ from those of french premier Clemenceau and British prime minister Lloyd George?
Although the fighting had stopped, World War I was not over. In January 1919, delegates from 27 countries traveled to the peace conference at the Palace of Versailles, near Paris. The treaty with Germany that resulted came to be called the Treaty of Versailles. The conference also negotiated the Treaty of Saint-Germain, ending the war with Austria-Hungary. Negotiations on the Treaty of Versailles lasted five months. The most important participants were the so-called “Big Four”: President Wilson of the United States, British prime minister David Lloyd George, French premier Georges Clemenceau, and Italian prime minister Vittorio Orlando. Russian representatives were not invited to the conference because Allied leaders refused to recognize Lenin’s government as legitimate.
The Fourteen Points
President Wilson arrived in Paris in 1919 with a peace plan known as the Fourteen Points. It was based on “the principle of justice to all peoples and nationalities.” In the first five points, Wilson proposed to eliminate the causes ofthe war through free trade, freedom ofthe seas, disarmament, an impartial adjustment of colonial claims, and open diplomacy.
246
GEOGRAPHY CONNECTION
European borders were redrawn as a result ofWorldWarl.
PLACES AND REGIONS
M/Zwf was one unusual characteristic ofthe new state of Poland?
PLACES AND REGIONS
How did the regions controlled by Russia change in 1919?
The next eight points addressed the right of national self-determination, the idea that the borders of countries should be based on ethnicity and national identity. Supporters of this idea believed that when borders are not based on national identity, nations are more likely to go to war to resolve border disputes. This principle also meant that no nation should keep territory taken from another nation. This required the Central Powers to evacuate all invaded countries and Germany to restore the French territory of Alsace-Lorraine, taken in 1871.
The fourteenth point called for the creation of a League of Nations. The Leagues members would help preserve peace by pledging to respect and protect each other’s territory and political independence. Wilson was willing to give up his other goals in exchange for support for the League.
The Treaty of Versailles
Wilson’s popularity in Europe put him in a strong negotiating position. The peace conference decided to use the Fourteen Points as the basis for negotiations. But not everyone was impressed by Wilson’s ideas. Premier Clemenceau of France and British prime minister Lloyd George wanted to punish the Germans for the suffering they had inflicted on the rest of Europe. Additionally, Britain refused to give up its sizable naval advantage by agreeing to Wilson’s call for freedom of the seas.
The Treaty of Versailles, reluctantly signed by Germany on June 28,
1919,	included many terms designed to punish and weaken Germany. Germany’s armed forces were greatly reduced and its troops were not allowed west ofthe Rhine River. The treaty also specifically blamed “the aggression of Germany” for the war. This allowed the Allies to demand that Germany pay reparations—monetary compensation for all of the war damages it had caused. A commission decided that Germany owed the Allies about $33 billion. This sum far exceeded what Germany could pay all at once and was intended to keep its economy weak for a long time.
Wilson had somewhat better success in promoting national self-determination. The Austro-Hungarian Empire, the Russian Empire, the
(continued from p. 245)
TEKS
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills 4E analyze the impact of significant technological innovations in World War I such as machine guns, airplanes, tanks, poison gas, and trench warfare that resulted in the stalemate on the Western Front
4F analyze major issues such as isolationism and neutrality raised by U.S. involvement in World War I, Woodrow Wilson’s Fourteen Points, and the Treaty of Versailles
4G analyze significant events such as the Battle of Argonne Forest
continued on the next page
national self-determination the free choice by the people of a nation of their own future political status
resolve to come to an agreement
reparations payment by the losing country in a war to the winner for the damages caused by the war
World War I and Its Aftermath 247
German Empire, and the Ottoman Empire were dismantled, and new nations created. In general, the majority of people in each new country were from one ethnic group. But both Poland and Czechoslovakia were given territory where the majority of the people were German, and Germany was split in two in order to give Poland access to the Baltic Sea. This arrangement helped set the stage for a new series of crises in the 1930s.
The Treaty of Versailles ignored freedom of the seas, free trade, and Wilson’s goal of a fair settlement of colonial claims. No colonial people in Asia or Africa
received independence. France and Britain took over colonial areas in Africa and the Middle East, and Japan assumed responsibility for colonies in East Asia. The treaty did, however, call for the creation of a League of Nations. League members promised to reduce armaments, to submit all disputes that endangered the peace to arbitration, and to aid any member who was threatened with aggression.
The Belgian town of Ypres (shown above) was the site of some of the heaviest fighting of World War I. The war devastated Europe's people and places. The physical scars on the landscape and the millions of casualties affected Europe for years to come.
CRITICAL THINKING
Predicting Consequences How did the damage caused during World War I change Europe in later years?
(continued from p. 247)
TEKS
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills 12B identify and explain reasons for changes in political boundaries such as those resulting from statehood and international conflicts
15D describe the economic effects of international military conflicts, including the Spanish-American War and World War I, on the United States
19E evaluate the pros and cons of U.S. participation in international organizations and treaties 26F discuss the importance of congressional Medal of Honor recipients, including individuals of all races and genders such as Vernon J. Baker, Alvin York, and Roy Benavidez
27B explain how specific needs result in scientific discoveries and technological innovations in the military
The U.S. Senate Rejects the Treaty
President Wilson was confident the American people would support the Treaty of Versailles. But he had badly underestimated opposition to the League of Nations in the Senate. All treaties signed by the United States must be ratified by two-thirds of the Senate, and in November 1918, the Democratic Party had lost control of the Senate. Even though he needed Republican support to ratify the treaty, Wilson refused to take any Republican leaders with him to the peace conference. This ensured that Wilsons views prevailed, but it also meant that Republican concerns were not addressed.
Opposition in the Senate focused on the League of Nations. One group of senators, nicknamed “the Irreconcilables,” refused to support the treaty under any circumstances. They assailed the League as the kind of “entangling alliance” that George Washington and the other Founders had warned against. They believed that joining an international organization endangered American sovereignty. As a democratic-republic, the American government was supposed to act based on what its own citizens wanted, not what people in other countries wanted.
A larger group of senators, known as the “Reservationists,” was led by the powerful chairman of the Foreign Relations committee, Henry Cabot Lodge. The reservationists were willing to support the Treaty of Versailles if amendments were made to the League of Nations. The reservationists pointed out that the Constitution requires Congress to declare war. Yet the League of Nations could require member states to aid any member who was attacked. The reservationists argued that this might force the United States into a war without Congressional approval. They agreed to ratify the treaty if it was amended to say that any military action by the United States required the approval of Congress. Wilson refused, fearing the change would undermine the League’s effectiveness.
Wilson decided to take his case directly to the American people. Starting in September 1919, he traveled some 8,000 miles and made more than 30 major speeches in three weeks. Soon afterward he suffered a stroke. Although bedridden, Wilson still refused to compromise on the treaty.
The Senate voted in November 1919 and in March 1920, but both times it refused to give its consent to the treaty. After Wilson left office in 1921, the United States negotiated separate peace treaties with each ofthe Central Powers. The League of Nations took shape without the United States.
248
The debate had pointed out the pros and cons of international treaties and international organizations. On the one hand, once the United States joined an international organization and signed an international treaty, it was bound by those agreements which would limit the nation’s ability to act independently. Of course, the United States could always withdraw from a treaty, but when a nation does that too often, its credibility is damaged and other nations will no longer trust it to keep its agreements. On the other hand, had the United States joined the League of Nations, it would have been able to use its power and influence to shape League policies and enforce League actions. It could have helped promote international cooperation and peace. In the years ahead, many people would argue that the League of Nations was ineffective because many powerful nations, such as the United States, were not members.
World War I: A Turning Point
World War I marked an important turning point in world history. The war had destroyed the German, Russian, and Austro-Hungarian empires and badly weakened Britain and France. All across the world, Wilson’s idea of national self-determination began to take hold as people in Europe’s colonies began to work for independence. The war had also triggered a communist revolution in Russia, and that development would affect global events for the rest of the twentieth century as a slow motion struggle began between supporters of democratic institutions and free enterprise and supporters of communism and revolution.
H READING PROGRESS CHECK
Comparing and Contrasting How did Wilson's perspective on the best outcome ofthe peace process differ from those of European leaders?
LESSON 3 REVIEW
Reviewing Vocabulary
1.	Contrasting What is the difference between an armistice and a treaty? 4F
2.	Applying How did ideas of national self-determination influence the Treaty of Versailles? 4F,12B
Using Your Notes
3.	Explaining Review the notes you completed during the lesson and then write a paragraph explaining how new technology changed warfare during World War I. 4E, 15D, 27B
Answering the Guiding Questions
4.	Identifying Cause and Effect How did new technologies increase the number of casualties compared with previous wars? 4E.27B
5.	Drawing Conclusions Why was the arrival of American forces so important to the war effort? 4D,4G
6.	Identifying Perspectives Why did President Wilson's ideas for peace negotiations differ from those of French premier Clemenceau and British prime minister Lloyd George? 4F, 12B, 15D
Writing Activity
INFORMATIVE/EXPLANATORY
Write a brief essay that explains the reasons the U.S. Senate refused to give its consent to the Treaty of Versailles. 4F,19E World War I and Its Aftermath 249
networks
There's More Online!
BIOGRAPHY J.
Edgar Hoover Sf BIOGRAPHY A. Mitchell Palmer Ef IMAGE Palmer Raid Ef MAP Presidential Election of 1920 eT VIDEO Post-War-Turmoil Sf INTERACTIVE SELF-CHECK
QUIZ
LESSON 4
The War's Impact
IT MATTERS BECAUSE
HELPDESK
Academic Vocabulary
• widespread • authorities
Content Vocabulary
•	cost of living • deport
•	general strike
TAKING NOTES:
Key Ideas and Details
Organizing As you read, complete a graphic organizer similar to the one below to list the effects ofthe end of World War I on the U.S. economy.
Effects of End of World War I on Economy
TEKS
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills 6A analyze causes and effects of events and social issues such as immigration, Social Darwinism, eugenics, race relations, nativism, the Red Scare, Prohibition, and the changing role of women
15D describe the economic effects of international military conflicts, including the Spanish-American War and World War I, on the United States
America's victory overseas led to turmoil at home. The end ofthe wartime economy led to a depression and fears of communism, as strikes, riots, and bombings took place.
An Economy in Turmoil
guidingquestion Why did many workers participate in strikes following the war ?
After the war ended, government agencies removed their controls from the economy. People raced to buy goods that had been rationed, while businesses raised prices they had been forced to keep low. The result was rapid inflation that greatly increased the cost of living—the cost of food, clothing, shelter, and other essentials. With orders for war materials evaporating, factories laid off workers. Returning soldiers found that jobs were scarce. Inflation Leads to Strikes
While workers wanted higher wages to keep up with inflation, companies resisted because inflation was also driving up their operating costs. During the war, union membership had increased greatly. Business leaders, however, were determined to break the power of the unions. By the end of 1919, more than 3,600 strikes involving more than four million workers had taken place.
The Seattle General Strike In Seattle, some 35,000 shipyard workers walked off the job demanding higher wages and shorter hours. Other unions in Seattle soon organized a general strike—-a strike that involves all workers in a community—of more than 60,000 people that paralyzed the city for five days. The strikers returned to work without making any gains, but their actions worried many Americans because the general strike was a common tactic of Communists and some radical groups in Europe.
The Boston Police Strike One of the most famous strikes of 1919 occurred in Boston, where roughly 75 percent ofthe police force walked off the job. Riots and looting forced Governor Calvin
A
250
Coolidge to call in the National Guard. When the strikers tried to return to work, the police commissioner instead fired them. Despite protests, Coolidge agreed that the men should be fired, declaring: “There is no right to strike against the public safety by anybody, anywhere, anytime.” Coolidge’s response earned him widespread public support and convinced the Republicans to make him their vice-presidential candidate in 1920.
The Steel Strike Soon after the police strike, an estimated 350,000 steelworkers went on strike for higher pay, shorter hours, and recognition of their union. U.S. Steel refused to talk to union leaders and set out to break the union. It blamed the strike on foreign radicals and called for loyal Americans to return to work. Meanwhile, the company hired African American and Mexican workers as replacements. Clashes between company guards and strikers were frequent. In Gary, Indiana, a riot left 18 strikers dead. The strike collapsed in 1920, setting back the union cause in the steel industry for more than a decade. Racial Unrest
Postwar economic turmoil also contributed to widespread racial unrest. Many African Americans had moved north during the war to take factory jobs. As people began to be laid off and returning soldiers found it hard to find work and affordable housing, many blamed African Americans for taking their jobs. Frustration and racism combined to produce violence.
In the summer of 1919, 25 race riots broke out across the nation. The riots began in July, when a mob of angry whites burned shops and homes in an African American neighborhood in Longview, Texas. A week later in Washington, D.C., gangs of African Americans and whites fought each other for four days before troops got the riots under control.
The worst violence occurred in Chicago. On a hot July day, African Americans went to a whites-only beach. Both sides began throwing stones, and an African American teenager drowned as a result. A full-scale riot then erupted. Angry African Americans attacked white neighborhoods while whites attacked African American neighborhoods. The riot lasted for almost two weeks until the government sent in the National Guard to impose order. By the time the rioting ended, 38 people had been killed—15 white and 23 African American—and more than 500 had been injured.
cost of living the cost of purchasing goods and services essential for survival
general strike a strike involving all the workers in a particular geographic location
widespread widely diffused or prevalent
Some strikes became so violent and out of control that the federal government was forced to call in the National Guard to impose order. Here, troops get rioting under control during the Boston Police Strike of 1919.
CRITICALTHINKING
Analyzing Information Why do you think the government reacted against strikes so strongly in 1919?
deport to expel an individual from the country
In September 1920, a bomb made of 100 pounds of dynamite and 500 pounds of steel fragments exploded in New York City, killing 38 people and injuring 100 others, k CRITICAL THINKING Analyzing Primary Sources What effect do you think the event depicted below had on public attitudes toward political radicals?
The race riots of 1919 disillusioned some African Americans who felt their wartime contributions had been for nothing. For others, however, the wartime struggle for democracy encouraged them to fight for their rights at home. For the first time, African Americans organized and fought back. The NAACP experienced a surge in membership after the war, and in 1919 it launched a new campaign for a federal law against lynching.
READING PROGRESS CHECK
Determining Cause and Effect Why did the number of strikes increase after the war?
The Red Scare
go 5D8NG question Doyou agree or disagree with A. Mitchell Palmer's efforts to prevent a "radical" revolution in the United States?
Since the late 1800s, many Americans had accused immigrants of importing socialist and communist ideas and had blamed them for labor unrest and violence. Events in Russia seemed to justify fears of a Communist revolution. The strikes of 1919 fueled fears that Communists, or “reds,” might seize power, leading to a nationwide panic known as the Red Scare. Many people were particularly concerned about workers using strikes to start a revolution. The Palmer Raids
In April the postal service intercepted more than 30 parcels containing homemade bombs addressed to prominent Americans. The next month, a parade in Cleveland to protest the jailing of American Socialist Party leader Eugene Debs turned into a series of riots. Two people were killed and another 40 were injured. In June eight bombs in eight cities exploded within minutes of one another, suggesting a nationwide conspiracy.
One of these bombs damaged the home of United States attorney general A. Mitchell Palmer. Palmer took action, establishing a special division within the Justice Department, the General Intelligence Division, which eventually became the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI). Although evidence pointed to no single group, Palmer’s agents targeted the foreign-born. On November 7, 1919, Palmer ordered a series of raids on offices of the Union of Russian Workers in 12 cities. Less than seven weeks later, a transport ship left New York for Russia carrying 249 immigrants who had been deported, or expelled from the country.
In January 1920, Palmer ordered another series of raids on the headquarters of various radical organizations. Nearly 6,000 people were arrested. Palmer’s raids continued until the spring of 1920, and authorities detained thousands of suspects. Palmers agents often ignored the civil liberties of suspects. Officers entered homes and offices without search warrants. Some suspects were jailed indefinitely and were not allowed to talk to their attorneys. Many of the nearly 600 immigrants who were deported never had a court hearing. Palmer defended his actions:
authorities those who have control over determining and enforcing what is right or wrong
— Analyzing--------
Primary Sources
PRIMARYSOURCE
«Like a prairie-fire, the blaze of revolution was sweeping over every American institution of law and order a year ago. It was eating its way into the homes of the American workmen... leaping into the belfry ofthe school bell, crawling into the sacred corners of American homes... burning up the foundations of society.w
—from "The Case Against the 'Reds',"Forum, 1920
For a while, Palmer was regarded as a national hero. But his raids failed to turn up any hard evidence of revolutionary conspiracy. The Red Scare, however, greatly influenced people’s attitudes during the 1920s. The New York state legislature expelled five members of the Socialist Party in January 1920, and within a few months, nearly 30 states passed sedition laws making it illegal to join groups advocating revolution. Many linked radicalism with immigrants, which led to calls to limit immigration.
The Election of 1920
Economic problems, labor unrest, racial tensions, and the fresh memories of World War I created a general sense of disillusionment in the United States. During the 1920 campaign, Ohio governor James M. Cox and his running mate, Assistant Secretary of the Navy Franklin D. Roosevelt, ran on a platform of progressive ideals. President Wilson tried to convince the Democrats to make the campaign a referendum on the Treaty of Versailles and the League of Nations. The Republican candidate, Warren G. Harding, called for a return to “normalcy,” arguing that the country needed to return to the days before the Progressive Era reforms. Harding won the election by a landslide. Many Americans hoped to put racial, labor, and economic troubles behind them and build a more prosperous and stable society.
B READING PROGRESS CHECK
Theorizing Do you think that the events of 1919 justified Palmer's actions? Why or why not?
Warren G. Harding on a Return to Normalcy
& [Our] present need is not heroics, but healing; not nostrums, but normalcy; not revolution, but [bold] restoration; not agitation, but adjustment; not surgery, but serenity; not the dramatic, but the dispassionate;... not submergence in internationality, but sustainment in triumphant nationality.**
—from a speech given May 14,1920
DBQ
MAKING GENERALIZATIONS
What feelings did Harding hope to promote in this speech?
LESSON 4 REVIEW
Reviewing Vocabulary
1.	Defining What types of costs are included in the cost of living?
15D
2.	Stating What happens to a person who is deported? 6A
Using Your Notes
3.	Explaining Use the notes you completed during the lesson to write a paragraph explaining the effects of the end of World War I on the U.S. economy. 15D
Answering the Guiding Questions
4.	Identifying Cause and Effect Why did many workers participate in strikes following the war? 15D
5.	Identifying Central Issues Do you agree or disagree with A. Mitchell Palmer's efforts to prevent a "radical" revolution in the United States? 6A
Writing Activity
ARGUMENT
Radical, labor, and racial unrest increased after World War I, and the federal government responded strongly. The National Guard was sent in to break up strikes and riots, and government agents detained and deported thousands of immigrants and radicals. Do you sympathize with those reacting against society, or with the government? Write a short persuasive speech explaining your position and offering reasons to support it. 6A, 15D World War I and its Aftermath 253
chapter 7 Assessment
Directions: On a separate sheet of paper, answer the questions below. Make sure you read carefully and answer all parts ofthe questions.
Lesson Review
Lesson 1
0 Specifying What were the major empires in Europe prior to World War I, and why did nationalism threaten the stability of Europe? 4C
0 Identifying Identify the nations involved when World War I started in 1914. What were the two alliances called? 4C
0 Explaining What event began the chain reaction that led to World War I? 4C
0 Identifying Cause and Effect What are the reasons the United States entered World War I? 4C, 29B
Lesson 2
0 Making Generalizations How were economic opportunities expanded for African Americans and Mexican Americans during World War I? 26A
0 Explaining How did the Food Administration help to ensure troops had enough food overseas? 15D
0 Explaining What constitutional issues were raised by the federal government's efforts to ensure public support during World War I? How did the Court deviate from a strict construction view of the First Amendment? 19B
0 Identifying Explain how World War I expanded economic opportunities for women and identify how women's role in the military changed as a result of the war. 26A
Lesson 3
0 Defending What facts support the statement that
technology made World War I the first modern war? 4E, 27B
© Interpreting Significance What impact did the arrival of American troops have on the course ofthe war? 4F
© Explaining What is the military strategy of convoys and how did it help the Allies?
© Specifying Which countries did Russia give up as a result of pulling out ofthe war and signing the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk? 12B
Lesson 4
© Identifying Perspectives What economic and social issues caused the racial unrest in 1919? What effects did the war and the race riots have on African Americans and their struggle for civil rights? 6A
© Analyzing Cause and Effect Why did many Americans come to fear Communists and other radicals during the Red Scare after World War I? What was the effect ofthe Red Scare? 6A
© Naming Who participated in the 1920 presidential campaign and which candidate won the election?
Exploring the Essential Questions
© Identifying Cause and Effect Write a brief essay discussing why each of the following countries took part in World War I: Germany, Austria-Hungary, the Balkan states, France, Russia, Italy, Britain, and the United States. Synthesize these reasons and explain the main causes of World War I. What major themes emerge as to why nations go to war? 4C.29B, 29G
Critical Thinking
© Comparing Compare imperialism and nationalism.
Why might nationalism be the result after years of imperial rule? 4C
© Analyzing Discuss the major issues ofthe neutrality debate that began in the United States after the start of World War I. What were the major issues being debated? Explain why Americans were divided in their opinions and identify people and groups on different sides of the issue. 4F
© Evaluating What were the pros and cons ofthe United States participating in the Treaty of Versailles and joining the League of Nations? 19E
Need Extra Help?
Go to page 233 I 234 I 233 I 234 I 238 I 237 I
254
© Analyzing What was the significance ofthe Battle ofthe Argonne Forest? 4G
© Drawing Conclusions Explain the significance of World War I. Why is it a turning point in history? 2D, 29B
© Describing What were the economic effects of World War I on the United States? Be sure to include the impact on the economy prior to America's entry into the war, the effect of mobilization, and the economic changes that took place after the war ended. 15D
0 Identifying Cause and Effect Analyze the impact of technological innovations in World War I. How did technology impact the way the war was fought and why did it cause a stalemate on the Western Front? 4E
Social Studies Skills
© Drawing Inferences Describe the Selective Service system set up during World War I. Based on your knowledge of progressivism, explain why the Selective Service Act reflects progressive ideas. 29B
Categorizing Make a chart that lists four new technologies for warfare that were developed and used for the first time during World War I. In the chart, explain the specific needs that led to the development of each new military technology, and how the technology changed the nature of war. 27B, 29B
0 Writing a Biography Research Alvin York and write a biographical report describing why he initially objected to the war and then ended up becoming a recipient ofthe congressional Medal of Honor because of his leadership. Discuss why his actions were important and why his heroism has been remembered. 26F, 30A
0 Preparing an Oral Presentation Prepare a lecture that describes the contributions of the American Expeditionary Force (AEF) and General John Pershing during World War I. Include an assessment of how important the AEF was to bringing an end to the war. 4D, 3OA
Igjjg Analyzing Primary Sources
Pead the following excerpt from President Wilson's Fourteen Points and answer the questions that follow.
Need Extra Help?
PRIMARYSOURCE
I.
Open covenants of peace, openly arrived at.... II.
Absolute freedom of navigation upon the seas.... III.
The removal, so far as possible, of all economic barriers and the establishment of an equality of trade.... IV.	... that national armaments will be reduced to the lowest point consistent with domestic safety.
V. A
free, open-minded, and absolutely impartial adjustment of all colonial claims.... VI.
The evacuation of all Russian territory.... VII.
Belgium... must be evacuated and restored.... VIII.
All French territory should be freed.... IX. A
readjustment of the frontiers of Italy should be effected along clearly recognizable lines of nationality. X.
The peoples of Austria-Hungary... should be accorded the freest opportunity to autonomous development. XI.
Rumania, Serbia, and Montenegro should be evacuated; occupied territories restored; Serbia accorded free and secure access to the sea... XII.
The Turkish portion ofthe present Ottoman Empire should be assured a secure sovereignty, but the other nationalities which are now under Turkish rule should be assured an... opportunity of autonomous development.... XIII.
An independent Polish state should be erected.... XIV. A
general association of nations must be formed under specific covenants for the purpose of affording mutual guarantees of political independence and territorial integrity to great and small states alike, w —President Wilson's Fourteen Points, January 1918.
@ Analyzing What were the major issues raised by President Wilson's Fourteen Points? Why did they represent a challenge to the way the major powers had conducted themselves before the war? 4F, 29A
© Interpreting Texts Based on the text ofthe Fourteen Points, what groups of people did Wilson think should be given their own countries? 4F, 29A
© Analyzing Primary Sources Based on the text ofthe Fourteen Points, which countries had been invaded and still had part of their territory occupied when the war ended? 4F, 29A
17	18	19	20	21	22
23	24	25	26	27	28	29	30
|Gotopage | 233 | 234 | 247 | 246 [ 249 | 250
| 243 | 240 | 243 | 246 | 245 | 246 | 247 | 247 |
World War I and Its Aftermath 255
Analyzing Visuals
Use the map Changes in Europe 1919 to answer the following questions.
Former Austria-Hungary boundary Former German boundary Former Russian boundary Former Serbian boundary
Former Montenegran | boundary Former Romanian boundarv
© Analyzing Maps Which empire was completely dismantled as a result of World War I? Identify the new countries created from this empire and how the breakup of the empire changed the borders of existing countries. Explain the idea or political principle that was used to justify breaking this empire into separate countries. 12B
Use the recruiting poster Men of Britain to answer the following questions.
MEN OF BRITAIN ! WILL YOU STAND THIS
4
j

* ‘ ••	'■» 4 H
• ...................
7!S Women & Children wore Killed and 2.V	■ ;-
ii Children wen? wounded by the Ceram P.n.ler•- i
ENLIST NOW
:: © Detecting Bias in Visuals Who is the poster trying to influence? What visual elements and words are used in this poster to create an emotional reaction among viewers? What values is the poster appealing to in order to get people to enlist? 29F
© Creating a Visual Presentation Search the Internet to find examples of propaganda posters from World War I. Create a PowerPoint presentation or a poster board display that shows the different ways nations used words and images to build support for the war and recruit soldiers. 29F, 30A
Extended Response Question
© Expressing a Point of View After World War I, the United States refused to ratify the Treaty of Versailles despite the efforts of Woodrow Wilson to convince Americans that ratification would help ensure an enduring peace. Write a persuasive essay using historical evidence that analyzes the major issues raised by the Treaty of Versailles and either supports or opposes the ratification of the treaty. Your essay should include an introduction, at least three paragraphs, and a conclusion. 4F, 296
Standardized Test Questions
© Which ofthe following was not a major cause of World Warl? 4C
A imperialism and nationalism B the Bolshevik seizure of power in Russia C militarism and alliances D the assassination of Franz Ferdinand
© What major concern of President Wilson's was not addressed in the Treaty of Versailles? 4F
F
German reparations G National self-determination H Colonial independence J Formation of the League of Nations Need Extra Help?
	31	32	33	34	35	36
, Go to page	12471	234 |	229 |		|233|	I2471
256
African American artists and entertainers of the Harlem Renaissance reached a wide audience, helping overcome racial barriers in American society.
PHOTO:
John Springer Collection/CORBIS ◄ The works of legendary jazz singer and trumpet player Louis Armstrong are still widely played in many areas of contemporary culture. His improvised melodies influence jazz and other American music to this day.
257
