CHAPTER 6
Lesson 1
The Roots of Progressivism
Lesson 2
Roosevelt and Taft
Lesson 3
The Wilson Years
The Story Matters. ••
Today we assume that our foods and medicines are safe, but in the 1800s, that was not so. Through the efforts ofthe progressives, who wanted to improve life for all Americans, changes were made that not only safeguarded food and medicine, but also gave women the right to vote, improved working conditions, and conserved the nation's natural places.
◄ Alice Paul, a Quaker social worker, fought miIitantly for woman suffrage, enduring several incarcerations for her efforts to win women the right to vote.
PHOTO:
The Granger Collection, New York 199
CHAPTER 6
Place andTime: United States 1890-1920
Industrialization changed American society. Cities were crowded, working conditions were often poor, and the political system was unresponsive. These conditions gave rise to the Progressive movement. Led by journalists, clergy, social workers, and other concerned citizens, the Progressive movement campaigned for both political and social reforms.
Step Into the Place
Read the quotes and look at the information presented on the map. 14B, 29a
Analyzing Historical Documents As the United States became an industrialized nation, how did the government address the rapid exploitation of public lands and natural resources? Based on the quotes, did Roosevelt and Pinchot agree or disagree on this issue?
DBQ
PRIMARY SOURCE
« We have become great because ofthe lavish use of our resources and we have just reason to be proud of our growth. But the time has come to inquire seriously what will happen when our forests are gone, when the coal, the iron, the oil and the gas are exhausted, when the soils shall have been still further impoverished and washed into the streams, polluting the rivers, denuding the fields and obstructing navigation.99
—President Theodore Roosevelt, from a speech delivered at the Conference on the Conservation ofthe Nation's Resources, 1908
PRIMARY SOURCE
** The first principle of conservation is development, the use ofthe natural resources now existing c this continent for the benefit ofthe people who live here now. There may be just as much waste in neglecting the development and use of certain natural resources as there is in their destruction....
Conservation stands emphatically for the development and use of water-power now, without delay. It stands for the immediate construction of navigable waterways... as assistants to the railroads....
In addition... natural resources must be developed and preserved for the benefit ofthe many, and not merely for the profit of the few.w
— Gifford Pinchot, Chief of U.S. Forest Service, from The Fight for Conservation, 1!
■	•	Jane Addams
Step Into the Time	°npceh7cjgujHouse
Drawing Conclusions
Research a niece of lenislatinn
U.S. PRESIDENTS
■■ llUl	i. J _i_i

National Parks of the Western United States 1872-1920
AG’ *&£>
A
i, v 4./
■GA
CANADA
^CIFIC
KEAN
,.>4	
	
	
! ’I1
.|O,
H
National Park Sequoia National Park was established in 1890 in an effort to protect Giant Sequoia trees. The largest ofthe Giant Sequoias, General Sherman, is thought to be 2,300 to 2,700 years old and is the largest living thing on earth.
400 km
nbert Azimuthal Equal-Area projection *
400 miles
Washington
&Mt. Rainier (1899)
Co^mbia R.
(1890) General Grant (1890)
'.r' o .
, *2-c-, t

>02 Maryland	1906 Pure
sses first U.S. workers'	Food and Drug
mpensation laws	Act passed
Taft
1909-1913
Yellowstone is the home to Old Faithful, the most famous geyser in North
America. Old Faithful erupts every 33 to 120 minutes, spouting over 200-degree
North Dakota I Minnesota


Wilson
1910	1913-1921 1914 Clayton
Mann-Elkins Z^\ Antitrust Act Act passed f 1® \ is enacted
1916	1919 Eighteenth	1920 Nineteenth
National Park Amendment,	Amendment gives
Service is	establishing	women voting
created	Prohibition, is ratified rights
mfcwinii

T
“I.
networks
There's More Online!
BIOGRAPHY
Susan B. Anthony BIOGRAPHY
Carrie Chapman Catt BIOGRAPHY
Robert La Follette BIOGRAPHY
Elizabeth Cady Stanton Ef GRAPHIC NOVEL "Jeannette Rankin: First Woman in Congress"
Ef IMAGE Triangle Shirtwaist Fire
TIMELINE
The Woman Suffrage Movement Ef VIDEO William Jennings Bryan vs. JP Morgan
INTERACTIVE SELF-CHECK QUIZ
Reading HELPDESK
LESSON 1
The Roots of Progressivism

IT MATTERS BECAUSE
The Progressive Era was a time when many Americans tried to improve their society. They tried to make government honest, efficient, and more democratic. The movement for woman suffrage gained more support, as did efforts to limit child labor and reduce alcohol abuse.
Academic Vocabulary
•	legislation • advocate
•	lobbying
Content Vocabulary w
•	muckraker
•	direct primary
•	initiative
•	referendum
•	recall
•	suffrage
•	prohibition
The Rise of Progressivism
guiding question Who were progressives, and what did they believe caused social problems
Progressivism was a collection of different ideas and activities, not a tightly organized political movement with a specific set of goals. Rather, it was a series of responses to problems in American societ that had emerged from the growth of industry. Progressives had many different ideas about how to fix the problems they saw in American society.
TAKING NOTES:
Key Ideas and Details
Organizing As you read about progressivism, complete a graphic organizer similar to the one below by filling in the beliefs of progressives.
TEKS lewsEssentialLKnoj^geajdSI^

3C analyze social issues affecting women, minorities, children, immigrants, urbanization, the Social Gospel, and philanthropy of industrialists
continued on the next page
Who Were the Progressives?
Progressivism was partly a reaction against laissez-faire economics and its emphasis on an unregulated market. Progressives generally believed that industrialization and urbanization had created many social problems. After seeing the poverty of the working class and the filth and crime of urban society, reformers began doubting the free market’s ability to address those problems.
Progressives belonged to both major political parties. Most were urban, educated, middle-class Americans. Among their leaders were journalists, social workers, educators, politicians, ar members of the clergy. Most agreed that government should take more active role in solving society’s problems. At the same time, they doubted that the government in its present form could fix those problems. They concluded that government had to be fixe< before it could be used to fix other problems.
One reason progressives thought they could improve society was their strong faith in science and technology. The applicatior scientific knowledge had produced the lightbulb, the telephone,
202
and the automobile. It had built skyscrapers and railroads. Science and technology had benefited people; thus, progressives believed using scientific principles could also produce solutions for society.
The Muckrakers
Among the first people to articulate progressive ideas was a group of crusading journalists who investigated social conditions and political corruption. President Theodore Roosevelt nicknamed these writers "muckrakers" because of what he perceived as their obsession with scandal and corruption. Widely circulated, cheap newspapers and magazines helped spread the muckrakers’ ideas.
Muckrakers uncovered corruption in many areas. Some, such as Ida Tarbell and Charles Edward Russell, concentrated on exposing the unfair practices of large corporations. Other muckrakers targeted government and social problems. Lincoln Steffens reported on vote stealing and other corrupt political practices of political machines.
Still other muckrakers concentrated on social problems. In his influential book How the Other Half Lives (1890), Jacob Riis published photographs and descriptions of the poverty, disease, and crime that afflicted many immigrant neighborhoods in New York City. By raising awareness of these problems, the muckrakers stimulated calls for reform.
H READING PROGRESS CHECK
Stating What groups of people made up the Progressive movement?
Reforming Government
guidingquestion Howdid progressives hope to make government more efficient and responsive to citizens?
Progressivism included a wide range of reform activities. Different issues led to different approaches, and some progressives even took opposing positions on how to address some problems. They condemned government corruption but did not always agree on the best way to fix the problem.
muckraker a journalist who uncovers abuses and corruption in a society
(continued from p. 202)
TEKS
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills 5A evaluate the impact of Progressive Era reforms, including initiative, referendum, recall, and the passage ofthe 16th, 17th, 18th, and 19th amendments
5B evaluate the impact of muckrakers and reform leaders such as Upton Sinclair, Susan B. Anthony,
Ida B. Wells, and W. E. B. DuBois on American society
9A trace the historical development ofthe civil rights movement in the 19th, 20th, and 21st centuries, including the 13th, 14th, 15th, and 19th amendments
continued on the next page
Progressive photographer Jacob Riis captured the poverty, disease, and crime common in many of New York City's immigrant neighborhoods.
CRITICALTHINKING
Determining Cause and Effect What did progressives believe caused the social problems that Riis photographed? direct primary a vote held by all members of a political party to decide their candidate for public office
initiative the right of citizens to place a measure or issue before the voters or the legislature for approval
legislation a proposed law to be voted on by a governing body
referendum the practice of letting voters accept or reject measures proposed by the legislature
recall the right that enables voters to remove unsatisfactory elected officials from office
(continued from p. 203)
TEKS
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills 9B describe the roles of political organizations that promoted civil rights, including ones from African American, Chicano, American Indian, women’s, and other civil rights movements
14C understand the effects of governmental actions on individuals, industries, and communities, including the impact on Fifth Amendment property rights
15B describe the changing relationship between the federal government and private business, including the costs and benefits of laissez-faire, anti-trust acts, the Interstate Commerce Act, and the Pure Food and Drug Act
continued on the next page
In 1900 the political machine running Galveston, Texas, failed to help the city recover from a devastating hurricane, so local business leaders convinced the state to allow them to take control.
Making Government Efficient
One group of progressives drew its ideas for increasing government efficiency from business. Theories of business efficiency first became popular in the 1890s. Books such as Frederick W. Taylor’s The Principles of Scientific Management (1911) described how a company could increase efficiency by managing time, breaking tasks down into small parts, and using standardized tools—a scientific approach to business that some progressives wanted to extend to government.
Progressives saw corruption and inefficiency in city government. Many municipal leaders traditionally chose political supporters and friends to run city departments, even though these people often knew little about managing city services.
Progressives supported proposals to reform city government. One, a commission plan, divided city government into several departments, with each one under an expert commissioner’s control. A second, a council-manager system, employed a city manager who was hired by the city council. In both systems, experts play a major role in managing the city. Galveston, Texas, adopted the commission system in 1901. In other cities, political machines were weakened by having officials elected city-wide instead of by neighborhoods.
Democratic Reforms
Another group of progressives focused on making government more democratic and more responsive to citizens. Many believed that the key to improving government was to make elected officials more responsive and accountable to voters.
Wisconsin became a “laboratory of democracy”under the leadership of its governor, Robert M. La Follette, who attacked the way political parties ran their conventions. Party bosses controlled the selection of convention delegates and the nomination of candidates. La Follette pressured the state legislature to pass a law requiring parties to hold a direct primary, in which all party members could vote for a candidate to run in the general election.
The direct primary soon spread to other states. Other progressives also pushed for additional reforms: the initiative, the referendum, and the recall. The initiative permits citizens to introduce legislation and requires the legislature to vote on it. Typically, citizens have to gather a certain number of signatures on a petition to make the initiative legally binding. In an indirect initiative, the proposed law goes to the legislature first. If the legislature refuses to act on it, it goes on the ballot for the public to vote on it. A direct initiative goes directly to the public for a vote.
A referendum allows citizens to vote on proposed laws directly. In some states, if the legislature passes certain laws, such as a change to taxes, the new law has to be approved by the public in a referendum. Referendums are also used to repeal existing laws. Both the referendum and the initiative gave reformers the power to bypass or overrule the legislature if it refused to support something the people wanted. The idea of the initiative and the referendum was more popular in the West and Midwest. Today, 26 states allow some form of initiative and/or referendum. Since 1904, more than 2000 statewide referendums have been initiated by citizens.
The recall provided voters an option to demand a special election to remove an elected official from office before his or her term had expired. Today, nineteen states allow citizens to recall state officials, and at least 29 states allow recalls of local officials. Recalls are frequent for local officials.
BH
Full woman suffrage before 1920, with date granted I 1 Partial woman suffrage before 1920 I
No woman suffrage until ratification of Nineteenth Amendment GEOGRAPHY CONNECTION
Woman suffrage gained strength after the Civil War.
THE WORLD IN SPATIAL TERMS
Which state or territory first granted women the right to vote? HUMAN SYSTEMS
In what direction did support for woman suffrage generally move throughout the country before 1920? Hundreds of city council members, school board members, and mayors have been recalled over the over the years but, as of 2013, only 20 state legislators have been recalled and only two governors.
Progressives also targeted the U.S. Senate. The U.S. Constitution originally directed each state legislature to elect two senators. Political machines and business interests often influenced these elections. Some senators, once elected, repaid their supporters with federal contracts and jobs. To counter corruption in the Senate, reformers called for the direct election of senators by voters. In 1912 Congress passed a direct-election amendment. In 1913 the amendment was ratified and became the Seventeenth Amendment to the Constitution. Although direct election was meant to end corruption, it also removed one of the state legislatures’ checks on federal power.
H READING PROGRESS CHECK
Summarizing How did progressives hope to solve problems through
political reform?
Woman Suffrage
guidingquestion Why did the progressives support the woman suffrage movement?
At the first women’s rights convention in Seneca Falls, New York, in 1848, Elizabeth Cady Stanton convinced the delegates that winning suffrage the right to vote—should be a priority. Decades later, this right still had not been gained. It became a major goal for female progressives.
Early Challenges
The woman suffrage movement started slowly. Suffragists were threatened and called unfeminine and immoral. Many ofthe movements supporters were abolitionists as well, and in the years before the Civil War, ending slavery took priority over womens voting rights.
After the Civil War, Congress introduced the Fourteenth and Fifteenth Amendments to grant citizenship to African Americans and voting rights to African American men. Leaders of the woman suffrage movement wanted
(continued from p. 204)
TEKS
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills 21B discuss historical reasons why the constitution has been amended
21C evaluate constitutional change in terms of strict construction versus judicial interpretation
23A identify and analyze methods of expanding the right to participate in the democratic process, including lobbying, non-violent protesting, litigation, and amendments to the U.S. Constitution
23B evaluate various means of achieving equality of political rights, including the 19th, 24th, and 26th amendments and congressional acts such as the American Indian Citizenship Act of 1924
26A explain actions taken by people to expand economic opportunities and political rights, including those for racial, ethnic, and religious minorities as well as women, in American society
26D identify the political, social, and economic contributions of women such as Frances Willard, Jane Addams, Eleanor Roosevelt, Dolores Huerta, Sonia Sotomayor, and Oprah Winfrey to American society
suffrage the right to vote
The Progressive Movement 205
BIOGRAPHY
Susan B. Anthony (1820-1906)
Susan B. Anthony left teaching to join the temperance and antislavery movements in the early 1850s. She found that the male leaders of both movements discriminated against women so she turned to the women's rights movement.
She was the president ofthe National American Woman Suffrage Association, from 1892 to 1900. She lectured constantly on the right of women to vote, often to hostile audiences, and traveled extensively, lobbying state legislators to pass suffrage laws. Her ultimate goal was an amendment to the United States Constitution that would recognize a woman's right to vote in every state. On her 86th birthday in 1906, she attended a dinner in her honor and spoke briefly, concluding her remarks with these words: "Failure is impossible!" She was right, but did not live to see the Nineteenth Amendment, that gave women the right to vote, ratified in 1920.
these amendments to give women the right to vote as well. They were disappointed when established politicians refused.
The debate over these two amendments split the movement into two groups: the New York City-based National Woman Suffrage Association, founded by Stanton and Susan B. Anthony in 1869, and the Boston-based American Woman Suffrage Association, led by Lucy Stone and Julia Ward Howe. The first group wanted to focus on passing a constitutional amendment. The second believed that the best strategy was convincing state governments to grant women the right to vote first. This split weakened the suffrage movement. By 1900, only Wyoming, Idaho, Utah, and Colorado had granted women full voting rights.
Building Support
In 1890 the two groups united to form the National American Woman Suffrage Association (NAWSA). The movement still faced the challenge of convincing women to become politically active. As the Progressive movement gained momentum, however, many women realized that they needed the vote to promote reforms and pass labor laws. Women began organizing events, handing out pamphlets, and delivering speeches. Many leaders of the suffrage movement were also able to lobby state and federal legislators directly. Lobbying is when you contact a political leader personally, explain your concern, and try to convince them to vote fora legislation that supports your causes. Often lobbyists promise to support the legislator financially when they run for reelection in return for their support. To gain influence with legislators and make their lobbying more effective, suffrage leaders raised funds for legislators who supported suffrage and campaigned for their election even though they could not actually vote for them. They also worked to defeat legislators who opposed women’s suffrage.
Quaker social worker and former NAWSA member Alice Paul founded the National Woman’s Party (NWP). The NWP emphasized non-violent protest to promote women’s right to participate in the democratic process. Its members picketed, blocked sidewalks, chained themselves to lampposts, and went on hunger strikes if arrested. Suffragist Rose Winslow and several other women, including Alice Paul, were arrested for picketing the White House. After being sentenced to seven months in jail, Winslow and other women prisoners went on a hunger strike.
lobbying the act of contacting a political leader to explain a concern in order to convince them to vote for a cause
Many progressives focused on fixing social-welfare problems, such as child labor.
k CRITICAL THINKING Drawing Conclusions Why do you
think progressives made their fight against child labor a key issue?

206
PRIMARYSOURCE
BIOGRAPHY
We have been in solitary for five weeks.... I have felt quite feeble the last few days—faint, so that I could hardly get my hair brushed, my arms ached so. But today I am well again.... [Alice Paul] dreaded forcible feeding frightfully, and I hate to think how she must be feeling.... I am really all right. If this continues very long perhaps I won't be. All the officers here know we are making this hunger strike [so] that women fighting for liberty may be considered political prisoners.... [W]e don't want women ever to have to do this over again. **
—Rose Winslow, quoted in Jailed for Freedom, 1920
The hunger strikers were force fed in prison, and the story gathered a lot of attention in the press, creating a national scandal. Equally disturbing was a police attack on a group of woman protestors that left several women with concussions and broken ribs.
The United States had entered World War I a few months before, and President Wilson was trying to portray the United States as fighting for freedom and democracy. As a result the NWP’s protests may have helped convince Wilson to publicly ask Congress to pass an amendment giving women the right to vote. Wilson may also have been influenced by the public support that NAWSA had given him.
While the NWP had focused on non-violent protest, the leader of NAWSA, Carrie Chapman Catt, had organized the suffrage movement for one final nationwide push for suffrage. She used the organization’s funds to support politicians who backed suffrage. She convinced the organization to support President Wilson’s re-election in 1916 and then supported the president when he took the country into war in 1917. As more states granted women the right to vote, Congress began to favor a constitutional amendment. In 1918 the House of Representatives passed a woman suffrage amendment. In the Senate, however, the amendment failed by two votes.
During the midterm elections of 1918, Catt used NAWSA’s resources to defeat two antisuffrage senators. In 1919 the Senate passed the amendment by slightly more than the two-thirds vote needed. On August 26, 1920, after three-fourths of the states had ratified it, the Nineteenth Amendment guaranteeing women the right to vote went into effect.
H READING PROGRESS CHECK
Determining Cause and Effect What progressive goals did suffragists believe they could achieve if women had the right to vote?
Reforming Society
guiding question What problems did social-welfare progressives attempt to reform?
While many progressives focused on reforming the political system, others focused on social problems, such as crime, illiteracy, alcohol abuse, child labor, and the health and safety of Americans. These social-welfare progressives created charities to help the poor and disadvantaged. They also pushed for new laws they hoped would fix social problems.
Women were prominent leaders of the social-welfare progressives. Most women in the progressive movement came from the middle or upper class, and felt a responsibility toward working class women. The main issues that working class women faced were poverty, safety, and abuse. Because the culture ofthe time generally expected fathers and husbands to work and provide for their families, women and children who lost their husbands and fathers were seen as exceptionally vulnerable and likely to be forced into
Florence Kelley (1859-1932)
Progressive Florence Kelley dedicated her life to campaigning for reforms. While working at Chicago's Hull House in the 1890s, she conducted research that encouraged the passage ofthe first law banning children younger than 14from factory work. Later, she contributed to the foundation ofthe United States Children's Bureau to protect children. Her research on the effects of long workdays on women's health contributed to the Supreme Court's decision in Muller v. Oregon.
CRITICAL THINKING
Making Generalizations In what areas did Florence Kelley's actions contribute to significant reform? The Progressive Movement 207
---------Analyzing----
PRIMARY SOURCES
Jane Addams on Unsafe Working Conditions for Children
f f When the injury of one of the boys resulted in his death, we felt quite sure that the owners of the factory would share our horror and remorse, and that they would do everything possible to prevent the recurrence of such a tragedy. To our surprise they did nothing whatever, and I made my first acquaintance then with those pathetic documents signed by the parents of working children, that they will make no claim for damages resulting from carelessness.’^
—from Twenty Years at Hull House, 1910
DBQ
DRAWING CONCLUSIONS
Based on this excerpt, what insight does Addams's description offer about the progressives'view of child labor and the conditions in factories?
poverty. Society also believed that women were more physically vulnerabk than men, and for progressives the idea that poor women and their childn might be forced into difficult and dangerous working conditions was an important women’s issue.
Child Labor
Probably the most emotional progressive issue was the campaign against child labor. Children had always worked on family farms, but mines and factories presented more dangerous and unhealthy working conditions. Muckraker John Spargo’s 1906 book, The Bitter Cry ofthe Children, present detailed evidence of child labor conditions. It told of coal mines that hired thousands of 9- or 10-year-old “breaker boys” to pick slag out of coal, payin them 60 cents for a 10-hour day. It described how the work bent their backs permanently and often crippled their hands. Reports like these convinced states to pass laws that set a minimum age for employment and established other limits on child labor, such as maximum hours children could work. A the same time, many states began passing compulsory education laws, requiring young children to be in school instead of at work.
Health and Safety Codes
Many adult workers also labored in difficult conditions. Factories, coal mine and railroads were particularly dangerous. When workers were injured or killed on the job, they and their families received little or no compensation. Progressives joined union leaders to pressure states for workers’ compensatic laws. These laws established insurance funds that employers financed. Workers injured in accidents received payments from the funds.
In two cases, Lochnerv. New York (1905) and Muller v. Oregon (1908), the U.S. Supreme Court addressed government’s authority to regulate business to protect workers. In the Lochner case, the Court ruled that a New York law forbidding bakers to work more than 10 hours a day was unconstitutional, saying the state did not have the right to interfere with th liberty of employers and employees. In the Muller case, which involved women working in laundries in Oregon, however, the Court upheld the state’s right to limit hours.
The different judgments were based on gender differences. The Court state that healthy mothers were the state’s concern and, therefore, the limits on women’s working hours did not violate their Fourteenth Amendment rights.
In the Lochner case, the Court had adhered to a strict construction of the Constitution and decided that government did not have the power to interfere in the right of an employer and employee to make a contract. In the Miller case the Court had been more activist. It interpreted the Constitution so as to give government the power to regulate the workplace because of perceived public need to keep women safe by treating them differently from men.
On March 25, 1911, a tragedy occurred in New York City that led to ne^ reforms. A fire on the top floors of the Triangle Shirtwaist Company caused nearly 150 of the factory s 500 workers to lose their lives. The disaster illustrated that fire precautions and inspections were inadequate. In response, New York created a Factory Investigating Commission and soon passed new laws that reformed the labor code.
Some progressives also favored zoning laws as a method of protecting the public. These laws divided a town or city into zones for commercial, residential, or other development, thereby regulating how land and buildings could be used. Building codes set minimum standards for light,
208
air, room size, and sanitation and required buildings to have fire escapes. Health codes required restaurants and other facilities to maintain clean environments for their patrons.
Zoning laws created a constitutional question. The Fifth Amendment ofthe Constitution says that no one shall be “deprived of life, liberty, or property, without due process of law; nor shall private property be taken for public use, without just compensation.” If the government takes something of value from someone, it is supposed to pay for it. As governments began to impose zoning laws on communities to improve sanitation, safety, and the quality of life, individuals and businesses began to complain that they were losing the use of their property. They argued that the government should compensate them for the loss.
In Hadacheck v. Sebastian (1915), a brick-maker argued that he needed clay on his land to make bricks and that zoning laws forcing him to move his kiln deprived him of his Fifth Amendment rights. The Court disagreed finding that the zoning laws were a constitutional use of a government’s police power to protect public health. In 1922, in Pennsylvania Coal v. Mahon, however, the court narrowed its interpretation. A coal company owned the rights to mine under a piece of land but a law prohibited mining below land that supported buildings on the surface. The Court agreed that the law had gone too far. Under its Fifth Amendment rights, the coal company had been deprived of its property and was owed compensation.
The case established that the government does not have an unlimited right to regulate property use. At some point government regulation of property, even when done in the public interest, does require compensation.
FRANK LESLIES ILLUSTRATED
WORT i 8 .WIRES A LIQUORS
‘^!fS
The temperance movement gained a key victory in 1917 when Congress passed the Eighteenth Amendment. Prohibition went into effect in 1920, after the amendment was ratified.
► CRITICALTHINKING
Summarizing Why did the temperance movement push for the prohibition of alcoholic beverages?
The Prohibition Movement
Many progressives blamed alcohol for many of society’s problems. Society at the time tended to view drinking alcohol as acceptable for men, not women, and men consumed the vast majority of all the alcohol produced. As a result social-welfare progressives focused on the problems that alcohol abuse created for women. Settlement-house workers knew that wages were often spent on alcohol instead of the family, and that drunkenness often led to physical abuse, illness, poverty, and abandonment. From these concerns emerged one ofthe major women’s issues of the era, the temperance movement, which advocated that people stop, or at least moderate, their alcohol consumption.
Women were important leaders of the temperance movement. In 1874 a group of women formed the Womans Christian Temperance Union (WCTU). In 1879, Frances Willard became president of the WCTU and held the post for nearly 20 years. Under her leadership, the temperance movement grew to a national movement with significant political influence. In addition to temperance, Willard convinced the WCTU to support women’s suffrage and champion many social welfare causes, including prison reform, equal pay for women, protections for children, and the eight hour day. By 1911, the
advocate to propose a certain position or viewpoint
The Progressive Movement 209
prohibition laws banning the manufacture, transportation, and sale of alcoholic beverages
SKILLS PRACTICE
There are many new words in this lesson, including initiative, referendum, primary, suffrage, prohibition, lobbying and others. Discuss the new words with a partner. If a word reminds you of any past experience, tell your partner about the experience.
WCTU had nearly a quarter of million members. In 1893 evangelical Protestant ministers formed another group, the Anti-Saloon League. When the temperance movement began, it concentrated on reducing alcohol consumption. Later it pressed for prohibition—laws banning the manufactu: transportation, and sale of alcoholic beverages.
Despite significant opposition, especially from working-class voters, support for prohibition grew steadily. By 1916, nineteen states had introduced some form of prohibition on alcohol, and leaders of the prohibition movement began to push for a constitutional amendment banning the manufacture, transportation, or sale of alcohol in all ofthe United States. In 1919, the amendment was ratified. It went into effect in January 1920.
Progressives Versus Big Business
Many progressives agreed that big business needed regulation. Some believed the government should break up big companies to restore competition. This led to the passage of the Sherman Antitrust Act in 1890, Others argued that big business was the most efficient way to organize the economy. They pushed for government to regulate big companies and prevent them from abusing their power. The Interstate Commerce Commission (ICC), created in 1887 to regulate the railroads, was an early example of this kind of thinking.
Some activists even went so far as to advocate socialism—the idea that the government should own and operate industry for the community. They wanted the government to buy up large companies, especially industries that affected everyone, such as railroads and utilities. At its peak, socialism had some national support. Eugene V. Debs, the former leader of the American Railway Union, won nearly a million votes as the American Socialist Party candidate for president in 1912. Most progressives and most Americans, however, believed in the superiority of the American system of free enterprise.
H READING PROGRESS CHECK
Explaining How did progressives seek to improve working conditions?
LESSON 1 REVIEW
Reviewing Vocabulary
1.	Drawing Conclusions What was the primary goal of Progressive Era muckrakers? 5B.25A
2.	Determining Cause and Effect Why did women's organizations work for the passage of prohibition? 3C, 26D
Using Your Notes
3.	Organizing Use your notes to write a statement summarizing progressive beliefs.
Answering the Guiding Questions
4.	Identifying Central Ideas Who were progressives, and what did they believe caused social problems? 5B
fT
5.	Summarizing How did progressives hope to make governmer more efficient and responsive to citizens? 5A
6.	Monitoring Why did the progressives support the woman suffrage movement? 5A, 9A, 9B, 23B, 26D
7.	Identifying What problems did social-welfare progressives attempt to reform? sc
Writing Activity
ARGUMENT
Suppose that you are one ofthe progressives wh( wanted to bring about change to municipal government. Prepa persuasive speech that you could deliver to convince people to support your call for reform. 3C TEKS 29A, 29B
Making Generalizations
Why Learn This Skill?
Have you heard statements such as "Only tall people play basketball well/' or "Dogs make better pets than cats"? Do you accept these statements at face value, or do you stop and consider whether or not they are valid?
Look for a conclusion or common element that fits all the facts. Make a generalization from these common elements.
Test your generalization to see if you can falsify it. Look for facts to support or disprove it.
Learning the Skill
The statements listed above are called generalizations. A generalization is a broad statement about a topic. A generalization takes facts from specific cases and then makes an inference that certain general conclusions can be derived from those facts. At a minimum, to be valid, a generalization must be based on accurate information.
Let's examine the generalization, "Only tall people play basketball well." We can find many examples of tall basketball players, but there are also many shorter players who excel at this sport. In other words we can find facts that disprove the generalization.
Suppose that you want to make a generalization about the relative danger of airplane travel compared to automobile travel. First, you would collect accident statistics involving airplanes and cars. Your next step would be to classify the information into categories. Then you would look for relationships between these categories. For example, you might put the airplane and automobile statistics in separate categories. You might also categorize the number of accidents and the number of fatalities. Finally, you should make a generalization that is consistent with most of the facts you gathered.
To Make and Test Generalizations, follow these steps:
•	To make a valid generalization, first collect information about a topic. This information must consist of accurate facts, not opinions.
•	Compare and contrast what those facts are telling you.
Practicing this Skill
Reread the lesson "The Roots of Progressivism" and examine the above photo of immigrants in New York in the early 1900s. Then answer these questions:
1.	What categories of progressives were there?
2.	A progressive muckraker, Jacob Riis, took the photo below. What kinds of issues is he trying to show in the photo?
3.	What are the problems that progressives tried to solve?
4.	What methods did progressives favor when trying to resolve problems?
5.	What generalizations can you make about progressive reformers and the types of reforms they wanted?
Applying the Skill
Making Generalizations Read the lesson “Roosevelt and Taft.” Write a generalization about each president that describes their progressivism.
211
networks
There's More Online!
Sf BIOGRAPHY Upton Sinclair
BIOGRAPHY
Gifford Pinchot Sf VIDEO Theodore Roosevelt
INTERACTIVE SELF-CHECK QUIZ
LESSON 2
Roosevelt and Taft
Reading HELPDESK
Academic Vocabulary
•	regulate
•	environmental
Content Vocabulary
•	Social Darwinism
•	arbitration
•	insubordination
TAKING NOTES:
Key Ideas and Details
Outlining As you read about the Roosevelt and Taft administrations, use the headings from the lesson to create an Outlining similar to the one below.
Roosevelt and Taft
I.
Roosevelt Revives the Presidency A.
B.
C.
II.
TEKS
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills A
5B evaluate the impact of muckrakers and reform leaders such as Upton Sinclair, Susan B. Anthony, Ida B. Wells, and W. E.
B.
DuBois on American society continued on the next page
'A* ~ 'TF* 7J n ■ T F 7 7
It Matters Because
Energetic and strong-willed, Theodore Roosevelt extende the federal government's ability to conserve natural resources and to curb the power of big business.
His successor, William Howard Taft, was less popular with progressives.
Roosevelt Revives the Presidency
guidingquestion How much do you think a president's personal beliefs should shape national policy?
Theodore Roosevelt became president at age 42—the youngest person ever to take the office. In international affairs, he believed i Social Darwinism, which held that nations were in competition ar only the strongest would survive. Domestically, however, he was a committed progressive. He believed that government should balance the needs of competing groups in American society on behalf of the public interest. His reform programs soon became known as the Square Deal.
Roosevelt Takes on the Trusts
Roosevelt thought that trusts and other large business organizatioi were efficient and part of the reason for the prosperity of the Unit States. Yet he also felt that the monopoly power of some trusts hur
the public interest. He wanted to ensure that trusts did not abuse their power.
His first target was J. P. Morgan’s railroad holding company, Northern Securities. The company planned an exchange of stock that would merge existing railroad systems, creating a monopoly on railroad traffic in the Northwest. Farmers and business owner feared that without railroad competition, shipping rates would rif and reduce their profits. In 1902 Roosevelt ordered the attorney general to sue Northern Securities under the Sherman Antitrust Act. The suit charged Northern Securities with restraint of trade.
212
POLITICAL CARTOONS
ROOSEVELT VERSUS THE TRUSTS
Wealthy, powerful businessmen, including John D. Rockefeller (top right) and J. P. Morgan (right), tower over Theodore Roosevelt, who stands on Wall Street, carrying a sword labeled "Public Service."
1	Analyzing What do the giants in the political cartoon represent?
2	Making Inferences What point does the cartoon make by picturing Roosevelt as tiny in relation to
the giants?
(continued from p. 212)
TEKS
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills 14B identify the roles of governmental entities and private citizens in managing the environment such as the establishment ofthe National Park System, the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), and the Endangered Species Act
15B describe the changing relationship between the federal government and private business, including the costs and benefits of laissez-faire, anti-trust acts, the Interstate Commerce Act, and the Pure Food and Drug Act
The suit puzzled J. P. Morgan, who asked what could be done to fix the problem. Unmoved, Roosevelt proceeded with the case. In 1904, in Northern Securities v. United States, the Supreme Court ruled that Morgan’s firm had violated the Sherman Antitrust Act. Roosevelt was hailed as a “trustbuster,” and his popularity with the public grew.
Northern Securities and the Commerce Clause
The Supreme Court’s decision in the Northern Securities case marked yet another shift in the relationship between the federal government and private business. Article I, Section 8, of the Constitution states that “The Congress shall have Power ... To regulate Commerce with foreign Nations, and among the several States. . . .” It was agreed that the Constitution gives the federal government the power to regulate commerce between the states, not within a state. But the definition of what actually constituted “interstate commerce” was open to interpretation.
In the late 1800s, the Court had applied a very strict interpretation of the commerce power. For example, when a sugar company gained control of 98 percent of the sugar industry, the Court ruled in U.S. v. E.C. Knight (1894), that the Sherman Anti-Trust Act could not be applied because the sugar was manufactured within a state. Manufacturing, the Court said, did not involve interstate commerce, even though the sugar was sold across state lines.
In the Northern Securities case, the Court began broadening its interpretation. Northern Securities was based in one state and was simply buying stock in other companies, but the Court, in a narrow 5-4 decision, decided the Antitrust Act could still be applied. In dissent, Justice Oliver Wendell Holmes warned that the decision created a slippery slope: If the act before us is to be carried out according to what seems to me the logic ofthe argument... I can see no part ofthe conduct of life with which, on similar principles, Congress might not interfere.” Over time, his comment has proved accurate. It would take many decades and several Supreme Court decisions, but the interpretation ofthe commerce clause of the Constitution has been gradually expanded allowing the federal government more and more power to regulate private business.
Social Darwinism
a philosophy based on Charles Darwin's theories of evolution and natural selection, stating that humans have developed through competition and natural selection with only the strongest surviving
SKILLS PRACTICE
Before you read text about changes in how the federal government regulated business, build background by discussing the topic with a partner. Tell your partner what you know, listen to what your partner knows, and combine your background knowledge.
The Progressive Movement 213
arbitration settling a dispute by agreeing to accept the decision of an impartial outsider
The Coal Strike of 1902
As president, Roosevelt believed that it was his job to keep society operating efficiently by helping settle conflicts between different groups and their interests. In the fall of 1902, he put this belief into practice.
He worked to help resolve a coal strike between mine owners and nearly 150,000 members ofthe United Mine Workers (UMW). The UMW wantec increased pay, reduced hours, and union recognition. If the strike had dragged on, the nation would have faced a coal shortage that could have shut down factories and left many homes unheated.
Roosevelt urged the UMW and the mine owners to accept arbitration—a settlement negotiated by an outside party. The union agreed to arbitration. The mine owners refused, however, until Roosevelt threatened to order the army to run the mines. By intervening in the dispute, he took the first step toward establishing the federal government as an honest broker between powerful groups in society.
Regulating Big Business
Despite his lawsuit against Northern Securities and his role in the coal strike, Roosevelt believed that most trusts were good for the economy and that the costs of antitrust action outweighed its benefits. He agreed with th opponents of trust-busting who argued that companies generally formed trusts because it was the most efficient way to do business. Breaking up a trust would make an industry less efficient and drive up costs for the publi Furthermore, by taking a company to court, the government created uncertainty in the industry until the case was resolved. Business leaders would not know how to plan or what to expect, and that too would distort the economy and make it less efficient.
Roosevelt generally accepted these arguments against antitrust action, and he was also keenly aware that America’s biggest companies were now competing globally against foreign companies. U.S. Steel had formed a tru: in the United States, but it was competing against huge European steel companies in Britain, France, and Germany. Standard Oil had formed a tri in the United States, but it was competing globally against Burmah Oil in Britain (today known as BP), Royal Dutch Petroleum (today known as She Oil), and many other companies. Antitrust action against an American company might cripple its ability to compete internationally.
As a progressive, Roosevelt valued efficiency, and he believed that the United States had to be a world power, militarily and economically, in ord to prosper. But as a progressive, he also distrusted large concentrations of power and the potential for corruption and harm to the public good. So instead of aggressively seeking to break up trusts, he proposed to create a federal agency to investigate corporations and publicize the findings. He believed the most effective way to prevent big business from abusing its power was to keep the public informed.
In 1903 Roosevelt convinced Congress to create the Department of Commerce and Labor. The following year, this department began investigating U.S. Steel, a gigantic holding company that had been createc in 1901. Worried about a possible antitrust lawsuit, the company’s leader; met privately with Roosevelt. They offered to open their files for examination. In exchange, the Department of Commerce and Labor wou privately tell the company about any problems and allow them to fix the problems quietly. Roosevelt accepted this “gentlemen’s agreement,” as he called it, and soon made similar deals with other companies. These deals
214
gave him the ability to regulate big business without having to sacrifice economic efficiency by breaking up the trusts.
In keeping with his belief in regulation, Roosevelt pushed the Hepburn Act through Congress in 1906. The act was intended to strengthen the Interstate Commerce Commission (ICC) by giving it the power to set railroad rates. At first, railroad companies were suspicious of the ICC. However, the railroads eventually realized they could work with the commission to set rates and regulations that limited competition and prevented new competitors from entering the industry. By 1920, the ICC had begun setting rates at levels intended to ensure the industry’s profits.
By 1905 consumer protection had become a national issue. As Americans read news stories by muckrakers and listened to the concerns of progressive reformers, they increasingly felt that the costs of a laissez-faire approach to the economy outweighed the benefits. That year, a muckraker journalist named Samuel Hopkins Adams published several articles in Collier’s magazine describing the patent medicine business. Many companies patented and marketed potions they claimed would cure a variety of ills. Many of these medicines were little more than alcohol, colored water, and sugar. Others contained caffeine, opium, cocaine, and other dangerous compounds. Consumers had no way to know what they were taking, nor did they know whether the medicines worked as claimed. Many Americans were equally concerned about the food they ate. Dr. W. H. Wiley, chief chemist at the United States Department of Agriculture, had issued reports documenting dangerous preservatives, including formaldehyde and borax, being used in what he called ‘ embalmed meat.”
For similar reasons, food preparation businesses came under scrutiny. In 1906 Upton Sinclair published a novel, The Jungle, based on his close observations of the slaughterhouses of Chicago. The appalling conditions in the meatpacking industry, as described by Sinclair, enraged consumers.
Roosevelt and Congress responded with the Meat Inspection Act, passed in 1906. It required federal inspection of meat sold through interstate commerce and required the Agriculture Department to set standards of cleanliness in meatpacking plants. The Pure Food and Drug Act, passed on the same day in 1906, prohibited the manufacture, sale, or shipment of impure or falsely labeled food and drugs.
These two acts marked yet another change in the relationship between government and business. In both cases, the U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) was given authority to inspect business operations and ensure that products were safe before they could be sold to the public. Initially, the Bureau of Chemistry at the U.S. Department of Agriculture was in charge of enforcing the Pure Food and Drug Act. The Bureau later became the Food and Drug Administration, or FDA, that continues to regulate food and drugs today. The benefits ofthe new laws were obvious. Consumers were less likely to become sick and could expect that products actually contained the ingredients on their labels. The costs of the law, as with other regulations ofthe economy, meant that companies had to charge more for their products. Putting labels on products cost money, and companies passed that on to consumers. Given
| what Wiley had found in peoples food prior to the law, many Americans and I government leaders thought the costs were worth it.
B READING PROGRESS CHECK
} Analyzing What were Theodore Roosevelt's beliefs about big business, and how did | he act on those beliefs during the early 1900s?
— Analuzing-----
Primary Sources
Upton Sinclair on the Meatpacking Industry
M [TJhere would come all the way back from Europe old sausage that had been rejected, and that was [moldy] and white—it would be dosed with borax and glycerine, and dumped into the hoppers, and made over again for home consumption.... There would be meat stored in great piles in rooms; and the water from leaky roofs would drip over it, and thousands of rats would race about [upon] it.^
—from The Jungle, 1906
DBQ
DRAWING CONCLUSIONS
Based on this excerpt, how would you describe the attitude of slaughterhouse owners in Sinclair's time?
regulate to control or direct with rules
environmental relating to the environment; the complex system of plants, animals, water, and soil
The Progressive Movement 215
(1865-1946)
Connecticut native Gifford Pinchot ; studied forestry at schools in Europe before becoming head of the U.S. Forest Service. As head, he ■ helped develop the forest service j system and was influential in the conservation movement, which he ; enthusiastically supported. He j advocated wise use of natural resources and their stewardship by the federal government, believing that business would not sufficiently protect America's natural resources.
CRITICALTHINKING
Making Generalizations How I might Pinchot's study of forestry	)
have helped him in his work with	J
the U.S. Forest Service?	i
American naturalist John Muir looks out over Yosemite. Muir believed in preserving wilderness areas and successfully lobbied for the creation of Yosemite National Park.
Conservation
guiding QUESTION Why did President Roosevelt support conservation?
Of all his progressive actions, Roosevelt may be best remembered for his efforts in the area of environmental conservation. Roosevelt realized that the nation’s bountiful natural resources were being used up at an alarming rate. He urged Americans to conserve those resources.
Roosevelt was an enthusiastic outdoorsman, and he valued the country’s minerals, animals, and rugged terrain. He cautioned against unregulated use of public lands and argued that conservation should be the guiding principle in managing the United States s natural resources.
In his 1907 annual message to Congress, Roosevelt said: “[T]o waste, to destroy our natural resources, to skin and exhaust the land instead of using it so as to increase its usefulness, will result in undermining in the days of our children the very prosperity which we ought by right to hand down to them amplified and developed.”
Western Land Development
Roosevelt quickly applied his philosophy in the dry Western states, where farmers and city dwellers competed for scarce water. In 1902 Roosevelt supported passage of the Newlands Reclamation Act. This act authorized th use of federal funds from public land sales to pay for irrigation and land development projects. The federal government thus began transforming the West’s landscape and economy on a large scale.
Roosevelt also backed efforts to save the nation’s forests. He supported careful management of the timber resources of the West. He appointed his close friend Gifford Pinchot to head the United States Forest Service, established in 1905.
As progressives, Roosevelt and Pinchot both believed that trained experts in forestry and resource management should manage the nation’s forests. These professional managers would apply the same scientific standards to the landscape that others were applying to managing cities an industry. With the president’s support, Pinchot’s department drew up regulations to control lumbering on federal lands. Roosevelt also added more than 100 million acres to the protected national forests and established five new national parks and 51 federal wildlife reservations.
Roosevelt's Legacy
President Theodore Roosevelt changed the role of the federal government. F used his power in the White House to present his views, calling it his “bully pulpit. Increasingly, Americans began looking to the federal government to solve the nation’s economic and social problems.
Under Roosevelt, the power of the executive branch of government ha dramatically increased. The Interstate Commerce Commission, through t Hepburn Act, could set rates. The Department of Commerce and Laboi could monitor business. And the attorney general could rapidly brinj antitrust lawsuits under the Expedition Act. In addition, Roosevelt concern for the environment and for protection of the wild areas the United States helped develop a national parks system that preceded the establishment of the National Park Service in 19b H READING PROGRESS CHECK

Examining What were President Roosevelt's views on conservation, ai how did he act on those views?
Taft's Reforms
guiding question How did President Taft's beliefs differ from the progressives'beliefs?
Roosevelt believed William Howard Taft, his secretary of war, was the ideal person to continue his policies. Taft easily secured the Republican nomination and won the election of 1908. The Democratic candidate,
William Jennings Bryan, lost for a third time.
Taft Angers Progressives
Like many progressives, Taft believed high tariffs limited competition, hurt consumers, and protected trusts. Roosevelt had warned him to stay away from tariff reform because it would divide the Republican Party. Nevertheless, Taft called Congress into special session to lower tariff rates. The tariff debate did, indeed, divide the Republican Party into two groups: the progressives, who favored tariff reduction, and conservative Republicans, who wanted to maintain high tariffs. As negotiations dragged on, Taft’s support for tariff reductions waned. Finally, he signed into law the Payne-Aldrich Tariff, which hardly cut tariffs at all and actually raised them on some goods. Progressives felt outraged by Taft’s decision.
In 1909 Taft further angered progressives by replacing Roosevelt’s secretary of the interior, James R. Garfield, with Richard A. Ballinger. Garfield was an aggressive conservationist; Ballinger was a conservative corporate lawyer. Once in office, Ballinger tried to open nearly a million acres of public lands to private development. Gifford Pinchot accused Ballinger of planning to give valuable public lands in Alaska to a private business group for his own profit. Taft’s attorney general investigated the charges and decided they were unfounded. Not satisfied, Pinchot went to the press and asked Congress to investigate. Taft fired Pinchot for insubordination, or disobedience to authority. The congressional investigation cleared Ballinger.
By the second half of Taft’s term of office, many Americans had become so frustrated with him that the congressional elections of 1910 resulted in a sweeping Democratic victory. Democrats took the majority in the House, and Democrats and progressive Republicans gained control of the Senate from conservative Republicans.
At a Georgia cotton mill in 1909, two boys keep a spinning machine running by repairing broken thread and replacing bobbins as they are filled.
CRITICAL THINKING
Predicting Consequences What might happen if one of these boys slips? This page from the Los Angeles Times, January 9,1910, highlights the controversy between progressive Gifford Pinchot and Taft's secretary of the interior, Richard Ballinger. Pinchot leaked a story to the press alleging that Ballinger turned over public lands for personal profit.
CRITICAL THINKING
Determining Cause and Effect Why do you think Pinchot made accusations against Ballinger?
insubordination
disobedience to authority
Taft's Achievements
Despite his political problems, Taft also had several successes. Although Roosevelt was nicknamed the trustbuster, Taft actually brought twice as mani antitrust cases in four years as his predecessor had in seven. In other areas, Tafi also pursued progressive policies. In 1912 he established the Childrens Bureau, This agency investigated and publicized the problems of child labor.
The Ballinger-Pinchot controversy aside, Taft was also a dedicated conservationist. In 1910 Taft set up the Bureau of Mines to monitor the activities of mining companies, expand national forests, and protect waterpower sites from private development. The bureau helped make
possible many new technologies in the field of mining.
Although disturbed by stories of Taft’s “betrayal” of his progressivism, Roosevelt refused to criticize the president. He soon became impatient. In 1907, while president, Roosevelt had approved the purchase ofthe Tennessee Coal and Iron Company by U.S. Steel. In October 1911, Taft declared thatth deal violated the Sherman Antitrust Act. Roosevelt believed Taft’s focus on breaking up trusts was destroying the system of cooperation and regulation that he had seti with big business. In November 1911, Roosevelt publicly criticized Taft for this decision.
After Roosevelt broke with Taft, it was only a matter of time before progressives convinced Roosevelt to reenter politics. In late February 1912, Roosevelt announced h< would enter the presidential campaign of 1912 and attempt to replace Taft as the Republican nominee for president.
Taft disappointed Roosevelt, who attempted to unseat him in the 1912 Republican nomination.
READING PROGRESS CHECK
Evaluating Which of Taft's actions most harmed his standing among progressives?
LESSON 2 REVIEW
Reviewing Vocabulary
1.	Explaining Why did President Taft fire Gifford Pinchot for insubordination? 14B
Using Your Notes
2.	Identifying Use your notes to identify ways in which Taft helped conservation efforts and child labor problems.
Answering the Guiding Questions
3.	Evaluating What approach did Roosevelt take toward regulating big business? 15B
4.	Analyzing Why did President Roosevelt support conservation?
14B
5.	Examining How did President Taft's beliefs differ from the progressives'beliefs?
Writing Activity
ARGUMENT
Who did more to support the conservation of natural resources: President Roosevelt or President Taft? Write ai essay in which you express your opinion and support it with specific examples. 218
TEKS 29B
Drawing Inferences
Why Learn This Skill?
Just as you are about to leave home to catch your school bus, you hear a radio report. There is a traffic jam near the bus garage. Your bus is late. Although no one told you, you conclude that the traffic jam probably made the bus late, and you use your phone to call a friend for a ride home. You have made an inference. From the limited facts available, you formed a conclusion. By combining facts and general knowledge, you made an inference about the reasons the bus was late. Making inferences is an important skill because we live in a world of imperfect knowledge. We cannot always have all the facts, but we have to make decisions based on what we do know. Many times, having only some of the facts is enough to reach a conclusion that lets you make a decision, if you have been careful about the inferences you have made.
Learning the Skill
Learning how to make inferences will help you draw conclusions about particular situations. To make accurate inferences, follow these steps:
•	Read or listen carefully for stated facts and ideas.
•	Review what you already know about the topic or situation.
•	Think about similar experiences you have had in the past to help understand the current situation.
•	Use logic and common sense to form a conclusion about the topic or situation.
•	If possible, find information that confirms or disproves your inference.
•	Recognize that you don't have all the information you need, and you might be wrong.
•	Decide whether to act on your inference.
Practicing this Skill
On December 8,1903, Samuel Langley was | ready for his second attempt at flying a manned,
1 self-propelled aircraft. This had never been done J before. Langley used a $50,000 U.S. government
5
grant to build a plane based on unmanned aircraft designs, adding a very powerful engine. The plane broke apart on takeoff and crashed into the Potomac River.
In contrast, Wilbur and Orville Wright used a little more than $1,000 of their personal savings to build an aircraft. The brothers carefully studied the problems with previous planes and designed one with better wings, a more efficient propeller, and a strong but light engine. On December 17,1903, these intrepid Americans made the first manned, powered flight in history on the sand dunes of Kitty Hawk, North Carolina.
1.	What are the facts regarding Langley's attempt?
2.	What are the facts regarding the Wright brothers' attempt?
3.	What inferences might you draw based on the success of the Wright brothers and failure of Langley?
4.	What experience and prior knowledge helped you make your inference?
5.	How could you prove or disprove your inference?
Applying the Skill
Drawing Inferences Both President Roosevelt and President Wilson created several agencies to regulate business. Read the lessons describing their presidencies and then answer these questions. What inferences can you make about their beliefs concerning government agencies and the economy? Based on what you know about government agencies today, what inferences can you make about the progressive emphasis on creating government agencies?
219
Academic Vocabulary
•	academic
•	unconstitutional
IT MATTERS BECAUSE
Woodrow Wilson, a progressive Democrat, won the election of 1912. While in office, he supported lower tariffs, more regulation of business, and the creation of the Federal Reserve System.
The Election of 1912
Content Vocabulary
guiding question How was the election of 1912 different from previous presidential elections?
•	direct tax
•	indirect tax
•	income tax
•	unfair trade practices
The 1912 presidential campaign featured a current president, a former president, and an academic who had entered politics onl two years earlier. The election’s outcome determined the path of the Progressive movement.
TAKING NOTES:
Key Ideas and Details
Outlining As you read about progressivism during the Wilson administration, complete a chart similar to the one below by listing Wilson's progressive economic and social reforms.
Economic Reforms	Social Reforms
	
	
	
	
TEKS
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills 5A evaluate the impact of Progressive Era reforms, including initiative, referendum, recall, and the passage ofthe 16th, 17th, 18th, and 19th amendments
continued on the next page

220
Picking the Candidates
Believing that President William Howard Taft had failed to live up to progressive ideals, Theodore Roosevelt informed seven state governors that he was willing to accept the Republican nomination “My hat is in the ring!” he declared. “The fight is on.”
The struggle for control of the Republican Party reached its climax at the national convention in Chicago in June 1912. Conservatives rallied behind Taft. Most progressives supported Roosevelt. When it became clear that Taft’s delegates controlled the nomination, Roosevelt decided to leave the party and campaign as an independent.
Declaring himself “fit as a bull moose,” Roosevelt became the presidential candidate for the newly formed Progressive Party, which quickly became known as the Bull Moose Party. Because Ta: had alienated so many groups, the election of 1912 became a contest between two progressives: Roosevelt and the Democratic candidate Woodrow Wilson.
After a university teaching career that culminated in his becoming the president of Princeton University, Woodrow Wilson entered politics as a firm progressive. As the governor of New Jersey, he pushed through many progressive reforms.
* Eleven electors in California voted for Roosevelt and two for Wilson.
He introduced the direct primary, established utility regulatory boards, and allowed cities to adopt the commissioner form of government. In less than two years, New Jersey became a model of progressive reform.
Wilson Versus Roosevelt
The election of 1912 was a contest between two progressives with different approaches to reform. Roosevelt accepted large trusts as a fact of life and set out to create proposals to increase regulation. He favored laws to protect women and children in the labor force and supported workers’ compensation for those injured on the job. Roosevelt called his program the New Nationalism.
Wilson countered with what he called the New Freedom. He criticized Roosevelt’s New Nationalism for supporting “regulated monopoly.”
Wilson argued that Roosevelt’s approach gave the federal government too much power in the economy and did nothing to restore competition.
Wilson believed that freedom outweighed efficiency.
As expected, Roosevelt and Taft split the Republican voters. Wilson won the Electoral College with 435 votes. He won the election even though he received less than 42 percent of the popular vote. For the first time since Grover Cleveland’s election in 1892, a Democrat was elected president.
B READING PROGRESS CHECK
GEOGRAPHY CONNECTION
The election of 1912 was the first presidential election in which all of the then 48 states participated.
THE WORLD IN SPATIAL TERMS
In which two states did Taft win electoral votes?
PLACES AND REGIONS
In what region did Roosevelt have the most electoral support?
Summarizing How did having three nominees running for president make the election of 1912 different from others?
(continued from p. 220)
TEKS
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills 5B evaluate the impact of muckrakers and reform leaders such as Upton Sinclair, Susan B. Anthony,
Ida B. Wells, and W. E. B. DuBois on American society
5C evaluate the impact of third parties, including the Populist and Progressive parties
Wilson's Reforms
15B describe the changing relationship between the federal government and private business, including the costs and benefits of laissez-faire, anti-trust acts, the Interstate Commerce Act, and the Pure Food and Drug Act
guiding question How did Wilson earn the respect of progressives?
As the new Chief Executive, Wilson lost no time in embarking on his program of progressive reform. During his eight years as president, Wilson demonstrated his executive power as he crafted reforms affecting tariffs, the banking system, trusts, and workers rights.
15E describe the emergence of monetary policy in the United States, including the Federal Reserve Act of 1913 and the shifting trend from a gold standard to fiat money
continued on the next page
The Progressive Movement 221
academic a person associated with higher learning at a scholarly institution
direct tax a tax imposed directly on a peron or their property
indirect tax a tax that someone pays, but the tax burden falls on someone else
— Analyzing-----
Primary Sources
Wilson's New Freedom
am perfectly willing that [a business] should beat any competitor by fair means.... But there must be no squeezing out the beginner ... no secret arrangements against him. All the fair competition you choose, but no unfair competition of any kind .. .^
—from The New Freedom, 1918
DBQ
MAKING INFERENCES
What can you infer about Wilson's belief in free enterprise?
income tax a tax based on the net income of a person or business
(continued from p. 221)
TEKS
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills 21B discuss historical reasons why the constitution has been amended
21C evaluate constitutional change in terms of strict construction versus judicial interpretation
26A explain actions taken by people to expand economic opportunities and political rights, including those for racial, ethnic, and religious minorities as well as women, in American society
Income Taxes and the 16th Amendment
Article 1, section 2 ofthe Constitution states that “Representatives and direct Taxes shall be apportioned among the several States which may be included within this Union, according to their respective Numbers...” A direct tax is a tax imposed directly on a person or their property. If the federal government wants to tax property, it has to make sure the tax is proportionate among the states based on their population. If a state has 20 percent ofthe people in the country, it has to pay 20 percent of the taxes, regardless of whether the state is poor or wealthy. This requirement makes it very difficult for Congress to pass direct taxes.
An indirect tax is a tax that someone pays, but the tax burden falls on someone else. For example, if a company pays a tax for each car it makes, it simply includes that tax in the price of the car. The person who really pays the tax is the consumer, but they pay it indirectly. Sales taxes, excise taxes, and tariffs are all indirect taxes. An income tax on wages is also an indirect tax. It is actually an indirect tax on an employer. Employers know workers have to pay income taxes. So they have to pay high enough wages that workers will still take the job knowing they will pay income taxes. If there were no income taxes, employers could pay workers less and still get them to take the job.
Up until the early 1900s, the federal government had raised most of its money using sales taxes, excise taxes, and tariffs. As the progressive movement began, many progressives began to argue that income taxes were the best way to fund the federal government. An income tax could be graduated. You could tax wealthy people at a higher percentage than poor people. A graduated income tax is sometimes called a progressive tax.
In 1894, Congress imposed income taxes on wealthy Americans. The following year, the Supreme Court struck down the income tax law because it was not just a tax on wages, but a tax on all types of income. If a person earned income because they rented property, or because they owned stocks that paid dividends, they still had to pay the income tax. The Supreme Cour declared that an income tax that included income from property was a direct tax, not an indirect tax, and since it had not been divided proportionately among the states, it was unconstitutional.
The Court’s decision frustrated progressives. It meant that income taxes could be put on wages, and fall on working class Americans, but that rich people who earned most of their income from property could not be taxed on that income. Soon afterward, progressives began pressing for a Constitutional amendment that would allow the federal government to tax income, no matter its source, and without having to divide it proportionate! among the states. Both President Roosevelt and President Taft supported the amendment as did many political leaders in both parties. In February 1913, the 16th amendment allowing for taxes on incomes was ratified by the states.
A little over two months later, and only five weeks after taking office, President Wilson appeared before Congress, the first president to do so since John Adams. He had come to present his bill to reduce tariffs and introduce a federal income tax. Wilson personally lobbied members of Congress to support the tariff reduction bill. Not even Roosevelt had taken such an active role in promoting legislation. In 1913 Congress passed the Revenue Act of 1913, also known as the Underwood-Simmons Act, and Wilson signed it into law. This law reduced the average tariff on imported goods to about 30 percent of the value of the goods and provided for levying
222
a federal graduated income tax. The income tax was intended to replace the revenue lost by the tariff reductions.
Reforming the Banks
The United States had not had a central bank since the 1830s. Periodic economic depressions that had occurred after that time had destroyed numerous small banks, wiping out many of their customers’ life savings.
To restore public confidence in the banking system, Wilson supported a federal reserve system. Banks would have to keep part of their deposits in one of 12 reserve banks, providing a cushion against unexpected financial losses. The Federal Reserve Act of 1913 created the regional reserve banks, supervised by a Board of Governors appointed by the president. The Board could set the interest rates the reserve banks charged other banks, thereby indirectly controlling the nations interest rates and the amount of money in circulation.
The Federal Reserve Act became one of the most significant pieces of legislation in American history. It created an independent agency that began to use monetary policy to manage the nation’s economy. Monetary policy refers to policies that adjust a nation’s money supply in order to regulate the economy. If the Federal Reserve sets interest rates low, businesses and individuals will generally borrow more money. This increases the amount of money in circulation and causes the economy to grow. If interest rates are raised, people borrow less, which slows the economy, but also reduces inflation. Generally speaking, the goal of monetary policy is to contract the money supply if inflation is too high, and expand the money supply if the economy is in a recession and unemployment is too high.
Antitrust Action
During his campaign, Wilson had promised to restore competition to the economy by breaking up monopolies. After the election, he realized that Roosevelt had been right: big businesses were more efficient and unlikely to be replaced by smaller, more competitive firms. Wilson decided against pursuing the monopolies. Progressives in Congress, however, continued to demand action against big business. In 1914, at Wilson’s request, Congress created the Federal Trade Commission (FTC) to monitor American business. The FTC had the power to investigate companies and issue “cease and desist” orders against those it found to be engaging in unfair trade practices, or practices that hurt competition. If a business disagreed with its rulings, it could take the FTC to court.
Wilson did not want the FTC to break up big business. Instead, it was to work toward limiting unfair trade practices. He deliberately appointed conservative business leaders as the FTC’s first commissioners. Unsatisfied by Wilson’s approach, progressives in Congress responded by passing the Clayton Antitrust Act in 1914. The act outlawed certain practices that restricted competition such as price discrimination, or charging different customers different prices. The passing ofthe Clayton Antitrust Act corrected deficiencies in the Sherman Antitrust Act of 1890.
Before the law passed, labor unions lobbied Congress to exempt unions. As a result, the Clayton Antitrust Act stated that its provisions did not apply to labor organizations or agricultural organizations. When the bill became law, Samuel Gompers, the head ofthe American Federation of Labor, called the act the workers’ “Magna Carta” because it gave unions the right to exist.
unfair trade practices
trading practices that derive a gain at the expense of competition
Regulating Big Business
In 1916 Wilson signed the first federal law Keating-Owen Child Labor Act prohibited
regulating child labor. The the employment of children
The Progressive Movement 223
unconstitutional notin accordance with or authorized by the constitution of a state or society
under the age of 14 in factories producing goods for interstate commerce. Although the Supreme Court declared the law unconstitutional in 1918, Wilson’s effort helped his reputation among progressives. He also supported the Adamson Act, which established the eight-hour workday fc railroad workers, and the Federal Farm Loan Act, which helped provide low-interest loans to farmers.
g READING PROGRESS CHECK
Drawing Conclusions Why was the Federal Reserve Act so important?
Progressivism^ Legacies and Limits
guiding question What doyou believe were progressivism's most important success and biggest failure?
During his presidency, Wilson built upon Roosevelt’s foundation. He expanded both the federal government and the power of the president.
New Roles for Government
Progressivism made important changes in the political life of the United States. Before this era, most Americans did not expect the government to pass laws protecting workers or regulating big business. In fact, many courts had previously ruled the passage of such laws unconstitutional. By the end of the Progressive Era, however, both legal and public opinion ha' shifted. Increasingly, Americans expected the government, particularly th federal government, to play a more active role in regulating the economy
African American leaders such as	and solving social problems.
W.E.B.
Du Bois worked to end racial discrimination, communicating	The Limits of Progressivism
through publications including the	The most conspicuous limit to progressivism was its failure to address racial
NAACP's journal, The Crisis.	and religious discrimination. African Americans themselves, however, were
CRITICAL THINKING
absorbing the reform spirit, which fueled their long-standing desire for Making Connections What are	advancement. In 1905 W.E.B. Du Bois and 28 other African American leade
ways that people today work to	met at Niagara Falls to demand full rights for African Americans. There the
reduce discrimination?	launched what became known as the Niagara Movement.
^OPV
224
Du Bois and other African American leaders believed that voting rights were essential to end lynching and racial discrimination. “The power ofthe ballot we need in sheer self-defense,” Du Bois said, “else what shall save us from a second slavery? Freedom too, the long-sought we still seek,—the freedom of life and limb, the freedom to work and think, the freedom to love and aspire. Work, culture, liberty,—all these we need, not singly, but together.”
In 1908 race riots in Springfield, Illinois, shocked many people, including Mary White Ovington, a settlement house worker. She had been studying African Americans in New York, determined to do something to improve their situation. Other progressives, including Jane Addams of Hull House and muckrakers Ida Wells-Barnett and Lincoln Steffens, joined Ovington in calling for change. Capitalizing on Springfield as Abraham Lincoln’s hometown and on the centennial of his birthday on February 12, 1909, they organized a national conference in Springfield to take stock of the progress in emancipation. At a second conference the following year, the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP) was born. Through Du Bois, the members learned of the Niagara Movement, and the two groups eventually merged.
African Americans were not the only minority group facing discrimination. Jewish people also lived in fear of mob violence. In 1913 Leo Frank, a Jew being tried in Atlanta for a murder that the facts proved he did not commit, was sentenced to death. Although his sentence was changed to life imprisonment, a mob lynched him two years later.
In this context, lawyer Sigmund Livingston started the Anti-Defamation League (ADL) to combat stereotypes and discrimination. According to its 1913 charter, the ADL’s “ultimate purpose [was] to secure justice and fair treatment to all citizens alike and to put an end forever to unjust and unfair discrimination against and ridicule of any sect or body of citizens.” The ADL worked to remove negative portrayals of Jews in movies, in print, and on stage. For example, the League protested a World War I army manual that claimed Jews were likely to pretend to be sick to escape work or battle. When the ADL complained, President Wilson had the manual recalled.
H READING PROGRESS CHECK
Identifying What do you think were progressivism's most important success and biggest failure?
LESSON 3 REVIEW
Reviewing Vocabulary
1.	Defining The Federal Trade Commission had the power to investigate companies engaging in what actions that unfairly limited competition? 15B
Using Your Notes
2.	Comparing and Contrasting Review the notes that you completed during the lesson to write a statement comparing and contrasting Wilson's economic and social reforms. 15B, 15E
Answering the Guiding Questions
3.	Contrasting How was the election of 1912 different from previous presidential elections?
4.	Monitoring How did Wilson earn the respect of progressives?
5.	Evaluating What do you believe were progressivism's most important success and biggest failure?
Writing Activity
INFORMATIVE/EXPLANATORY
During the Progressive Era, nongovernmental organizations such as the NAACP and the ADL worked to gain rights and end discrimination for minority groups. Explain what steps these groups took to correct injustices in American life. 15B.26A The Progressive Movement 225
chapter 6 Assessment
Directions: On a separate sheet of paper, answer the questions below. Make sure you read carefully and
answer all parts of the questions.
Lesson Review
Lesson 1
0 Evaluating What progressive issue eventually led to the passage ofthe Eighteenth Amendment? What was the impact on American society of the campaign for the Eighteenth Amendment and related reforms? 5A
Q
Describing What were the goals of progressives? 0 Analyzing What were the main social issues affecting women and children in the Progressive Era, and what reforms did progressives seek to help them? 3C
0 Making Generalizations Evaluate the impact of the muckrakers on the progressive movement. What did they accomplish and what were the costs and benefits to American society? 5B
0 Evaluating How did the Nineteenth Amendment help
achieve equal political rights in the United States?
5A, 23B
0 Evaluating What change did the Seventeenth
Amendment make to the Constitution and what impact did this have on the federal system? 5A
0 Describing Explain the effects zoning laws had on individuals, businesses, and communities and how these laws impacted Fifth Amendment property rights. 14C
0 Describing What were the roles ofthe National American Woman Suffrage Association (NAWSA) and the National Woman's Party in the woman's civil rights movement? 9B
Lesson 2
0 Sequencing Describe the steps Theodore Roosevelt took to rein in big business and then summarize his approach to regulating business. 5B, 15B
© Defending What arguments might a conservationist use to justify President Roosevelt's expansion ofthe power of the federal government? 14B
© Comparing and Contrasting Compare President Taft’ record as a progressive to President Roosevelt's achievements. How were the two men similar? Where did they differ? 5A,14B,15B
Lesson 3
© Evaluating Which amendment gave the federal government the power to collect income tax directly without having to apportion it among the states? What impact did this have on the way the U.S. government raised revenue? 5A
© Contrasting On what progressive political issue did Roosevelt and Wilson most differ during their 1912 presidential campaigns? 5A, 15B
© Evaluating What was the impact ofthe Progressive Party on the 1912 election? 5C
© Explaining What actions did W.E.B. Du Bois take to expand the political rights and economic opportunities African Americans during the Progressive Era? 5B, 26/
0 Analyzing How did progressivism change the United States? Who were overlooked by progressive reformers?
© Identifying Cause and Effect Explain the actions tha lawyer Sigmund Livingston took to help the Jewish religious minority expand its political rights and econor opportunities in American society. 26A
Exploring the Essential Questions
© Identifying Central Issues Make an informative post that identifies how progressives tried to fix society's problems and documents their success. Your poster sho include charts, illustrations, graphs, or lists to support y information. 5A, 5B, 3OA
Need Extra Help?
l6*"*11**-----l1W 1^ I Mi I 2W I M5 | 2M | 206 | 212 | 2H | 212 | 222 |	224 | 225 11
226
Critical Thinking
(J) Describing Change and Continuity How did the Pure Food and Drug Act change the relationship between the federal government and business? What were the costs and benefits of the act? 15B
© Comparing and Contrasting Evaluate the Supreme Court decisions in Lochner v. New York (1905), and Northern Securities v. United States (1904). In which case does the Court take a more strict construction approach? Explain why and evaluate which case had more of a long-term effect on the federal government's relationship to business. 15B.21C
® Evaluating Explain the impact ofthe initiative and the referendum on making government more democratic and responsive to voters. 5A
© Making Generalizations How does a direct primary or a recall reduce corruption and bias among elected officials and make them more responsive to voters? 5A
Describing Explain the Federal Reserve system created by the Federal Reserve Act in 1913. What was the purpose ofthe Federal Reserve and why was it created? How did the creation ofthe Federal Reserve contribute to the emergence of monetary policy? 15E
$ Analyzing How did the Hepburn Act alter the Interstate Commerce Commission and change the relationship between the federal government and private business? Were there any costs associated with these changes? 15B
Comparing and Contrasting Describe the costs and benefits of anti-trust actions during the Roosevelt and Wilson administrations. How did their different approaches affect the relationship between the federal government and private business? 15B
Identifying Costs Describe how the costs ofthe laissez-faire approach to the economy helped trigger progressive reforms and how the relationship between the federal government and business changed during the Progressive Era. 15B
Social Studies Skills
© Creating a Thematic Chart Make a chart that explains why the Constitution was amended during the Progressive Era. In the first column, list each ofthe amendments to the Constitution that occurred during the Progressive Era. In the second column, identify how each amendment changed the Constitution. In the third column, explain the
historical reasons why the Constitution was amended.
26D, 31A
© Transferring Information Do additional research using print and/or online sources into the life and achievements of Frances Willard. Then write a short report based on the research describing her social, political and economic contributions. Turn the report into a digital visual presentation using computer software. 26D, 30C
DBQ
Analyzing Primary Sources
Read the excerpt and answer the questions that follow.
PRIMARY SOURCE
44 I am perfectly willing that [a business] should beat any competitor by fair means... but there must be no squeezing out the beginner... no secret arrangements against him. All the fair competition you choose, but no unfair competition of any kind.... A trust is an arrangement to get rid of competition.... A trust does not bring efficiency... it buys efficiency out of business. I am for big business, and I am against the trusts... any man who can put others out of business by making a thing cheaper for the consumer... I take off my hat to... ’>
—quoted in The New Freedom
Analyzing Primary Sources Which ofthe presidential contenders in the 1912 election do you think said the above quote? Explain your choice. What policies were enacted during his administration that reflected the beliefs expressed above? 15B.29A
© Gathering Information Identify the government entities that were created during the Progressive Era to help manage the environment. 14B
Need Extra Help?
	19	20	21	22	23	24	25	26	27	28	29	30
, Go to page	| 215 | 208 |	M		[223;	|215	| 212 | 212	, 199 1 209 1 220 | 200 |
The Progressive Movement 227
Analyzing Visuals
Use the image to answer the following questions.
© Drawing Inferences What does the image tell you about who supported the prohibition of alcohol? Why do you think the consumption of alcohol was such an important issue for this group of Americans? What impression does the image give ofthe protestors as compared to the people in the saloon? 3C, 5A, 26D, 29A, 29B, 29F
Use the map Woman Suffrage 1869-1920 to answer the following questions.
© Analyzing Geographic Patterns Describe the
geographic pattern that developed among states as they granted woman suffrage 3C, 26A, 31B
Analyzing Geographic Distributions Why was the fa
that so many states granted full or partial suffrage befoi 1920 important to the success ofthe effort to amend the Constitution? 3C, 26D, 31B
Extended Response Question
© Analyzing Write an essay tracing the historical development ofthe suffrage movement culminating in tl Nineteenth Amendment. Identify the major leaders of th movement and explain the different strategies they wan' to use to expand political rights for women and the resulting split ofthe movement into two groups. Then identify the different methods suffragists used to convim political leaders to expand women's participation in the democratic process and evaluate their effectiveness. Whi methods appear to have been most effective in helping suffragists reach their goals? Your essay should include at introduction, at least three supporting paragraphs, and a conclusion. 5B, 9A, 9B, 23A, 26A, 26D
Standardized Test Practice
Who were the muckrakers? 5B, 5C
A.	a group of journalists who wrote stories about sod; problems and corruption
B.	a group of senators opposed to tariff reform
C.	supporters of women's suffrage who blocked roads and picketed the White House
D.	police who broke up labor unions
© Which act of Congress created a system for regulating th nation's banks and controlling the money supply? 15E
F.
The Clayton Act G.
The Reclamation Act H.
The Federal Trade Commission Act J. The Federal Reserve Act Need Extra Help?
	31	32	33	34	35	36
| Go to page	1 209 | 205 | 205 | 205 | 203 | 223 I
228
World War I and Its Aftermath
1914-1920
networks
There's More Online about the involvement ofthe United States in World War I.
CHAPTER

Lesson 1
The United States Enters World War I
Lesson 2
The Home Front
Lesson 3
A
Bloody Confli Lesson 4
The War’s Impact
The Story Matters. ••
When war began between European nations in 1914, the United States tried to remain neutral, but attacks on U.S. ships eventually caused the United States to enter the war.
To successfully fight the war, the U.S. government used progressive ideas to manage the economy, build a large military, and shape public opinion. America's involvement in the war effort had a profound impact on American society for years to come.
◄ General John J. Pershing commanded the American Expeditionary Force in several successful battles against the Central Powers during World War I.
PHOTO:
Underwood & Underwood/Bettmann/CORBIS 229
h-3
