646 ® CHAPTER 23
MIGRANT FAMILY
Dorothea Lange, one of the great photographers of the Depression era, worked in the 1930s for the photographic division of the Farm Security Administration (FSA). The FSA photographers sought to record the conditions of life in America's troubled agrarian world during the Great Depression in the hopes of stimulating reform. Lange's photograph here represents a family in transit as they, like thousands of others, moved from the Great Plains to California. (Photo by Dorothea Lange/© Time & Life Pictures/Getty Images) was 50 percent or more. In other cities, it was higher. Two million African Americans were on some form of relief by 1932.
Traditional patterns of segregation and disenfranchisement in the South survived the Depression largely unchal-Scottsboro lenSed- But a few particularly notorious Case	examples of racism did attract national
attention. The most celebrated was the
Scottsboro case. In March 1931, nine black teenagers were taken off a freight train in Alabama (in a small town near Scottsboro) and arrested for vagrancy and disorder. Later, two white women who had also been riding the train accused them of rape. In fact, there was overwhelming evidence, medical and otherwise, that the women had not been raped-that they may have made their accusations out of fear of being arrested themselves. Nevertheless, an all-white jury in Alabama quickly convicted all nine of the "'Scottsboro boys” (as they were known to both friends and foes) and sentenced eight of them to death.
The Supreme Court overturned the convictions in 1932, and
a series of new trials began that attracted increasing national
attention. The International Labor Defense, an organization
associated with the Communist Party, came to the aid of the accused youths and began to publicize the case. Later, the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP) provided assistance as well. The trials continued throughout the 1930s. Although the white southern Juries who sat on the case never acquitted any of the defendants, all of them eventually gained their freedom-four because the charges were dropped, four because of early paroles, and one because he escaped. But the last of the Scottsboro defendants did not leave prison until 1950.
The Depression was a time of important changes in the role and behavior of leading black organizations. The NAACP, for example, began to work diligently to win a position for blacks within
NAACP’s	tBe emer&in& lab°r movement,
Changing	supporting the formation of the
Role	Congress of Industrial Organ-
izations and helping to break down racial barriers within labor unions. Walter White, secretary of the NAACP, once made a personal appearance at an auto plant to implore African Americans not to work as strikebreakers. Partly as a result of such efforts, more than half a million blacks were able to join the labor movement. In the Steelworkers Union, for example, African Americans constituted about 20 percent of
the membership.
Mexican Americans
in Depression America
Similar patterns of discrimination confronted the large and growing population of Mexicans and Mexican Americans, which numbered approximately 2 million in the 1930s.
Mexican Americans filled many of the same menial jobs in the West and elsewhere that African Americans filled in other regions. Some farmed small, marginal tracts. Some became agricultural migrants, traveling from region to region harvesting fruit, lettuce, and other crops. But most lived in urban areas-in California, New Mexico, and Arizona, but also in Detroit, Chicago, New York, and other eastern industrial cities-and occupied the lower ranks of the unskilled labor force in such industries as steel, automobiles, and meatpacking.
As in the South, unemployed white Anglos in the Southwest Discrimination demanded jobs held by Hispanics. Thus against	Mexican unemployment rose quickly to
Hispanics levels far higher than those for Anglos.
Some Mexicans were, in effect, forced to leave the country by officials who arbitrarily removed them from relief rolls or simply rounded them up and transported them across the border. Perhaps half a million Chicanos left the United States for Mexico in the first years of the Depression. Most relief programs excluded Mexicans from their rolls or
THE GREAT DEPRESSION * 647
DUST STORM, SOUTHWEST PLAINS, 1937
The dust storms of the 1930s were a terrifying experience for all who lived through them. Resembling a black wall sweeping in from the western horizon, such a storm engulfed farms and towns alike, blotting out the light of the sun and covering everything with fine dirt. (@ Bettmann/Corbis) „	.	(	r„r»l Smith into the cities had bequn before World War I. But in the 1930s and 1940s the movement accelerated.
CK MIGRANTS
The Great Migration of African Americans 1 S Truth Housing Project in Detroit under the guard of Michigan state troopers and police, enters were not always so welcoming. Here, vans move African Americans to the federal sojourner	a t
5 Granger Collection, New York)
648 ® CHAPTER 23
offered them benefits far below those available to whites. Latinos generally had no access to American schools. Many hospitals refused them admission.
Occasionally, there were signs of organized resistance by Mexican Americans themselves, most notably in California, where some formed a union of migrant farmworkers. But harsh repression by local growers and the public authorities allied with them prevented such organizations from having much impact. Like African American farmworkers, many Mexicans began as a result to migrate to cities such as Los Angeles, where they lived in a poverty comparable to that of urban blacks in the South and Northeast.
Asian Americans in Haro Times
For Asian Americans, too, the Depression reinforced long-standing patterns of discrimination and economic marginalization. In California, where the largest Japanese American and Chinese American populations resided, even educated Asians had always found it difficult, if not impossible, to move into mainstream professions. Japanese American college graduates often found themselves working at family fruit stands; 20 percent of
CHINATOWN, NEW YORK A
Chinese man carries a "sandwich board” through the streets of New York’s Chinatown bearing the latest news of the war between China and Japan, which in 1938 was already well under way. Chinese Americans had the dual challenge in the 1930s of dealing both with large-scale unemployment and with continuing news of catastrophe from China, where most still had many family members. (© Hulton Archive/Getty Images) all Japanese Americans in Los Angeles worked at such stands at the end of the 1930s. For those who found jobs (usually poorly paid) in the industrial or service economy, employment was precarious; like blacks and Hispanics, they often lost jobs to white Americans desperate for work that a few years earlier they would not have considered. Japanese farmworkers, like Chicano farmworkers, suffered from the increasing competition for even these low-paying jobs from white migrants from the Great Plains.
In California, younger men and women organized Japanese American Democratic Clubs in several cities, which worked for, among other things, laws protecting racial and ethnic minorities from discrimination. At the same time, some Japanese American businessmen and professionals tried to overcome obstacles by encouraging other
Japanese to become more assimilated, more "American.” They formed the Japanese American Citizens League in 1930 to promote their goals. By 1940, it had nearly 6,000 members.
Chinese Americans fared no better. The overwhelming majority continued to work in Chinese-owned laundries and restaurants. Those who moved outside the Asian community could rarely find jobs above the entry level.
Japanese
American
Citizens
League
Women and the Workplace in the Great Depression
me economic crisis served m many ways
J J
□UUllgUlVll widespread belief that a woman’s proper place was in the home. Most men and many women believed that what work there was should go tc men. Many people believed that no woman whose husband was employed should acc ept a job.
But the widespread assumption that married women, at least, should not work outside the home did not stop them from doing so. Both single and married women worked in the 1930s, despite public condemnation of the practice, because they or their families needed the money. In fact, the largest new group of female workers consisted ol wives and mothers. By the end of the Depression, 20 percent
Popular Disapproval of Women’s Employment
Increased
Female
Employment
more women were working than had been doing so at the beginning.
The increase occurred despite considerable obstacles. Professional opportunities for women declined because unemployed men began moving into professions, such as teaching and social work, that had previously been considered women’s fields. Female industrial workers were more likely to be laid off or to experience wage reductions than their male counterparts. But white women also had certain advantages in the workplace. The nonprofessional jobs that women traditionally held-as salesclerks and stenographers, and in other service positions were less likely to disappear than the predominantly male jobs in heavy industry. Nor were many men even unemployed men, likely to ask for such jobs.
THE GREAT DEPRESSION
« 649 60
20
29%
10
0
1900	1 910	1 920	1 930	1 940
Year
WOMEN IN THE PAID WORKFORCE, 1900-1940
The participation of women in the paid workforce increased slowly but steadily in the first forty years of the twentieth century. Note, however, the general leveling off of the participation of single women—who traditionally accounted for the vast majority of women workers—after 1920, at the same time that the total number of women in the paid workforce was rising. Many more married women began entering the paid workforce in these years, particularly in the 1930s. * IV/iy did so many married women begin doing paid work during the Great Depression?
Black women suffered massive unemployment because of a great reduction of domestic service jobs. As many as half of all black working women lost their jobs in the 1930s. Even so, at the end of the 1930s, 38 percent of black women were employed, as compared to 24 percent of white women. That was because black women-both married and unmarried-had always been more likely to work than white women, less out of preference than out of economic necessity.
For American feminists, the Depression years were, on the whole, a time of frustration. Although economic pressures pushed more women into the workforce, those same pressures helped to erode the frail support that feminists had won in the 1920s for the idea of women becoming economically and professionally independent.
Depression Families
The economic hardships of the Depression years placed great
strains on American families, many of whom had become
accustomed in the 1920s to a steadily rising standard of living
but now found themselves plunged suddenly into uncertainty.
Such circumstances forced many families to retreat from the consumer patterns they had developed in the 1920s. Women often returned to sewing clothes for themselves and Retreat from l^eir Tumilies and to preserving their own Consumerism f°°d rather than buying such products in stores. Others engaged in home businesses-taking in laundry, selling baked goods, accepting boarders. Many households expanded to include distant relatives. Parents often moved in with their children and grandparents with their
grandchildren, or vice versa.
But the Depression also eroded the strength of many family units. There was a decline in the divorce rate, but largely because divorce was now too expensive for some. More common was the informal breakup of families, particularly the desertion of families by unemployed men bent on escaping the humiliation of being unable to earn a living. The marriage and birth rates declined simultaneously for the first time since the early nineteenth century.
THE DEPRESSION AND AMERICAN CULTURE
The Great Depression was a traumatic experience for millions of Americans, and it shook the confidence of many people in themselves or in their nation or both. Out of the crisis emerged some of the most probing criticisms of American society and the American economic system of the industrial age. At the same time, the Depression produced powerful confirmations of traditional values and reinforced many traditional goals. There was not one Depression culture, but many.
Depression Values
American social values seemed to change relatively little in response to the Depression. Instead, many people responded to hard times by redoubling their commitment to familiar ideas and goals. The sociologists Robert Lynd and Helen Merrell Lynd, who had published a celebrated study of Muncie, Indiana, Middletown, in 1929, returned there in the mid-1930s to see how the city had changed. They concluded in their 1937 book, Middletown in Transition, that in most respects "the texture of Middletown’s culture has not changed. . . . Middletown is overwhelmingly living by the values by which it lived in 1925.” Above all, the men and women of "Middle to wn”-and by implication many other Americans-remained committed to the traditional American emphasis on the individual.
In some respects, the economic crisis worked to undermine the traditional "success ethic” in America. Many people began to look to government for assistance; many blamed corporate moguls, international bankers, "economic
royalists,” and others for their distress. Yet the Depression did not, in the end, seriously erode the success ethic.
Persistence of the "Success Ethic”
650 ® CHAPTER 23
Some victims of the Depression expressed anger and struck out at the economic system. Many, however, seemed to blame themselves. Nothing so surprised foreign observers of America Self-Blame in	as the apparent passivity of
the unemployed, many of whom were so ashamed of their joblessness that they refused to leave their
homes.
At the same time, millions of people responded eagerly to reassurances that they could, through their own efforts, restore themselves to prosperity and success. The writer and lecturer Dale Carnegie’s self-help manual How to Win Friends and Influence People (1936) was one of the best-selling books of the decade. Carnegie’s message was not only that personal initiative was the route to success; it was also that the best way for people to get ahead was to fit in and make other people feel important.
Artists and Intellectuals in the Great Depression
Just as many progressives had become alarmed when, early in
the twentieth century, they "discovered” the existence of
„	„ widespread poverty in the cities, so many
"Discovery” . r r ,7 .	,
of Rural Americans were shocked during the 1930s
Poverty at their discovery of debilitating rural poverty. Among those who were most effective in conveying the dimensions of this poverty was a group of documentary photographers, many of them employed by the federal Farm Security Administration in the late 1930s, who traveled through the South recording the nature of agricultural life. Roy Stryker, Walker Evans, Arthur Rothstein, Ben Shahn, Margaret Bourke-White, Dorothea Lange, and others produced memorable studies of farm families and their
in the rural South.
Depression
Literature
surroundings, studies often designed to reveal the savage impact of a hostile environment on its victims.
Many writers, similarly, turned away from the personal concerns of the 1920s and devoted themselves to exposes of social injustice. Erskine Caldwell’s Tobacco Road (1932), which later became a long-running Broadway play, was an expose of poverty Richard Wright, a major African American novelist, exposed the plight of residents of the urban ghetto in Native Son (1940). John Steinbeck’s novels portrayed the trials of
workers and migrants in California. John Dos Passos’s trilogy, U.S.A. (1930-1936), attacked modern capitalism outright. Playwright Clifford Odets provided an explicit demonstration of the appeal of political radicalism in Waiting for Lefty (1935).
But the cultural products of the 1930s that attracted the widest popular audiences were those that diverted attention away from the Depression. And they came to Americans primarily through the two most powerful instruments of popular culture in the 193 Os-radio and the movies.
Radio
Almost every American family had a radio in the 1930s. In cities and towns, radio consoles were now as familiar a part of the furnishing of parlors and kitchens as tables and chairs. Even in remote rural areas without access to electricity, many families purchased radios and hooked them up to car batteries when they wished to listen.
Unlike in later times, radio in the 1930s was often a community experience. Young people would place radios on their front porches and invite friends over to sit, talk, or dance. In poor urban neighborhoods, many people who could not afford
A RADIO PLAY
Among the most popular entertainments of the 1930s were live readings of plays over the radio—many of them mysteries or romances written specifically for the new medium. Here, a group of actors performs a radio comedy over WNBC in New York City in the early 1930s. The actors (from left to right) are Jack Benny, George Murphy, Jean Cranford, and Reginald Gardiner. (© Hulton Archive/Getty Images)
THE GREAT DEPRESSION - 651
KITTY ORLBIE ALUM 4
JOHESl Sewm
GEOftst $ Kaufman WMORRIE OVSWNt) SAM woon
A NIGHT AT THE OPERA
The antic comedy of the Marx Brothers provided a popular and welcome escape from the rigors of the Great Depression. The Marx Brothers, shown here in a poster for one of their most famous films, effectively lampooned dilemmas that many Americans faced in their ceaseless, and usually unsuccessful, efforts to find an easy route to wealth and comfort. (© Everett Collection) other kinds of social activities would gather on a street or in a backyard to listen to sporting events or concerts. Within families, the radio often drew parents and children together in the evening to listen to favorite programs.
What did Americans hear on the radio? Although radio stations occasionally carried socially and politically provocative
Escapist programs, the staple of broadcasting was Programming escapism: comedies such as Amos 'n Andy (with its humorous, if demeaning, picture of urban blacks); adventures such as Superman, Dick Tracy, and The Lone Ranger; and other entertainment programs. Radio brought a new kind of comedy-previously limited to vaudeville or to ethnic theatersto a wide audience. Jack Benny, George Burns and Gracie Allen, and other masters of elaborately timed jokes and repartee began to develop broad followings (that they
would later take with them to television).
Soap operas, also later to become staples of television programming, were enormously popular on radio in the 1930s, especially with women who were alone in the house during the day. (That was one reason they became known as soap operas; soap companies-whose advertising was targeted at women-generally sponsored them.)
Almost invariably, radio programs were broadcast live; and as a result, radio spawned an enormous number of public performances. Radio comedies and dramas were often performed before audiences in theaters or studios. Band concerts were broadcast from dance halls, helping jazz and swing bands to achieve broad popularity. Classical music, too, was broadcast bve from studios.
Radio provided Americans with their first direct access to
important public events, and radio news and sports divisions
grew rapidly to meet the demand. Some of the most dramatic
moments of the 1930s were a result of radio coverage of celebrated events: the World Series, major college football games, the Academy Awards, political
Radio’s	conventions, presidential inaugu-
Impact	rations. When the German dirigi-
ble the Hindenburg crashed in flames in Lakehurst, New Jersey, in 1937 after a transatlantic voyage, it produced an enormous national reaction largely because of the live radio account by a broadcaster overcome with emotion who cried out, as he watched the terrible crash, "Oh the humanity! Oh the humanity!” The actor/director Orson Welles created another memorable event in 1938 when he broadcast "War of the Worlds,” which created panic among millions of people who believed for a while that the fictional events it described were real. (See
"Patterns of Popular Culture,” pp. 696-697.)
Radio was important for the way it drew the nation
together by creating the possibility of shared experiences and common access to culture and information. It was also significant for the way it helped reshape the social life of the nation, for the way it encouraged many families and individuals to center their lives more around the home than they had in the past.
Continuing Popularity of Movies
Movies in the New Era
Moviegoing would seem particularly vulnerable to hard times. Families struggling to pay the rent or buy food could easily decide to forgo an evening at the movies. In the first years of the Depression, movie attendance did drop significantly. By the mid-1930s, however, most Americans had resumed their moviegoing habits-in part because movies were
a less expensive entertainment option than many other possibilities, and in part because the movies themselves (all of them now with sound, and by the end of the decade many of them in color) were becoming more appealing.
In many ways, movies were as safely conventional in the 1930s as they had been in the late 1920s. Hollywood continued to exercise tight control over its products in the 1930s through its resilient censor Will Hays, who ensured that most movies carried no sensational or controversial messages. The studio system-through which a few large movie companies exercised iron control over actors, writers, and directors, and through which a few great moguls, such as Louis B. Mayer or Jack Warner, could single-handedly decide the fate of most projects-also worked to ensure that Hollywood films avoided controversy.
But neither the censor nor the studio system could (or wished to) prevent films from exploring social questions altogether. A few films, such as King Vidor’s Our Daily Bread (1932) and John Ford’s adaptation of John Steinbeck’s novel The Grapes of Wrath (1940), did explore political themes. The director Frank Capra provided a muted social message in several of his comedies-Mr. Deeds Goes to Town (1936), Mr. Smith Goes to Washington (1939), and Meet John Doe (1941)-which
The Films of Frank Capra
D A KT
Ttf Capra is probably best remembered today for his last successful film, It's a I4 ll Il IX Wonderful Life (1946), widely replayed every year at Christmas. In it, George Bailey, a kind and compassionate small-town savings-and-loan operator (played by Jimmy Stewart), is almost destroyed by a wealthy, greedy, and malicious banker. In despair and contemplating suicide, Bailey receives a visit from an angel who shows him what life in his community, Bedford Falls, would have been like had George never been born. After a few hours of wandering through a coarse, corrupt, degraded version of the town he knew, Bailey comes to understand the value of his own life. He returns to the real Bedford Falls to find that his family, friends, and neighbors have rallied together to rescue him from his financial difficulties and affirm his value to them, and theirs to him. By the time It's a Wonderful Life appeared, Frank Capra had been the most famous and successful director in Hollywood for more than a decade. His films during those years had almost all been great
commercial and critical successes. Capra's popularity was a result in part of his tremendous talent as a director, But it was also a result of his ideas. Most of his films expressed a vision of society, and of politics, that resonated clearly with the concerns of millions of Americans as they struggled through the years of the Great Depression.
Capra was born in 1897 in a small village in Sicily and moved with his family to America six years later, After working his way through college, he found a job in the still-young movie industry in California and eventually became a director of feature films. His great
MR. DEEDS GOES TO TOWN
Gary Cooper, playing the newly wealthy Longfellow Deeds, leaves the friendly, virtuous small town of Mandrake Falls en route to New York to receive the fortune he has inherited. Capra's evocation of the warmth and generosity of Mandrake Falls was part of his effort to contrast the decent America of ordinary people with the grasping and corrupt America of the wealthy and the city. (© Columbia Pictures/Photofest) PROMOTING CAPRA
Capra was unusual among directors of the 1930s in having a distinct following of his own. Most films attempted to attract audiences by highlighting their stars. Capra films highlighted Capra himself. (© Columbia Pictures/Photofest) celebrated the virtues of the small town and the decency of the common people in contrast to the selfish, corrupt values of the city and the urban rich. (See "Patterns of Popular Culture,” pp. 652-653.) Gangster movies such as Little Caesar (1930) and The Public Enemy (1931) portrayed a dark, gritty, violent world with which few Americans were familiar, but their desperate stories were popular nevertheless with those engaged in their own difficult struggles.
More often, however, the commercial films of the 1930s were deliberately and explicitly escapist: lavish musicals such
652 *
as Gold Diggers of 1933 (whose theme song was "We’re in the Money”), "screwball” comedies such as Capra’s It Happened One Night, or the many films of the Marx Brothers-films designed to divert audiences from their troubles and, often, indulge their fantasies about quick and easy wealth.
The 1930s saw the beginning of Walt Disney’s long reign as the champion of animation and children’s entertainment. After producing cartoon shorts for theaters in the late 1920s-many Walt Disney t^em starring the newly created charac-ter °f Mickey Mouse, who made his debut
FRANK CAPRA
Frank Capra was one of the most famous and successful Hollywood movie directors of the 1930s and 1940s. His films evoked a romantic populism and patriotism during a time of great stress and deprivation. (© Moviepix/Getty Images) breakthrough came in 1934 with It Happened One Night, a now-classic comedy that won five major Academy Awards, including best picture and best director. Over the next seven years, he built on that success by making a series of more-pointed films through which he established himself as a powerful voice of a comfortably populist vision of democracy and American life.
Capra made no secret of his romantic image of the small town and the common man, his distaste for cities, his contempt for opportunistic politicians, and his condemnation of what he considered the amoral (and often immoral) capitalist marketplace. In Mr. Deeds Goes to Town (1936), a simple man from a small town inherits a large fortune, moves to the city, and—not liking the greed and dishonesty be finds there—gives the money away and moves back home. In Mr. Smith Goes to Washington (1939), a decent man from a western state is elected to the U.S. Senate, refuses to join in the self-interested politics of Washington, and dramatically exposes the corruption and selfishness of his colleagues. (The rugged western actor Gary Cooper portrayed Mr. Deeds, and Jimmy Stewart played Mr. Smith.) In Meet John Doe (1941), released on the brink of American entry into World War II, an
ordinary man—played again by Gary Cooper—is manipulated by a fascist cartel to dupe the public on their behalf. He comes to his senses just in time and, by threatening suicide, rallies ordinary people to turn against the malign plans of the fascists. He then disappears into the night.
Capra was entirely conscious of the romantic populism that he brought to his films. He was intensely patriotic, and he believed fervently that America stood for individual opportunity and was defined by the decency of ordinary people. He did not like the term "masses" and found it "insulting, degrading." He saw the people, rather, as a "collection of free individuals... each an island of human dignity."
When America entered World War II, Capra collaborated with the government (and the Walt Disney studios) to make a series of films designed to explain to new soldiers what the war was about—a series known as Why We Fight. They contrasted the individualistic democracy of the American small town with the dark collectivism of the Nazis and Fascists. Capra poured into them all his skills as a filmmaker and all his romantic, patriotic images. It's a Wonderful Life, released a year after the war ended, continued his evocation of the decency of ordinary people.
In the decades that followed, Capra ceased to be an important force in American cinema. The sentimental populism and comic optimism that had been so appealing to audiences during the hard years of the Depression and the war gave way to a harder, more realistic style of filmmaking in the 1950s and 1960s; and Capra—a romantic to the end—was never fully able to adjust. But in a time of crisis, Capra had helped his audiences find solace in his romantic vision of the American past, and in the warmth and goodness of small towns and the decency of ordinary people. •
UNDERSTAND, ANALYZE, AND EVALUATE
1.	Why were Capra’s films so popular with people suffering through the economic crisis of the Great Depression?
2.	What social messages do Capra’s films convey?
3.	If Capra's style was considered dated after World War II, why has his film It's a Wonderful Life continued to be so popular?
in the 1928 cartoon Steamboat Willie-Disney began to produce feature-length animated films, starting in 1937 with Snow White. Other enormously popular films of the 1930s were adaptations of popular novels: The Wizard of Oz and Gone with the Wind, both released in 1939.
Popular Literature and Journalism
The social and political strains of the Great Depression found
voice much more successfully in print than they did on the
airwaves or the screen. Much literature and journalism in the 1930s dealt directly or indirectly with the tremendous disillusionment, and the increasing radicalism, of the era.
Not all literature, of course, was challenging or controversial. The most popular books and magazines of the time were as escapist and romantic as the most popular radio shows and
movies. Two of the best-selling novels of the decade were romantic sagas set in ear-
Life Magazine
lier eras: Margaret Mitchell’s Gone with the Wind (1936) and Hervey Allen’s Anthony Adverse (1933). Leading magazines
653
654 * CHAPTER 23
focused more on fashions, stunts, scenery, and the arts than on the social conditions of the nation. The enormously popular new photographic journal Life, which began publication in 1936 and quickly became one of the most successful magazines in American history, had one of the largest readerships of any publication in the United States. It devoted some attention to politics and to the economic conditions of the Depression, more, in fact, than did many of its competitors. But it was best known for stunning photographs of sporting and theater events, natural landscapes, and impressive public projects. Its first cover was a striking photograph by Margaret Bourke-White of a New Deal hydroelectric project. One of its most popular features was "Life Goes to a Party,” which took the chatty social columns of daily newspapers and turned them into glossy photographic glimpses of Americans having fun.
Other Depression writing, however, was frankly and openly challenging to the dominant values of American popular culture. In the first years of the Depression, some of the most significant literature offered corrosive portraits of the harshness and emptiness of American life: Nathanael West’s Miss Lonely hearts (1933), the story of an advice columnist overwhelmed by the sadness he encounters in the lives of those who consult him; Jack Conroy’s The Disinherited (1933), a harsh portrait of the lives of coal miners; and James T. Farrell’s Studs Lonigan (1932), a portrait of a lost, hardened working-class youth.
The Popular Front and the Left
In the later 1930s, much of the political literature was a result of the rise of the Popular Front, a broad coalition of "antifascist” groups on the left, of which the most important was the American Communist Party. The party had long been a harsh and unrelenting critic of American capitalism and the government it claimed was controlled by it. But in 1935, under instructions from the Soviet Union, the party softened its attitude toward Franklin Roosevelt (whom Stalin considered a potential ally in the coming battle against Hitler) and formed loose alliances with many other "progressive” groups. The party began to praise the New Deal. It even supported John L. Lewis, a powerful (and strongly anticommunist) labor leader. The party adopted the slogan "Communism is twentieth-century Americanism.” In its heyday, the Popular Front did much to enhance the reputation and influence of the Communist Party, whose formal membership grew to perhaps 100,000 in the mid-1930s, the highest it had ever been or would be again. But it also helped mobilize writers, artists, and intellectuals-many of them unconnected with (and many of them uninterested in) the Communist Party-behind a pattern of social criticism.
For some intellectuals, the Popular Front offered an escape from the lonely and difficult stance of detachment and alienation they had embraced in the 1920s. The Spanish Civil War
Spanish Civil was imPortant t0 manY American intellec-
War	tuals, especially those on the left. It helped
give meaning and purpose to individual
lives. The war in Spain pitted the fascists of Francisco Franco
Southern
Tenant
Farmers* Union
(who was receiving support from Hitler and Mussolini) against the existing republican government. It attracted a substantial group of young Americans-more than 3,000-who formed the Abraham Lincoln Brigade (directed and in part created by the American Communist Party) and traveled to Spain to join the fight against the fascists. About a third of its members died in combat. Ernest Hemingway, who spent time as a correspondent in Spain during the conflict, wrote in his novel For Whom the Bell Tolls (1940) of how the war provided those Americans who fought in it with "a part in something which you could believe in wholly and completely and in which you felt an absolute brotherhood with others who were engaged in it.”
The Communist Party was active as well in organizing the unemployed in the early 1930s and staged a hunger march in Washington, D.C., in 1931. Party members were among the most effective union organizers in some industries. And the party was among the few political organizations that took a firm stand in favor of racial justice; its active defense of the Scottsboro defendants was but one example of its efforts to ally itself with the aspirations of African Americans.
The American Communist Party was not, however, the open, patriotic organization it tried to appear. It was always under the close and rigid supervision of the Soviet Union. Its leaders took their orders from the Comintern in Moscow. Most members obediently followed the "party line” (although there were many areas in which Communists were active for which there was no party line, areas in which members acted independently). The subordination of the party leadership to the Soviet Union was most clearly demonstrated in 1939, when Stalin signed a nonaggression pact with Nazi Germany. Moscow then sent orders to the American Communist Party to abandon the Popular Front and return to its old stance of harsh criticism of American liberals; and Communist Party leaders in the United States immediately obeyed-although thousands of disillusioned members left the party as a result.
The Socialist Party of America, under the leadership of Norman Thomas, also cited the economic crisis as evidence of the failure of capitalism and sought vigorously to win public support for its own political program. Among other things, it attempted to mobilize support among the rural poor. The Southern Tenant Farmers’ Union (STFU),
supported by the party and organized by a young socialist, H. L. Mitchell, attempted to create a biracial coalition of sharecroppers, tenant farmers, and others to demand economic reform. Neither the STFU nor the party itself, however, made any real progress toward establishing socialism as a major force in American politics. By 1936, membership in the Socialist Party had fallen below 20,000.
Antiradicahsm was a powerful force in the 1930s, just as it had been during and after World War I and would be again in the 1940s and 1950s. Hostility toward the Communist Party, in par-ticu ar, was intense at many levels of government. Congressional committees chaired by Hamilton Fish of New York and Martin ies o Texas investigated communist influence wherever they
THE GREAT DEPRESSION * 655
MIGRANT FAMILY
This photograph by the great Depression photographer Dorothea Lange portrays a family of migrants leaving Texas in search of work in California. It suggests the plight of hundreds of thousands of families who fled the regions affected by drought in the 1930s—a devastation that became known as the Dust Bowl. (© The Granger Collection, New York) could find it (or imagine it). State and local governments harried and sometimes imprisoned communist organizers. White southerners tried to drive communist organizers out of the countryside, just as growers in California and elsewhere tried (unsuccessfully) to keep communists from organizing Mexican American and other workers.
Even so, only a few times before in American history (and in few since) did being part of the left seem so respectable and even conventional among workers, intellectuals, and others. Thus the
The Left’ 1930s witnessed a significant, if temporary,
Newfound widening of the ideological range of main-Respectability stream art and politics. The New Deal sponsored artistic work through the Works
Projects Administration that was frankly challenging to the capitalist norms of the 1920s. The filmmaker Pare Lorentz, with funding from New Deal agencies, made a series of powerful and polemical documentaries— The Plou) That Broke the Plains (1936), The River (1937)-that combined a celebration of New Deal programs with a harsh critique of the exploitation of people and the environment that industrial capitalism had produced.
Perhaps the most successful chronicler of social conditions
in the 1930s was the novelist John Steinbeck, particularly in
his celebrated novel The Grapes of Wrath, published in 1939. In telling the story of the Joad family, migrants from the Dust
The Grapes Bow^ t0 CaBf°rnia who encounter an unend-of Wrath ing string of calamities and failures, he offered not only a harsh portrait of the exploitive features of agrarian life in the West, but also a tribute to the endurance of his main characters-and to the spirit of community
they represent.
THE UNHAPPY PRESIDENCY OF HERBERT HOOVER
Herbert Hoover began his presidency in March 1929 believing, like most Americans, that the nation faced a bright and prosperous future. For the first six months of his Republican administration, he attempted to expand the policies he had advocated during his eight years as secretary of commerce, policies that would, he believed, complete a stable system of cooperative individualism and sustain a successful economy. The economic crisis that began before the year was out forced
656 * CHAPTER 23
the president to deal with a new set of problems, but for most
of the rest of his term, he continued to rely on the principles
that had always governed his public life.
The Hoover Program
Hoover’s first response to the Depression was to attempt to
restore public confidence in the economy. "The fundamental
business of this country, that is, production and distribution of
commodities,” Hoover said in 1930, "is on a sound and prosper-
_	_ ous basis.” He then summoned leaders of
Failure of
Voluntarism business, labor, and agriculture to the White House and urged them to adopt a program of voluntary cooperation for recovery. He implored businessmen not to cut production or lay off workers; he talked labor leaders into forgoing demands for higher wages or better hours. But by mid-1931, economic conditions had deteriorated so much that the modest structure of voluntary cooperation he
had erected collapsed.
Hoover also attempted to use government spending as a tool for fighting the Depression. The president proposed to Congress an increase of $423 million-a significant sum by the standards of the time-in federal public works programs, and he exhorted state and local governments to fund public construction. But the spending was not nearly enough in the face of such devastating problems. And when economic conditions worsened, he became less willing to increase spending, worrying instead about creating large government deficits. In 1932, at the depth of the Depression, he proposed a tax increase to help the government avoid a deficit.
Even before the stock market crash, Hoover had begun to construct a program to assist the already troubled agricultural economy. In April 1929, he proposed the Agricultural Marketing Act, which established the first major government program to
.	help farmers maintain prices. A federally
ArRlCUTTlIRAT	r	r	j
Marketing sponsored Farm Board would make loans to Act	national marketing cooperatives or establish
corporations to buy surpluses and thus raise prices. At the same time, Hoover attempted to protect American farmers from international competition by raising agricultural tariffs. The Tariff Act of 1930 (also known as the Smoot-Hawley Tariff and the Hawley-Smoot Tariff) increased protection on seventy-five farm products. But neither the Agricultural Marketing Act nor the Hawley-Smoot Tariff ultimately helped American farmers significantly. The tariff, on the contrary, harmed the agricultural economy by stifling exports of food.
By the spring of 1931, Herbert Hoover’s political position had deteriorated considerably. In the 1930 congressional elections, Democrats won control of the House and made substantial inroads in the Senate by promising increased government assistance to the economy. Many Americans held the president personally to blame for the crisis and began calling the shantytowns that unemployed people established
on the outskirts of cities "Hoovervilles.” Democrats urged the
Hoover’s
Declining
Popularity
HOOVER THE PATRICIAN
Although Herbert Hoover grew up in a family of modest means in a small town in Iowa, his critics in the 1930s delighted in portraying him as an aloof aristocrat, fond of fancy dinners and elegant surroundings. As this formal portrait shows, Hoover gave his critics many opportunities to strengthen that image. (© Corbis) president to support more-vigorous programs of relief and public spending. Hoover continued to believe his policies were working.
The international financial panic of the spring of 1931 destroyed the illusion that the economic crisis was coming to an end. Throughout the 1920s, European nations had depended on loans from American banks to allow them to make payments on their debts. After 1929, when they could no longer get such loans, the financial fabric of several European nations began to unravel. In May 1931, one of the largest banks in Austria collapsed. Over the next several months, panic gripped the financial institutions of neighboring countries. The American economy rapidly declined to new lows.
By the time Congress convened in December 1931, conditions had grown so desperate that Hoover supported a series of measures designed to keep endangered banks afloat and protect homeowners from foreclosure on their mortgages. More important was a bill passed in January 1932 establishing the Reconstruction Finance Corporation (RFC),
Reconstruction a government agency whose purpose was
Corpor^on t0 Provic^e Federal loans to troubled banks, railroads, and other businesses. It even
THE GREAT DEPRESSION
657
HOOVERVILLES
Herbert Hoover remained a symbol of despair for many Americans enduring the stresses of the Great Depression. This shanty town in Seattle and many others throughout the country were called by critics of the president "Hoovervilles." (© World History Archive/Alamy) made funds available to local governments to support public works projects and assist relief efforts. Unlike some earlier Hoover programs, it operated on a large scale. In 1932, the RFC had a budget of $ 1.5 billion for public works alone.
Nevertheless, the new agency failed to deal directly or forcefully enough with the real problems of the economy to produce any significant recovery. The RFC lent funds only to financial institutions with sufficient collateral; much of its money went to large banks and corporations. At Hoover’s insistence, it helped finance only those public works projects that promised ultimately to pay for themselves (toll bridges, public housing, and others). Above all, the RFC did not have enough money to make any real impact on the Depression, and it did not even spend all the money it had. Of the $300 million available to support local relief efforts, the RFC lent out only $30 million in 1932. Of the $1.5 billion public works budget, it released only about 20 percent.
Popular Protest
For the first several years of the Depression, most Americans were either too stunned or too confused to raise any effective protest. By the middle of 1932, however, dissident voices
Holiday
Association
A more celebrated protest movement emerged from
American veterans. In 1924, Congress had approved the payment of a $1,000 bonus to all those who had served in World War I, the money to be paid beginning in 1945. By 1932, however, many veterans were demanding that the bonus be paid immediately. Hoover, concerned about balancing the budget, rejected their appeal. In June, more than 20,000 veterans, members of the self-proclaimed Bonus Expeditionary Force, or "Bonus Army,” marched into Washington, built crude camps around the city, and promised to stay until Congress approved legislation to pay the bonus. Some of the veterans departed in July, after Congress voted down their proposal. Many, however, remained where they were.
Their continued presence in Washington disturbed President
Hoover. Finally, in mid-July, he ordered police to clear the marchers out of several abandoned federal buildings in which they had been staying. A few marchers threw rocks at the police, and someone opened fire; two veterans fell dead. Hoover considered the incident evidence of growing violence and radicalism, and he ordered the U.S. Army to assist the police in clearing out the buildings.
General Douglas MacArthur, the army chief of staff, carried out the mission himself (with the assistance of his aide, Dwight D. Eisenhower) and greatly exceeded the president’s orders.
He led the Third Cavalry (under the com-
Bonus Army mand of GeorSe s- Patton), two infantry regiments, a machine-gun detachment, and six tanks down Pennsylvania Avenue in pursuit of the Bonus Army. The veterans fled in terror. MacArthur followed them across the Anacostia River, where he ordered the soldiers to burn their tent city to the ground. More than 100 marchers
were injured.
-gan to be heard.
In the summer of 1932, a group of unhappy farm owners thered in Des Moines, Iowa, to establish a new organization: P	, the Farmers’ Holiday Association, which
RMers endorsed the withholding of farm products
from the market—in effect a farmers strike.
The strike began in August in western Iowa,
ead briefly to a few neighboring areas, and succeeded in
>ckading several markets, but in the end it dissolved in failure.
658
CHAPTER 23
CLEARING OUT THE BONUS MARCHERS
In July 1932, President Hoover ordered the Washington, D.C., police to evict the Bonus marchers from some of the public buildings and land they had been occupying. The result was a series of pitched battles (one of them visible here), in which both veterans and police sustained injuries. Such skirmishes persuaded Hoover to call out the U.S. Army to finish the eviction. (© Bettmann/Corbis) The incident served as perhaps the final blow to Hoover’s already-battered political standing. Hoover’s own reserved personality reinforced the public image of him as aloof and unsympathetic to distressed people. The Great Engineer, the personification of the optimistic days of the 1920s, had become a symbol of the nation’s failure to deal effectively with its startling reversal of fortune.
Roosevelt had been a well-known figure in the party for many years already. A Hudson Valley aristocrat, a distant cousin of Theodore Roosevelt (a connection strengthened by his marriage in 1904 to the president’s niece, Eleanor), and a handsome, charming young man, he progressed rapidly: from a seat in the New York State legislature to a position as assistant secretary of the navy during World War I to his party’s vice presidential nomination in 1920 on the ill-fated ticket with James M. Cox. Less than a year later, he was stricken with polio. Although he never regained use of his legs (and eventually could appear to walk only by using crutches and braces), he built up sufficient physical strength to return to politics in 1928. When Al Smith received the Democratic nomination for president that year, Roosevelt was elected to succeed him as governor of New York. In 1930, he easily won reelection.
Roosevelt worked no miracles in New York, but he did initiate enough positive programs of government assistance to be able to present himself as a more energetic and imaginative leader than Hoover. In national politics, he avoided such divisive cultural issues as religion and prohibition and emphasized the economic grievances that most Democrats shared. He was able as a result to assemble a broad coalition within the party and win his party’s nomination. In a dramatic break with tradition, he flew to Chicago to address the convention in person and accept the nomination. In the course of his acceptance speech, Roosevelt aroused the delegates with his ringing promise: "I pledge you, I pledge myself, to a new deal for the American people,” giving his future program a name that would long endure. Neither then nor in the subsequent campaign did Roosevelt give much indication of what that program would be. But Herbert Hoover’s unpopularity virtually ensured Roosevelt’s election.
In November, to the surprise of no one, Roosevelt won by a landslide. He received 57.4 percent of the popular vote to 1932 Election Hoover’s 39.7. In the electoral college, the result was even more overwhelming. Hoover carried Delaware, Pennsylvania, Connecticut, Vermont, New Hampshire, and Maine. Roosevelt won everything else. Democrats won majorities in both houses of Congress. It was a broad and convincing mandate.
The "Interregnum"
The period between the election and the inauguration (which in the early 1930s lasted more than four months) was a season of growing economic crisis. Presidents-elect traditionally do involve themselves directly in government. But in a series o rittle exchanges with Roosevelt in the months following the election, Hoover tried to exact from the president-elect a
P edge to maintain policies of economic orthodoxy. Roosevelt genially refused.
The Election of 1932
As the 1932 presidential election approached, few people doubted the outcome. The Republican Party dutifully renominated Herbert Hoover for a second term of office, but the
FDR	gloomy atmosphere of the convention made
Nominated c^ear r^at few delegates believed he could
win. The Democrats, in the meantime, gath-
ered jubilantly in Chicago to nominate the governor of New York,
Franklin Delano Roosevelt.
THE GREAT DEPRESSION * 659
Candidate (Party)
Franklin D. Roosevelt (Democratic)
Herbert Hoover (Republican)
Electoral Vote
472
59
Norman Thomas (Socialist)
Other candidates (Communist, Prohibition, Socialist Labor, Liberty)
Popular Vote (%)
22,821,857
(57.4)
15,761,841
(39.7)
881,951
(2.2)
271,355
56.9% of electorate voting
THE CHANGING OF THE GUARD
Herbert Hoover and Franklin D. Roosevelt travel together to the Capitol for Roosevelt's inauguration. The ride appeared uncomfortable for the outgoing president. Hoover seems glum and uncommunicative whereas Roosevelt seems ready to take on his new responsibilities. I© Bettmann/Corbis) ELECTION OF 1932
Like the election of 1928, the election of 1932 was exceptionally one-sided. But this time, the landslide favored the Democratic candidate, Franklin Roosevelt, who overwhelmed Herbert Hoover in all regions of the country except New England. Roosevelt obviously benefited primarily from popular disillusionment with Hoover’s response to the Great Depression. ’ But what characteristics of Roosevelt himself contributed to his victory?
In February, only a month before the inauguration, a new crisis developed when the collapse of the American banking system suddenly and rapidly accelerated. Public confidence in
Banking rhe banks was ebbing; depositors were Crisis	withdrawing their money in panic; and
one bank after another was closing its doors and declaring bankruptcy. Hoover again asked Roosevelt to give prompt public assurances that there would be no
tinkering with the currency, no heavy borrowing, no unbalancing of the budget. Roosevelt again refused.
March 4, 1933, was, therefore, a day of both economic crisis and considerable personal bitterness. On that morning, Herbert Hoover, convinced that the United States was headed for disaster, rode glumly down Pennsylvania Avenue with a beaming, buoyant Franklin Roosevelt, who would shortly be sworn in as the thirty-second president of the United States.
looking back
The Great Depression, which began so unexpectedly and spread so quickly and widely, changed many things in American hfe. It created unemployment on a scale never before experienced in the nation’s history. It put enormous pressures on families, on communities, on state and local governments, and ultimately on Washington—which during the innovative but ultimately failed presidency of Herbert Hoover was unable to produce policies capable of dealing effectively with the crisis. In the nation’s politics and culture, the Depression provoked
strong currents of radicalism and protest; and many middle-class Americans came to fear (and many less-affluent people to hope) that a revolution might be approaching.
In reality, while the Great Depression shook much of American society and culture, it actually toppled very little. The capitalist system survived, damaged for a time but never truly threatened. The widely shared values of materialism and personal responsibility were shaken, but never overturned. The American people in the 1930s were more receptive than
660 ® CHAPTER 23
they had been in the 1920s to evocations of community, generosity, and the dignity of common people. They were more open to experiments in government and business and even private lives than they had been in earlier years. But for most Americans, belief in the "American way of life”-a phrase that became widely resonant in the 1930s for the first time-remained strong throughout the long years of economic despair.
Key Terms/People/Places/Events
Agricultural Marketing Act 656
"Black Tuesday” 640 Bonus Army 657 Clifford Odets 650 Dust Bowl 645 Erskine Caldwell 650 Frank Capra 651 Tariff Act of 1930 656 Hindenburg 651 Hoovervilles 656
John Dos Passos 650 John Steinbeck 650 Life magazine 653 "Okies” 645 Orson Welles 651 Popular Front 654 Reconstruction Finance
Corporation 657 Richard Wright 650 Scottsboro case 646 Soap operas 651
RECALL AND REFLECT
1.	Was the 1929 stock market crash the cause of the Depression? Why or why not?
2.	How did farmers fare during the Depression? What environmental conditions contributed to their plight?
3.	What particular problems faced women, both black and white, who worked outside the home?
4.	How did radio affect both social life and the life of the family?
5.	What was the Popular Front? What groups did it comprise? How did they respond to the Depression?
6.	What popular protests arose in response to the Depression? How successful were these protests?
7.	How did Hoover’s political beliefs affect his attempt to deal with the economic crisis of the Depression?
SIGNIFICANT EVENTS
1929..........*
Stock market crash signals onset of Great Depression
Agricultural Marketing Act passed
1931
Scottsboro defendants arrested
Communist Party stages hunger march in Washington, D.C.
1933
