216 • CHAPTER 8

AN EARLY MILL IN NEW ENGLAND
This early folk painting of about 1814 shows the small town of East Chelmsford, Massachusetts—still primarily agrarian, with its rural houses, open fields, and grazing livestock, but with a small textile mill already operating along the stream, at right. A little more than a decade later, the town had been transformed into a major manufacturing center and renamed for the family that owned the mills: Lowell. [Part of the Town of Chelmsford. By Miss Warren. Abby Aldrich Rockefeller Folk Art Museum, Colonial Williamsburg Foundation, Williamsburg, VA) (© Abby Aldrich Rockefeller Folk Art Museum, The Colonial Williamsburg Foundation, Wiilliamsburg, VA) Growth of the Textile Industry
unskilled labor and inexperienced management, new factories could start operations virtually assured of quick profits.
The American textile industry experienced a particularly dramatic growth. Between 1807 and 1815, the total number of cotton spindles increased more than fifteenfold, from 8,000 to 130,000. Until 1814, the textile factories-most of them in New England-
produced only yarn and thread; families operating hand-looms at home did the actual weaving of cloth. Then the Boston merchant Francis Cabot Lowell, after examining textile machinery in England, developed a power loom that was better than its English counterpart. In 1813, Lowell organized the Boston Manufacturing Company and, at Waltham,
Massachusetts, founded the first mill in America to carry on spinning and weaving under a single roof. Lowell’s company was an important step in revolutionizing American manufacturing and in shaping the character of the early industrial workforce.
But the end of the war suddenly dimmed the prospects for American industry. British ships-determined to recapture their lost markets-swarmed into American ports and unloaded cargoes of manufactured goods, many priced below cost. As one English leader explained to Parliament, it was "well worth while to incur a loss upon the first
exportation, in order, by the glut, to stifle in the cradle those rising manufactures in the United States.” The "infant industries” cried out for protection against these tactics, arguing that they needed time to grow strong enough to withstand the foreign competition.
In 1816, protectionists in Congress won passage of a tariff law that effectively limited competition from abroad on a wide range of items, the most important of which was cotton cloth. There were objections from agri-
A
PTarw?IVE cultural interests, who would have to pay higher prices for manufactured goods as a result. But the nationalist dream of creating an important American industrial economy prevailed.
Transportation
The nation’s most pressing economic need in the aftermath of the war was for a better transportation system. Without one, manufacturers would not have access to the raw materials they needed or to domestic markets. So an old debate resumed: Should the federal government help to finance roads and other "internal improvements”?
The idea of using government funds to finance road building was not new. When Ohio entered the Union in 1803, the federal government agreed that part of the proceeds
Non-Intercourse
Panic of 1819 (followed by
AMERICAN IMPORTS AND EXPORTS 179O~lRon
tu:. l . . , . , f ,	, - . ,	’	820 This chart shows the pattern of qoods imported to and
exported from the United States—the level of foreiqn trade and thp halanro	, l j 1 u
Americans were heavily dependent on Britain and Eu one in T h a -	9°°dS b°U9ht 9°°dS S°
y uepenoent on Br,tarn and Europe (or finished or ’manufactured- goods in these years; and as you
can see, imports grew as rapidly as, and often even more ranidlv	* m ,	,	y ,
Euronpan nowJ^c Jk L . □	P'd ly than' exPorts- Note how the nation's disputes with
European powers depressed both exports and imports from about 1808 to 1814.
How does this chart help explain Congress^passage of a protective tariff IOI
w in 1816?
from the government’s sale of public lands should finance road construction. In 1807, Jefferson’s secretary of the treasury, Albert Gallatin, proposed that revenues from the Ohio land sales should help finance a National Road from the Potomac River to the Ohio River. Both Congress and the president approved. After many delays, construction of the National Road finally began in 1811 at Cumberland, Maryland, on the Potomac; and by 1818, this highway-with
Government- a crushed stone surface and massive Funded Roads stone bridges—ran as far as Wheeling,
Virginia, on the Ohio River. Meanwhile, the state of Pennsylvania gave $100,000 to a private company to extend the Lancaster pike westward to Pittsburgh. Over both of these roads a heavy traffic soon moved: stagecoaches, Conestoga wagons, private carriages, and other vehicles, as well as droves of cattle. Despite high tolls, the roads made transportation costs across the mountains lower than ever before. Manufactures, particularly textiles, moved from the Atlantic seaboard to the Ohio Valley in unprecedented quantities.
VARIETIES OF AMERICAN NATIONALISM
• 217 At the same time, on the rivers and the Great Lakes, steam-powered shipping was expanding rapidly. The development of steamboat lines was already well under way before the War of 1812, thanks to the technological advances introduced by Robert Fulton and others. The war had retarded expansion for a time, but by 1816, river steamers were beginning to Journey
Steamboats uP an^ ^own Mississippi t0 Ohio River, and up the Ohio as far as Pittsburgh.
Within a few years, steamboats were carrying far more cargo on the Mississippi than all the earlier forms of river transport-flatboats, barges, and others-combined. They stimulated the agricultural economy of the West and the South, by providing much readier access to markets at greatly reduced cost. And they enabled eastern manufacturers to send their finished goods west.
Despite the progress with steamboats and turnpikes, there remained serious gaps in the nation's transportation network, as the War of 1812 had shown. Once the British blockade cut off Atlantic shipping, the coastal roads became choked by the unaccustomed volume of north-south traffic. Long lines of
STEAMBOATS ON THE HUDSON
Inventor Robert Fulton developed powered vessels, first built in 1807, were the first large and reliable enough to an engine that could propel a boat from Manhattan to Albany, a distance of about 150 miles, in thirty two hours. His steam-be commercially valuable. (Photo © Tarker/The Bridgeman Art Library)
218
CHAPTER 8
Vetoing
Internal
Improvements
wagons waited for a chance to use the ferries that were still the only means of crossing most rivers. Oxcarts, pressed into emergency service, took six or seven weeks to go from Philadelphia to Charleston. In some areas there were serious shortages of goods that normally traveled by sea, and prices rose to new heights. Rice cost three times as much in New York as in Charleston, flour three times as much in Boston as in Richmond-all because of the difficulty of transportation. There were military consequences, too. On the northern and western frontiers, the absence of good roads had frustrated American campaigns.
In 1815, with this wartime experience in mind, President Madison called the attention of Congress to the "great importance of establishing throughout our country the roads and canals which can be best executed under the national authority,” and suggested that a constitutional amendment would resolve any doubts about Congress’s authority to provide for their construction. Representative John C. Calhoun promptly introduced a bill that would have used the funds owed the government by the Bank of the United States to finance internal improvements. "Let us, then, bind the republic together with a perfect system of roads and canals,” Calhoun urged. "Let us conquer space.”
Congress passed Calhoun’s internal improvements bill, but President Madison, on his last day in office (March 3, 1817), vetoed it. He supported the purpose of the bill, he explained, but he still believed that Congress lacked authority to fund the improvements without a constitutional amendment. It remained for state govern-
ments and private enterprise to undertake the tremendous task of building the transportation network necessary for the growing American economy.
EXPANDING WESTWARD
One reason for the growing interest in internal improvements was the sudden and dramatic surge in westward expansion in the years following the War of 1812. "Old America seems to be breaking up and moving westward,” wrote an English observer at the time. By the time of the census of 1820, white settlers had pushed well beyond the Mississippi River, and the population of the western regions was increasing more rapidly than that of the nation as a whole. Almost one of every four white Americans lived west of the Appalachians in 1820; ten years before, only one in seven had resided there.
The Great Migrations
Reasons for Westward Expansion
The westward movement of the white American populatior was one of the most important developments of the nine teenth century. It had a profound effect ot the nation’s economy, bringing vast nev regions into the emerging capitalist sys tern. It had great political ramifications
which ultimately became a major factor in the coming of th<
Civil War. And like earlier movements west, it thrust peoples of different cultures and traditions into intimate (and often disastrous) association with one another.
There were several important reasons for this expansion. The pressures driving white Americans out of the East came in part from the continued growth of the nation s population-both through natural increase and through immigration. Between 1800 and 1820, the population nearly doubled-from 5.3 million to 9.6 million. The growth of cities absorbed some of that increase, but most Americans were still farmers. The agricultural lands of the East were by now largely occupied, and some of them were exhausted. In the South, the spread of the plantation system, and of a slave labor force, limited opportunities for new settlers.
At the same time, the West itself was becoming increasingly attractive to white settlers. The War of 1812 had helped diminish (although it did not wholly eliminate) one of the traditional deterrents to western expansion: Native American opposition. And in the aftermath of the war, the federal government continued its policy of pushing the remaining tribes farther and farther west. A series of treaties in 1815 wrested more land from the Indians. In the meantime, the government was erecting a chain of stockaded forts along the Great Lakes The Factor an<^ Mississippi to protect the frontier. System	It a^so created a "factor” system, by which
government factors (or agents) supplied the tribes with goods at cost. This not only worked to drive Canadian traders out of the region; it also helped create a situation of dependency on the factors that made Native Americans
easier to control.
Now that fertile lands were secure for white settlement, migrants from throughout the East flocked to the Old Northwest (now called the Midwest). The Ohio and Monongahela Rivers were the main routes westward, until the completion of the Erie Canal in 1825. Once on the Ohio, the migrants floated downstream on flatboats bearing all their possessions, then left the river (often at Cincinnati, which was becoming one of the region’s-and the nation’s principal cities) and pressed on overland with wagons, handcarts, packhorses, cattle, and hogs.
The Plantation System
in the Southwest
In the Southwest, the new agricultural economy emerged along different lines. The principal attraction was cotton. The cotton lands in the uplands of the Old South had lost much of their fertility through overplanting and erosion. But the market for cotton continued to grow, so there was no lack of ambitious farmers seeking fresh soil in a climate suitable for the crop. In the Southwest, there were vast tracts of land appropriate for growing cotton. They included what would become known as the Black Belt of central Alabama and Mississippi.3 large region with a dark, productive soil of rotted limestone.
The growth of southern settlement spread cotton, plantations, and slavery. The first arrivals in an uncultivated region
VARIETIES OF AMERICAN NATIONALISM
• 219 IfM.
cjh’'; '■ - ----------

yp ,/<c	.
Ji ZA h
}V 1 -.
FORT SNELLING
This is an 1838 sketch of Fort Snelling (at the juncture of the Minnesota and Mississippi Rivers), containing instructions for reaching it from St. Louis. It was one of a string of fortifications built along the western edge of European settlement along the Great Lakes and the upper Mississippi in the first three decades of the nineteenth century. The forts were designed to protect the new white communities from hostile Indians. Fort Snelling stands today in Minnesota as a "living history" site. ("Fort Snelling from the East." Smithsonian Institution Archives. Record Unit 7290, Carl Andreas Geyer Journal, 1838. Negative # SA-861.) verc usually small farmers who made rough clearings in the r	forest. But wealthier planters soon fol-
THE
Expansion lowed. They bought up cleared or partially of Slavery cleared land, and the original settlers moved farther west and started over again.
The large planters made the westward journey in a style quite different from that of the first pioneers. Over the alternately dusty and muddy roads came great caravans consisting jf herds of livestock, wagonloads of household goods, long lines of slaves, and-at the rearthe planter's family riding in carriages. Success in the wilderness was by no means ensured, sven for the wealthiest settlers. But many planters soon expanded small clearings into vast cotton fields. They replaced the cabins of the early pioneers with sumptuous log dwellings and ultimately with imposing mansions that symbolized the emergence of a newly wealthy class. In later years, these western planters would assume the airs of a long-standing aristocracy. But by the time of the Civil War, few planter families in the Southwest had been there for more than one or two generations.
The rapid growth of the Northwest and Southwest resulted in the admission of four new states to the Union in the
immediate aftermath of the War of 1812: Indiana in 1816, Mississippi in 1817, Illinois in 1818, and Alabama in 1819.
Trade and Trapping in the Far West
Not many Anglo-Americans had much knowledge of or interest in the far western areas of the continent. But a significant trade nevertheless developed between these far western regions and the United States beginning early in the nineteenth century and growing steadily for decades.
Mexico, which controlled Texas, California, and much of the rest of the Southwest, won its independence from Spain in 1821. Almost immediately, it opened its northern territories to trade with the United States. American traders poured into the region-overland into Texas and New Mexico, by sea into California. Merchants from the United States quickly displaced both Indian and Mexican traders who had previously dominated trade. A steady traffic of commercial wagon trains was moving back and forth along the Santa Fe Trail between Missouri and New Mexico.
Fur traders created a wholly new commerce with the West. Before the War of 1812, John Jacob Astor’s American Astor’s ^ur Company had established Astoria as a
American Fur trading post at the mouth of the Columbia
Company River in Oregon. But when the war came, Astor sold his suddenly imperiled interests to the Northwestern Fur Company, a British concern operating out of Canada. After the war, Astor centered his operations in the Great Lakes area and eventually extended them westward to the Rockies. Other companies carried on operations up the Missouri and its tributaries and
into the Rocky Mountains.
At first, fur traders did most of their business by purchasing pelts from the Indians. But increasingly, white trappers entered the region and began to hunt beaver on their own. Substantial numbers of Anglo-Americans and French Canadians moved deep into the Great Lakes region and beyond to join the Iroquois and other Indians in pursuit of furs.
As the trappers, or ’’mountain men,” moved west from the Great Lakes region, they began to establish themselves in what is now Utah and in parts of New Mexico. In 1822, Andrew Henry and William Ashley founded the Rocky Mountain Fur Company and recruited white trappers to move permanently into the Rockies in search of furs, which were becoming increasingly scarce farther east. Henry and Ashley dispatched supplies annually to their trappers in exchange for furs and skins. The arrival of the supply train became the occasion for a gathering of scores of mountain men, some of whom lived much of the year in considerable isolation.
But however isolated their daily lives, these mountain men were closely bound up with the expanding market economy The Fur of the United States. Some were employees Trade and the of the Rocky Mountain Fur Company (or
Market some other, similar enterprise), earning a
Economy	}	f	,
salary in return for providing a steady
220 • CHAPTER 8
RENDEZVOUS, 1837 The annual gathering of fur trappers and traders was a major event in the lives of the lonely men who made their livelihoods gathering furs. It was also a meeting of representatives of the many cultures that mingled in the Far West, among them Anglo-Americans, French Canadians, and those of Spanish origins. (© Walters Art Museum, Baltimore, USA/The Bridgeman Art Library)
supply of furs. Others were nominally independent but relied on the companies for credit; they were almost always in debt and hence economically bound to the companies. Some trapped entirely on their own and simply sold their furs for cash, but they too depended on merchants from the East for their livelihoods. And it was to those merchants that the bulk of the profits from the trade flowed.
Many trappers and mountain men lived peacefully and successfully with the Native Americans and Mexicans whose lands they shared. Perhaps two-thirds of the white trappers married women of Indian or Spanish backgrounds while living in the West. But white-Indian relations were not always friendly or peaceful. Jedediah S. Smith, a trapper who became an Ashley partner, led a series of forays deep into Mexican territory that ended in disastrous battles with the Mojaves and other tribes. Four years after an 1827 expedition to Oregon in which sixteen members of his party of twenty had died, Smith set out for New Mexico and was killed by Comanches, who took the weapons he was carrying and sold them to Mexican settlers.
Eastern Images of the West
Americans in the East were only dimly aware of the world the trappers were entering and helping to reshape. Smith and others
Stephen
Long’s
Expedition
became the source of dramatic (and often exaggerated) popular stories. But few trappers themselves wrote of their lives.
More important in increasing eastern awareness of the West were explorers, many of them dispatched by the U.S. government with instructions to chart the territories they visited. In 1819 and 1820, Stephen H. Long led nineteen soldiers on a journey up the Platte and South Platte Rivers through what is now Nebraska and eastern Colorado, and then re-
turned eastward along the Arkansas River through what is now Kansas. He wrote an influential report on his trip, including an assessment of the region’s potential for future settlement and development that echoed the dismissive conclusions of Zebulon Pike fifteen years before. On the published map of his expedition, he labeled the Great Plains the "Great American Desert.”
THE “ERA OF GOOD FEELINGS”
The expansion of the economy, the growth of white settlement and trade in the West, the creation of new states-all reflected the rising spirit of nationalism that was permeating the United States in the years following the War of 1812. That spirit found reflection for a time in the character of national politics.
THE TRIUMPHANT TOUR OF JAMES MONROE
After James Monroe's enormously successful tour of the northern and eastern states in 1818, midway through his first term as president, there was widespread self-congratulation through much of the United States for the apparent political unity that had gripped the nation. Only a few years earlier, the Northeast had been the bastion of Federalist Party opposition to the Republican governments of the early nineteenth century. At one point, some Federalist leaders had even proposed secession from the United States. But now a Virginia Republican president had been greeted as a hero in the former Federalist strongholds. This book, published in 1820 (when Monroe ran virtually unopposed for reelection), is an account of the president s triumphant tour and a short account of his life—an early version of the now-familiar campaign biography, (fn) Collection of David J. and Janice L. Frent) The End of the First Party System
Ever since 1800, the presidency seemed to have been the special possession of Virginians. After two terms in office, Jefferson chose his secretary of state, James Madison of Virginia, to succeed him, and after two more terms, Madison secured the presidential nomination for his secretary of state, James Monroe,
The Virgin,a	als° °f Virginia- Many in.the N°rth T"!
Dynasty expressing impatience with the so-called Virginia Dynasty, but the Republicans had no difficulty electing their candidate in the listless campaign of 1816. Monroe received 183 ballots in the electoral college; his Federalist opponent, Rufus King of New York, received only
34-Yrom Massachusetts, Connecticut, and Delaware.
Monroe was sixty-one years old when he became president.
In the course of his long career, he had served as a soldier in the Revolution, as a diplomat, and most recently as a cabinet officer. He entered office under what seemed to be remarkably favorable circumstances. With the decline of the Federalists, his party faced no serious opposition. With the conclusion of the War of 1812, the nation faced no important international
VARIETIES OF AMERICAN NATIONALISM * 221
threats. American politicians had dreamed since the first days of the republic of a time in which partisan divisions and factional disputes might come to an end. In the prosperous postwar years, Monroe attempted to use his office to realize that dream.
He made that clear, above all, in the selection of his cabinet. For secretary of state, he chose the New Englander and former Federalist John Quincy Adams. Jefferson, Madison, and Monroe had all served as secretary of state before becoming president; Adams, therefore, immediately became the heir apparent, suggesting that the "Virginia Dynasty” would soon come to an end. Speaker of the House Henry Clay declined an offer to be secretary of war, so Monroe named John C. Calhoun instead. In his other appointments, too, Monroe took pains to include both northerners and southerners, easterners and westerners, Federalists and Republicans.
Soon after his inauguration, Monroe did what no president since Washington had done: he made a goodwill tour through the country. In New England, so recently the scene of rabid Federalist discontent, he was greeted every-enthusiastic demonstrations. The
Columbian Centinel, a Federalist newspaper in Boston, commenting on the "Presidential Jubilee” in that city, observed that an "era of good feelings” had arrived. And on the surface, at least, the years of Monroe’s presidency did appear to be an "era of good feelings.” In 1820, Monroe was reelected without opposition. For all practical purposes, the Federalist Party had now ceased to exist.
Monroe’s
Goodwill
Tour
where with
John Quincy Adams and Florida
Like his father, the second president, John Quincy Adams had spent much of his life in diplomatic service. Even before becoming secretary of state, he had become one of the great diplomats in American history. He was also a committed nationalist, and he considered his most important task to be the promotion of American expansion.
Adams’s first challenge as secretary of state was Florida. The United States had already annexed West Florida, but that claim remained in dispute. Most Americans believed the nation should gain possession of the entire peninsula. In 1817, Adams began negotiations with the Spanish minister, Luis de Onis, in hopes of resolving the dispute and gaining the entire territory for the United States.
In the meantime, events were taking their own course in Florida. Andrew Jackson, now in command of American troops
_	_	along the Florida frontier, had orders from
The Seminole 6 f XA. _ „	, ,	,
War	Secretary of War Calhoun to adopt the
necessary measures” to stop continuing raids on American territory by Seminole Indians south of the Florida border. Jackson used those orders as an excuse to
224
CHAPTER 8
Confirming
Implied
Powers
College’s charter (granted by King George III in 1769) to convert the private college into a state university. Daniel Webster, a Dartmouth graduate and brilliant orator, argued the college’s case. The Dartmouth charter, he insisted, was a contract, protected by the same doctrine that the Court had already upheld in Fletcher v. Peck. Then, according to legend, he brought some of the justices to tears with an irrelevant passage that concluded: "It is, sir, ... a small college. And yet there are those who love it.” The Court ruled for Dartmouth. The decision placed important restrictions on the ability of state governments to control corporations.
In overturning the act of the legislature and the decisions of the New Hampshire courts, the justices also implicitly claimed for themselves the right to override the decisions of state courts. But advocates of states’ rights, especially in the South, continued to challenge the Supreme Court’s right to do so. In Cohens v. Virginia (1821), Marshall explicitly affirmed the constitutionality of federal review of state court decisions. The states had given up part of their sovereignty in ratifying the Constitution, he explained, and their courts must submit to federal jurisdiction; otherwise, the federal government would be powerless "at the feet of every state in the Union.”
Meanwhile, in McCulloch v. Maryland (1819), Marshall confirmed the "implied powers” of Congress by upholding the constitutionality of the Bank of the United States. The Bank had become so unpopular in the South and the West that several of the states tried to drive branches out of
business by outright prohibition or by confiscatory taxes. This case presented two constitutional questions: Could Congress charter a bank? And if so, could individual states ban it or tax it? Daniel Webster, one of the Bank’s attorneys, argued that establishing such an institution came within the "necessary and proper” clause of the Constitution and that the power to tax involved a "power to destroy.” If the states could tax the Bank at all, Webster said, they could "tax it to death.” Marshall adopted Webster’s words in deciding for the Bank.
In the case of Gibbons v. Ogden (1824), the Court strengthened Congress’s power to regulate interstate commerce. The state of New York had indirectly granted Aaron Ogden the business of carrying passengers across the river between New York and New Jersey. But Thomas Gibbons, with a license granted under an act of Congress, began competing with Ogden for the ferry traffic. Ogden brought suit against him and won in the New York courts. Gibbons appealed to the Supreme Court. The most important question facing the justices was whether Congress’s power to give Gibbons a license to operate his ferry superseded the state of New York’s power to grant Ogden a monopoly. Marshall claimed that the power of Congress to regulate interstate commerce (which, he said, included navigation) was "complete in itself’ and might be "exercised to its utmost extent.” Ogden’s state-granted monopoly, therefore, was void.
The decisions of the Marshall Court established the primacy of the federal government over the states in regulating the economy and opened the way for an increased federal role in
Establishing promoting economic growth. They pro-
Federal	tected corporations and other private eco-
Primacy	nomic institutions from local government
interference. They were, in short, highly nationalistic decisions, designed to promote the growth of a
strong, unified, and economically developed United States.
The Court and the Tribes
The nationalist inclinations of the Marshall Court were visible as well in a series of decisions concerning the legal status of Indian tribes within the United States. But these decisions did not simply affirm the supremacy of the United States; they also carved out a distinctive position for Native Americans within the constitutional structure.
The first of the crucial Indian decisions was in the case of Johnson v. McIntosh (1823). Leaders of the Illinois and Pinakeshaw tribes had sold parcels of their land to a group of white settlers (including Johnson) but later signed a treaty with the federal government ceding territory that included those same parcels to the United States. The government proceeded to grant homestead rights to new white settlers (among them McIntosh) on the land claimed by Johnson. The Court was asked to decide which claim had precedence. Marshall’s ruling, not surprisingly, favored the United States. But in explaining it, he offered a preliminary definition of the place of Indians within the nation. The tribes had a basic right to their tribal lands, he said, that preceded all other American law. Individual American citizens could not buy or take land from the tribes; only the federal government the supreme authority-could do that.
Even more important was the Court’s 1832 decision in Worcester v. Georgia, in which the Court invalidated Georgia laws that attempted to regulate access by U.S. citizens to Cherokee country. Only the federal government could do that, Marshall claimed, thus taking another important step in consol-Worcestfr v bating federal authority over the states (and Georgia	ovqt the tribes). In doing so, he further de-
fined the nature of the Indian nations. The tribes, he explained, were sovereign entities in much the same way Georgia was a sovereign entity -”distinct political communities, having territorial boundaries within which their authority is exclusive.” In defending the power of the federal government, he was also affirming, indeed expanding, the rights of the tribes
to remain free from the authority of state governments.
The Marshall decisions, therefore, did what the Constitution itself had not done: they defined a place for Indian tribes within the American political system. The tribes had basic property rights. They were sovereign entities not subject to the authority of state governments. But the federal government, like a "guardian” governing its "ward,” had ultimate authority over tribal affairs-even if that authority was, according to the Court, limited by the government’s obligation to protect Indian welfare. These provisions were seldom enough to defend Indians from the steady westward march of white civilization, but they formed the basis of what few legal protections they had.
VARIETIES OF AMERICAN NATIONALISM
■ 225 The Latin American Revolution
and the Monroe Doctrine
Americans looking southward in the years following the War of 1812 beheld a gigantic spectacle: the Spanish Empire in its death Revolution in throes, a whole continent in revolt, new Latin America nations in the making. Already the United
States had developed a profitable trade with Latin America and was rivaling Great Britain as the principal trading nation there. Many Americans believed the success of the anti-Spanish revolutions would further strengthen America’s position in the region.
In 1815, the United States proclaimed neutrality in the wars between Spain and its rebellious colonies, implying a partial recognition of the rebels’ status as nations. Moreover, the United States sold ships and supplies to the revolutionaries, a clear indication that it was not genuinely neutral but was trying to help the insurgents. Finally, in 1822, President Monroe established diplomatic relations with five new nations-La Plata (later Argentina), Chile, Peru, Colombia, and Mexico-making the United States the first country to recognize them.
In 1823, Monroe went further and announced a policy that would ultimately be known (beginning some thirty years later) as the "Monroe Doctrine,” even though it was primarily the The Monroe wor^ of John Quincy Adams. "The American
Doctrine continents,” Monroe declared, . are henceforth not to be considered as subjects for future colonization by any European powers.” The United
States would consider any foreign challenge to the sovereignty of existing American nations an unfriendly act. At the same time, he proclaimed, "Our policy in regard to Europe ... is not to interfere in the internal concerns of any of its powers.”
The Monroe Doctrine emerged directly out of America’s relations with Europe in the 1820s. Many Americans feared
American r^at ^Pains European allies (notably Fears	France) would assist Spain in an effort to
retake its lost empire. Even more troubling to Adams (and many other Americans) was the fear that Great Britain had designs on Cuba. Adams wanted to keep Cuba in Spanish hands until it fell (as he believed it ultimately would)
to the Americans.
The Monroe Doctrine had few immediate effects, but it was important as an expression of the growing spirit of nationalism in the United States in the 1820s. And it established the idea




77
......d';*
C S<>
/'A	y..';	- 4 X <.
/
7'7-et fl-	X-•« «.
CHEROKEE LEADER SEQUOYAH
Sequoyah (who also used the name George Guess) was a mixed-blood Cherokee who translated his tribe's language into writing through an elaborate sylla ary (equivalent to an alphabet) of his own invention, pictured here. He opposed Indian assimilation into white society and saw the preservation of the Cherokee language as a way to protect the culture o tribe. He moved to Arkansas in the 1820s and became a chief of the western Cherokee tribes. (© Hulton Archive/Getty Images)




X,


z/ ■ X ✓/	.	~	"	*

-



x—,«/
/i.	v -1 — * T' j,
zz,z...... /X.zZ xZ	•-'5	z fj
77 ~~ -7	>•.—------'J
z.	'	■/

& r
THE MONROE DOCTRINE
On December 2, 1823, President James Monroe delivered his seventh annual message to Congress. In it, he outlined an important part of his foreign policy that subsequently became known as the "Monroe Doctrine.” Monroe declared that henceforth any attempt by a European power to colonize any part of the "American continents" would be viewed as an "unfriendly act" toward the United States. (© Everett Collection Historical/Alamy) 226 « CHAPTER 8
VARIETIES OF AMERICAN NATIONALISM * 227
of the United States as the dominant power in the Western Hemisphere.
THE REVIVAL OF OPPOSITION
After 1816, the Federalist Party offered no presidential candidate and soon ceased to exist as a national political force. The Republican Party (which considered itself not a party but an organization representing the whole of the population) was the only organized force in national politics.
By the late 1820s, however, partisan divisions were emerging once again. In some respects, the division mirrored the schism that had produced the first party system in the 1790s.
The Republicans had in many ways come
NEDivisionsCAL t0 resemble the early Federalist regimes in their promotion of economic growth and centralization. And the opposition, like the opposition in the
1790s, objected to the federal government’s expanding role in the economy. There was, however, a crucial difference. At the beginning of the century, the opponents of centralization had
also often been opponents of economic growth. Now, in the 1820s, the controversy involved not whether but how the nation should continue to expand.
The "Corrupt Bargain"
Until 1820, when the Federalist Party effectively ceased operations and James Monroe ran for reelection unopposed, presi-
„	dential candidates were nominated by
End of the	. .	.
Caucus System caucuses of the two parties m Congress.
But in the presidential election of 1824,
"King Caucus” was overthrown. The Republican caucus nominated William H. Crawford of Georgia, the secretary of the treasury and the favorite of the extreme states’ rights faction of the party. But other candidates received nominations from state legislatures and won endorsements from irregular mass meetings throughout the country.
One of them was Secretary of State John Quincy Adams, who held the office that was the traditional stepping-stone to the presidency. But as he himself ruefully understood, he was a man of cold and forbidding manners, with little popular appeal. Another contender was Henry Clay, the Speaker of the House. He had a devoted personal following and a definite and coherent program: the ''American System,” which proposed creating a great home market for factory and farm producers by raising the protective tariff, strengthening the national bank, and financing internal improvements. Andrew Jackson, the fourth major candidate, had no significant political record-even though he had served briefly as a representative in Congress and was now a new member of the U.S. Senate. But he was a military hero and had the help of shrewd political allies from his home state of Tennessee.
Jackson received more popular and electoral votes than any other candidate, but not a majority. He had 99 electoral votes to Adams’s 84, Crawford’s 41, and Clay’s 37. The Twelfth
JOHN QUINCY ADAMS
This photograph of the former president was taken shortly before his death in 1848 at the age of eighty—almost twenty years after he had left the White House—when he was serving as a congressman from Massachusetts. During his years as president, he was—as he had been throughout his life—an intensely disciplined and hardworking man. He rose at four in the morning and made a long entry in his diary for the previous day. He wrote so much that his right hand at times became paralyzed with writer's cramp, so he taught himself to write with his left hand as well. (© Hulton Archive/Getty Images) Amendment to the Constitution (passed in the aftermath
contested 1800 election) required the House of Representatives
to choose among the three candidates with the largest numbers
of electoral votes. Crawford was by then seriously ill and not a
plausible candidate. Clay was out of the running, but he was in
a strong position to influence the result Election of t ,	,	, ,,	,. .
1824	Jackson was Clay’s most formidable political
rival in the West, so Clay supported Adams, in part because, alone among the candidates, Adams was an ar

dent nationalist and a likely supporter of the American System. With Clay5s endorsement, Adams won election in the House.
The Jacksonians believed their large popular and electoral pluralities entitled their candidate to the presidency, and they were enraged when he lost. But they grew angrier still when Adams named Clay his secretary of state. The State Department was the well-established route to the presidency, and Adams thus appeared to be naming Clay as his own successor. The
outrage the Jacksonians expressed at what they called a "corrupt bargain” haunted Adams throughout his presidency.
The Second President Adams
Throughout Adams’s term in the White House, the political bitterness arising from the "corrupt bargain” charges thoroughly frustrated his policies. Adams proposed an ambitiously nationalist program reminiscent of Clay’s American System. But Jacksonians in Congress blocked most of it.
Adams also experienced diplomatic frustrations. He appointed delegates to an international conference that the Venezuelan liberator, Simon Bolivar, had called in Panama in 1826. But Haiti was one of the participating nations, and southerners in Congress opposed the idea of white Americans mingling with the black delegates. Congress delayed approving the Panama mission so long that the American delegation did not arrive until after the conference was over.
Adams also lost a contest with the state of Georgia, which wished to remove the remaining Creek and Cherokee Indians from the state to gain additional soil for cotton planters. The U.S. government, in a 1791 treaty, had guaranteed that land to the Creeks; but in 1825, white Georgians had extracted a new treaty from William McIntosh, the leader of one faction in the tribe and a longtime advocate of Indian cooperation with the United States. Adams believed the new treaty had no legal force, since McIntosh clearly did not represent the wishes of the tribe; and he refused to enforce the treaty, setting up a direct conflict between the president and the state. The governor of Georgia defied the president and proceeded with plans for Indian removal. Adams found no way to stop him.
Even more damaging to the administration was its support for a new tariff on imported goods in 1828. This measure originated with the demands of Massachusetts and Rhode Island woolen manufacturers, who complained that the British were on the American market at artificially low
prices. But to win support from middle and western states, the administration had to accept duties on other items. In the process, it antagonized the original New England supporters of the bill; the benefits of protecting their manufactured goods from foreign competition now had to be weighed against the prospects of having to pay more for raw materials. Adams signed the bill, earning the animosity of southerners, who cursed it as the "tariff of abominations.”
Jackson Triumphant
By the time of the 1828 presidential election, a new two-party system had begun to emerge out of the divisions among the Republicans. On one side stood the supporters of John Quincy Adams, who called themselves the National Republicans and who supported the economic nationalism of the preceding years. Opposing them were the followers of Andrew Jackson, who took the name Democratic Republicans and who called for an assault on privilege and a widening of opportunity.
Tariff of Abominations
dumping textiles
Candidate (Party)	Electoral Vote	Popular Vote (%)
Andrew Jackson	178	642,553
(Democrat)		(56)
John Quincy Adams	83	500,897
(National Republican)		(44)
THE ELECTION OF 1828
As this map shows, Andrew Jackson's victory over John Quincy Adams was one of the most decisive in American history for a challenger facing an incumbent president. ' What accounts for this decisive repudiation of President Adams?
Adams attracted the support of most of the remaining Federalists; Jackson appealed to a broad coalition that opposed the "economic aristocracy.”
But issues seemed to count for little in the end, as the campaign degenerated into a war of personal invective. The Jacksonians charged that Adams as president had been guilty of gross waste and extravagance and had used public funds to buy gambling devices (a chess set and a billiard table) for the White House. Adams’s supporters hurled even worse accusations at Jackson. They called him a murderer and distributed a "coffin handbill,” which listed, within coffin-shaped outlines, the names of militiamen whom Jackson was said to have shot in cold blood during the War of 1812. (The men had been deserters who were legally executed after sentence by a court-martial.) And they called his wife a bigamist. Jackson had married his beloved Rachel at a time when the pair incorrectly believed her first husband had divorced her. (When Jackson’s wife first read of the accusations against her shortly after the election, she collapsed and, a few weeks later, died; not without reason, Jackson blamed his opponents for her death.)
Jackson’s victory was decisive, but sectional. He won 56 percent of the popular vote and an electoral majority of 178 votes to 83. Adams swept virtually all of New England and showed significant strength in the mid-Atlantic region.
Nevertheless, the Jacksonians considered their victory as complete and as important as Jefferson’s in 1800. Once again, the forces of privilege had been driven from Washington. Once
JACKSON
TRIUMPHANT
228 CHAPTER 8
again, a champion of democracy would occupy the White House and restore liberty to the people and to the economy. America had entered, some Jacksonians claimed, a new era of democracy, the "age of the common man.”
SIGNIFICANT EVENTS
LOOKING BACK
In the aftermath of the War of 1812, a vigorous nationalism came increasingly to characterize the political and popular culture of the United States. In all regions of the country, white men and women celebrated the achievements of the early leaders of the republic, the genius of the Constitution, and the success of the nation in withstanding serious challenges from both without and within. Party divisions faded to the point that James Monroe, the fifth president, won reelection in 1820 without opposition.
But the broad nationalism of the so-called era of good feelings disguised some deep divisions within the United States. Indeed, the character of American nationalism differed substantially from one region, and one group, to another. Battles continued between those who favored a strong central government committed to advancing the economic development of the nation and those who wanted a decentralization of power to open opportunity to more people. Battles continued as well over the role of slavery in American life-and in particular over the place of slavery in the new western territories that the United States was rapidly populating (and wresting from the tribes). The Missouri Compromise of 1820 postponed the day of reckoning on that issue-but only for a time, as Andrew Jackson would discover soon after becoming president in 1829.
, 1815.........
U.S. signs treaties with tribes taking western lands from Indians
Monroe elected
president
1818
Jackson invades Florida, ends first Seminole War
Commercial panic destabilizes economy
1820
Monroe reelected president without opposition
Terms People/ Places/Events
1823
Monroe Doctrine proclaimed
1816
Second Bank of the United States chartered
1819
Spain cedes Florida to United States in Adams-Onis Treaty
Supreme Court hears Dartmouth College v.
Woodward and McCulloch v Maryland
Missouri Compromise enacted
1821
Mexico achieves independence from Spain
Adams-Onis Treaty 222 American System 226 Factor system 218 Francis Cabot
Lowell 216 Gibbons v. Ogden 224 Henry Clay 226 John Quincy Adams 226
McCulloch v.
Maryland 224
Missouri Compromise 222 Monroe Doctrine 225 Seminole War 221 Stephen H. Long 220 Tallmadge
Amendment 222
Supreme Court rules in Gibbons v. Ogden
1824
John Quincy Adams wins disputed presidential election
RECALL AND REFLECT
1.	How did the War of 1812 stimulate the national economy?
2.	What were the reasons for the rise of sectional differences in this era? What attempts were made to resolve these differences? How successful were those attempts?
3.	Why was the Monroe Doctrine proclaimed?
4.	What was the significance of Andrew Jackson’s victory in the election of 1828?
1828
"Tariff of abominations” passed Andrew Jackson elected president
JACKSONIAN AMERICA
THE VERDICT OF THE PEOPLE
(1855), BY GEORGE CALEB BINGHAM This scene of an election-day gathering is peopled almost entirely by white men. Women and African Americans were barred from voting, but political rights expanded substantially in the 1830s and 1840s among white males, i© Courtesy of The Saint Louis Art Museum) looking ahead
t How did the electorate expand during the Jacksonian era, and what were the limits of that expansion?
2.	What events fed the growing tension between nationalism and states rights, and what were the arguments on both sides of that issue?
3.	What was the Second Party System, and how did its emergence and rise change national politics?
SETTING THE STAGE
DURING THE YEARS OF ECONOMIC AND TERRITORIAL
expansion in the early nineteenth century, Americans pondered the future of their democracy. Some feared that the nations rapid growth would produce social chaos and insisted that the country's first priority must be to establish order and a clear system of authority. Others argued that the greatest danger facing the nation was privilege and that society's goal should be to eliminate the favored status of powerful elites and make opportunity more widely available. Advocates of this latter vision won control of the federal government in 1829 with the inauguration of Andrew Jackson, The "democratization” of government over which Andrew Jackson presided was accompanied by a lofty rhetoric of equality and aroused the excitement of working people. But Jackson and his followers were not egalitarians. They accepted economic inequality and social gradation, Jackson himself was a frontier aristocrat, and most of those who served him were people of wealth and standing. They were not, however, usually aristocrats by birth, They had, they believed, risen to prominence on the basis of their own talents and energies, and their goal in public life was to ensure that others like themselves would have the opportunity to do the same. For these national leaders the purpose of democratization was not primarily to aid farmers and laborers or to assist the disenfranchised: African Americans (both slave and free), women, and Native Americans. It was, rather, to challenge the power of eastern elites for the sake of the rising entrepreneurs of the South and the West.
THE RISE OF MASS POLITICS
On March 4, 1829, an unprecedented throng-thousands of Americans from all regions of the country, including farmers, laborers, and others of modest social rank-crowded before the Capitol in
, Washington, D.C., to witness the inauguration of Andrew Jackson. After the Inauguration ceremonies, the boisterous crowd poured down Pennsylvania Avenue, following their hero to the White House. There, at a public reception open to all, they filled the state rooms to overflowing, trampling one another, soiling the carpets, ruining elegantly upholstered sofas and chairs in their eagerness to shake the new president’s hand. "It was a proud day for the people,” wrote Amos Kendall, one of Jackson’s closest political associates. "General Jackson is their own President.” To other observers, however, the scene was less appealing. Justice of the Supreme Court Joseph Story, a friend and colleague of John Marshall, looked on the inaugural levee, as it was called, and remarked with disgust: "The reign of King ’Mob’ seems triumphant.”
The Emergence of Andrew Jackson
Jackson, one of the most powerful presidents of the nineteenth century, was born in 1767 to modest parents. They had moved from Ireland two years before Andrew was born in a small village in the Carolinas. At the age of thirteen, he was captured by the British during the American Revolution. When Jackson refused to clean the boots of a British officer, the officer cut Jackson with a sword, leaving him with scars and an enduring hatred of the British. As he became older, Jackson received only sporadic education and worked in various shops and on farms. As a young man, he studied law and was admitted to the bar.
Most of Jackson’s early legal work involved disputed land-claims of which he soon tired. He was elected as a delegate to the Tennessee constitutional convention in 1796 and, later that same year, became a U.S. congressman. In 1797, he went on to become a U.S. senator but resigned within a year’ In 1798, he was appointed a judge of the Tennessee Supreme Court, a position he held until 1804.
Gradually, Jackson prospered as planter and merchant. He also bought slaves to help his growing plantation. In 1804, he acquired an elegant home, the Hermitage, a large plantation in
Davidson County, near Nashville. In time, he had one of the largest plantations in the state with up to 300 slaves.
230 •
JACKSONIAN AMERICA
231
Jackson joined the Tennessee militia in 1801 and in the next year was elected major general. He fought Indians in Alabama and Georgia. In the War of 1812, he fought against Britain. When the British threatened New Orleans, Jackson took command. In the Battle of New Orleans, his soldiers won a decisive victory over the British that ensured New Orleans would be part of the United States. He developed the reputation for being as "tough as old hickory” and thus earned the nickname "Old Hickory.” Jackson left the war with many people calling for him to run for president of the United States.
Expanding Democracy
What some have called the "age of Jackson” did not much advance the cause of economic equality. The distribution of wealth and property in America was little different at the end of the Jacksonian era than it had been at the start. But it did mark a transformation of American politics that widely extended to new groups the right to vote.
Until the 1820s, relatively few Americans had been permitted to vote. Most states restricted the franchise to white males
Broadening w^° were ProPertY owners or taxpayers or the Franchise both, effectively barring an enormous number of the less affluent from the voting rolls. But beginning even before Jackson's election, the rules governing voting began to expand. Changes came first in Ohio and other new states of the West, which, on joining the Union, adopted constitutions that guaranteed all adult white males the right to vote and gave all voters the right to hold public office. Older states, concerned about the loss of their population to the West and thinking that extending the franchise might encourage some residents to stay, began to grant similar political rights to their citizens, dropping or reducing their property ownership or taxpaying requirements. Eventually, every state democratized its electorate to some degree,
although some much later and less fully than others.
Change provoked resistance, and at times the democratic
trend fell short of the aims of the radical reformers, as when Massachusetts held its constitutional convention in 1820. Reform-minded delegates complained that in the Massachusetts government the rich were better represented than the poor, both because of restrictions on voting and officeholding and because of a peculiar system by which members of the state senate represented property rather than simply people. But Daniel Webster, one of the conservative delegates, opposed democratic changes on the grounds that "power naturally and necessarily follows property” and that "property as such should have its weight and influence in political arrangement. Webster and the rest of the conservatives could not prevent the reform of the rules for representation in the state senate, nor could they prevent elimination of the property requirement for voting. But, to the dismay of the radicals, the new constitution required that every voter be a taxpayer and that the governor be the owner of considerable real estate.
More often, however, the forces of democratization pre-vailed in the states. In the New York convention of 1821, for
i
ANDREW JACKSON
This stern portrait suggests something of the fierce determination that characterized Andrew Jackson s military and political careers. Shattered by the death of his wife a few weeks after his election as president—a death he blamed (not without reason) on the attacks his political opponents had leveled at her—he entered office with a steely determination to live by his own principles and give no quarter to his adversaries. (© Collection of the New-York Historical Society, USA/The Bridgeman Art Library) example, conservatives led by James Kent insisted that a tax-paying requirement for suffrage was not enough and that, at least in the election of state senators, the property qualification should survive. But reformers, citing the Declaration of Independence, maintained that life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness, not property, were the main concerns of society and government. The property qualification was abolished.
The wave of state reforms was generally peaceful, but in Rhode Island democratization efforts created considerable instability. The Rhode Island constitution (still basically the old colonial charter) barred more than half the adult males of the state from voting. The conservative legislature, chosen by this restricted electorate, consistently blocked all efforts at reform. In 1840, the lawyer and activist Thomas W. Dorr and a group
The Dorr	Showers f°rmed a "People's Party,”
Rebellion held a convention, drafted a new constitution, and submitted it to a popular vote. It was overwhelmingly approved. The existing legislature, however, refused to accept the Dorr document and submitted a new constitution of its own to the voters. It was narrowly defeated. The Dorrites, in the meantime, had begun to set up a new government, under their own constitution, with Dorr as governor; and so, in 1842, two governments were claiming
