256 » CHAPTER 10
1620 1650 1680 1710 1740 1770 1800 1830 1860 Year
POPULATION GROWTH, 1620-1860
From its tiny beginnings in the seventeenth century, the American population grew rapidly and dramatically so that by 1860—with more than 31 million people—the United States was one of the most populous countries in the world. * How did this growing population contribute to the nation's economic transformation?
Total immigration during	347
five-year periods (in thousands)
41
1821-1825 1826-1830 1831-1835 1836-1840 Year
IMMIGRATION, 1821-1840 Among the sources of the nation’s growing population in the nineteenth century was rapidly increasing immigration. This graph shows how rapidly immigration to the United States increased in the 1820s and 1830s. The 347,000 immigrants in the second half of the 1830s were almost nine times the number in the first half of the 1820s.
• Where did most of these new immigrants settle?
Immigration, choked off by wars in Europe and economic crises in America, contributed little to the American population in the first three decades of the nineteenth century but rapidly revived beginning in the 1830s. Of the total 1830 population of nearly 13 million, the foreign-born numbered fewer than 500,000. But the number of immigrants climbed by 60,000 in 1832 and nearly 80,000 in 1837. Reduced transportation costs and increasing economic opportunities helped stimulate the immigration boom, as did deteriorating economic conditions in some areas of Europe. The migrations introduced new groups to the United States. In particular, the number of immigrants arriving from the southern counties of Ireland began to grow, marking the beginning of a tremendous influx of Irish Catholics that would continue through the three decades before the Civil War.
Much of this new European immigration flowed into the rapidly growing cities of the Northeast. But urban growth was a result of substantial internal migration as well. As the agricultural regions of New England and other areas grew less profitable, more and more people picked up stakes and moved-some to more promising agricultural regions in the West, but many to eastern cities. In 1790, one person in thirty had lived in a city (defined as a community of 8,000 or more); in 1820, one in twenty; and in 1840, one in twelve.
The rise of New York City was particularly dramatic. By 1810, it was the largest city in the United States. That was partly a result of its superior natural harbor. It was also a result of the Erie Canal (completed in 1825), which gave the city unrivaled access to the interior, and of liberal state laws that made the city attractive for both foreign and domestic commerce.
Immigration and Urban Growth,
1840-1860
The growth of cities accelerated even more dramatically between 1840 and 1860. The population of New York, for exam-
Rapid	Ple’ rose from 312,000 to 805,000. (New
Urbanization York’s population would have numbered 1.2 million in 1860 if Brooklyn, which was then a separate municipality, had been included in the total.) Philadelphia s population grew over the same twenty-year pe' riod from 220,000 to 565,000; Boston’s from 93,000 to 177,000. By 1860, 26 percent of the population of the free states was living in towns (places of 2,500 people or more) or cities (8,000 people or more), up from 14 percent in 1840. That percentage was even higher for the industrializing states
AMERICA’S ECONOMIC REVOLUTION
• 257 1%
All Others
SOURCES OF IMMIGRATION, 1820-1840
This pie chart shows where the large numbers of immigrants portrayed in the previous chart came from. Note the very large number of Irish immigrants. • Why were the Irish among the most likely immigrant groups to become part of the industrial workforce?
of the Northeast. (In the South, by contrast, the increase of urban residents was only from 6 percent in 1840 to 10 percent in 1860.)
The booming agricultural economy of the western regions of the nation produced significant urban growth as well. Between 1820 and 1840, communities that had once been small western villages or trading posts became major cities: St. Louis, Pittsburgh, Cincinnati, Louisville. All of them benefited from strategic positions on the Mississippi River or one of its major tributaries. All of them became centers of the growing carrying trade that connected the farmers of the Midwest with New Orleans and, through it, the cities of the Northeast. After 1830, however, substantial shipping began from the Mississippi River to the Great Lakes, creating major new urban centers that gradually superseded the river ports. Among them were Buffalo, Detroit, Milwaukee, Cleveland, and-most important-Chicago.
The enlarged urban population was in part a reflection of the growth of the national population as a whole, which rose by more than a third-from 23 million to over 31 million-in the decade of the 1850s alone. By 1860, the American population was larger than Britain’s and quickly approaching that of France and Germany. Urban growth was also a result of the increasing flow of people into cities from the farms of the Northeast.
AMERICAN POPULATION DENSITY, 1820
The population of the United States in 1820 populated really densely states, although settlement was growing in the Ohio River valley to the west. Note how few areas of the country	populated really densely.
around New York City, and the area in Maryland adjoining Baltimore.	_______________________________________________
‘ What accounts for the density in these areas?
still overwhelmingly rural and agrarian and was still concentrated largely in the original thirteen small area in northeastern Massachusetts, the area
258 • CHAPTER 10
(ja n '/ur, rz-’r
BROADWAY IN 1836
This image of the area of New York City's Broadway in what is now lower Manhattan suggests the way in which New York was becoming an increasingly important center of trade and commerce—and a densely urban place-in the 1830s. (© The Granger Collection, New York) 1 lliBllBlil#
{. \
p\cinc \	/
OCEAN	,
)	X,
Persons Per Square Mile /
HJ^| 90 and over 18-89
2-17
Fewer than 2
N'
Gulf of Mexico { Q.............	5(|0 mi
500	1000 km
AMERICAN POPULATION DENSITY, 1860
By 1860, the population of the United States had spread more evenly across the entire country. Communities that had once been small trading posts emerged as major cities. Among them were St. Louis, Pittsburgh, Cincinnati, and Louisville. In the meantime, the Erie Canal had opened up a large and prosperous market area for New York City. Note the larger and more numerous areas of dense population, including many in the Midwest. What accounts for the growing population density in some areas of the South?
AMERICA’S ECONOMIC REVOLUTION - 259
Immigration from abroad continued to increase as well. Between 1840 and 1850, more than 1.5 million Europeans moved to
Surging America, three times the number of arrivals
Immigration in the 1830s. Still greater numbers arrived in the 1850s-over 2.5 million. Almost half the residents of New York City in the 1850s were recent immigrants. In St. Louis, Chicago, and Milwaukee, the foreign-born outnumbered those of native birth. Few immigrants settled in the South. Only 500,000 lived in the slave states in 1860, and a third of these were concentrated in Missouri, mostly in St. Louis.
The newcomers came from many different countries and regions: England, France, Italy, Scandinavia, Poland, and Holland.
German and But the °verwhelming majority came from Irish	Ireland and Germany. In 1850, the Irish
Immigrants constituted approximately 45 percent and the Germans over 20 percent of the foreign-born in America. By 1860, there were more than 1.5 million Irish-born and approximately 1 million German-born people in the United States. In Germany, the economic dislocations of the industrial revolution had caused widespread poverty, and the collapse of the liberal revolution there in 1848 also persuaded many Germans to emigrate. In Ireland, the oppressiveness and unpopularity of English rule drove many people out. But even more important was the greatest disaster in Ireland’s history: a catastrophic failure of the potato crop (and other food crops) that caused the devastating "potato famine” of 1845-1849. Nearly a million people died of starvation and disease. Well
over a million more emigrated to the United States.
The great majority of Irish immigrants settled in the eastern
cities, where they swelled the ranks of unskilled labor. Most German immigrants moved on to the Northwest, where they became farmers or went into business in the western towns. One reason for the difference was wealth: German immigrants generally arrived with at least some money; the Irish had practically none. Another important reason was gender. Most German immigrants were members of family groups or were single men, for whom movement to the agricultural frontier was both possible and attractive. Many Irish immigrants were young, single women, for whom movement west was much less plausible. They were more likely to stay in the eastern cities, where factory and domestic work was available.
The Rise of Nativism
Some native-born Americans welcomed the new immigration, which provided a large supply of cheap labor that they believed would help keep wage rates low. Land speculators and others with investments in the sparsely populated West hoped that immigrants would move into the region and help expand the population, and thus the market for land and goods, there. Political leaders in western states and territories wanted the im migrants to swell their population, which would increase the political influence of the region. Wisconsin, for example, permit ted foreign-born residents to become voters as soon as they had declared their intention of seeking citizenship and had resided m the state for a year; other western states soon followed its lead.
In eastern cities, too, urban political organizations eagerly courted immigrant voters, hoping to enhance their own political strength.
Other Americans, however, viewed the growing foreign-born population with alarm. Their fears led to the rise of what is known as "nativism,” a defense of native-born people and a hostility to the foreign-born, usually combined with a desire to stop or slow immigration. The emerging nativism took many forms. Some of it was a result of simple racism. Many nativists (conveniently overlooking their own immigrant heritage) argued that the new immigrants were inherently inferior to older-stock Americans. Some viewed them with the same contempt and prejudice-and the same low estimate of their potential abilities-with which they viewed African Americans and Indians. Many nativists avoided racist arguments but argued nevertheless that the newcomers were socially unfit to live alongside people of older stock, that they did not bring with them sufficient standards of civilization. Evidence for that, they claimed, was the wretched urban and sometimes rural slums in which they lived. (Many nativists seemed to assume that such wretchedness was something immigrants chose, rather than the result of their extreme poverty.) Others-especially workers-complained that because foreigners were willing to work for low wages, they were stealing jobs from the native labor force. Protestants, observing the success of Irish Catholics in establishing footholds in urban politics, warned that the Catholic Church and the pope were gaining a foothold in
Total immigration during 1,748
1841-1845 1846-1850 1851-1855 1856-1860 Year
IMMIGRATION, 1841-1860 Immigration continued to increase in the forty years before the Civil War. This chart illustrates the much higher levels of growth than in the previous forty years.
The low point in this era was the first half of the 1840s, in which 430,000 new immigrants entered the United States. That was significantly higher than the largest number of the previous twenty years. In the early 1850s, the number of immigrants grew to nearly 2 million. (© Comstock Images/Alamy) * What events in Europe contributed to this increase in immigration?
CONSIDER THE SOURCE

imiifiiimiiiimiiiiiiiitiimimmmiiiiiiiiiiiiiiniimimiimimuiiitmiiHiiittitmimti
llJtlliliilillllillll......
anti-immigration sentiment
NATIVISM AND ANTI-IMMIGRATION SENTIMENT AND NATIVISM HAVE LONG BEEN
PRESENT IN THE NATION,
as indicated by the first two items below: an 1852 broadside announcing publication of The American Patriot, a nativist newspaper, and a cartoon from 1850. The broadside issues a dire warning: "Already the enemies of our dearest institutions, like the foreign spies in the Trojan horse of old, are within our gates. They are disgorging themselves upon us, at the rate of Hundreds of Thousands Every Year! They aim at nothing short of conquest and supremacy over us.” Fast-forward to April 2010 when Arizona Senate Bill 1070 was signed into law by Governor Jan Brewer. Provisions of the law include the right of law enforcement agents to ask for a person's immigration documents during routine stops and a mandate that any illegal immigrant convicted of a crime or misdemeanor be turned over to federal immigration agents. Critics claim that the law is a product of nativism and anti-immigration sentiment directed specifically at those of Hispanic origin, which will result in persecution of both legal and undocumented immigrants. Some of the most insightful critiques of the law have come from political cartoonists. See two examples on p. 261.
AMERICAN CITIZENS!
•♦pa * in thv Tr«<jtn h<>r*« ,»»' <> >!,
£*p*i	Reman C’athuheiim.
Foreigners holding
Nunneriea and the Jeauiu.
To U	Used for the support of Foreign
F*«f*ra mitllona of dollars yearly?
ThePATMOTi,	« -
‘",l f,’r S''', ......... ■’l.dlr.1
W«* are burdened with ____________
taaea by foreigner*, We are corrupted m the moral* of oar youth. We are interfered with in our government. We are* forced into eollbdona with other naliona. . M e arc tampered with in our religion v We are injured in our labor. H e are aaaailrd in our freedom of sjwech.
(Historicus, Inc.]
ANTI-IMMIGRATION SENTIMENT—1850/1852
AND GERMANS STEAL THE BALLOT BOX.”
(©The Granger Collection, New York) UNDERSTAND, ANALYZE, AND EVALUATE
1.	What complaints against immigrants are stated in the broadside? To whom in particular is The American Patriot opposed? Why is there such strong opposition to these immigrants?
2.	What does the depiction of the immigrants in the cartoon suggest about them? What specific grievance against the immigrants is expressed?
REACTIONS TO ARIZONA SENATE BILL 1070-2010
ACTIVITIES AROUSE SUSPICION” BY NICK ANDERSON
(Nick Anderson Editorial Cartoon used with the permission of Nick Anderson, the Washington Post Writers Group and the Cartoonist Group, All rights reserved.) AND LIBERTY” BY DARYL CAGLE
(Source: © 2010 Daryl Cagle, MSNBC, and PoliticalCartoons.com) MAKE CONNECTIONS
1.	What attitude toward the Arizona law is reflected in these two cartoons? Do the cartoons suggest the same attitude toward the law? What differences, if any, do you detect?
2.	How do the cartoonists portray immigrants or those most affected by the Arizona law?
3.	In what ways does the nativist sentiment reflected in the nineteenth-century documents differ from the attitude toward immigration behind the Arizona law?
261
262 • CHAPTER 10
Native
American
Party
American government. Whig politicians were outraged because so many of the newcomers voted Democratic. Others complained that the immigrants corrupted politics by selling their votes. Many older-stock Americans of both parties feared that immigrants would bring new, radical ideas into national life.
Out of these tensions and prejudices emerged a number of new secret societies created to combat what nativists had come to call the "alien menace.” Most of them originated in the Northeast. Some later spread to the West and even to the South. The first of these, the Native American Association, began agitating against immigration in 1837. In 1845,
nativists held a convention in Philadelphia and formed the Native American Party (unaware that the term they used to describe themselves would one day become a common label for American Indians). Many of the nativist groups combined in 1850 to form the Supreme Order of the Star-Spangled Banner. It endorsed a list of demands that included banning Catholics or the foreign-born from holding public office, more-restrictive naturalization laws, and literacy tests for voting. The order adopted a strict code of secrecy, which included the secret password, used in lodges across the country, T know nothing.” Ultimately, members of the movement became known as the "Know-Nothings.”
Gradually, the Know-Nothings turned their attention to party politics, and after the election of 1852 they created a new political organization that they called the American Party. In the East, the new organization scored an immediate and astonishing success in the elections of 1854: the Know-Nothings cast a
The Know-Nothings
TUX
T L
/'/ ' - ISAAC M? CAW.
Other Northern European
5%
CtO PRE!
-i'*' All Others
/ 12%
THE LAMENT OF THE IRISH EMIGRANT
This poem, written by Helen Selina Blackwood and set to music by William R. Dempster captures the painful time in Ireland during the potato famine from the mid 1840s to the early 1850s. During this period an estimated 1 million people died of starvation and another million emigrated, many to the United States. The protagonist of the poem sings of his grief from having lost his wife and his promise to remember her in the new land. (The Library of Congress [LC-USZ62-41030]) {English
16%
Irish
40%
\	German
x	27%
SOURCES OF IMMIGRATION, 1840-1860
Although the extent of immigration increased dramatically in the two decades after 1840, the sources of it remained remarkably stable. Note how closely the distribution of immigrant groups portrayed in this pie chart parallels that in the similar chart for the 1820-1840 period on p. 257. ® What were some of the differences between what German and Irish immigrants did once they arrived in America?
large vote in Pennsylvania and New York and won control of the state government in Massachusetts. Elsewhere, the progress of the Know-Nothings was modest. Western members of the party, because of the presence of many German voters in the area, found it expedient not to oppose naturalized Protestants. After 1854, the strength of the Know-Nothings declined.
TRANSPORTATION,
COMMUNICATIONS,
AND TECHNOLOGY
Just as the industrial revolution needed a growing population, it also required an efficient system of transportation and co® munications. Such a system was essential in creating regional.
national, and ultimately international markets. Progress in this area required not just significant investment, but also important advances in technological knowledge.
The Canal Age
From 1790 until the 1820s, the so-called turnpike era, Americans had relied largely on roads for internal transportation. But in a country as large as the United States was becoming, roads alone (and the mostly horse-drawn vehicles that used them) were not adequate for the nation’s expanding needs. And so, in the 1820s and 1830s, Americans began to turn to other means of transportation as well.
The larger rivers, especially the Mississippi and the Ohio, had been important transportation routes for years, but most of the traffic on them consisted of flat barges-little more than rafts-that floated downstream laden with cargo and were broken up at the end of their journeys because they could not navigate back upstream. To return north, shippers had to send goods by land or by agonizingly slow upstream vessels that sometimes took up to four months to travel the length of the Mississippi.
These rivers became vastly more important by the 1820s, Steamboats as steamb°ats grew in number and improved in design. The new riverboats carried the corn and wheat of northwestern farmers and the cotton and tobacco of southwestern planters to New Orleans in a fraction of the time of the old barges. From New Orleans, oceangoing
AMERICA’S ECONOMIC REVOLUTION - 263
KNOW-NOTHING SOAP
This illustrated advertising label for soap manufactured in Boston alludes to the Know Nothing or nativist movement. The Indians depicted in the foreground and the teepees and camp in the background symbolize the movement's prejudice against foreigners. (The Library of Congress [LC-USZCN4-182]) X
„ „„ rr £5	* b 1
of the enormous engineering challenges faced by the builders of the Erie Canal. This picture shows a deep cutting at connected New York to the Great Lakes via the Hudson River. (© The Granger Collection, New York)
THE ERIE CANAL
This lithograph suggests something Lockport, New York. The canal was completed in 1825 and 264 CHAPTER 10
ships took the cargoes on to eastern ports. Steamboats also developed a significant passenger traffic, and companies built increasingly lavish vessels to compete for this lucrative trade.
But neither the farmers of the West nor the merchants of the East were wholly satisfied with this pattern of trade. Farmers would pay less to transport their goods (and eastern consumers would pay less to consume them) if they could ship them directly eastward to market, rather than by the roundabout river-sea route; and northeastern merchants, too, could sell larger quantities of their manufactured goods if they could transport their merchandise more directly and economically to the West. New highways across the mountains provided a partial solution to the problem. But the costs of hauling goods overland, although lower than before, were still too high for anything except the most compact and valuable merchandise. The thoughts of some merchants and entrepreneurs began, therefore, to turn to an alternative: canals.
A team of four horses could haul one and a half tons of goods eighteen miles a day on the turnpikes. But the same four horses, walking along the "towpaths” next to canals while yoked to barges, could draw a boatload of a hundred tons twenty-four miles a day. By the 1820s, the economic advantages of canals had
Economic
Advantages of Canals
generated a booming interest in expanding the water routes to the West. Canal building was too expensive for private enterprise, and the job of digging canals fell largely to the states. The ambitious state governments of the Northeast took the
lead in constructing them. New York was the first to act. It had the natural advantage of a good land route between the Hudson
River and Lake Erie through the only real break in the Appalachian chain. But the engineering tasks were still imposing. The distance was more than 350 miles, several times the length of any of the existing canals in America. The route was interrupted by high ridges and a wilderness of woods. After a long public debate over whether the scheme was practical, canal advocates prevailed when De Witt Clinton, a late but ardent convert to the cause, became governor in 1817. Digging began on July 4, 1817.
The building of the Erie Canal was the greatest construction project the United States had ever undertaken. The canal itself was simple: a ditch forty feet wide and four feet deep, with The Erie towpaths along the banks. But hundreds of Canal	difficult cuts and fills, some of them enor-
mous, were required to enable the canal to pass through hills and over valleys; stone aqueducts were
Ml ANTIC OCEAN
CANALS IN THE NORTHEAST, 1823-1860
The great success of the Erie Canal, which opened in 182S inspired decad f th,s map illustrates. But none of the new canals had anything like the impact of the original Erie Canal, and thus none of New Yn\	ener9e"C “ buiWin9 many areaS °' lhe Uni'ed “
were able to displace it as the nation s leading commercial center.	r 1 y s competitors among them Baltimore, Philadelphia, and Boston—
• What form of transportation ultimately displaced the canals?
AMERICA’S ECONOMIC REVOLUTION * 265
necessary to carry it across streams; and eighty-eight locks, of heavy masonry with great wooden gates, were needed to permit ascents and descents. The Erie Canal was not just an engineering triumph, but an immediate financial success as well. It opened in October 1825, amid elaborate ceremonies and celebrations, and traffic was soon so heavy that within about seven years tolls had repaid the entire cost of construction. By providing a route to the Great Lakes, the canal gave New York City direct access to Chicago and the growing markets of the West. New York City could now compete with (and increasingly replace) New Orleans as a destination for agricultural goods (particularly wheat) and other products of the West, and as a source for manufactured goods to be sold in the region.
The system of water transportation-and the primacy of New York City-extended farther when the states of Ohio and Indiana, inspired by the success of the Erie Canal, provided water connections between Lake Erie and the Ohio River. These canals helped connect them by an inland water route all the way to New York, although it was still necessary to transfer cargoes several times between canal, lake, and river craft. One of the immediate results of these new transportation routes was increased white settlement in the Northwest, because canals made it easier for migrants to make the westward journey and to ship their goods back to eastern markets.
Rival cities along the Atlantic seaboard took alarm at the prospect of New York’s acquiring so vast a hinterland. But they had limited success in catching up. Boston, its way to the Hudson River blocked by the Berkshire Mountains, did not even try to connect itself to the West by canal; its hinterland would remain confined largely to New England. Philadelphia and Baltimore had the still more formidable Allegheny Mountains to contend with. They made a serious effort at canal building, nevertheless, but with discouraging results. Pennsylvania’s effort ended in an expensive failure. Maryland constructed part of the Chesapeake and Ohio Canal beginning in 1828, but completed only the stretch between Washington, D.C., and Cumberland, Maryland, and thus never crossed the mountains. In the South, Richmond and Charleston also aspired to build water routes to the Ohio Valley, but never completed them.
In the end, canals did not provide a satisfactory route to the West for any of New York’s rivals. Some cities, however, saw their opportunity in a different and newer means of transportation. Even before the canal age had reached its height, the era of the railroad was already beginning.
The Early Railroads
Eventually, railroads became the primary transportation system for the United States, and they remained so until the construction of the interstate highway system in the midtwentieth century.
Railroads emerged from a combination of technological and
entrepreneurial innovations. The technological breakthroughs
_____ „ included the invention of tracks, the cre-
Technological
Basis of the ation of steam-powered locomotives, and
Railroad the development of railroad cars that could serve as public carriers of passengers and freight. By 1804, both English and American inventors had experimented with steam engines for propelling land vehicles. In 1820, John Stevens ran a locomotive and cars around a circular track on his New Jersey estate. And in 1825, the Stockton and Darlington Railroad in England opened a short length of
track and became the first line to carry general traffic.
American entrepreneurs, especially in those northeastern cities that sought better communication with the West, quickly grew interested in the English experiment. The first company to begin actual operations was the Baltimore and Ohio, which opened a thirteen-mile stretch of track in 1830. In New York, the Mohawk and Hudson began running trains along the sixteen miles between Schenectady and Albany in 1831. By 1836, more than a thousand miles of track had been laid in eleven states.
But there was not yet a true railroad system. Even the longest of the lines was comparatively short in the 1830s, and most of them served simply to connect water routes, not to link one railroad to another. Even when two lines did connect, the tracks often differed in gauge (width), so that cars from one line often could not fit onto the tracks of another.
.	,	. k as a philanthropist and as the founder of the Cooper Union in New York City, was also a successful iron
RAdNG ON THE RAILROAD Peter Cooper, who ,n later years wa test k own as a p ntanufacturer. Cooper designed and built the first «°were ocomohve .Am Thumb) against a horse-drawn railroad car. This sketch depicts the
266 . CHAPTER 10
Schedules were erratic, and wrecks were frequent. But railroads made some important advances in the 1830s and 1840s. The introduction of heavier iron rails improved the roadbeds. Steam locomotives became more flexible and powerful. Redesigned passenger cars became stabler, more comfortable,
Competition between Railroads and Canals
and larger.
Railroads and canals were soon competing bitterly. For a time, the Chesapeake and Ohio Canal Company blocked the advance of the Baltimore and Ohio Railroad through the narrow gorge of the upper Potomac, which it controlled; and the state of New York prohibited railroads from hauling freight in competition with the
Erie Canal and its branches. But railroads had so many advantages that when they were able to compete freely with other forms of transportation they almost always prevailed.
The Triumph of the Rails
After 1840, railroads gradually supplanted canals and all other modes of transport. In 1840, there were 2,818 miles of railroad tracks in the United States; by 1850, there were 9,021. An unparalleled burst of railroad construction followed in the 1850s, tripling the amount of trackage in just ten years. The most comprehensive and efficient system was in the Northeast, which had twice as much trackage per square mile as the Northwest and four times as much as the South. But the expansion of the rails left no region untouched. Railroads were even reaching west of the Mississippi, which was spanned at several points by great iron bridges. One line ran from Hannibal to St. Joseph on the Missouri River, and another was under construction between St. Louis and Kansas City.
An important change in railroad development was the trend
toward the consolidation of short lines into longer lines (known
_	as 'Trunk lines”). By 1853, four major railroad
Consolidation	, A ll.
trunk lines had crossed the Appalachian Mountains to connect the Northeast with the Northwest. The New York Central and the New York and Erie gave New York City access to the Lake Erie ports. The Pennsylvania railroad linked Philadelphia and Pittsburgh, and the Baltimore and Ohio connected Baltimore with the Ohio River at Wheeling. From the terminals of these lines, other railroads into the interior touched the Mississippi River at eight points. Chicago became the rail center of the West, served by fifteen lines and more than a hundred daily trains. The appearance of the great trunk lines tended to divert traffic from the main water routes-the Erie Canal and the Mississippi River. By lessening the dependence of the West on the Mississippi, the railroads helped weaken further the connection between the Northwest and the South.
Capital to finance the railroad boom came from many sources. Private American investors provided part of the necessary funding, and railroad companies borrowed large sums from abroad. But local governments—states, counties, cities, towns-also often contributed capital, because they were eager to have railroads serve them. The railroads obtained substantial additional assistance from the federal government in the form
of public land grants. In 1850, Senator Stephen A. Douglas of Illinois and other railroad-minded politicians persuaded Congress to grant federal lands to aid the Illinois Central, which was building from Chicago toward the Gulf of Mexico. Other states and their railroad promoters demanded the same privileges, and by 1860, Congress had allotted over 30 million acres to eleven states to assist railroad construction.
Innovations in Communications
ano Journalism
Critical to the railroads was an important innovation in communications: the magnetic telegraph. Telegraph lines extended along the tracks, connecting one station with another and aiding the scheduling and routing of trains. But the telegraph also permitted instant communication between distant cities, tying the nation together as never before. At the same time, it helped reinforce the schism between the North and the South. Like railroads, telegraph lines were far more extensive in the North than in the South, and they helped similarly to link the North to the Northwest (and thus to separate the Northwest further from the South).
jHE	The telegraph burst into American life
Telegraph in 1844, when Samuel F. B. Morse, after several years of experimentation, succeeded in transmitting from Baltimore to Washington, D.C., the news of James K. Polk's nomination for the presidency. The relatively low cost of constructing wire systems made the Morse telegraph system seem the ideal answer to the problems of long-distance communication. By 1860, more than 50,000 miles of wire connected most parts of the country; and a year later, the Pacific telegraph, with 3,595 miles of wire, opened between New York City and San Francisco. By then, nearly all the independent lines had joined in one organization, the
Western Union Telegraph Company.
New forms of journalism also drew communities into a common communications system. In 1846, Richard Hoe invented the yHE	steam cylinder rotary press, making it possi-
Associated	t0 Print newspapers rapidly and cheaply.
Press	The development of the telegraph, together
with the introduction of the rotary press, made possible much speedier collection and distribution of news than ever before. In 1846, newspaper publishers from around the nation formed the Associated Press to promote cooperative news gathering by wire; no longer did they have to depend on the
cumbersome exchange of newspapers for out-of-town reports.
Major metropolitan newspapers began to appear in the larger cities of the Northeast. In New York alone, there were Horace Greeley’s Tribune, James Gordon Bennett’s Herald, Henry J. Raymond’s Times, and others. All gave serious attention to national and even international events and had substantial circulations beyond the city.
In the long run, journalism would become an important unifying factor in American life. In the 1840s and 1850s, however, the rise of the new journalism helped to feed sectional discord. Most of the major magazines and newspapers were in
AMERICA’S ECONOMIC REVOLUTION . 267
fh dramatic qrowth in the extent of American railroads in the 1850s. Note the particularly extensive increase in mileage in the RAILROAD GROWTH, 1850-1860 These two maps il ustra e e	.	in ra;|rOad mileaqe in the South. Railroads forged a close economic relationship between the upper Midwest
upper Midwest (known at the time as the Northwest). Note too the relatively smaller increase
and the Northeast, and weakened the Midwest's relationship to the South.	--------- --------------------------------------------------------- -------------------
How did ,he growth railroads in the North contribute to the South s growing sense of insecuritg within the Union?
268 • CHAPTER 10
THE TELEGRAPH
The telegraph provided rapid communication across the country—and eventually across oceans—for the first time. Samuel F. B. Morse was one of a number of nineteenth-century inventors who helped create the telegraph, but Morse was the most commercially successful of the rivals, hence his greater reputation than others who helped create it. (The Library of Congress [LCUSZC4-5040]) the North, reinforcing the South's sense of subjugation. Fueling Southern newspapers tended to have Sectional	smaller budgets and reported largely local
Discord	news. Few had any impact outside their
immediate communities. The combined circulation of the Tribune and the Herald exceeded that of all
the daily newspapers published in the South put together.
COMMERCE AND INDUSTRY
By the middle years of the nineteenth century, the United States had developed the beginnings of a modern capitalist Impact of the economY and an advanced industrial capac-
Market ity- This emerging economy created enor-
Economy mous wealth and changed the face of all areas of the nation. But it did not, of course, affect everyone equally. Some classes and regions benefited
from the economic development far more than others.
Advantages of the
Corporation
The Expansion of Business, 1820-1840
American business grew rapidly in the 1820s and 1830s, partly because of population growth and the transportation revolution, but also because of the daring, imagination, and ruthlessness of a new generation of entrepreneurs whose enormous wealth allowed for lifestyles of "conspicuous consumption.”
One important change came in the retail distribution of goods. In the larger cities, stores specializing in groceries, dry goods, hardware, and other lines appeared, although residents of smaller towns and villages still depended on general stores (stores that did not specialize). In these less populous areas, many people did much of their business by barter.
The organization of business was also changing. Individuals or limited partnerships continued to operate most businesses, and the dominating figures were still the great merchant capitalists, who generally had sole ownership of their enterprises. In some larger businesses, however, the individual merchant capitalist was giving way to the corporation.
Corporations began to develop particularly rapidly in the 1830s, when some legal obstacles to their formation were removed. Previously, a corporation could
obtain a charter only by a special act of the state legislature-a cumbersome process that stifled corporate growth. By the 1830s, however, states were beginning to pass general incorporation laws, under which a group could secure a charter merely by paying a fee.
The new laws also permitted a system of limited liability, which meant that individual stockholders risked losing only the value of their own investment if a corporation should fail, and that they were not liable (as they had been in the past) for the corporation's larger losses. The rise of these new corporations made possible the accumulation of much greater amounts of capital and hence made possible much larger manufacturing and business enterprises.
Investment alone, however, still provided too little capital to meet the demands of the most ambitious businesses. Such Inadequate businesses relied heavily on credit, and Credit	their borrowing often created dangerous
instability. Credit mechanisms remained very crude in the early nineteenth century. The government alone could issue official currency, but the official currency consisted only of gold and silver (or paper certificates backed literally by gold and silver), and there was thus too little of it to support the growing demand for credit. Under pressure from corporate promoters, many banks issued large quantities of bank notes—unofficial currency that circulated in much the same way that government currency did but was of much less stable value. But the notes had value only to the degree that the bank could sustain public confidence in their value; and some banks issued so many notes that their own reserves could not cover them. As a result, bank failures were frequent, and bank deposits were often insecure. The difficulty of obtaining credit for business investment remained, therefore, an
impediment to economic growth.
AMERICA’S ECONOMIC REVOLUTION
• 269 The Emergence of the Factory
The most profound economic development in mid-nineteenth-century America was the rise of the factory. Before the War of 1812, most of what manufacturing there was in the United States took place within private households or in small, individually operated workshops. Men and women built or made products by hand, or with simple machines such as hand-operated looms. Gradually, however, improved technology and increasing demand produced a fundamental change. It came first in the New England textile industry. There, entrepreneurs were beginning to make use of new and larger machines driven by water power that allowed them to bring textile operations together under a single roof. This factory system, as it came to be known, spread rapidly in the 1820s and began to make serious inroads into the old home-based system of spinning thread and weaving cloth.
Factories also penetrated the shoe industry, concentrated
in eastern Massachusetts. Shoes were still largely handmade,
but manufacturers were beginning to Transformation	,	,	,	,	,
of the Shoe employ workers who specialized in one Industry	or another of the various tasks involved
in production. Some factories began producing large numbers of identical shoes in ungraded sizes and without distinction as to rights and lefts. By the 1830s, factory production was spreading from textiles and shoes into other industries and from New England to other areas of
the Northeast.
Between 1840 and 1860, American industry experienced even more dramatic growth as the factory system spread rapidly. In 1840, the total value of manufactured goods produced in the United States stood at $483 million; ten years later the figure had climbed to over $1 billion; and in 1860 it reached close to $2 billion. For the first time, the value of manufactured goods was approximately equal to that of agricultural products.
Of the approximately 140,000 manufacturing establishments in the country in 1860, 74,000 were located in the Northeast. The Northeast plants were so large that the region produced more than two-thirds of the nation’s manufactured goods. Of the 1,311,000 workers in man-
ufacturing in the United States, about 938,000 were employed in the mills and factories of New England and the mid-Atlantic states.
The
Industrial
Northeast
Advances in Technology
Even the most highly developed industries were still immature by later standards. American cotton manufacturers, for example, produced goods of coarse grade; fine items continued to come from England. But machine technology advanced more rapidly in the United States in the mid-nineteenth century than in any other country in the world. The American economy was growing so rapidly that the rewards of technological innovation were very great. Change was so rapid, in fact, that some manufacturers built their new machinery out of wood; by the time the wood wore out, they reasoned, improved
□ ■ u rk- n River illustrates the rapid growth of the city in the 1850s as it was becoming the great trading center of the central CARGO IN CHICAGO This engraving of cargo ships docked in the L icag part of the United States. F-) Archive Photos/Getty Image)

270 * CHAPTER 10
Interchangeable North had tried to
Interchangeable
Parts
technology would have made the machine obsolete. By the beginning of the 1830s, American technology had become so advanced-particularly in textile manufacturing-that industrialists in Britain and Europe were beginning to travel to the United States to learn new techniques, instead of the other way around.
The manufacturing of machine tools-the tools used to make machinery parts-was an important contribution to manufacturing. The government supported much of the research and development of machine tools, often in connection with supplying the military. For example, a government armory in Springfield, Massachusetts, developed two important tools-the turret lathe (used for cutting screws and other metal parts) and the universal milling machine (which replaced the hand chiseling of complicated parts and dies)-early in the nineteenth century. The precision grinding machine (which became critical to, among other things, the construction of sewing machines) was designed in the 1850s to help the United States Army produce standardized rifle parts. The federal armories such as those at Springfield and Harpers Ferry, Virginia, became the breeding ground for many technological discoveries, and a magnet for craftsmen and factory owners looking for ideas that could be useful to them. By the 1840s, the machine tools used in the factories of the Northeast were already better than those in most European factories.
parts, which Eli Whitney and Simeon introduce into gun factories, now found their way into many industries. Eventually, interchangeability would revolutionize watch and clock making, the
manufacturing of locomotives and steam engines, and the making of many farm tools. It would also help make possible such newer devices as bicycles, sewing machines, typewriters, cash registers, and eventually the automobile.
Industrialization was also profiting from the introduction of new sources of energy. Coal was replacing wood and water power as fuel for many factories. The production of coal, most of it mined around Pittsburgh in western Pennsylvania, leaped from 50,000 tons in 1820 to 14 million tons in 1860. The new power source made it possible to locate mills away from running streams and thus permitted industry to expand still more widely.
The great technological advances in American industry owed much to American inventors, as the patent records of
Technological the time make clear- In 1830’ the num-
Innovations ber of inventions patented was 544; by 1850, the figure had risen to 993; and in
1860, it stood at 4,778. In 1839, Charles Goodyear, a New England hardware merchant, discovered a method of vulcanizing rubber (treating it to give it greater strength and elasticity); by 1860, his process had found over 500 uses and had helped create a major American rubber industry. In 1846, Elias Howe of Massachusetts constructed a sewing machine; Isaac Singer made improvements on it, and the Howe-Singer machine was soon being used in the manufacture of ready-to-wear clothing.
i
!
For all the technological innovations that characterized the early factory system, most American industry remained dependent on the most traditional source of power: water. In the 1820s and 1830s, water power remained the most important source of power for manufacturing. The first important factory towns in New England-Lawrence, Lowell, and others-emerged where they did because of the natural waterfalls that could be channeled to provide power for the mills built along their banks. This sometimes required factories to close for periods in the winter when rivers were frozen. That was one reason factory owners began to look for alternative forms of energy that could be used throughout the year, which led them by the late 1830s to rely more and more on steam and other transportable forms of energy that could be fueled by wood, coal, or (later) petroleum.
MEN AND WOMEN AT WORK
However sophisticated industrial firms became technologically and administratively, manufacturers still relied above all on a supply of labor. In the 1820s and 1830s, factory labor came primarily from the native-born population. After 1840, the growing immigrant population became the most important new source of workers.
Recruiting a Native Workforce
Recruiting a labor force was not an easy task in the early years of the factory system. Ninety percent of Americans in the 1820s still lived and worked on farms, and many urban residents were skilled artisans-independent crafts workers who owned and managed their own shops as small businessmen; they were not likely to flock to factory jobs. The available unskilled workers were not numerous enough to form a reservoir from which the new industries could draw.
The beginnings of an industrial labor supply came instead from the transformation of American agriculture in the nineteenth century. The opening of vast, fertile new farmlands in
Transformation the Midwest' the improvement of trans-portation systems, the development of new farm machinery-all combined to increase food production dramatically.
New farming methods were also less labor-intensive than the
of American Agriculture
old ones; the number of workers required to produce large crops in the West was much smaller than the number required to produce smaller crops in the less fertile Northeast. No longer did each region have to feed itself entirely from its own farms; it could import food from other regions. As as result, farmers and their families began to abandon some of the relatively unprofitable farming areas of the East. In the Northeast, especially in New England, where poor land had always placed harsh limits on farm productivity, rural people began leaving the land to work in the factories.
Two systems of recruitment emerged to bring this new labor supply to the expanding textile mills. One, common in the
AMERICA’S ECONOMIC REVOLUTION - 271
WOMEN AT WORK
This wood engraving from an American newspaper of 1859 shows women working in a skirt factory. Aside from the crowdedness of the factory, none of the usual primitive and unsafe conditions characteristic of many work environments of the time are shown. (© The Granger Collection, New York) mid-Atlantic states (especially in such major manufacturing centers as New York City and Philadelphia), brought whole families from the farm to the mill. Parents tended looms alongside their children, some of whom were no more than four or five years old. The second system, common in Massachusetts, enlisted young women, mostly farmers’ daughters in their late teens and early twenties. It was known as the Lowell or Waltham System, after the factory towns in which it first emerged. Many of these women worked for several years in the factories, saved their wages, and returned home to marry and raise children. Others married men they met in the factories or in town and remained part of the industrial world, but often stopped working in the mills to take up domestic roles instead.
Labor conditions in these early years of the factory system were significantly better than those in English industry, better too than they would ultimately become in much of the United States. The employment of young children created undeniable hardships. But the misery was not as great as in European factories, since working children in America usually remained under the supervision of their parents. In England, by contrast, asylum authorities often hired out orphans to factory owners who showed little concern for their welfare and kept them in something close to slavery.
Even more different from the European labor pattern was the "Lowell System,” which relied heavily, indeed almost Thf 1 own exclusively, on young unmarried women. System	In England and other areas of industrial
Europe, the conditions of work for women were often horrifyingly bad. A British parliamentary investigation revealed, for example, that women workers in the coal mines endured unimaginably wretched conditions. Some had to crawl on their hands and knees, naked and filthy,
through cramped, narrow tunnels, pulling heavy coal carts behind them. It was little wonder that English visitors to America considered the Lowell mills a female paradise by contrast. The Lowell workers lived in clean boardinghouses and dormitories, which the factory owners maintained for them. They were well fed and carefully supervised. Because many New Englanders considered the employment of women to be vaguely immoral, the factory owners placed great emphasis on maintaining a proper environment for their employees, enforcing strict curfews and requiring regular church attendance. Employers quickly dismissed women suspected of immoral conduct. Wages for the Lowell workers were generous by the standards of the time. The women even found time to write and publish a monthly magazine, the Lowell Offering.
Yet even these relatively well-treated workers often found the transition from farm life to factory work difficult, even traumatic. Uprooted from everything familiar, forced to live Women among strangers in a regimented environ-
Workers ment, many women suffered from severe loneliness and disorientation. Still more had difficulty adjusting to the nature of factory work-the repetition of fixed tasks hour after hour, day after day. That the women had to labor from sunrise to sunset was not in itself a new experience; many of them had worked similarly long days on the farm. But that they now had to spend those days performing tedious, unvarying chores, and that their schedules did not change from week to week or season to season, made the adjustment to factory work especially painful. But however uncomfortable women may have found factory work, they had few other options. They were barred from such manual labor as construction or from work as sailors or on the docks. Most of society considered it unthinkable
I

CONSIDER THE SOURCE
lltltlilllllllllllllilllil
tiiiiiiiiiifiiitiitiHimiiiiiiimiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiitiiiifiiiHimHiii
STRICT RULES GOVERNED THE WORKING LIFE OF THE YOUNG WOMEN
RULES FOR EMPLOYEES
who worked in the textile mills in Lowell, Massachusetts, in the first half of the nineteenth century. Equally strict rules regulated their time away from work (what little leisure time they enjoyed) in the company-supervised boardinghouses in which they lived. The excerpts from the Handbook to Lowell from 1848 that follow suggest the tight supervision under which the Lowell mill girls worked and lived. Many companies today publish employee handbooks that provide information about employee responsibilities, including working hours and days, and expectations of employee performance. They may also outline employee benefits, such as compensation, vacation policies, and medical benefits. Some companies issue formal rules of conduct and ethics by which their employees must abide. The example from the Simpson Manufacturing Company, which makes building products, provides an interesting comparison to the Lowell guidelines.
HANDBOOK TO LOWELL-1848
Handbook to Lowell
Factory Rules
I
I
REGULATIONS TO BE OBSERVED
by all persons employed in the factories of the Hamilton Manufacturing Company. The overseers are to be always in their rooms at the starting of the mill, and not absent unnecessarily during working hours. They are to see that all those employed in their rooms are in their places in due season, and keep a correct account of their time and work. They may grant leave of absence to those employed under them, when they have spare hands to supply their places and not otherwise, except in cases of absolute necessity.
All persons in the employ of the Hamilton Manufacturing Company are to observe the regulations of the room where they are employed. They are not to be absent from their work without the consent of the overseer, except in cases of sickness, and then they are to send him word of the cause of their absence. They are to board in one of the houses of the company and give information at the counting room, where they board, when they begin, or, whenever they change their boarding place; and are to observe the regulations of their boarding-house.
Those intending to leave the employment of the company are to give at least two weeks’ notice thereof to their overseer.
All persons entering into the employment of the company are considered as engaged for twelve months, and those who leave sooner, or do not comply with all these regulations, will not be entitled to a regular discharge.
The company will not employ anyone who is habitually absent from public worship on the Sabbath, or known to be guilty of immorality.
A physician will attend once in every month at the counting-room, to vaccinate all who may need it, free of expense.
Anyone who shall take from the mills or the yard, any yarn, cloth or other article belonging to the company will be considered guilty of stealing and be liable to prosecution.
Payment will be made monthly, including board and wages. The accounts will be made up to the last Saturday but one in every month, and paid in the course of the following week.
(
1
These regulations are considered part of the contract, with which all persons entering into the Hamilton Manufacturing Company, engage to comply.
employment of the
Boarding House Rules
REGULATIONS FOR THE BOARDING-HOI JSF<;
nfrbo u -i a a . , , , , , ,	,	.	USES or the Hamilton Manufacturing Company. The tenants of the boarding-houses
are not to board, or permit any part of their hnncoc	jk	i .	,	, r u
. ,	. . y H tiieir nouses to be occupied by any person, except those in the employ of the
company, without special permission.
They will be considered answerable for any improper conduct in their houses, and are not to permit their boarders to have company at unseasonable hours.
The doors must be closed at ten o clock in the evening, and no person admitted after that time, without some reasonable excuse.
The keepers of the boarding-houses must give an account of the number, names and employment of their boarders, when required, and report the names of such as are guilty of any improper conduct, or are not in the regular habit of attending public worship.
The buildings, and yards about them, must be kept clean and in good order; and if they are injured, otherwise than from ordinary use, all necessary repairs will be made, and charged to the occupant.
The sidewalks, also, in front of the houses, must be kept clean, and free from snow, which must be removed from them immediately after it has ceased falling; if neglected, it will be removed by the company at the expense of the tenant.
It is desirable that the families of those who live in the houses, as well as the boarders, who have not had the kine pox, should be vaccinated, which will be done at the expense of the company, for such as wish it.
Some suitable chamber in the house must be reserved, and appropriated for the use of the sick, so that others may not be under the necessity of sleeping in the same room. jOHN AVERY, Agent.
Source: The Handbook to Lowell (1848)
UNDERSTAND, ANALYZE, AND EVALUATE
1.	What do these rules suggest about the everyday lives of the mill workers?
2.	What do the rules suggest about the company’s attitude toward the workers? Do the rules offer any protections to the employees, or are they all geared toward benefiting the employer?
3.	Why would the company enforce such strict rules? Why would the mill workers accept them?
SIMPSON MANUFACTURING CODE OF CONDUCT-2011
Simpson Manufacturing: Code of Business Conduct and Ethics
November 1, 2011
A,
Simpson Manufacturing Co., Inc. and its subsidiaries (Company). W« expert that all of our employees, office,, and directors will treat each other, our cnsiomer. and our suppliers wuh goodwill, trust, and respect As a Company, we value honesty, high ethical standard, and compliance wuh laws, rules and regulations The following provides guidance on the application of these prin p
Compliance with laws, rules and regulations
273
Accounting Requirements: Follow the accepted rules and controls required by the U.S. Securities	,
Commission (SEC), Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB), and New York Stock Exchange (NYS ). or a i lonal information on these rules and controls, contact the Company’s Chief Financial Officer.
Equal Employment Opportunity (EEO) and Discrimination Laws: It continues to be the practice o t e ompany to employ positive business and personnel practices designed to ensure the full realization of equal emp oyment opportu nity. Further, we expect all employees to accomplish their work in a businesslike manner with a concern or t e well-being of their co-workers. Harassment of any employee by any other employee is prohibited, regar ess o t eir working relationship. Any employee who experiences harassment should bring it to the attention of his/her supervisor or branch manager. If the employee is not satisfied that the matter has been appropriately addressed, the employee should feel free to contact the President of Simpson Strong-Tie or the President of Simpson Manufacturing.
Securities Laws: All employees of the Company are prohibited from transacting in the Company s securities, for themselves, family members, friends or any other person, while in the possession of material, nonpublic (inside) information concerning the Company. In addition employees must not give inside information to anyone. Inside information is information that the Company has not made public about any Company activities, such as earnings estimates, the commencement or outcome of litigation, mergers and acquisitions, or any other information that could affect the Company’s fortunes and therefore the price of the stock. For more detailed information, please refer to Insider Trading Policies and Procedures, available from the Company’s Chief Financial Officer.
Antitrust Laws: We do not discuss our prices with our competitors. We do not enter into illegal agreements or engage in illegal practices in restraint of trade. For additional information on antitrust laws, contact the President of Simpson Strong-Tie or the President of Simpson Manufacturing.
Anti Corruption Laws: Our officers, directors, employees and agents are expected to comply with all U.S. and foreign laws while conducting business outside the United States, including, but not limited to, the United States Foreign Corrupt Practices Act CFCPA”).
Health and safety
The Company seeks to provide a clean, safe and healthy place to work. All employees are expected to observe all safety rules and practices and to follow instructions concerning safe work practices.
Record keeping and reporting of information
All records and reported information must be accurate, complete, honest and timely.
Conflicts of interest
Every employee, officer and director, is expected to make decisions in the best interest of the Company and not for personal gain. A conflict of interest can arise when an employee, officer or director takes action or has a personal interest that may make it difficult to perform his or her work for the Company objectively and effectively. This may include outside business interests, outside employment, outside investments and business relationships with friends or relatives that could cause a conflict of interest. Employees, officers and directors should report potential conflicts of interest and are prohibited from taking for themselves personally opportunities that are discovered or may be available through the use of the Company s property, information or position. Employees are prohibited from accepting meals, entertainment, travel, gratuities, merchandise or promotional material that could influence objectivity in making business decisions. Employees are generally prohibited from accepting any such item worth more than $50. Certain business events may require an employee’s participation in excess of this amount. These must be approved by their supervisor.
Fair dealing
Employees, officers and directors should endeavor to deal fairly with the Company’s customers and suppliers and each other. No one should take unfair advantage of anyone else through manipulation or misrepresentation of material facts.
Quality
Products that meet our quality standards are essential to our success. Everyone in the Company is responsible for product
nnle ComZJs nTT C	effectiveness of the QualiV Management System. For more information
on the Company s Quality Principles, please see your supervisor.
Protection and proper use of Company assets	|
All employees, officers and directors should protect the Company’s assets and ensure their efficient use.	I
Confidentiality	f
Employees, officers and directors should maintain the confidentiality of information entrusted to them by the Company, j its customers, and its vendors and suppliers, except when disclosure is authorized or legally mandated. Confidential information includes all non-public information.
I
Encouraging the reporting of any illegal or unethical behavior
Many areas of the law, such as securities and antitrust, are very complicated. The Company encourages employees to talk to supervisors, managers or other appropriate personnel when in doubt about the best course of action in a particular situation. Additionally, employees should report violations of laws, rules, regulations or the Code of Business Conduct and Ethics to the President of the Company or the subsidiary or an ombudsman appointed for this purpose. There will be no retaliation against anyone who presents this type of information in good faith.
Waiver of the Code of Business Conduct and Ethics
There will be no waivers to the Code of Business Conduct and Ethics.
Copyright @2011 Simpson Manufacturing Co., Inc. All rights reserved. Reprinted by permission.	i
MAKE CONNECTIONS
1.	What attitude toward its employees is reflected in Simpson Manufacturing's Code of Business Conduct and Ethics? Is the attitude noticeably different from that evident in the Handbook to Lowell?
2.	What image of its own status does the Simpson Manufacturing Code present?
3.	What might account for the change in employee-employer relations evident in these two documents?
275
276 • CHAPTER 10
LOWELL, MASSACHUSETTS, 1832
Lowell was one of the leading manufacturing centers of New England in the 1830s, and one of the largest textile centers in America. Lowell relied heavily on women workers. Company owners-in deference to popular uneasiness about women working outside the home-created a paternalistic system of boardinghouses for them, where they could be carefully supervised. This map shows the clusters of boardinghouses adjacent to groups of factories. Note how concentrated the manufacturing center of the town was, and how the transportation system (rail and water) served the factories. Note also the many churches, which women workers were usually required to attend. • What happened to this labor system in the 1840s and 1850s?
Decline of the Lowell System
for women to travel the country alone, as many men did, in search of opportunities. Work in the mills was in many cases the only alternative to returning to farms that could no longer support them.
The paternalistic factory system of Lowell did not, in any case, survive for long. In the competitive textile market as it developed in the 1830s and 1840s-a market prey to the booms and busts that afflicted the American economy as a whole-manufacturers found it difficult to maintain the high living standards and the attractive working conditions with
which they had begun. Wages declined; the hours of work lengthened; the conditions of the boardinghouses deteriorated as the buildings decayed and overcrowding increased.
In 1834, mill workers in Lowell organized a union-the Factory Girls Association-which staged a strike to protest a 25 percent wage cut. Two years later, the association struck again-against a rent increase in the boardinghouses. Both strikes failed, and a recession in 1837 virtually destroyed the organization. Eight years later the Lowell women, led by the militant Sarah Bagley, created the Female Labor Reform
Association and began demanding a ten-hour day (some women worked twelve-hour shifts) and for improvements in conditions in the mills. The new association not only made demands of management; it also turned to state government and asked for legislative investigation of conditions in the mills. By then, however, the character of the factory workforce was changing again. The young women who had worked in the mills were gradually moving into other occu-pations-teaching or domestic service-or they got married. And textile manufacturers were turning to a less contentious labor supply: immigrants.
The Immigrant Workforce
The rapidly increasing supply of immigrant workers after 1840 was a boon to manufacturers and other entrepreneurs. At last they had access to a source of labor that was both large and inexpensive. These new workers, because of their vast numbers and unfamiliarity with their new country, had less leverage than the women they at times displaced. As a result, they often encountered far worse working conditions. Construction
AMERICA’S ECONOMIC REVOLUTION
277
FOUR WOMEN WEAVERS
This tintype shows four young women employed in the textile factories of Lowell, Massachusetts. Neatly dressed in matching uniforms, they conveyed the image the factory managers wanted the public to absorb: that women could work in the mills and still be protected from the rough-and-tumble world of industrialization. ('<-) American Textile History Museum, Lowell, MA.)
Economic Advantages of Immigrant Labor
gangs, made up increasingly of Irish immigrants, performed the heavy, unskilled work on turnpikes, canals, and railroads under often intolerable conditions. Because most of these workers had no marketable skills and because of native prejudice against them, they received
wages so low (and so intermittently, since the work was seasonal and uncertain) that they generally did not earn enough to support their families in even minimal comfort. Many of them lived in flimsy shanties, in grim conditions that endangered the health of their families (and reinforced native preju-
dices toward the "shanty Irish”).
The arrival of Irish workers accelerated the deterioration of
working conditions in New England. There was far less social pressure on owners to provide a decent environment for Irish workers than there had been for native women. Employers began paying piece rates (wages tied to how much a worker produced) rather than a daily wage and employed other devices to speed up production and use the labor force more
profitably and efficiently. By the mid-1840s, the town of Lowell-once a model for foreign visitors of enlightened industrial development-had become a squalid slum. Similarly miserable working-class neighborhoods were emerging in other northeastern cities.
Conditions were still not as bad as in most factory towns in England and Europe, but in almost all industrial areas, factories themselves were becoming large, noisy, unsanitary, and often dangerous places to work. Harsh Work	,
Conditions The average workday was ex‘ tending to twelve, often fourteen hours. Wages were declining, so that even skilled male workers could hope to earn only from $4 to $10 per week, while unskilled laborers were likely to earn only about $1 to $6 per week. Women and children, whatever their skills, also earned less than most men.
The Factory System and the Artisan Tradition
It was not only the mill workers who suffered from the transition to the modern factory system. It was also the skilled artisans whose trades the factories were displacing. The artisan tradition was as much a part of the older, republican vision of America as the tradition of sturdy, independent, yeoman farmers. Independent craftsmen considered themselves embodiments of the American ideal; they clung to a vision of economic life that was in some ways very different from what the new capitalist class was promoting. Skilled artisans valued their independence;
they also valued the stability and relative equality within their economic world.
The factory system threatened that world with obsolescence. De-skilling Some artisans made successful transitions into small-scale industry. But others found themselves unable to compete with the new factory-made goods that sold for a fraction of the artisans' prices. In the face of this competition from industrial capitalists, craftsmen began early in the nineteenth century to form organizations-workingmen's political parties and the first American labor unions-to protect their endangered positions and to resist the new economic order. As early as the 1790s, printers and cordwainers (makers of high-quality boots and shoes) took the lead. Members of other skilled trades-carpenters, joiners, masons, plasterers, hatters,
and shipbuilders-felt similarly vulnerable.
In such cities as Philadelphia, Baltimore, Boston, and New York, the skilled workers of each craft formed societies for mutual aid. During the 1820s and 1830s, the
Trade Unions craft societies began to combine on a citywide basis and set up central organizations known as trade unions. With the widening of markets, the
278 * CHAPTER 10
economies of cities were interconnected, so workers soon realized there were advantages in joining forces. They established national unions or federations of local ones. In 1834, delegates from six cities founded the National Trades’ Union; and in 1836, the printers and the cordwainers set up their own national craft unions.
This early craft union movement fared poorly. Labor leaders struggled against the handicap of hostile laws and hostile courts. The common law, as interpreted by the courts in the industrial states, viewed a combination among workers as an illegal conspiracy. The Panic of 1837, a dramatic financial collapse that produced a severe recession, weakened the movement further.
Fighting for Control
Commonwealth v. Hunt
Workers at all levels of the emerging industrial economy attempted to improve their lots. They tried, with little success, to persuade state legislatures to pass laws setting a maximum workday. Two states-New Hampshire in 1847 and Pennsylvania in 1848-passed ten-hour laws, limiting the workday unless the workers agreed to an "express contract” calling for more time on the job. Such measures were virtually without impact, however, because employers could simply require prospective employees to sign the "express contract” as a condition of hiring. Three states-Massachusetts, New Hampshire, and Pennsylvania-passed laws regulating child labor. But again, the results were minimal. The laws simply limited the workday to ten hours for children unless their parents agreed to something longer; employers had little difficulty persuading parents to consent to additional hours.
Perhaps the greatest legal victory of industrial workers came in Massachusetts in 1842, when the supreme court of the state, in Commonwealth v. Hunt, declared that unions were lawful organizations and that the strike was a lawful
weapon. Other state courts gradually accepted the principles of the Massachusetts decision. On the whole, however, the union movement of the 1840s and 1850s remained generally ineffective. Some workers were reluctant to think of themselves as members of a permanent laboring force and resisted joining unions. But even those unions that did manage to recruit significant numbers of industrial workers were usually not large enough or strong enough to stage strikes, and even less frequently strong enough to win them.
Artisans and skilled workers, despite their setbacks in the 1830s, had somewhat greater success than did factory workers. But their unions often had more in common with preindustrial guilds than with modern labor organizations. In most cases, their primary purpose was to protect the favored position of their members in the labor force by restricting admission to the skilled trades. The organizing effort that had floundered in the 1830s revived impressively in the 1850s. Among the new organizations skilled workers created were the National Typographical Union, founded in 1852, the Stone
Cutters in 1853, the Hat Finishers in 1854, and the Molders and the Machinists, both in 1859.
Virtually all the early craft unions excluded women, even though female workers were numerous in almost every industry and craft. As a result, women began es-pJJtcctJve tablishing their own protective unions by Unions	the 1850s, often with the support of mid-
dle-class female reformers. Like the male craft unions, the female protective unions had little power in dealing with employers. They did, however, serve an important role as mutual-aid societies for women workers.
Despite these persistent efforts at organization and protest, the American working class in the 1840s and 1850s was notable for its relatively modest power. In England, workers were becoming a powerful, united, and often violent economic and political force. They were creating widespread social turmoil and helping to transform the nation’s political structure. In America, nothing of the sort happened. Many factors combined to inhibit the growth of effective labor resistance.
Among the most important was the flood of immigrant laborers into the country. The newcomers were usually willing to work for lower wages than native workers. Because they were so numerous, manufac-
turers had little difficulty replacing disgruntled or striking workers with eager immigrants. Ethnic divisions and tensions-both between natives and immigrants and among the various immigrant groups themselves-often led workers to channel their resentments into internal bickering rather than into their shared grievances against employers. There was, too, the sheer strength of the industrial capitalists, who had not only economic but also political and social power and could usually triumph over even the most militant challenges.
America’s
Divided
Working
Class
W «■	I	»»
Free Labor
Despite the many obstacles and challenges that faced northern workers in the first half of the nineteenth century, nothing was more important than the idea of personal freedom. Most workers had hard lives, but they were proud of their personal freedoms and considered themselves what some people called the "sovereign individual”-people who could, at least in theory, make choices and change their lives.
Modern notions of freedom are much more robust than those of the early nineteenth century, when only a few men (and no women) were able to vote; when workers were sometimes bound to their employers for years; when husbands subjugated their wives and when, of course, millions of African Americans were living with almost no freedom. But even in the early years of American history, the belief in the freedom of the individual was strong. In the North in particular, pen sonal liberty was growing exponentially for more and more Americans. By the mid-nineteenth century, most white Americans identified themselves as free individuals, no matter what their occupations or means.

AMERICA’S ECONOMIC REVOLUTION
• 279 Some of the great philosophers of nineteenth-century America argued that the "independency of the individual” required free people to escape from the market economy and find freedom in solitude and the wonders of nature-as Henry David Thoreau tried to do in his famous retreat to live alone in a cabin on Walden Pond in Concord, Massachusetts (see p. 318). But for most Americans, the opportunities for solitude and communion with nature were slim. For most northern workers, freedom meant the absence of slavery. It meant that they could leave jobs they did not want, move to new areas of the country, and seek opportunities to change their lives. Their material circumstances were sometimes far worse than those of many slaves in the South. Still, they believed that their lives were better than those who lacked freedom. And when the great debate over slavery began in the 1840s and 1850s, northern laborers-however bad their own lots-abhorred slavery, both because it was the antithesis of freedom and because they feared that slavery threatened the jobs of free laborers.
Not only slaves were denied the freedom that most Americans valued. The more than 200,000 free black men and women living in the North (and a few in the South) remained ineligible to vote and were not considered legal citizens. Many of the free blacks in the North were people who had been skilled crafts workers as slaves and who bought or were given their freedom. But their lots were in many ways worse than when they were working in the South. In the northern cities to which many free blacks moved, there were many white craftsmen already who saw black workers as rivals. Most free blacks worked in menial jobs and as domestic servants.
PATTERNS OF INDUSTRIAL SOCIETY
The industrial revolution made the United States-and particularly its more economically developed regions—dramatically wealthier almost every year. It was also making society more unequal, and it transformed social relationships and everyday life at almost every level from the workplace to the family.
The Rich and the Poor
The commercial and industrial growth of the United States greatly elevated the average income of the American people. But this increasing wealth was being distributed highly un equally. Substantial groups of the population shared hardly at all in the economic growth: slaves, Indians, landless farmers, and many of the unskilled workers on the
fringes of the manufacturing system. But even among the rest of the population, disparities of income were marked. Wea t had always been unequally distributed in the United States, to be sure. Even in the era of the Revolution, according to some estimates, 45 percent of the wealth was concentrate in
Increasing
Inequality in Wealth
the hands of about 10 percent of the population. But by the mid-nineteenth century, that concentration had become far more pronounced. In Boston in 1845, for example, 4 percent of the citizens are estimated to have owned more than 65 percent of the wealth; in Philadelphia in 1860, 1 percent of the population possessed more than half the wealth. Among the American people overall in 1860, according to scholarly estimates, 5 percent of the families possessed more than 50 percent of the wealth.
There had been wealthy classes in America almost from the beginning of European settlement. But the extent and character of wealth were changing in response to the commercial revolution of the mid-nineteenth century. Merchants and industrialists were accumulating enormous fortunes; and because there was now a significant number of rich people living in cities, a distinctive culture of wealth began to emerge. In large cities, people of great wealth gathered together in neighborhoods of great opulence. They founded clubs and developed elaborate social rituals. They looked increasingly for ways to display their wealth-in the great mansions they built, the showy carriages in which they rode, the lavish household goods they accumulated, the clothes they wore, the elegant social establishments they patronized. New York City, which had more wealthy families than anywhere else, developed a particularly elaborate high society.
POVERTY IN NEW YORK CITY
This wood engraving from 1869 shows "squatters'’ and their dilapidated shanties. This group of extremely poor people lived on hilly land near New York City's new Central Park, an urban retreat designed for the city's wealthier classes. Compare the circumstances of these homeless people with those of the aristocrats shown in the picture on page 280. (© The Granger Collection, New York) 280 ■ CHAPTER 10
CENTRAL PARK
To affluent New Yorkers, the construction of the city's great Central Park was important because it provided them with an elegant setting for their daily carriage rides—an activity ostensibly designed to expose the riders to fresh air but that was really an occasion for them to display their finery to their neighbors. (© Private Collection/The Bridgeman Art Library) New Yorkers in 1857 were trying to make the city as important as London and Paris. To achieve this goal, they decided to build a great park that would impart elegance to the city and draw New Yorkers to the upper part of the city where new real estate was available. Two great landscape architects-Frederick Law Olmsted and Calvert Vaux-devel-oped a vast part of Manhattan, displacing people from their houses in the process. The result was one of the largest parks
_	„	in America. Olmsted called Central Park a
Central Park ,	, r
place or great importance as the first real park in this country.” Designed with hills, lakes, paths, bridges, and elegant buildings, it began as a place for wealthy New Yorkers, but very soon became important to almost everyone in the city.
There was also a significant population of genuinely desti-The Urban tute PeoP^e emerging in the growing urban Poor	centers of the nation. These were people
who were not merely poor, in the sense of having to struggle to sustain themselves-most Americans were poor in that sense. They were almost entirely without resources, often homeless, dependent on charity or crime or
both for survival.
Some of these "paupers,” as contemporaries called them, were recent immigrants who had failed to find work or to
adjust to life in the New World. Some were widows and orphans, stripped of the family structures that allowed most working-class Americans to survive. Some were people suffering from alcoholism or mental illness, unable to work. Others were victims of native prejudice-barred from all but the most menial employment because of race or ethnicity. The Irish were particular victims of such prejudice.
Among the worst off were free blacks. African American communities in antebellum northern cities were small by later standards, but most major urban areas had significant African black populations. Some of these African
American Americans were descendants of families
Poverty that had lived in the North for generations.
Others were former slaves who had escaped from the South or been released by their masters or had bought their freedom; some former slaves, once free, then worked to buy the freedom of relatives left behind. In material terms, at least, life was not always much better for them in the North than it had been in slavery. Most had access only to very menial jobs, which usually paid too little to allow workers to support their families or educate their children; in bad times, many had access to no jobs at all. In most parts of the North, blacks could not vote, could not attend public schools, indeed could not use any of the public services available to white
AMERICA’S ECONOMIC REVOLUTION
• 281 residents. Still, most blacks preferred life in the North how ever arduous, to life in the South because it permitted them at least some level of freedom.
Social Mobility
One might expect the contrasts between conspicuous wealth and conspicuous poverty in antebellum America to have encouraged more class conflict than actually occurred. But a number of factors operated to limit resentments. For one thing, however much the relative economic position of American workers may have been declining, the absolute living standard of most laborers was improving. Life, in material terms at least, was usually better for factory workers than It had been on the farms or in the European societies from which they had migrated. They ate better, they were often better clothed and housed, and they had greater access to consumer goods.
There was also a significant amount of mobility within the working class, which helped to limit discontent. Oppor-Social	tunities for social mobility, for working
Mobility one’s way up the economic ladder, were relatively modest. A few workers did manage to move from poverty to riches by dint of work, ingenuity, and luck a very small number, but enough to support the dreams of those who watched them. And a much larger number of workers managed to move at least one notch up the ladder for example, becoming in the course of a lifetime a skilled, rather than an unskilled, laborer. Such people could envision their children and grandchildren mov-
ing up even further.
More common than social mobility was geographic mobility, which was even more extensive in the United States than in Europe, where it was considerable. America had a huge expanse of uncultivated land in the West, much of it open for settlement for the first time in the 1840s and 1850s. Some workers saved money, bought land, and moved west to farm it. The historian Frederick Jackson Turner later referred to the availability of western lands as a ’’safety valve” for discontent, a basic explanation for the relative lack of social conflict in the antebellum United States. But few urban workers, and even fewer poor ones, could afford to make such a move or had the expertise to know how to work land even if they could. Much more common was the movement of laborers from one industrial town to another. Restless, questing, sometimes hopeful, sometimes despairing, these frequently moving people were often the victims of layoffs, looking for better opportunities elsewhere. Their searches may seldom have led to a marked improvement in their circumstances, but the rootlessness of this large segment of the workforce-one of the most distressed segments-made effective organization and protest difficult.
There was, finally, another "safety valve” for working-class discontent: politics. Economic opportunity may not have greatly expanded in the nineteenth century, but opportuni ties to participate in politics did. And to many white, ma e
working people, access to the ballot seemed to offer a way to help guide their society and to feel like a significant part of their communities.
Middle-Class Life
For all the visibility of the very rich and the very poor in antebellum society, the fastest-growing group in America was the middle class. The expansion of the middle class was in part a result of the growth of the industrial economy and the increasing commercial life that accompanied it. Economic development opened many more opportunities for people to
Rapidly	own or wor^ in businesses, to own shops,
Expanding	t0 en£a8e in trade, to enter professions,
Middle Class and to administer organizations. In earlier times, when ownership of land had been the only real basis of wealth, society had been divided between people with little or no land (people Europeans generally called peasants) and a landed gentry (which in Europe usually meant an inherited aristocracy). Once commerce and industry became a source of wealth, these rigid distinctions broke down, and many people who did not own land could become prosperous by providing valuable services to the new
economy or by owning capital other than land.
Middle-class life in the years before the Civil War rapidly established itself as the most influential cultural form of urban America. Middle-class families lived in solid and often substantial homes, which, like the wealthy, they tended to own. Workers and artisans were increasingly becoming renters-a relatively new phenomenon in American cities that spread widely in the early nineteenth century.
Middle-class women tended to remain in the home and care for the children and the household, although increasingly they were also able to hire servants-usually young, unmarried immigrant women who put in long hours of arduous work for very little money. One of the aspirations of middle-class women in an age when doing the family’s laundry could take an entire day was to escape from some of the drudgery of housework.
New household inventions altered, and greatly improved, the character of life in middle-class homes. Perhaps the most important was the invention of the cast-
Household iron stove’ which began to replace fire-Inventions places as the principal vehicle for cooking and also as an important source of heat.
These wood- or coal-burning devices were hot, clumsy, and dirty by the standards of the twenty-first century; but compared to the inconvenience and danger of cooking on an open hearth, they seemed a great luxury. Stoves gave cooks more control over the preparation of food and allowed them to cook several things at once.
Middle-class diets were changing rapidly in the antebellum years, and not just because of the wider range of cooking the stove made possible. The expansion and diversification of American agriculture, and the ability of farmers to ship goods to urban markets by rail from distant regions, greatly
282
CHAPTER 10
increased the variety of food available in cities. Fruits and vegetables were difficult to ship over long distances in an age with little refrigeration, but families had access to a greater variety of meats, grains, and dairy products than they had had in the past. A few households acquired iceboxes in the years before the Civil War, and the sight of wagons delivering large chunks of ice to wealthy and middle-class homes began to become a familiar part of urban life. Iceboxes allowed their owners to keep fresh meat and dairy products for as long as several days without spoilage. Most families, however, did not yet have any kind of refrigeration. Preserving food for them meant curing meat with salt and preserving fruits in sugar. Diets were generally much heavier and starchier than they are today, and middle-class people tended to be considerably stouter than would be fashionable in the twenty-first century.
Middle-class homes came to differentiate themselves from those of workers and artisans in other ways as well. They
Growing were more elaborately decorated and fur-Class	nished, with household goods made avail-
Distinctions able for the first time through factory production. Houses that had once had bare walls and floors now had carpeting, wallpaper, and curtains. The spare, simple styles of eighteenth-century homes gave way to the much more elaborate, even baroque household styles of the early Victorian era-styles increasingly characterized by crowded, even cluttered rooms, dark colors, lush fabrics, and heavy furniture and draperies. Middle-class homes also became larger. It became less common for children to share beds and less common for all family members to sleep in the same room. Parlors and dining rooms separate from the kitchen-once a luxury reserved largely for the wealthy-became the norm for the middle class as well. Some urban middle-class homes had indoor plumbing and indoor toilets by the 1850s-a significant advance over the outdoor wells and privies that had been virtually universal only a few years earlier (and that remained common among working-
class people).
The Changing Family
The new industrializing society of the northern regions of the United States produced profound changes in the nature and function of the family. At the heart of the transformation was the movement of families from farms to urban areas, where jobs, not land, were the most valued commodities. The patriarchal system of the countryside, whereby fathers controlled their children’s futures by controlling the distribution of land to them, could not survive the move to a city or town. Sons and daughters were much more likely to leave the family in search of work than they had been in the rural world.
Another important change was the shift of income-earning work out of the home and into the shop, mill, or factory. In the early decades of the nineteenth century (and for many years before that), the family had been the principal unit of
economic activity. Family farms, family shops, and family industries were the norm throughout most of the United States. Men women, and children worked together, sharing tasks and jointly earning the income that sustained the family. But as farming spread to the fertile lands of the Northwest and as the size and profitability of farms expanded,
Declining agricultural work became more commer-Role^ofthe cialized. Farm owners in need of labor be-Family	gan to rely less on their families (which
