616 CHAPTER 22
THE STEAMFITTER
Lewis Hine was among the first American photographers to recognize his craft as an art. In this photograph from the mid-1920s, Hine made a point that many other artists were making in other media: The rise of the machine could serve human beings, but might also bend them to its own needs. The steamfitter (carefully posed by the photographer) is forced to shape his body to the contours of his machine in order to complete his task. {© New York Public Library, USA/Bridgeman Images) commercial broadcasting began, families flocked to buy conventional radio sets, which, unlike the cheaper "shortwave” or "ham” radios, could receive high-quality signals over short and medium distances. They were powered by vacuum tubes that were much more reliable than earlier models. By 1925, there were 2 million sets in American homes, and by the end of the 1920s almost every family had one.
Commercial aviation developed slowly in the 1920s, beginning with the use of planes to deliver mail. On the whole, airplanes remained curiosities and sources of entertainment. But technological advances-the development of the radial engine and the creation of pressurized cabins-were laying the groundwork for the great increase in commercial travel in the 1930s and beyond. Trains became faster and more efficient as well with the development of the diesel-electric engine. Electronics, home appliances, plastics and synthetic fibers such as nylon (both pioneered by researchers at Du Pont), aluminum, magnesium, oil, electric power, and other industries fueled by technological advances-all grew and spurred the economic boom. Telephones continued to proliferate. By the late 1930s, there
were approximately 25 million telephones in the United States, approximately one for every six people.
The seeds of future technologies were also visible in the 1920s and 1930s. In both England and America, scientists and engineers were working to transform primitive calculating Early	machines into devices capable of perform-
Computers ing more complicated tasks. By the early 1930s, researchers at MIT, led by Vannevar
Bush, had created an instrument capable of performing a variety of complicated tasks-the first analog computer, which became the starting point for dramatic progress over the next several decades. A few years later, Howard Aiken, with financial assistance from Harvard and MIT, built a much more complex computer with memory, capable of multiplying eleven-digit numbers in three seconds.
Genetic research had begun in Austria in the mid-nineteenth century through the work of Gregor Mendel, a Catholic monk who performed experiments on the hybridization of vegetables in the garden of his monastery. His findings attracted little attention during his lifetime, but in the early twentieth century they were discovered by several investigators and helped shape modern genetic research. Among the American pioneers was Thomas Hunt Morgan of Columbia University and later Cal Tech, whose experiments with fruit flies revealed how several genes could be transmitted together (as opposed to Mendel’s belief that they could only be transferred separately). Morgan also revealed the way in which genes were arranged along the chromosome. His work helped open the path to understanding how genes could recombine-a critical discovery that led to advanced experiments in hybridization and genetics.
Economic Organization
Large sectors of American business were accelerating their drive toward national organization and consolidation. Certain industries-notably those, such as steel, dependent on large-scale mass production—seemed naturally to move toward concentrating production in a few large firms; U.S. Steel, the nation’s largest corporation, was so dominant that almost everyone used the term "Little Steel” to refer to all of its competitors combined. Other industries, such as textiles, that were less dependent on technology and less susceptible to great economies of scale, proved more resistant to consolidation, despite the efforts of many businessmen to promote it.
In those areas where industry did consolidate, new forms of corporate organization emerged to advance the trend. General Modern	Motors, by 1920 not only the largest auto-
Administrative	mobile manufacturer but also the
Systems	fifth-largest American corporation, was a
classic example. GM’s founder, William
Durant, had expanded the company dramatically but had never replaced the informal, personal management style with which he began. When GM foundered in the recession of the early 1920s, leadership of the company fell to Alfred P. Sloan, who created a modern administrative system with an efficient
THE “NEW ERA” > 617
divisional organization. The new system not only made it easier for GM to control its many subsidiaries; it also made it simpler for it-and for the many other corporations that adopted similar administrative systems-to expand further.
Some industries less susceptible to domination by a few great corporations attempted to stabilize themselves not Trade	through consolidation but through cooper-
Associations ation. An important vehicle was the trade association-a national organization created by various members of an industry to encourage coordination in production and marketing techniques. Trade associations worked reasonably well in the mass-production industries that had already succeeded in limiting competition through consolidation. But in more decentralized industries, such as cotton
textiles, their effectiveness was limited.
The strenuous efforts by industrialists throughout the economy to find ways to curb competition through consolidation or cooperation reflected a strong fear of overproduction. Even in the booming mid-1920s, industrialists remembered how too-rapid expansion had helped produce recessions in 1893, 1907, and 1920. The great, unrealized dream of the New Era was to find a way to stabilize the economy so that such collapses would never occur again.
Labor in the New Era
The remarkable economic growth was accompanied by a continuing, and in some areas even increasing, maldistribution of wealth and purchasing power. More than two-thirds of the American people in 1929 lived at no better than what one major study described as the "minimum comfort level/’ Half of those languished at or below the level of "subsistence and poverty.”
American industrial workers experienced both the successes and the failures of the 1920s as much as any other group. On the one hand, most workers saw their standard of living rise during the decade; many enjoyed greatly improved working conditions and other benefits. Some employers in the 1920s, eager to avoid disruptive labor unrest and the growth of independent trade unions, adopted paternalistic techniques that came to be known as "welfare capitalism.” Henry Ford, for
"Welfare example, shortened the workweek, raised
Capitalism” wages, and instituted paid vacations. U.S.
Steel made conspicuous efforts to improve safety and sanitation in its factories. For the first time, some workers became eligible for pensions on retirement—nearly 3 million by 1926. (Women workers in such companies tended to receive other kinds of benefits-less often pensions, more often longer rest periods and vacations.) When labor grievances surfaced despite these efforts, workers could voice them through the so-called company unions that were emerging in many industries. These were workers’ councils and shop committees, organized by the corporations themselves and thus
without the independence later unions demanded.
Welfare capitalism brought many workers important eco-nomic benefits, but it did not help them gain any real control over their own fates. Company unions were feeble vehicles,
forbidden in most industries to raise the issues most important to workers. And welfare capitalism survived only as long as industry prospered. After 1929, with the economy in crisis, the system quickly collapsed.
Welfare capitalism affected only a relatively small number of workers in any case. Most employers were interested primarily in keeping their labor costs to a minimum. Workers as a whole, therefore, received wage increases at a rate far below increases in production and profits. Unskilled workers, in particular, saw their wages increase by only a little over 2 percent between 1920 and 1926. In the end, American workers in the 1920s remained a relatively impoverished and powerless group. Their wages rose; but the average annual income of a worker remained below $1,500 a year when $1,800 was considered necessary to maintain a minimally decent standard of living. Only by relying on the earnings of several family members could many working-class families make ends meet. And almost all such families had to live with the very real possibility of one or more members losing their jobs. Unemployment was lower in the 1920s than it had been in the previous two decades, and much lower than it would be in the 1930s. But a large proportion of the workforce (estimated at 5-7 percent at any given time) was out of work for at least some period during the decade-in part because the rapid growth of industrial technology made many jobs obsolete.
Many laborers continued to regard an effective, independent union movement as their best hope. But the New Era was a bleak time for labor organization, in part because the unions themselves were generally conservative and failed to adapt to the realities of the modern economy. The American Federation T r _	of Labor (AFL) remained committed to the
for Organized concept of the craft union, in which Labor	workers were organized on the basis of par-
ticular skills. It continued to make no provision for the fastest-growing area of the workforce: unskilled, industrial workers, who had few organizations of their own. William Green, who became president of the AFL in 1924, was committed to peaceful cooperation with employers and to strident opposition to communism and socialism. He
frowned on strikes.
Women ano Minorities in the
Workforce
A growing proportion of the workforce consisted of women, who were concentrated in what have since become known as "Pink-Collar” "pink-collar” jobs-low-paying service occu-
Jobs	pations with many of the same problems as
manufacturing employment. Large numbers of women worked as secretaries, salesclerks, telephone operators, and in other, similarly underpaid jobs. Because technically such positions were not industrial jobs, the AFL and other labor organizations were generally uninterested in orga-
nizing these workers.
Similarly, the half-million African Americans who had migrated from the rural South to the cities during the Great
SCOTTISH-BORN INVENTOR AND SCIENTIST
Alexander COMMUNICATIONS TECHNOLOGY craham Bell received a patent for his invention of the telephone on March 7, 1876. The Bell Telephone Company was formed in July of the following year; in the first month of the company’s existence, it sold only six phones. By the end of the year, however, more than 3,000 telephones were in service in the United States. The nation’s first telephone system (or exchange) was installed in
THE TELEPHONE—1914
What the Telephone Map Shows
56.8%	23.5%	10.5%	9.2%
Exchange* Bell-connected,	Exchange* Bell-owned.	Exchange* not Bell-	Places served by
but not Bell-owned.	owned or connected.	two companies,
Hartford, Connecticut, that same year. The first exchange linking two major cities was established in 1883 between New York City and Boston. By the turn of the century there were more than 5 million phones in the United States. As the map below shows, in 1914 telephone exchanges linked more than 70,000 places and 8 million subscribers in the United States. The telephone served as the basic communication link in the United States for over 100 years.
EVERY dot on the map marks a town where there is a telephone exchange, the same sized dot being used for a large city as for a small village. Some of these exchanges are owned by the Associated Bell companies and some by independent companies, Where joined together in one system they meet the needs of each community and, with their suburban lines, reach 70,000 places and over 8,000,000 subscribers.
The pyramids show that only a minority of the exchanges are Bell-owned, and that the greater majority of the exchanges are owned by independent companies and connected with the Bell System.
At comparatively few points are there two telephone companies, and there are comparatively few exchanges, chiefly rural, which do not have outside connections.
The recent agreement between the Attorney General of the United States and the Bell System will facilitate connections between all telephone subscribers regardless of who owns the exchanges.
Over 8,000 different telephone companies have already connected their exchanges to provide universal service for the whole country.
UNDERSTAND, ANALYZE,
AND EVALUATE
1.	In what area of the United States was the concentration of telephone exchanges the heaviest? Why do you think there were more exchanges in this part of the country than in other areas?
2.	The text accompanying the map explains that the same sized dots are used for large cities as for small villages. Would the use of different sized dots to indicate larger cities or smaller towns make the map more representative of U.S. telephone usage in 1914?
3.	This map is part of an advertisement produced by the American Telephone and Telegraph Company. How does that fact influence a reading of the information provided in the map and accompanying text?
618
American Telephone and Telegraph Company
And Associated Companies
One Policy	One System	Universal Service
Advantage mention Popular Electricity «n< Modern Meehenici when writing to Advertisers,
T9T 99t MBtlHtf
(Popular Electricity and Modern Mechanics, September, 19,1914)
One of the next big revolutions in communications technology occurred in the 1970s, with the development of the Internet. The Soviet Union’s launch of the satellite Sputnik in 1957 spurred the United States to develop computers and computer communications technology largely for defense-related purposes. The Department of Defense’s Advanced Research Projects Agency (ARPA) formed the first computer network (ARPANET) in 1969, linking the computers of four universities-Stanford, UCLA, the University of California at Santa Barbara, and the University of Utah. By 1971, the ARPANET had expanded to twenty-three hosts at universities and government research centers throughout the United States. The Department of Defense withdrew from ARPANET in the early 1980s for security reasons. Now free to develop independently, the network-renamed the Internet-expanded rapidly, not only throughout the United States but across the globe as well.
GLOBAL COMMUNICATION NETWORKS
(© iStock Vectors/Getty Images) E CONNECTIONS
as any area of the United States in the map above appear to be
ernet connections? Does the map point to regional and or economt differences cess to techonology, or a so-called digital divide, in the Un,ed States^ hat major shifts a n evident between the two maps? What factors would account Jse shifts?
619
620 « CHAPTER 22
PREPARING WOMEN FOR WORK
This school was established during World War I by the Northern Pacific Telegraph Company to train new women employees to be telephone operators. Both during and after the war, telephone companies were among the largest employers of women. (© Bettmann/Corbis) sentation. The
A.
Philip Randolph Migration after 1914 had few opportunities for union repre-skilled crafts represented in the AFL often worked actively to exclude blacks from their trades and organizations. Most blacks worked in jobs in which the AFL took no
interest-as janitors, dishwashers, garbage collectors, commercial laundry attendants, and domestics, and in other types of service jobs. This general reluctance to organize service-sector workers was in part because AFL leaders did not want women and minorities to become union members. The Brotherhood of
Sleeping Car Porters, founded in 1925 and led for years by A. Philip Randolph, was a notable exception: a vigorous union, led by an African American and representing a virtually allblack workforce. Over time, Randolph won some significant gains for his members-increased wages, shorter working hours, and other benefits. He also enlisted the union in battles for civil rights for African Americans.
In the West and the Southwest, the ranks of unskilled workers included considerable numbers of Asians and Hispanics, few of them organized, most of them actively excluded from white-dominated unions. In the wake of the Chinese Exclusion Acts of the late nineteenth century, Japanese immigrants increasingly took the place of the Chinese
in menial jobs in California, despite the continuing hostility of the white population. They worked on railroads, construction sites, and farms, and in many other low-paying workplaces. Some Japanese managed to escape the ranks of the unskilled by forming their own small businesses or setting themselves up as truck farmers (farmers who grow small food crops for local sale). Many of the Issei (Japanese immigrants) and Nisei (their American-born children) enjoyed significant economic success-so much so that California passed laws in 1913 and 1920 to make it more difficult for them to buy land. Other Asians-most notably Filipinos-also swelled the unskilled workforce and generated considerable hostility. Anti-Filipino riots in California beginning in 1929 helped produce legislation in 1934 virtually eliminating immigration from the Philippines.
Mexican immigrants formed a major part of the unskilled workforce throughout the Southwest and California. Nearly half a million Mexicans entered the United States in the 1920s, more than any other national group, increasing the total Mexican population to over a million. Most lived in California, Texas, Arizona, and New Mexico; and by 1930, most lived in
. . .	led by A. Philip Randolph and others against imposing
dairv 1*1	° j UP 3 const'tuency within the black working class. Here, an aspiring
d' °r 6r raWS attention t0 the contrast between African American patriotism in war and iscriminatory treatment African Americans faced at home. (© John Vachon/Getty Images)
black
THE “NEW ERA”
« 621 cities. Large M.cxica.n bjrrios usually raw urban communities often without even such basic services as plumbing and sewage—grew up in Los Angeles, El Paso, San Antonio, Denver, and many other cities and towns. Some of the residents found work locally in factories and shops; others traveled to mines or did migratory labor on farms, but returned to the cities between jobs. Mexican workers, too, faced hostility and discrimination from the Anglo population of the region; but there were few efforts actually to exclude them. Employers in the relatively underpopulated West needed this ready pool of low-paid, unskilled, and unorganized workers.
The "American Plan”
Whatever the weaknesses of the unions and of unorganized, unskilled workers, the strength of the corporations was the
principal reason for the absence of effective Protecting	; ,	A r	n
the Open	labor organization. After the turmoil of
Shop	1919, corporate leaders worked hard to
spread the doctrine that unionism was somehow subversive, that a crucial element of democratic capitalism was the protection of the open shop (a shop in which
no worker could be required to join a union). The crusade for the open shop, euphemistically titled the "American Plan,” received the endorsement of the National Association of Manufacturers in 1920 and became a pretext for a harsh campaign of union busting across the country.
When such tactics proved insufficient to counter union power, government assistance often made the difference. In 1921, the Supreme Court upheld a lower-court ruling that declared picketing illegal and supported the right of courts to issue injunctions against strikers. In 1922, the Justice Department intervened to quell a strike by 400,000 railroad workers. In 1924, the courts refused protection to members of the United Mine Workers Union when mine owners launched a violent campaign in western Pennsylvania to drive the union from the coal fields. As a result of these developments, union membership fell from more than 5 million in 1920 to under 3 million in 1929.
Agricultural Technology and
the Plight of the Farmer
Like industry, American agriculture in the 1920s was embracing new technologies for increasing production. The number
...	.'	in farm tenancy-that is, the number of farmers who did not own their land but worked as tenants for others-between
FARM TENANCY, 1910-1930
This map illustrates the significant inc ____________ areas was farmed by tenants. The gold and purple parts of the '910 and 1930. The dark green areas of the map show how extensive tenancy was even ,n 1910;	P .................
naP show the significant expansion of tenancy between 1910 and 1930—creatingmany_
* How did the increasing efficiency and
5 in which more than half the farmers were tenants.
technological progress of agriculluTe^e gears contribute to the growth of tenancg?
622 CHAPTER 22
Mechanized of tractors on American farms, for example,
Farming quadrupled during the 1920s, especially after they began to be powered by internal combustion engines (like automobiles) rather than by the cumbersome steam engines of the past. They helped to open 35 million new acres to cultivation. Increasingly sophisticated combines and harvesters were proliferating, helping make it
possible to produce more crops with fewer workers.
Agricultural researchers were already at work on other advances that would later transform food production in America and around the world: the invention of hybrid corn (made possible by advances in genetic research), which became available to farmers in 1921 but was not grown in great quantities until the 1930s; and the creation of chemical fertilizers and pesticides, which also began to have limited use in the 1920s but proliferated quickly in the 1930s and 1940s.
The new technologies greatly increased agricultural productivity, both in the United States and in other parts of the world. But the demand for agricultural goods was not rising as fast as production. The results were substantial surpluses, a disastrous decline in food prices, and a severe drop in farmers’ income beginning early in the 1920s. More than 3 million people left agriculture in the course of the decade. Of those who remained, many lost ownership of their lands and had to rent instead from banks or other landlords.
In response, some farmers began to demand relief in the form of government price supports. One price-raising scheme
^Parity” in Particu^ar came to dominate agrarian demands: the idea of ’’parity.” Parity was a complicated formula for setting an adequate price for farm goods and ensuring that farmers would earn back at least their production costs no matter how the national or world agricultural market might fluctuate. Champions of parity urged high tariffs against foreign agricultural goods and a government commitment to buy surplus domestic crops at parity and sell
them abroad at whatever the market would bring.
The legislative expression of the demand for parity was the McNary-Haugen Bill, named after its two principal sponsors in
McNary-Haugen Con§ress and introduced repeatedly Bill	between 1924 and 1928. In 1926 and
again in 1928, Congress (where farm interests enjoyed disproportionate influence) approved a bill requiring parity for grain, cotton, tobacco, and rice, but
President Coolidge vetoed it both times.
THE NEW CULTURE
The increasingly urban and consumer-oriented culture of the 1920s helped many Americans in all regions live their lives and perceive their world in increasingly similar ways. That same culture exposed them to a new set of values that reflected the prosperity and complexity of the modern economy. But the new culture could not, of course, erase the continuing, and indeed increasing, diversity of the United States.
Consumerism
Growing Mass Consumption
Among the many changes industrialization produced in the United States was the creation of a mass consumer culture. By the 1920s, America was a society in which many men and women could afford not merely the means of subsistence, but a
considerable measure of additional, discretionary goods and services; a society in which people could buy items not just because of need but for pleasure as well. Middle-class families purchased such new appliances as electric refrigerators, washing machines, electric irons, and vacuum cleaners, which revolutionized housework and had a particularly dramatic impact on the lives of women. Men and women wore wristwatches and smoked cigarettes. Women purchased cosmetics and mass-produced fashions. Above all, Americans bought automobiles. By the end of the decade, there were more than 30 million cars on American roads.
The automobile affected American life in countless ways. It greatly expanded the geographic horizons of millions of people who in the past had seldom ventured far from their homes. Rural men and women, in particular, found in the automobile a means of escaping the isola-
tion of farm life; now they could visit friends or drive into town quickly and at will, rather than spending hours traveling by horse or foot. City dwellers found in the automobile an escape from the congestion of urban life. Weekend drives through the countryside became a staple of urban leisure. Many families escaped the city in a permanent sense: by
Social Impact of THE Automobile
moving to the new suburbs that were rapidly growing up around large cities in response to the ease of access the automobile had created.
The automobile also transformed the idea of vacations. In the past, the idea of traveling for pleasure had been a luxury reserved for the wealthy. Now many middle-class and even working-class people could aspire to travel considerable distances for vacations, which were a new concept for most men and women in this era. Many businesses and industries began to include paid vacations among their employee benefits; and many employers encouraged their vacationing workers to travel, on the assumption that a change of scene would help restore their energy and vigor at work.
For young people in families affluent enough to afford a car, the automobile was often a means of a different kind of escape. It allowed them to move easily away from parents and family an to develop social lives of their own. It contributed to one o the distinctive developments of the early twentieth cen-
tUrYj t 6 emer&ence °f a well-developed and relatively independent youth culture.
Advertising


U1 CUI15U1I1C11O1H
The flXSPTS1 6 f°r CreatinS 'V than the advertising indus a vertising and public relations firms (N. W. Ayer;
THE “NEW ERA”
623
1900
AREA REACHED IN:
1 hour	3 hours	Railroads (1900)
2 hours	More than		 Paved roads (1930)
	3 hours	-— Unpaved roads (1930)
BREAKING DOWN RURAL ISOLATION: THE EXPANSION OF TRAVEL HORIZONS IN OREGON, ILLINOIS
This map uses the small town of Oregon, Illinois-west of Chicago—to illustrate the way in which railroads and then automobiles reduced the isolation of rural areas in the first decades of the twentieth century. The gold and purple areas of the two maps show the territory that residents of Oregon could reach within two hours. Note how small that area was in 1900 and how much larger it was in 1930, by which time an area of over a hundred square miles had become easily accessible to the town. Note, too, the significant network of paved roads in the region by 1930, few of which had existed in 1900. Why did automobile travel do so much more than railroads to expand the travel horizons of small towns?
(• Walter Thompson) had appeared well before World War I; but in the 1920s, partly as a result of techniques pioneered by wartime propaganda, advertising came of age. Publicists no longer simply conveyed information; they sought to identify products with a particular lifestyle, to invest them with glamour and prestige, and to persuade potential consumers that Purchasing a commodity could be a personally fulfilling and enriching experience.
Advertisers also encouraged the public to absorb the val
ues of promotion and salesmanship and to admire those who
were effective "boosters” and publicists. One of the most
The Man successful books of the 1920s was The
Nobody ^an Nobody Knows, by advertising execu-zCvovvs
tive Bruce Barton. It portrayed Jesus Christ as not only a religious prophet but also a
"super salesman,” who "picked up twelve men from the bottom ranks of business and forged them into an organization that conquered the world.” The parables, Barton claimed, were "the most powerful advertisements of all time.” Barton’s message was fully in tune with the new spirit of the consumer culture. Jesus had been a man concerned with living a full and rewarding life in this world; twentieth-century men and women should do the same. ("Life is meant to live and enjoy as you go along,” Barton once wrote.) Jesus had succeeded because he knew how to make friends, to become popular, to please others; that talent was a prescription for success in the modern era as well.
The advertising industry could never have had the impact it did without the emergence of new vehicles of communication that made it possible to reach large audiences quickly and easily. Newspapers were being absorbed into national chains, and wire services were making it possible even for independent newspapers to carry nationally syndicated material.
New or expanded mass-circulation magazines also attracted broad, national audiences. The Saturday Evening Post, which began publication as a magazine in 1871, appealed to rural and small-town families with its homey stories and its conspicuous traditionalism; its popularity was, in some
respects, evidence of a yearning for an earlier time. But other magazines responded directly to the realities of modern, urban life. The Reader’s Digest, founded in 1921 by DeWitt and Lila Wallace, condensed stories and even books originally published in other places in an effort to make the expanding world of knowledge and information available in a brief, efficient form for people who would otherwise have no access to it. Time magazine, founded in 1923 by Henry Luce and Briton Hadden, set out to condense the news of the week into a brief, accessible, lively format for busy people who did not have the time or desire to read newspapers.
Mass-
Circulation
Magazines
Hollywood
The Movies and Broadcasting
At the same time, movies were becoming an ever more popular and powerful form of mass communication. More than 100 million people saw films in 1930, as compared to 40 million in 1922. The addition of sound to motion pictures-beginning in 1927 with the first feature-length "talkie,” The Jazz Singer with Al Jolson-created
nationwide excitement. An embarrassing scandal in 1921 involving the popular comedian Fatty Arbuckle produced public outrage and political pressure to "clean up” Hollywood. In response, the film industry introduced "standards” to its films. Studio owners created the Motion Picture Association, a new trade association, and hired former postmaster general Will Hays to head it. More important, they gave Hays broad
624 « CHAPTER 22
powers to review films and to ban anything likely to offend viewers (or politicians). Hays exercised his powers broadly and imposed on the film industry a safe, sanctimonious conformity for many years.
The most important communications vehicle was the only one truly new to the 1920s: radio. The first commercial radio station in America, KDKA in Pittsburgh, began broadcasting in 1920; and the first national radio network, the National Broadcasting Company, was formed in 1927. By 1923, there were more than 500 radio stations, covering every area of the country. The radio industry, too, feared government regulation and control, and thus monitored program content carefully and excluded controversial or provocative material. But radio was much less centralized than filmmaking. Individual stations had considerable autonomy, and even carefully monitored stations and networks could not control the countless hours of programming as effectively as the Hays office could control films. Radio programming, therefore, was more diverse-and at times more controversial and even subversive-than film.
Modernist Religion
The influence of the consumer culture, and its increasing emphasis on immediate, personal fulfillment, was visible even in religion. Theological modernists taught their followers to abandon some of the traditional tenets of evangelical Christianity (literal interpretation of the Bible, belief in the
RADIO NEWS
In the early 1920s, when radio was still new, many people considered it a "hobby," appropriate to people interested in technology. By the end of the decade, radio was a normal part of the everyday lives of almost everyone. Radio News started off in 1919 as a magazine for amateur radio enthusiasts. By the time of its last issue, in 1971, the magazine had expanded to cover all technical aspects of radio and electronics. (© Buyenlarge/SuperStock) Trinity, attribution of human traits to the deity) and to accept a faith that would help individuals to live more fulfilling lives in the present world.
The most influential spokesman for liberal Protestantism in the 1920s was Harry Emerson Fosdick, the pastor of Riverside Church in New York City. The basis of Christian religion, he claimed, was not unexamined faith, but a
Harry	fu„ developed personality. In his 1926
bMERSON	J	,
Fosdick	book, Abundant Religion, he argued that
itual dynamic for radiant and triumphant living.”
Most Americans, even most middle-class Americans, stopped
well short of this view of religion as a vehicle for advancing "man’s abundant life” and remained faithful to traditional religious messages. But many other middle-class Americans were gradually devaluing religion, assigning it a secondary role (or at times no role) in their lives. When the sociologists Robert and Helen Merrell Lynd studied the society of Muncie, Indiana, in the mid-1920s, they were struck by how many people there claimed that they paid less attention to religion than their parents had. They no longer devoted much time to teaching their children the tenets of their faith; they seldom prayed at home or attended church on any day but Sunday. Even the Sabbath was becoming not a day of rest and religious reflection but, rather, a holiday filled with activities and entertainments.
Professional Women
In the 1920s, college-educated women were no longer pioneers. There were now two and even three generations of graduates of women’s or coeducational colleges and universities; many such women were making their presence felt in professional areas that in the past they had rarely penetrated.
Still, professional opportunities for women remained limited by prevailing assumptions (prevalent among many women
vvvtt dd
Limited Opportunities for Women
iiivny ciuuui Wild I. WCIC

female occupations. Although there were notable success stories about female business executives, journalists, doctors, and lawyers, most professional women remained confined to such traditionally "feminine” fields as fashion, education, social work, and nursing, or to the lower levels of business management. Some middle-class women now combined marriage and careers, but most still had to choose between work and family. The majority of the 25 percent of married women who worked outside the home in the 1920s were working class. The "new professional woman” was a vivid and widely publicized image in the 1920s. In reality, however, most middle-class married women did not work outside the home.
Changing Ideas of Motherhood
Yet the 1920s constituted a new era for middle-class women net eless. In particular, the decade saw a redefinition of the idea of motherhood. Shortly after World War 1, an influential group of psychologists-the "behaviorists,” led by John B. Watson-began to
THE “NEW ERA” 625
challenge the long-held assumption that women had an instinctive capacity for motherhood. Maternal affection was not, they claimed, sufficient preparation for child rearing. Instead, mothers should rely on the advice and assistance of experts and professionals: doctors, nurses, and trained educators in nursery schools and kindergartens.
For many middle-class women, these changes helped redefine what had been an all-consuming activity. Motherhood was no less important in behaviorist theory than it had been before; if anything, it was more so. But for many women it was
"Companionate leSS emotionallY fulfilling, less connected
Marriages” t0 r^eir instinctive lives, more dependent on (and tied to) people and institutions outside the family. Many attempted to compensate by devoting new attention to their roles as wives and companions, to developing what became known as "companionate marriage/’ The middle-class wife shared increasingly in her husband’s social life; she devoted more attention to cosmetics and clothing; she was less willing to allow children to interfere with their marriage. Most of all, many more women considered their sexual relationships with their husbands not simply as a means of procreation, as earlier generations had been taught to do, but as an important and pleasurable experience in its own
right, as the culmination of romantic love.
Progress in the development of birth control was both a cause and a result of this change. The pioneer of the American birth-control movement was Margaret Sanger, who had become committed to the cause in part because of the influence of
Emma Goldman-a Russian immigrant and political radical who had agitated for birth control before World War I. Sanger began
Birth	her career Promoting the diaphragm and
Control	other birth-control devices out of a concern
for working-class women, believing that large families were among the major causes of poverty and distress in poor communities. By the 1920s, partly because she had limited success in persuading working-class women to accept her teachings, she was becoming more concerned with persuading middle-class women of the benefits of birth control. Women, she argued, should be free to enjoy the pleasures of sexual activity without any connection to procreation. Birth-control devices began to find a large market among middle-class women, even though some techniques remained illegal in many states (and abortion remained illegal nearly everywhere).
The "Flapper”: Image and Reality
The new, more secular view of womanhood had effects on women beyond the middle class as well. Some women concluded that in the "New Era” it was no longer necessary to maintain a rigid, Victorian female "respectability.” Women could smoke, drink, dance, wear seductive clothes and makeup, and attend lively parties. They could strive for physical and emotional fulfillment, for release from repression and inhibition. (The wide popularity of Freudian ideas in the 1920s-often simplified and distorted for mass consumption-contributed to the growth of these attitudes.)
FLAPPER
By the mid-1920s, the flapper-the young woman whoJ" Toettmann/Corby is shown posing in the latest "beach costume, a fashion a long way 9 rn T T T"J T> TJ is probably no cultural or commercial product more closely identified with the 1 II u il JEj United States than motion pictures—or, as they are known in much of the world, the cinema, Although the technology of cinema emerged from the work of inventors in England and France as well as the United States, the production and distribution of films has been dominated by Americans almost from the start. The United States was the first nation to create a film "industry," and it did so at a scale vaster than that of any other country, The 700 feature films a year that Hollywood produced in the 1920s was more than ten times the number created by any other nation, and its films were dominating not only the vast American market, but much of the world's market as well. Seventy percent of the films seen in France, 80 percent of those seen in Latin America, and 95 percent of the movies viewed in Canada and Great Britain were produced in the United States in the 1920s.
As early as the 1930s, the penetration of other nations by American movies was already troubling many governments. The Soviet Union responded to the popularity of Walt Disney's Mickey Mouse cartoons by inventing a cartoon hero of its own—a porcupine, designed to entertain in a way consistent with socialist values and not the capitalist ones that the Soviets believed Hollywood conveyed. During World War II, American films were banned in occupied France (prompting some antifascist dissidents to screen such American films as Frank Capra's Mr, Smith Goes to Washington in protest).
American dominance was a result in part of World War I and its aftermath, which debilitated European filmmaking just as movies were vigorously growing in the United States. By the end of World War I, half the theaters of the world were in America. Two decades later, despite an extraordinary expansion of theaters in other nations, the United States continued to have over 40 percent of the world's cinemas. And while the spread of theaters through other areas of the world helped launch film industries in many other countries, it also increased the market (and the appetite) for American films and strengthened American supremacy in their production. "The sun, it now appears,” The Saturday Evening Post commented in the mid-1920s, "never sets on the British empire and the American motion picture." Movies were then, and perhaps remain still, America's most influential cultural export. Even American popular music, which has enormous global reach, faces more significant local competition than American movies do in most parts of the world.
Despite this American dominance, however, filmmaking has flourished—and continues to flourish-in many countries around the world. India's fabled "Bollywood," for example, produces an enormous number of movies for its domestic market—almost as many as the American industry creates, even
Rudolph\ui\ii\o
'The Son ot the Sheik
u \ i i m \ B \\k>
ft? M M U i L	f u ”
' a ee&RQE FtTZMAURICE owooi. ' r ■„
VALENTINO
The popularity of the film star Rudolph Valentino among American women was one of the most striking cultural phenomena of the 1920s. Valentino was slight and delicate, not at all like the conventional image of "manliness.” But he developed an enormous following among women, in part—as this poster is obviously intended to suggest—by baring his body on screen. Valentino was Italian, which made him seem somehow strange and foreign to many older-stock Americans, and he was almost always cast in exotic roles, never as an American. His sudden death in 1926 (at the age of 31) created enormous outpourings of grief among many American women. (© UA/Photofest) Such assumptions became the basis of the wflapper”-the modern woman whose liberated lifestyle found expression in dress, hairstyle, speech, and behavior. The flapper lifestyle had a particular impact on lower-middle-class and working-class single women, who were flocking to new jobs in industry and the service sector. (The young, affluent, upper-class "Bohemian” women most often associated with the flapper image were, in fact, imitating a style that emerged first among this larger working-class group.) At night, such women flocked, often alone, to clubs and dance halls in search of excitement and companionship.
Despite the image of liberation the flapper evoked in popular culture, most women remained highly dependent on men-both in the workplace, where they were usually poorly paid, and in the home-and relatively powerless when men exploited that dependence.
Pressing for Women’s Rights
The realization that the "new woman” was as much myth as reality inspired some American feminists to continue their crusade for reform. The National Woman’s Party, under the leadership of Alice Paul, pressed on with its campaign to make the Equal Rights Amendment, first proposed in 1923, a part of the Constitution, although it found little Equal Rights support in Congress (and met continued
Amendment resistance from other feminist groups).
Nevertheless, women’s organizations and
emale political activities grew in many ways in the 1920s.
Responding to the suffrage victory, women organized the
League of Women Voters and the women’s auxiliaries of both
the Democratic and Republican Parties. Female-dominated
626
THE “NEW ERA”
» 627 though few of them are widely exported. The global cinema has had a significant impact on American filmmaking, just as American films have influenced filmmakers abroad. The small British film industry had a strong early influence on American movies partly because of the quality and originality of British films, and partly because of the emigration of talented actors, directors, and screenwriters to the United States. The great Alfred Hitchcock, for example, made his first films in London before moving to Hollywood, where he spent the rest of his long career. After World War II, French "new wave” cinema helped spawn a new generation of highly individualistic directors in the United States. Asian cinema—especially the thriving film industry in Hong Kong, with its gritty realism-helped lead to some of the powerfully violent American films of the 1980s and beyond, as well as the genre of martial-arts films that has become popular around the world. German, Italian, Swedish, Dutch, Japanese, Australian, and Indian filmmakers also had influence on Hollywood-and over time perhaps even greater influence on the large and growing "independent film" movement in the United States.
In recent decades, as new technologies and new styles have transformed films around the world, the American movie industry has continued to dominate global cinema. But national boundaries no longer adequately describe moviemaking in the twenty-first century. It is becoming a truly globalized enterprise in the same way that so many other commercial ventures are becoming international. "American" films today are often produced abroad, often have non-American directors and actors, and are often paid for with international financing. Hollywood still dominates worldwide filmmaking, but Hollywood itself is now an increasingly global community. •
UNDERSTAND, ANALYZE, AND EVALUATE
1.	Did American movies, as the Soviet Union claimed in the 1930s, promote capitalism?
2.	Why has the American movie industry continued to dominate global cinema?
3.	With the increasing globalism of the movie industry, is there still an identifiable American cinema?
would introduce untrained outsiders into the health-care field. In 1929, Congress terminated the program.
Education and Youth
The growing secularism of American culture and its expanding emphasis on training and expertise found reflection in the increasingly important role of education in the lives of American youth. First, more people were going to school in the 1920s than ever before. High-school attendance more than doubled during the decade, from 2.2 million to more than 5 million. Enrollment in colleges and universities increased threefold between 1900 and 1930, with much of that increase occurring after World War I. In 1918, there had been 600,000 college students; in 1930, there were 1.2 million, nearly 20 percent of the college-age population. Attendance was increasing as well at trade and vocational schools and in other institutions providing the specialized training that the modern economy demanded. Schools were beginning to offer instruction not only in the traditional disciplines, but also in modern technical skills: engineering, management, economics.
The growing importance of education contributed to the emergence of a separate youth culture. The idea of adolescence as a distinct period in the life of an individual was for Youth	the most Part new t0 twentieth cen-
Culture tury. In some measure it was a result of the influence of Freudian psychology. But it was a result, too, of society’s recognition that a more extended period of training and preparation was necessary before a young person was ready to move into the workplace. Schools and colleges provided adolescents with a setting in which they could develop their own social patterns, their own hobbies, their own interests and activities. An increasing number of students saw school as a place not just for academic training, but also for organized athletics, extracurricular activities, clubs, and fraternities and sororities-that is, as an institution that allowed them to define themselves less in terms of their
families and more in terms of their peer group.
The Disenchanted
consumer groups grew rapidly and increased the range and energy of their efforts.
Women activists won a significant triumph in 1921, when they helped secure passage in Congress of a measure in keeping with the traditional feminist goal of securing ^protective legislation for women: the Sheppard-Towner Act. It provided fed-
Sheppard- eral funds t0 states t0 establish Prenatal Towner Act and child health-care programs. From the start, however, the bill produced controversy. Alice Paul and her supporters opposed the measure, arguing that it classified all women as mothers. Margaret Sanger’s objection was that the new programs would discourage birth-control efforts. More important, the American Medical Association fought Sheppard-Towner, warning that it
The generation that lived through (and in many cases fought in) the Great War quickly came to see the conflict as a useless waste of lives lost for no purpose. For many young people in the 1920s, disenchantment with the war contributed to a growing disenchantment with the United States. The newly prosperous and consumer-driven era they encountered seemed meaningless and vulgar to many artists and intellectuals in particular. As a result, they came to view their own culture with contempt. Rather than trying to
influence and reform their society, they isolated themselves from it and embarked on a restless search for personal fulfillment. The American writer Gertrude Stein once referred to the young Americans emerging from World War I as a "Lost Generation.” For some writers and intellectuals, at least, it was an apt description.
I

Dance Halls
I
TWfthe booming, boisterous, consumer-oriented world of the 1920s, many Americans— III especially those living in urban areas—challenged the inhibitions of traditional public culture. They looked instead for freedom, excitement, and release. Nowhere did they do so more vigorously and visibly than in the great dance halls that were proliferating in cities across the nation in these years.
The dance craze that swept urban America in the 1920s and 1930s was a result of many things. The great African American migration during World War I had helped bring new forms of jazz out of the South and into the urban North—where the phonograph and the radio popularized it. The growth of a distinctive youth culture—and the increasing tendency of men and women to socialize together in public—created an audience for uninhibited, sexually titillating entertainment. The relative prosperity of the 1920s enabled many young working-class people to afford to spend evenings out. And prohibition, by closing down most saloons and taverns, limited their other options.
Night after night, in big cities and small, young people flocked to dance halls to hear the powerful, pulsing new music; to revel in dazzling lights and ornate surroundings; to show off new clothes and hairstyles; and, of course, most of all, to dance. Like the new movie palaces that were being built at the same time, many of the dance halls provided a sense of grandiosity and glamour. Some of the larger dance halls in the big cities—Roseland and the Savoy in New York, the Trianon and the Aragon in Chicago, the Raymor in Boston, the Greystone in Detroit, the Hollywood Paladium, and many others—were truly cavernous, capable of accommodating thousands of couples at once. Over 10 percent of the men and women between the ages of 17 and 40 in New York went dancing at least once a week, and the numbers were comparable in other large cities.
What drew so many people to the dance halls? In large part, it was the music, which both its defenders and critics recognized as something very new in mainstream American culture. Dancing was "moral ruin," the Ladies' Home Journal primly warned in 1921, prompting "carelessness, recklessness, and laxity of moral responsibility" with its "direct appeal to the body's sensory centers." Many young dancers might have agreed with the description, if not with the moral judgment. Jazz encouraged a kind of uninhibited, even frenetic dancing—expressive, athletic, sensual—that young couples, in particular, found extraordinarily exciting, a welcome release from the often staid worlds of family, school, or work. Performances by some of the most famous bands and musicians of the day, Paul Whiteman, Ben
Pollack, Fletcher Henderson, Bix Beiderbecke, Louis Armstrong, and Duke Ellington—already familiar to everyone through radio performances and recordings—drew enormous crowds.
Some of the less savory halls also attracted dancers for illicit reasons—as sources of bootleg liquor or as places to buy drugs. "Taxi-dance" ballrooms, which allowed men without their own
THE SAVOY
The Savoy ballroom in New City’s Harlem was one of the largest and most popular dance halls in America, and , regular home to many of the most noted dance bands in the 1920s and 1930s. (© Archive Photos/Getty) At the heart of the Lost Generation’s critique of modern society was a sense of personal alienation. The repudiation of Wilsonian idealism, the restoration of "business as usual,” the growing emphasis on materialism and consumerism suggested that the war had been a fraud; that the suffering and the dying
628 ®
JITTERBUGGERS
As dance halls became more popular, dancing became more exuberant—perhaps never more so than when the "jitterbug” became popular in the 1930s. This photograph shows an acrobatic pair of dancers during a huge dance event in Los Angeles designed to raise money for the Salvation Army. More than 10,000 people attended the event, and the police on hand to keep order had to call for reinforcements as the crowd became more and more frenzied and enthusiastic. (© Bettmann/Corbis) partners to buy tickets to dance with "hostesses" and "instructresses," were sometimes closed by municipal authorities for "lewd" dancing and prostitution, Managers of the larger ballrooms tried to distance themselves from the unsavory image of the taxi-dance halls by imposing dress codes and making at least some efforts, usually futile, to require "decorum among their patrons.
Dance halls were particularly popular with young men and women from working-class, immigrant communities. For them, going dancing was part of becoming American, a way to escape—even if momentarily—the insular world of the immigrant neighborhood. (Their parents saw it that way too, and often tried to stop their children from going because they
had been in vain. Ernest Hemingway, one of the most celebrated (and most commercially success-
Generation’s	°f the n6W breed of writers> expressed
Critique tbe 8enerac'on’s contempt for the war in
his novel A Farewell to Arms (1929). Its
DANCING AT THE SAVOY
This photograph of the interior of the famous Savoy ballroom shows the crowds of men and women who typically flocked there to dance to the great black jazz bands of the 1920s and 1930s. (© International Center of Photography/Getly Images) feared the dance Halls would pull them out of the family and the community.) Going dancing was a chance to mingle with hundreds, sometimes thousands, of strangers of diverse backgrounds, and to participate in a cultural ritual that had no counterpart in ethnic cultures.
But dance halls were not melting pots. African Americans—who flocked to ballrooms at least as eagerly as whites—usually gathered at clubs in black neighborhoods, where there were only occasional white patrons. White working-class people might encounter a large number of different ethnic groups in a great hall at once, but the groups did not mix very much. In Chicago's Dreamland, for example, Italians congregated near the door, Poles near the band, and Jews in the middle of the floor. Still, the experience of the dance hall-like the experience of the movie palace °r the amusement park—drew people into the growing mass culture that was competing with and Beginning to overwhelm the close-knit ethnic cultures into which many young Americans had been born, •
UNDERSTAND, ANALYZE, AND
EVAluAT? 1.	Besides the music, what was the appeal of the dance hall?
2.	Although thousands of young people attended dance halls, why were the halls unable to break down the ethnic or racial barriers of those who flocked to them?
3.	Is there an equivalent today of the dance hall of the 1920s and 1930s? If so, what is its appeal? Who are its customers? How is it different from the dance halls of the earlier era?
i
One result of this alienation was a series of savage critiques of modern society by a wide range of writers, some of whom H L. Mencken were known as the "debunkers.” Among them was the Baltimore journalist H. L.
protagonist, an American officer fighting in Europe, decides
that there is no justification for his participation in the con-
flict and deserts the army with a nurse with whom he has
Mien in love. Hemingway suggested that the officer was to
he admired for doing so.
630
CHAPTER 22
i
i
WORKERS AT SCHOOL
The progressive ethos of the early twentieth century inspired many groups to fight for reform. These working-class women enrolled in a labor summer school at Bryn Mawr College in the summer of 1916 to prepare to become politically active. (The Library of Congress (LC-DIG-npcc-32693)) American Mercury-ridiculed everything most middle-class Americans held dear: religion, politics, the arts, even democracy itself. Mencken could not believe, he claimed, that ’’civilized life was possible under a democracy/’ because it was a form of government that placed power in the hands of the common people, whom he ridiculed as the ’’booboisie.” Echoing Mencken’s contempt was the novelist Sinclair Lewis, the first American to win a Nobel Prize in Literature. In a series of savage novels-Muzn Street (1920), Babbitt (1922), Arrowsmith (1925), and others-he lashed out at one aspect of modern soci-
Rejecting etY a^ter anot^er:	small town, the mod-
Success ern city> r^e tnedical profession, popular religion. The novelist F. Scott Fitzgerald ridiculed the American obsession with material success in The Great Gatsby (1925). The novel’s title character, Jay Gatsby, spends his life accumulating wealth and social prestige in order to win the woman he loves. The world to which he has aspired, however, turns out to be one of pretension, fraud, and
cruelty, and it ultimately destroys him.
The Harlem Renaissance
In postwar Harlem in New York City, a new generation of black artists and intellectuals created a flourishing African American culture widely described as the ’’Harlem Renaissance.” There were nightclubs (among them the famous Cotton Club) featuring many of the great jazz musicians who would later become staples of national popular culture: Duke Ellington, Jelly Roll Morton, Fletcher Henderson, and others. There were
theaters featuring ribald musical comedies and vaudeville acts. Many white New Yorkers traveled up to Harlem for the music and theater, but the audiences were largely black.
Harlem in the 1920s was above all a center of literature, poetry, and art that drew heavily from both American and African roots. Black artists were trying in part to demonstrate the richness of their own racial heritage (and, not incidentally, to prove to whites that their race was worthy of respect). The poet Langston Hughes captured much of the
IllUbl
AmeriTth l"	°'	1920s' COn,bined a" interest >
1® Archive

African
American
Pride
spirit of the movement in a single sentence: "I am a Negro-and beautiful.” One of the leaders of the Harlem Renaissance was Alain Locke, who assembled a notable collection of black writings published in 1925 as The Neu) Negro. Gradually, white publishers began to notice and take an interest in the writers Locke helped launch. Hughes, Zora Neale Hurston, Countee Cullen, Claude McKay, James Weldon Johnson, and others gradually found readerships well beyond the black community. The painter Aaron Douglas, talented chronicler of the African American experience, eventually found himself commissioned to create important murals in universities and public buildings.
A CONFLICT OF CULTURES
The modern, secular culture of the 1920s was not unchallenged. It grew up alongside older, more traditional cultures, with which it continually and often bitterly competed.
Prohibition
When the prohibition of the sale and manufacture of alcohol went into effect in January 1920, it had the support of most
Failure of members of the middle class and most of
Prohibition those who considered themselves progressives. Within a year, however, it had become clear that the "noble experiment,” as its defenders called it, was not working well. Prohibition did substantially reduce drinking, at least in some regions of the country. But it also produced conspicuous and growing violations that made the law an almost immediate source of disillusionment and controversy. The federal government hired only 1,500 agents to enforce the prohibition laws, and in many places they Ai mun,	received little help from local police. Before
Organized	long, k was almost as easYto acQuire megal
Crime	alcohol in much of the country as it had
once been to acquire legal alcohol. And since an enormous, lucrative industry was now barred to legitimate businessmen, organized crime figures took it over. In Chicago, Al Capone built a criminal empire based largely on illegal alcohol. He guarded it against interlopers with an army as many as 1,000 gunmen, whose zealousness contributed to the violent deaths of more than 250 people in the city between 1920 and 1927. Other regions produced gangsters
and gang wars of their own.
Many middle-class progressives who had originally sup
ported prohibition soon soured on the experiment. But an
enormous constituency of provincial, largely rural, Protestant
Americans continued vehemently to defend it.
THE “NEW ERA” . 631
HARLEM, 1925 Well-dressed schoolchildren gather on a street in Harlem, illustrating the growing affluence of the African American elite in New York. (© Bettmann/Corbis)
Opponents of prohibition (or "wets,” as they came to be known) gained steadily in influence. Not until 1933, however, when the Great Depression added weight to their appeals, were they finally able effectively to challenge the "drys” and win repeal of the Eighteenth Amendment.
Nativism and the Klan
Agitation for a curb on foreign emigration to the United States had begun in the nineteenth century; and like the prohibition movement, it had gathered strength in the years before the war largely because of the support of middle-class progressives. Such concerns had not been sufficient in the first years of the century to win passage of curbs on immigration; too many employers fought to keep low-paid immigrant workers flooding into the country. But in the troubled and repressive years immediately following the war, many old-stock Americans began to associate immigration with radicalism.
Sentiment on behalf of restriction grew rapidly as a result. In 1921, Congress passed an emergency immigration act, establishing a quota system by which annual immigration from any country could not exceed 3 percent of the number of persons of that nationality who had been in the United States in 1910. The new law cut immigration from 800,000 to 300,000 in any single year, but nativists remained unsatisfied and pushed for a harsher law. The National Origins Act of 1924
strengthened the exclusionist provision of
National	°
Origins Act	the 1921 law- banned immigration from
of 1924	east Asia entirely. That provision deeply
angered the Japanese, who understood that they were the principal target; Chinese immigration had been illegal since 1882. The law also reduced the quota for Europeans from 3 percent to 2 percent. The quota would be based, moreover, not on the 1910 census, but on the census of 1890, a year in which there had been many fewer southern
ern
J
632 ® CHAPTER 22
PROHIBITION, 1921 A New York City police commissioner oversees agents pouring illegal liquor into the street. This raid occurred in the early months of prohibition, when the battle against alcohol was still popular—hence the eagerness of the commissioner to appear in the photograph. (The Library of Congress (LC-USZ62-123257))
and eastern Europeans in the country. What immigration there was, in other words, would heavily favor northwestern Europeans-people of "Nordic” or "Teutonic” stock. Five years later, a further restriction set a rigid limit of 150,000 immigrants a year. In the years that followed, immigration officials seldom permitted even half that number actually to enter the country.
But the nativism of the 1920s extended well beyond restricting immigration. Among other things, this nativism helped instigate the rebirth of the Ku Klux Kian as a major force in American society.
The first Kian, founded during Reconstruction,
had died in the 1870s. But in 1915, another
group of white southerners The New Klan 5 e
met on Stone Mountain near Atlanta and established a new version of the society. Nativist passions had swelled in Georgia and elsewhere in response to the case of Leo Frank, a Jewish factory manager in Atlanta convicted in 1914 (on very flimsy evidence) of murdering a female employee; a mob stormed Frank’s jail and lynched him. The premiere (also in
2.64 Total immigration during five-year periods (in millions)
1921- 1926- 1931- 1936- 1941- 1946- 1951- 1956-1925 1930 1935 1940 1945 1950 1955 1960
Year
TOTAL IMMIGRATION, 1920-1960
After many years of extremely high rates of immigration from Europe and elsewhere, the United States experienced several decades of much lower immigration beginning in the 1920s. Immigration-restriction legislation passed in 1921 and 1924 was one important reason for the decline. • What other factors depressed immigration in the 1930s and 1940s?
,	—'»	•«**.**	i nis cnari snows a signincam cndiiyc in
the so^ces of immigration between 1920 and 1960, a direct result of the National Origins Act ° k 't IC establlshed nat,onal quotas for immigrants to the United States based on the num er o such immigrants who had been in the country in 1890. Note the shift back toward nor ern an western Europe and away from Italy and other southern and eastern European na ions w ic a not been heavily represented in the immigration of the 1890s). But the most
c ange was the huge increase in the proportion of immigrants from Latin America, a region explictly exempted from the quota system established in 1924. law in these years? menCOnS tre°ted differentl9 than Europeans in immigration
THE “NEW ERA” - 633
Atlanta) of D. W. Griffith’s film The Birth of a Nation, which glorified the early Klan, also helped inspire white southerners to form a new one. At first the new Klan, like the old, was largely concerned with intimidating African Americans, who, according to Klan leader William J. Simmons, were becoming insubordinate. And at first it remained small, obscure, and almost entirely southern. After World War I, however, concern about African Americans became secondary to concern about Catholics, Jews, and foreigners. At that point, membership in the Klan expanded rapidly and dramatically, not just in the small towns and rural areas of the South, but also in industrial cities in the North and Midwest. Indiana had the largest Klan membership of any state, and there were substantial Kians in Chicago, Detroit, and other northern industrial cities. The Klan was also strong in the West, with particularly large and active chapters in Oregon and Colorado. By 1924, there were reportedly 4 million members.
In some communities, where Klan leaders came from the most "respectable” segments of society, the organization operated much like a fraternal society, engaging in nothing more dangerous than occasional political pronouncements. Many Klan units (or "klaverns”) tried to present themselves as patriots and community leaders. Some established women’s and even children’s auxiliaries to demonstrate their commitment to the family. Often, however, the Klan also operated as a brutal, even violent, opponent of "alien” groups and as a defender of traditional, fundamentalist morality. Some Klansmen
systematically terrorized blacks, Jews, Catholics, and foreigners and boycotted their businesses, threatened their families, and attempted to drive them out of their communities. Occasionally, they resorted to violence: public whipping, tarring and feathering, arson, and lynching.
What the Klan feared, it soon became clear, was not simply
"foreign” or "racially impure” groups; it was anyone who posed
„	a challenge to "traditional values,” as the
Defending	°
"Traditional	defined them. Klansmen persecuted
Values” not only immigrants and African Americans, but also those white Protestants they considered guilty of irreligion, sexual promiscuity, or drunkenness. The Klan worked to enforce prohibition; it attempted to institute compulsory Bible reading in schools; it worked to punish divorce. It also provided its members, many of them people of modest means with little real power in society, with a sense of community and seeming authority. Its bizarre costumes, its elaborate rituals, its "secret” language, its burning crosses-all helped produce a sense of excitement and cohesion.
The Klan declined quickly after 1925, when a series of internal power struggles and several sordid scandals discredited some of its most important leaders. The most damaging episode involved David Stephenson, head of the Indiana Klan, who raped a young secretary, kidnapped her, and watched her
die rather than call a doctor after she swallowed poison. The Klan staggered on in some areas into the 1930s, but by World
S !
David
Stephenson
634 « CHAPTER 22
War II it was effectively dead. (The postwar Ku Klux Kian,
which still survives, is modeled on but has no direct connec-
tion to the Kian of the 1920s and 1930s.)
Religious Fundamentalism
Another bitter cultural controversy of the 1920s challenged the place of religion in contemporary society. By 1921, American Protestantism was divided into two warring camps. On one side stood the modernists: mostly urban, middle-class people who had attempted to adapt religion to the teachings of science and to the realities of their modern, secular society. On the other side stood the defenders of traditional faith: provincial, largely rural men and women, fighting to maintain the centrality of traditional religion in American life. They became known as "fundamentalists,” a term derived from an influential set of pamphlets, The Fundamentals, published before World War I. The fundamentalists were outraged at the abandonment of traditional beliefs in the face of scientific discoveries. They insisted the Bible was to be interpreted literally. Above all, they opposed the teachings of Charles Darwin, who had openly challenged the biblical story of the Creation. Human beings had not evolved from lower orders of animals, the fundamentalists insisted; they had been created by God, as described in Genesis.
Fundamentalism was a highly evangelical movement, interested in spreading the doctrine to new groups. Fundamentalist evangelists, among them the celebrated Billy Sunday, traveled from state to state (particularly in the South and parts of the West) attracting huge crowds to their revival meetings. Protestant modernists looked on much of this activity with
condescension and amusement. But by the mid-1920s, to their great alarm, evangelical fundamentalism was gaining political strength in some states with its demands for legislation to forbid the teaching of evolution in the public schools. In Tennessee in March 1925, the legislature adopted a measure making it illegal for any public school teacher "to teach any theory that denies the story of the divine creation of man as taught in the Bible.”
The Tennessee law attracted the attention of the fledgling
American Civil Liberties Union, which had been founded in
1920 by men and women alarmed by the repressive legal and
social climate of World War I and its aftermath. The ACLU
offered free counsel to any Tennessee educator willing to defy
the law and become the defendant in a test case. A twenty-
four-year-old biology teacher in the town of Dayton, John T.
Scopes, agreed to have himself arrested. And when the ACLU
decided to send the famous attorney Clarence Darrow to
_	defend Scopes, the aging William
Scopes "Monkey	z	r ,
Trial”	Jennings Bryan (now an important funda-
mentalist spokesman) announced that he would travel to Dayton to assist the prosecution. Journalists from across the country flocked to Tennessee to cover what became known as the "Monkey Trial,” which opened in an almost circuslike atmosphere. Scopes had, of course, clearly violated the law; and a verdict of guilty was a foregone conclusion, especially when the judge refused to permit "expert” testimony by evolution scholars. Scopes was fined $100, and the case was ultimately dismissed in a higher court because of a technicality. Nevertheless, Darrow scored an important victory for the modernists by calling Bryan to the stand to testify as an "expert on the Bible.” In the course of the cross-examination, which was broadcast by radio to
BRYAN AND DARROW IN DAYTON
Clarence Darrow (left), a famous lawyer who defended Scopes, and William Jennings Bryan, an even more famous politician who supported the prosecution, pose for photographers during the 1925 Scopes trial. Both men had removed their jackets because of the intense heat, and Bryan had shocked many of his admirers by revealing that he was not wearing suspenders (as most country people did), but a belt—which in rural Tennessee was a symbol of urban culture. (© Archive Photos/Getty Images) 
THE “NEW ERA”
• 635 much of the nation, Darrow made Bryan’s stubborn defense
of biblical truths appear foolish and finally tricked him into
admitting the possibility that not all religious dogma was
subject to only one interpretation.
The Scopes trial was a traumatic experience for many fundamentalists. It isolated and ultimately excluded them from many mainstream Protestant denominations. It helped put an end to much of their political activism. But it did not change their religious convictions. Even without connection to traditional denominations, fundamentalists continued to congregate in independent churches or new denominations of their own.
The Democrats’ Ordeal
The anguish of provincial Americans attempting to defend an embattled way of life proved particularly troubling to the Democratic Party, which suffered during the 1920s as a result of tensions between its urban and rural factions. More than the Republicans, the Democrats were a diverse coalition of interest groups, linked to the party by local traditions. Among those interest groups were prohibitionists, Klansmen, and fundamentalists on one side and Catholics, urban workers, and immigrants on the other.
In 1924, the tensions between them proved devastating. At the Democratic National Convention in New York City that summer, bitter conflict broke out over the platform when the party’s urban wing attempted to win approval of planks calling for the repeal of prohibition and a denunciation of the Kian. Both planks narrowly failed. More damaging to the party was a deadlock in the balloting for a presidential candidate. Urban Democrats supported Alfred E. Smith, the Irish Catholic Tammanyite who had risen to become a progressive governor of New York. Rural Democrats backed William McAdoo, Woodrow Wilson’s Treasury secretary (and son-in-law), later to become a senator from California; he had skillfully positioned himself to win the support of southern and western delegates suspicious of Tammany Hall and modern urban life. The convention dragged on for 103 ballots, until finally, after both Smith and McAdoo withdrew, the party settled on a compromise: the bland corporate lawyer John W. Davis, who had served as solicitor general and ambassador to Britain under Wilson. He was easily defeated by President Calvin Coolidge.
A similar schism plagued the Democrats again in 1928, when A1 Smith finally secured his party’s nomination for president after a much shorter battle. Smith was not, how-
Al Smith ever’ a^e t0 unite ^is divided Party~ largely because of widespread anti-Catholic sentiment, especially in the South. He was the first Democrat We the Civil War not to carry the entire South. Elsewhere, though he did well in the large cities, he carried only Massachusetts and Rhode Island. Smith’s opponent, and the victor in the presidential election, was a man who perhaps tnore than any other contemporary politician seemed to personify the modern, prosperous, middle-class society of the
blow Era: Herbert Hoover.
Candidate (Party)	Electoral Vote	Popular Vote (%)
Herbert Hoover (Republican)	444	21,391.381 (58.2)
Alfred E. Smith (Democratic)	87	15,016,443 (40.9)
Norman Thomas (Socialist)	—	267,835 (0.7)
Other parties (Socialist Workers, Prohibition)	—	62,890
56.9% of electorate voting
ELECTION OF 1928
The election of 1928 was, by almost any measure, highly one-sided. Herbert Hoover won over 58 percent of the vote to Alfred Smith's 41. Smith carried only Massachusetts, Rhode Island, and some traditionally Democratic states in the South. * Why did Smith do so poorly even in some of the South?
REPUBLICAN GOVERNMENT
For twelve years, beginning in 1921, both the presidency and the Congress were in the hands of the Republican Party-a party in which the power of reformers had greatly dwindled since the heyday of progressivism before the war. For most of those years, the federal government enjoyed a warm and supportive relationship with the American business community. Yet the government of the New Era was more than the passive, pliant instrument that critics often described. It also attempted to serve as an active agent of economic change.
Harding and Coolidge
Nothing seemed more clearly to illustrate the unadventurous character of 1920s politics than the characters of the two men who served as president during most of the decade: Warren G. Harding and Calvin Coolidge.
Harding was elected to the presidency in 1920, having spent many years in public life doing little of note. An undistinguished senator from Ohio, he had received the Republican presidential nomination as a result of an agreement among leaders of his party, who considered him, as one noted, a "good
-iK^a
636 » CHAPTER 22
second-rater.” Harding appointed capable men to the most important cabinet offices, and he attempted to stabilize the nation's troubled foreign policy. But even as he attempted to rise to his office, he seemed baffled by his responsibilities, as if he recognized his own unfitness. "I am a man of limited talents from a small town,” he reportedly told friends on one occasion. "I don’t seem to grasp that I am President.” Harding’s intellectual limits were compounded by personal weaknesses: his penchant for gambling, illegal alcohol, and attractive women.
Harding lacked the strength to abandon the party hacks who had helped create his political success. One of them, Harry Daugherty, the Ohio party boss principally responsible
Teapot Dome ^or ^is meteoric political ascent, he appointed attorney general. Another, New
Mexico senator Albert B. Fall, he made secretary of the Interior. Members of the so-called Ohio Gang filled important offices throughout the administration. Unknown to the public (and perhaps also to Harding), Daugherty, Fall, and others were engaged in fraud and corruption. The most spectacular scandal involved the rich naval oil reserves at Teapot Dome, Wyoming, and Elk Hills, California. At the urging of Fall, Harding transferred control of those reserves from the Navy Department to the Interior Department. Fall then secretly leased them to two wealthy businessmen and received in return nearly half a million dollars in "loans” to ease his private financial troubles. Fall was ultimately convicted of bribery and sentenced to a year in prison; Daugherty barely avoided a similar fate for his part in another scandal.
In the summer of 1923, only months before Senate investigations and press revelations brought the scandals to light, a tired and depressed Harding left Washington for a speaking tour in the West. In Seattle late in July, he suffered severe pain, which his doctors wrongly diagnosed as food poisoning. A few
days later, in San Francisco, he suffered two major heart attacks and died.
In many ways, Calvin Coolidge, who succeeded Harding in the presidency, was utterly different from his predecessor.
Where Harding was genial, garrulous, and
Coolidge debauched, Coolidge was dour, silent, even puritanical. And while Harding was, if not perhaps personally corrupt, then at least tolerant of corruption in others, Coolidge seemed honest beyond reproach. In other ways, however, Harding and Coolidge were similar figures.
Both took an essentially passive approach to their office.
Like Harding, Coolidge had risen to the presidency on the basis of few substantive accomplishments. Elected governor of Massachusetts in 1919, he had won national attention with his laconic response to the Boston police strike that year. That was enough to make him his party’s vice presidential nominee in 1920. Three years later, after Harding’s death, he took the oath of office from his father, a justice of the peace, by the light of a kerosene lamp.
If anything, Coolidge was even less active as president than Harding, partly as a result of his conviction that government should interfere as little as possible in the life of the nation. In 1924, he received his party’s presidential nomination virtually unopposed. Running against John W. Davis, he won a comfortable victory: 54 percent of the popular vote and 382 of the 531 electoral votes. Robert La Follette, the candidate of the reincarnated Progressive Party, received 16 percent of the popular vote but carried only his home state of Wisconsin. Coolidge probably could have won renomination and reelection in 1928. Instead, in characteristically laconic fashion, he walked into a press room one day and handed each reporter a slip of paper containing a single sentence: "I do not choose to run for president in 1928.”
HARDING AND FRIENDS
President Warren G. Harding (center left, holding a rod) poses with companions during a fishing trip to Miami in 1921. He enjoyed these social and sporting events with wealthy friends and political cronies. Two of his companions here, Attorney General Harry Daugherty (to the left of Harding) and Interior Secretary Albert Fall (at far right) were later principal figures in the scandals that rocked the administration before and after Harding's death. (© Bettmann/Corbis) THE “NEW ERA”
« 637 CALVIN COOLIDGE AT LEISURE
Coolidge was a silent man of simple tastes. But he was not really an outdoorsman, despite his efforts to appear so. He is shown here fishing in Simsbury, Connecticut, carefully attired in suit, tie, hat, and rubber boots. (© Bettmann/Corbis) Government and Business
The story of Harding and Coolidge themselves, however, is only a part-and by no means the most important part-of the story of their administrations. However passive the New Era presidents may have been, much of the federal government was working effectively and efficiently during the 1920s to adapt public pol-
Andrew icy to the widelV accePted £oal of the time:
Mellon helping business and industry operate with maximum efficiency and productivity. The dose relationship between the private sector and the federal
government that had been forged during World War I continued. Secretary of the Treasury Andrew Mellon, a wealthy steel and aluminum tycoon, devoted himself to working for substantial reductions in taxes on corporate profits, personal incomes, and inheritances. Largely because of his efforts, Congress cut them all by more than half. Mellon also worked closely with President Coolidge after 1924 on a series of measures to trim dramatically the already modest federal budget. The administration even managed to retire half the nation’s World War I debt.
The most energetic member of the cabinet was Commerce Secretary Herbert Hoover, who considered himself, and was considered by others, a notable progressive. During his eight years in the Commerce Department, Hoover encouraged voluntary cooperation in the private sector as the best avenue to stability. But the idea of voluntarism, he believed, did not require that the government remain passive; on the contrary, public institutions, Hoover insisted, should play an active role in creating the new, cooperative order. Above all, Hoover became the champion of
the concept of business "associationalism”a concept that envisioned the creation of national organizations of businessmen in particular industries. Through these trade associations, private entrepreneurs could, Hoover believed, stabilize their industries and promote efficiency in production and marketing.
Many progressives derived encouragement from the election of Herbert Hoover to the presidency in 1928. Hoover easily defeated A1 Smith, the Democratic candidate. And he entered office promising bold new efforts to solve the nation’s remaining economic problems. But Hoover had few opportunities to prove himself. Less than a year after his inauguration, the nation plunged into the severest and most prolonged economic crisis in its history-a crisis that brought many of the optimistic assumptions of the New Era crashing down and launched the nation into a period of unprecedented social innovation and reform.
Hoover’s
"Associationalism”
looking back
The remarkable prosperity of the 1920s-a prosperity without Parallel in the previous history of the United States—shaped niuch of what exuberant contemporaries liked to call the New Era.” In the years after World War I, America created a vibrant and extensive national culture. Its middle class moved increasingly to embrace consumerism. Its politics reorganized around the needs of a booming, interdependent industrial economy-rejecting many of the reform crusades of the previ-°us generation, but also creating new institutions to help promote economic growth and stability.
Beneath the glittering surface of the New Era, however, were roiling controversies and timeless injustices clamoring for redress. Although the prosperity of the 1920s was more widely shared than at any other time in the nation’s industrial history, more than half the population failed to achieve any real benefits from the growth. A new, optimistic, secular culture was attracting millions of urban, middle-class people. But many other Americans looked at this culture with alarm and fought against it with great fervor. Few eras in modern American history have seen so much political and cultural conflict.
638 . CHAPTER 22
The 1920s ended in a catastrophic economic crash that has colored the image of those years ever since. The crises of the 1930s should not obscure the real achievements of the New Era economy. Neither, however, should the prosperity of the 1920s obscure the inequity and instability in those years that helped produce the difficult years to come.
Key Terms/People/Places/Events
A.
Philip Randolph 620 Alain Locke 631 Al Smith 635 "American Plan” 621 H. L. Mencken 629 Harlem Renaissance 630 Herbert Hoover 637 Issei 620 Ku Klux Klan 632 Langston Hughes 630 Lost Generation 627
Margaret Sanger 625 National Origins Act
of 1924 631 Nisei 620 Parity 622 Scopes "Monkey
Trial” 634 Sinclair Lewis 630 Teapot Dome 636 The Jazz Singer 623 Welfare capitalism 617
RECALL AND REFLECT
1.	What was the impact of the automobile on American life?
2.	How did labor fare during the 1920s? What particular problems did female, black, immigrant, and unskilled laborers face?
3.	How did religion respond to the consumer culture of the 1920s?
4.	What was the myth and what was the reality of the "new woman" of the 1920s?
5.	What was the nature and extent of the nativism of the 1920s?
SIGNIFICANT EVENTS
1914-1920	*
Great Migration of black southerners to northern cities
e	1920
Prohibition begins
Warren G. Harding elected 1922	president
Sinclair Lewis publishes Babbitt First commercial radio station, Motion Picture Association,	KDKA in Pittsburgh, begins
under Will Hays, founded	broadcasting
to regulate film industry
1924
National Origins Act passed Ku Klux Klan reaches peak
membership
Coolidge elected president
1927
Charles Lindbergh makes solo transatlantic flight First feature-length sound motion picture, The Jazz Singer, released
1923
Harding dies; Calvin Coolidge becomes president
Teapot Dome and other scandals revealed
1925
Scopes trial in Dayton, Tennessee
A.
Philip Randolph founds Brotherhood of Sleeping Car Porters
F.
Scott Fitzgerald publishes The Great Gatsby 1928
Herbert Hoover elected president
1929
Ernest Hemingway publishes A Farewell to Arms
THE GREAT DEPRESSION
WOMAN OF THE HIGH PLAINS “IF YOU DIE, YOU’RE DEAD—THAT’S ALL”
This poignant photograph, taken by Dorothea Lange (1895-1965) in 1938, shows a plains woman, Nettie Featherston, enduring one of the great natural disasters in U.S. history: the Dust Bowl of the 1930s. Featherston, a migrant laborer's wife and mother of three, lived in the draught-ridden Texas Panhandle. Her despair could not be more evident. (© New York Public Library, USA/Bridgeman Images)
LOOKING AHEAD
1.	What were some of the causes of the Great Depression? What made it so severe, and why did it last so long?
2.	What was the impact of the Depression on farmers, minorities, and women?
3.	How did President Hoover and his administration try to deal with the Depression? What was the result of those efforts?
SETTING THE STAGE
IN AUGUST 1928, NOT LONG
before his election to the presidency, Herbert Hoover proclaimed: "We in America today are nearer to the final triumph over poverty than ever before in the history of any land. The poorhouse is vanishing from among us.” Only fifteen months later those words would return to haunt him, as the nation plunged into the severest and most prolonged economic depression in its history a depression that continued in one form or another for more than a decade, not only in the United States but throughout much of the rest of the world as well. The Depression reached into every area of both economic and social life. It destroyed the great bull market" of the 1920s and sent stock prices into a long and steep decline from which they did not recover for years. It halted the great wave of investment in industrial plants and infrastructure that had done so much to fuel economic growth before the crash. It jeopardized the health of the national banking system. Most of all, it created massive unemployment, which rose at some points to nearly 25 percent of the workforce. This massive and persistent unemployment was the most visible and, to many, most frightening aspect of the Depression.
In the midst of this crisis, Herbert Hoover used the tools of the federal government more aggressively and creatively than any president had ever used them before to address economic problems. But it was not enough to stem the tide of the Depression. And there were many steps that Hoover refused to consider because he believed they would violate basic principles of American life—most notably the rights and responsibilities of individuals. These values had been greatly admired through most of American history, but the crisis of the Depression called them into question, undermined Hoover's reputation, and contributed eventually to a major shift in the character of American politics.
THE COMING OF THE GREAT DEPRESSION
The sudden economic decline that began in 1929 came as an especially severe shock because it followed so closely a period in which the New Era seemed to be performing another series of economic miracles.
The Great Crash
In February 1928, stock prices began a steady rise that continued, with only a few temporary lapses, for a year and a half. Between May 1928 and September 1929, the average price of stocks
Stock Market	increased over 40 PercenL The stocks of the major industrials-the stocks that
Boom	are used determine the Dow Jones Industrial Average—doubled in value in
that same period. Trading mushroomed from 2 or 3 million shares a day to over
5 million and, at times, to as many as 10 or 12 million. A widespread speculative fever grew steadily more intense, particularly once brokerage firms began encouraging the mania by recklessly offering easy credit.
In the autumn of 1929, the great bull market began to fall apart. On October 21 and again on October 23, there were alarming declines in stock prices, in both cases followed by temporary recoveries (the second of them engineered by J. P. Morgan and Company and other big bankers "Black	wh° c°nsPic“°usly bought up stocks to restore public confidence). But on
Tuesday”	October 29, Black Tuesday,” all efforts to save the market failed. Sixteen
million shares of stock were traded; the industrial index dropped 43 points-stocks in many companies became worthless. The market remained deeply depressed for more
than four years.	H
Many people believed thatwhe stock market erash was the beglnmng. and even the cause, of the G,eat Depress,on. But although October 1929 might have been the hrs. visible sign of the crisis, the Depression had earlier beginnings and more important causes
640
THE GREAT DEPRESSION
» 641 AFTERMATH OF THE CRASH
Walter Thornton, shown here in October 1929 next to an expensive roadster he had bought not long before, was one of the affluent Americans who suffered substantial losses in the crash of the stock market in the fall of 1929. In popular mythology, many such people committed suicide in despair, In reality, very few people did. Much more common were efforts such as this to sell off assets to make up for the losses. Thornton was more fortunate than many victims of the Depression. Most had few assets to sell. (0 Bettmann/Corbis) Causes of the Depression
Economists, historians, and others have argued for decades about the causes of the Great Depression without reaching any consensus. (See "Debating the Past,” pp. 642-643.) But most agree on several things. They agree, first, that what is remarkable about the
crisis is not that it occurred; periodic recessions are a normal feature of capitalist economies. What is remarkable is that it was so severe and that it lasted so long. The important question, therefore, is not so much why there was a depression, but why it was such a bad one. Most observers agree, too, that a number of different factors account for the severity of the crisis, even if there is considerable disagreement about which was the most important.
One of those factors was a lack of diversification in the American economy in the 1920s. Prosperity had
_	depended excessively on a few
Lack of ,	. ,	,,
Diversification basic indusmes- notablY construe-tion and automobiles. In the late 1920s, those industries began to decline. Expenditures on construction fell from $11 billion to less than $9 billion between 1926 and 1929. Automobile sales fell by more than a third in the first nine months of 1929. Newer industries were emerging to take up the slack-among them petroleum, chemicals, plastics, and others oriented toward the expanding market for consumer goods-but had not yet developed enough strength to compensate for the decline in other sectors.
A second factor was the maldistribution of purchasing
power and, as a result, a weakness in consumer demand, which was too small to create an adequate market for the goods the economy was producing. Even in 1929, after nearly a decade
of economic growth, more than half the families in America lived on the edge of or below the minimum subsistence level-too poor to buy the goods the industrial economy was producing.
Maldistribution of Wealth
THE UNEMPLOYED, 1930
Thousands of unemployed men wait to be fed outside the Municipal Lodgers House in New York City. (The Library of Congress) DEBATING THE PAST
f:-;';s;UHKssr.n^dHi:,<•'	- -■ -U:SJU {ilHI>5BMiiHM;:
Causes of the Great Depression
T T A
rpwere the causes of the Great Depression? Economists and historians have W Jf* /* * debated this question since the economic collapse began and still have not reached anything close to agreement on an answer to it. In the process, however, they have produced several very different theories about how a modern economy works. During the Depression itself, different groups offered interpretations of the crisis that fit comfortably with their own self-interests. Some corporate leaders claimed that the Depression was the result of a lack of "business confidence,” that businessmen were reluctant to invest because they feared government regulation and high taxes. The Hoover administration, unable to solve the crisis with the tools it considered acceptable, blamed international economic forces and sought, therefore, to stabilize world currencies and debt structures. New Dealers, determined to find a domestic solution to the crisis and ideologically inclined to place limits on corporate power, argued that the Depression was a crisis of "underconsumption”—that low wages and high prices had made it too difficult to buy the products of the industrial economy—and that a lack of demand had led to the economic collapse.
Scholars in the years since the Great Depression have also created interpretations that fit their views of how the economy works. One of the first important postwar interpretations came from the economists Milton Friedman and Anna Schwartz, in their Monetary History of the United States (1963). In a chapter titled "The Great Contraction," they argued for what has become known as the "monetary" interpretation. The Depression, they claimed, was a result of a drastic contraction of the currency (a result largely of mistaken decisions by the Federal Reserve Board, which raised interest rates when it should have lowered them). These deflationary measures, Friedman and Schwartz argue, turned an ordinary recession into the Great Depression. Friedman, in particular, advocated for many years that sound monetary policy is the best way to solve economic problems—as opposed to fiscal policies, such as taxation and spending.
A second, very different argument, known as the "spending" interpretation, is identified with, among others, the economist Peter Temin and his book Did Monetary Forces Cause the Great Depression? (1976). Temin's answer to his own question is "no." The cause of the crisis was not monetary contraction (although the contraction made it worse), but a drop in investment and consumer spending, which preceded the decline in the money supply and helped to cause it. Here again, there are obvious political implications. If a decline in spending was the cause of the Depression, then the proper response was an effort to stimulate demand—raising government spending, increasing purchasing power, redistributing wealth. According to this theory, the New Deal never ended the Depression because it did not spend enough. World War II did end it because it pumped so much public money into the economy. This is a liberal, Keynesian explanation, just as the "monetary hypothesis" is a conservative explanation.
In The Great Depression (1987), the economic historian Michael Bernstein avoids trying to explain why the economic downturn occurred and asks, instead, why it lasted so long. The reason the recession of 1929
Another major problem was the credit structure of the economy. Farmers were deeply in debt-their land mortgaged, crop prices too low to allow them to pay off what they owed. Small banks, especially those tied to the agricultural economy, were in constant trouble in the 1920s as their customers defaulted on loans; many of these small banks failed. Large banks were in trouble, too. Although most American bankers were very conservative, some of the nation’s biggest banks were investing recklessly in the stock market or making unwise loans. When the stock market crashed, many of these banks suffered losses greater than they could absorb.
A fourth factor contributing to the coming of the Depression was America’s position in international trade. Late in the 1920s,
Declining European demand for American goods began
Exports t0 decline- That was Partty because of high American tariffs, partly because European industry and agriculture were becoming more productive, and partly because some European nations (most notably Germany, under the Weimar Republic) were having financial difficulties and could not afford to buy goods from overseas. But it was also because the European economy was being destabilized by, a fifth factor contributing to the Depression, the international debt
structure that had emerged in the aftermath of World War I.
Unstable
International
Debt
Structure
When the war ended in 1918, all the European nations that had been allied with the United States owed large sums of money to American banks, sums much too large to be repaid out of their shattered economies. That was one reason the Allies had insisted (over Woodrow Wilson’s objections) on reparation payments from Germany and Austria. Reparations, they believed, would provide them with a way to pay off their own debts. But Germany and Austria were themselves in economic trouble after the
war; they were no more able to pay the reparations than the Allies were able to pay their debts.
The U.S. government refused to forgive or reduce the debts. Instead, American banks began making large loans to European governments, with which they paid off their earlier loans. Thus debts (and reparations) were being paid only by piling up new and greater debts. In the late 1920s, particularly after the American economy began to weaken in 1929, the European nations found it much more difficult to borrow money from the United States. At the same time, high American protective tariffs were making it difficult for them to sell their goods in American markets. Without any source of foreign exchange with which to repay their loans, they began to default. The collapse of the international
642	*
SHOP WINDOW
Arthur Rothstein, one of the most significant photographers of the Great Depression, photographed this shop window in West Frankfort, Illinois, in 1939. The windows are plastered with signs pleading for customers to help them by purchasing their goods. (fcJ The Granger Collection, New York) after the war. This is, in other words, an explanation of the Depression that seems to support some of the economic ideas that became popular in the 1970s and 1980s calling for a more direct government role in stimulating the growth of new industries. Other explanations include the rise of protectionism (increased by the ill-advised Smoot-Hawley Tariff of 1931, which stifled international trade); the weakness of the banking system; the reckless credit policies of the 1920s; and many others.
In the end, however, no single explanation of the Great Depression has ever seemed adequate to most scholars. The event, the economist Robert Lucas once argued, is simply "inexplicable" by any rational calculation. •
UNDERSTAND, ANALYZE, AND EVALUATE
became the Depression of the 1930s, he argues, was the timing of the collapse. The recession began as an ordinary cyclical downturn. Had it begun a few years earlier, the basic strength of the automobile and construction industries in the 1920s would have led to a reasonably speedy recovery. Had it begun a few years later, a group of newer, emerging industries would have helped produce a recovery in a reasonably short time. But the recession began in 1929, too late for the automobile and construction industries to help and too soon for emerging new industries to help, since they were still in their infancies. One of the reasons World War II was so important to the long-term recovery of the U.S, economy, Bernstein's argument suggests, was not just that it pumped money into the economy, but that much of that money contributed to developing new industries that would help sustain prosperity
1.	How do the "monetary" and "spending" arguments about the causes of the Great Depression differ from each other?
2.	What is Michael Bernstein's theory of the causes of the Depression?
3.	Why have there been such widespread and long-standing differences on the question of the causes of the Depression?
credit structure was one of the reasons the Depression spread to Europe (and grew much worse in America) after 1931. (See "America in the World,” pp. 644-645.)
Progress of the Depression
The stock market crash of 1929 did not so much cause the Depression, then, as help trigger a chain of events that exposed long-standing weaknesses in the American economy. During the next three years, the crisis steadily worsened.
A collapse of much of the banking system followed the stock market crash. More than 9,000 American banks either went bankrupt or closed their doors to avoid bankruptcy between 1930 and 1933. Depositors lost over $2.5 billion in
Bankin	deposits. Partly as a result of these banking
Collapse	closures, the total money supply of the
nation fell by more than a third between
!930 and 1933. The declining money supply meant a decline hi purchasing power, and thus deflation. Manufacturers and Merchants began reducing prices, cutting back on production, and laying off workers. Some economists argue that a severe depression could have been avoided if the Federal Reserve sys-had acted more responsibly. But the members of the
Federal Reserve Board, concerned about protecting its own solvency in a dangerous economic environment, raised interest rates in 1931, which contracted the money supply even further.
The American gross national product plummeted from more than $104 billion in 1929 to $76.4 billion in 1932-a 25 percent decline in three years. In 1929, Americans had spent $16.2 billion Severe	in caPita^ investmenF in 1933, they invested
Contraction	onty a	a billion. The consumer price
index declined 25 percent between 1929 and 1933, the wholesale price index 32 percent. Gross farm
income dropped from $12 billion to $5 billion in four years.
THE AMERICAN PEOPLE
IN HARD TIMES
Someone asked the British economist John Maynard Keynes in the 1930s whether he was aware of any historical era comparable to the Great Depression. "Yes,” Keynes replied. "It was called the Dark Ages, and it lasted 400 years.” The Depression did not, of course, last 400 years, but it did bring unprecedented despair to the economies of the United States and
The Global Depression
rp tt	Great Depression began in the United States, but it did not end there. The collapse of
1 tl D the American economy—the largest in the world—sent shock waves around the globe. By 1931, the American depression had become a world depression.
The origins of the worldwide depression lay in the pattern of debts that had emerged during and after World War I, when the United States loaned billions of dollars to European nations. In 1931, large banks in New York began calling in their loans from Germany and Austria. That precipitated the failure of one of Austria’s largest banks, which in turn created panic through much of central Europe. The economic collapse in Germany and Austria meant that those nations could not continue paying reparations to Britain and France (required by the Treaty of Versailles of 1919), which meant in turn that Britain and France could not continue paying off their loans to the United States.
This spreading financial crisis was accompanied by a dramatic contraction of international trade, precipitated in part by the Smoot-Hawley Tariff in the United States, which established the highest import duties in history and stifled much global commerce. Depressed agricultural prices— a result of worldwide overproduction—also contributed to the downturn. By 1932, worldwide industrial production had declined by more than a third, and world trade had plummeted by nearly two-thirds. By 1933, thirty million people in industrial nations were unemployed, five times the number four years before.
But the Depression was not confined to industrial nations. Imperialism and industrialization drew almost all regions of the world into the international industrial economy. Colonies and nations in Africa, Asia, and South America—critically dependent on exporting raw materials and agricultural goods to industrial countries—experienced a decline in demand for their products, which led to rising levels of poverty and unemployment. Some nations—among them the Soviet Union and China—remained unconnected to the global economy and suffered relatively little from the Great Depression. But in most parts of the world, the Depression caused tremendous social and economic hardship.
It also created political turmoil. Among the countries hardest hit by the Depression was Germany, where industrial production had declined by 50 percent and unemployment reached 35 percent in the early 1930s. The desperate economic conditions there contributed greatly to the rise of the Nazi Party and its leader, Adolf Hitler, who became chancellor in 1932. Japan suffered greatly as well, and as in Germany, Japan's economic troubles produced political turmoil and aided the rise of a new militaristic regime. In Italy, the fascist government of Benito Mussolini, which had first taken power in
LOOKING FOR WORK IN LONDON, 1935
An unemployed London man wears a sign that seems designed to convince passersby that he is an educated, respectable person despite his present circumstances. (© Hulton Archive/Getty Images)
the 1920s, also saw militarization and territorial expansion as a way out of economic difficulties.
In other nations, governments sought solutions to the Depression through reform of their domestic economies. Among the most common responses to the
much of the Western world. And it had far-reaching effects on American society and culture.
Unemployment and Relief
In the industrial Northeast and Midwest, cities were becoming paralyzed by unemployment. Cleveland, Ohio, in 1932 had an unemployment rate of roughly 50 percent; Akron, 60 percent; Toledo, 80 percent. Many industrial workers were accustomed to periods of unemployment, but no one was prepared for the scale and duration of the joblessness of the 1930s.
Most Americans had been taught to believe that every individual was responsible for his or her own fate, that unemployment and poverty were signs of personal failure. Many adult men, in particular, felt deeply ashamed of their joblessness; the helplessness of unemployment was a
challenge to traditional notions of masculinity. Unemployed workers walked through the streets day after day looking for jobs that did not exist.
An increasing number of families were turning to state and local public relief systems, just to be able to eat. But those systems, which in the 1920s had served only a small number of indigent persons, were unequipped to handle the new demands. In many places, relief simply collapsed. Private charities attempted to supplement the public relief efforts, but the problem was far beyond their capabilities as well. State governments felt pressure to expand their own assistance to the unemployed; but tax revenues were declining along with everything else, and state leaders balked at placing additional strains on already tight budgets. Moreover, many public officials believed that an extensive welfare system would undermine the moral fiber of its clients.
Breadlines stretched for blocks outside Red Cross and Salvation Army kitchens. Thousands of people sifted through garbage cans
Belief in
Personal
Responsibility
644 <
THE GREAT DEPRESSION . 645
Depression around the world was substantial government investment in public works, The United States, Britain, France, Germany, Italy, the Soviet Union, and other countries made substantial investments in roads, bridges, dams, public buildings, and other large projects. All the industrial countries of the world also experimented with some form of government-funded relief for the unemployed, often borrowing ideas from one another in the process.
Furthermore, because classical models of economic behavior seemed unable to explain, or provide solutions to, the crisis, the Depression helped create new approaches to economics. The great British economist John Maynard Keynes revolutionized economic thought in much of the world. His 1936 book, The General Theory of Employment, Interest, and Money, despite its bland title, created a sensation by arguing that the Depression was a result not of declining production but, rather, of inadequate consumer demand. Governments, he said, could stimulate their economies by increasing the money supply and creating investment—through a combination of lowering interest rates and public spending. Keynesianism, as Keynes's theories became known, began to have an impact in the United States in 1938, and in much of the rest of the world in subsequent years.
The Great Depression was an important turning point not only in American history, but in the history of the twentieth-century world as well, It transformed ideas of public policy and economics in many nations, It toppled old regimes and created new ones, Above all, it was a major factor—maybe the single most important factor—in the coming of World War II. •
UNDERSTAND, ANALYZE, AND EVALUATE
1.	How did the 1919 Treaty of Versailles and the Hawley-Smoot Tariff contribute to the global depression of the 1930s?
2.	How did the governments of European nations respond to the depression?
3.	What effect did the global depression have on economic theory? Why was Keynes's economic theory so revolutionary?
for scraps of food or waited outside restaurant kitchens in hopes of receiving plate scrapings. Nearly 2 million men, most of them young (and a much smaller number of women), took to the roads, riding freight trains from city to city, living as nomads.
Farm income declined by 60 percent between 1929 and 1932. A third of all American farmers lost their land. In addition, a large area of agricultural settlement in the Great Plains °f the South and West was suffering from a catastrophic "Dust Bowl” natural disaster: one of the worst droughts in the history of the nation. Beginning in
!93O, a large area of the nation, stretching north from Texas into the Dakotas, came to be known as the "Dust Bowl. It began to experience a steady decline in rainfall and an accom Panying increase in heat. The drought continued for a decade, turning what had once been fertile farm regions into deserts, in Kansas, the soil in some places was without moisture as far as three feet below the surface. In Nebraska, Iowa, and other
affected states, summer temperatures were averaging over 100 degrees. Swarms of grasshoppers were moving from region to region, devouring what meager crops farmers were able to raise, often even devouring fenceposts or clothes hanging out to dry. Great dust storms-called "black blizzards”-swept across the plains, blotting out the sun and suffocating livestock as well as people unfortunate or foolish enough to stay outside.
Even with these disastrous conditions, the farm economy continued through the 1930s to produce far more food than American consumers could afford to buy. Farm prices fell so low that few growers made any profit on their crops. As a result, many farmers, like many urban unemployed, left their homes in search of work. In the South, in particular, many dispossessed farmers-black and white-wandered from town to town, hoping to find jobs or handouts. Hundreds of thou-«Okies” sands of families from the Dust Bowl (often known as "Okies,” since many came from
Oklahoma) traveled to California and other states, where they found conditions little better than those they had left. Many worked as agricultural migrants, traveling from farm to farm picking fruit and other crops at starvation wages.
Throughout the nation, problems resulting from malnutrition and homelessness grew at an alarming rate. Hospitals pointed to a striking increase in deaths from starvation. On the outskirts of cities, families lived in makeshift shacks constructed of flattened tin cans, scraps of wood, abandoned crates, and other debris. Many homeless Americans simply kept moving-sleeping in freight cars, city parks, subways, or unused sewer ducts.
African Americans and the Depression
As the Depression began, over half of all black Americans still lived in the South. Most were farmers. The collapse of prices for cotton and other staple crops left some with no income. Many
African	^anc^ abogethereither by choice or
American	forced by landlords who no longer found
Suffering	the sharecropping system profitable. Some
migrated to southern cities. But unemployed whites in the urban South believed they had first claim to all work and began to take positions as janitors, street cleaners, and domestic servants, displacing the African Americans who formerly
had occupied such jobs.
As the Depression deepened, whites in many southern cities began to demand that all blacks be dismissed from their jobs. In Atlanta in 1930, an organization calling itself the Black Shirts organized a campaign with the slogan "No Jobs for Niggers Until Every White Man Has a Job!” In other areas, whites used intimidation and violence to drive blacks from jobs. By 1932, over half the African Americans in the South were without employment. And what limited relief there was went almost invariably to whites first.
Unsurprisingly, therefore, many black southerners-perhaps 400,000-left the South in the 1930s and journeyed to the cities of the North. There they generally found less blatant discrimination. But conditions were little better than in the South. In New York, and in many other cities, black unemployment
