Almost from the moment Texas won its independence from Mexico in 1836, it sought admission to the United States as a state. Controversies over the status of slavery in the territories prevented its admission until 1845, and so for nine years it was an independent republic. The tattered banner pictured here was one of the republic's original flags. (© The Granger Collection, New York) 342 ■ CHAPTER 13
Americans in Texas
The United States had once claimed Texas-which until the 1830s was part of the Republic of Mexico-as a part of the Louisiana Purchase, but it had renounced the claim in 1819. Twice thereafter the United States had offered to buy Texas, only to meet with indignant Mexican refusals.
But in the early 1820s, the Mexican government launched an ill-advised experiment that would eventually cause it to lose its great northern province: it encouraged American emigration to Texas. The Mexicans hoped to strengthen the economy of the territory and increase their own tax revenues. They also liked the idea of the Americans sitting between Mexican settlement and the large and sometimes militant Indian tribes to the north. They convinced themselves, too, that settlers in Texas would serve as an effective buffer against United States expansion into the region; the Americans, they thought, would soon become loyal to the Mexican government. An 1824 colonization law designed to attract American settlers promised the newcomers cheap land and a four-year exemption from taxes.
Thousands of Americans, attracted by the rich soil in Texas, took advantage of Mexico’s welcome. Since much of the available land was suitable for growing cotton, the great majority of the immigrants were southerners, many of whom brought slaves with them. By 1830, there were about 7,000 Americans living in Texas, more than twice the number of Mexicans there.
Most of the settlers came to Texas through the efforts of American intermediaries, who received sizable land grants from Mexico in return for promising to bring settlers into the region. Stephen	The most successful of them was Stephen F.
Austin	Austin, a young immigrant from Missouri
who had established the first legal American settlement in Texas in 1822. Austin and other intermediaries were effective in recruiting American immigrants to Texas, but they also created centers of power in the region that competed with the Mexican government. In 1826, one of these American intermediaries led a revolt to establish Texas as an independent nation (which he proposed calling Fredonia). The Mexicans quickly crushed the revolt and, four years later, passed new laws barring any further American immigration into the region. They were too late. Americans kept flowing into the territory, and in 1833 Mexico dropped the futile immigration ban. By 1835 more
than 30,000 Americans, white and black, had settled in Texas.
Tensions between the United States and Mexico
Friction between the American settlers and the Mexican government continued to grow. It arose from the continuing ties of the immigrants to the United States, and it arose, too, from their desire to legalize slavery, which the Mexican government had made illegal in Texas in 1830. But the Americans were divided over how to address their unhappiness with Mexican rule. Austin and his followers wanted to reach a peaceful settlement that would give Texas more autonomy within the Mexican republic. Other Americans wanted to fight for independence.
In the mid-1830s, instability in Mexico drove General Antonio Lopez de Santa Anna to seize power as a dictator and impose a new, more autocratic regime on the nation and its territories. A new law increased the powers of the national government of Mexico at the expense of the state governments, a measure that Texans from the United States assumed Santa Anna was aiming specifically at them. The Mexicans even imprisoned Stephen Austin in Mexico City for a time, claiming that he was encouraging revolts among his fellow Americans in Texas. Sporadic fighting between Americans and Mexicans in Texas began in 1835 and escalated as the Mexican government sent more troops into the territory. In 1836, the American settlers defiantly proclaimed their independence from Mexico.
Santa Anna led a large army into Texas, where the American settlers were having difficulties organizing an effective defense of their new "nation.” Several different factions claimed to be the legitimate government of Texas, and the rebels could not even agree on who their commanders were. Mexican forces annihilated an American garrison at the Alamo mission in San Antonio after a famous, if futile, defense by a group of Texas patriots, a group that included, among others, the renowned frontiersman and former Tennessee congressman Davy Crockett. Another garrison, at Goliad, suffered substantially the same fate when the Mexicans executed most of the force after it had surrendered. By March 1836, the rebellion appeared to have collapsed. Americans were fleeing east toward Louisiana to escape Santa Anna’s army.
But General Sam Houston managed to keep a small force together. And on April 23, 1836, at the Battle of San jacinto San Jacinto (near the present-day city of Houston), he defeated the Mexican army and took Santa
Anna prisoner. During the surrender, American troops killed many of the Mexican soldiers in retribution for the executions at Goliad. Santa Anna, under pressure from his captors, signed a treaty giving Texas independence. The Mexican government repudiated the treaty, and Mexican troops briefly occupied San Antonio in 1842 but were unable to win Texas back.
A number of Mexican residents of Texas (known as "Tejanos”) had fought with the Americans in the revolution. But soon after Texas won its independence, their positions grew difficult. The Americans did not trust the Mexicans, fearing that they were agents of the Mexican government, and in effect drove many of them out of the new republic. Most of those who stayed had to settle for a politically and economically subordinate status within the fledgling nation.
Above all, American Texans hoped for annexation by the United States. One of the first acts of the new president of Texas, Sam Houston, was to send a delegation to Washington with an offer to join the Union. There were supporters of expansion in the United States who welcomed these overtures; indeed, ex-Opposition to pansionists in the United States had been Annexation supporting and encouraging the revolt against Mexico for years. But there was also opposition. Many American northerners opposed acquiring a large new slave territory, and others opposed increasing the southern votes in Congress and in the electoral college. Unfortunately for the Texans, one of the opponents was President
THE IMPENDING CRISIS
• 343 AUSTIN, TEXAS, 1840
Four years after Texas declared its independence from Mexico, the new republic’s capital, Austin, was still a small village, most of whose buildings were rustic cabins, as this hand-colored lithograph from the time suggests. The imposing house atop the hill at right was a notable exception. It was the residence of President Mirabeau Lamar. (© The Granger Collection, New York) Jackson, who feared annexation might cause a dangerous sectional controversy and even a war with Mexico. He therefore did not support annexation and even delayed recognizing the new republic until 1837. Presidents Martin Van Buren and William Henry Harrison also refrained from pressing the issue during their terms of office.
Spurned by the United States, Texas cast out on its own. Its leaders sought money and support from Europe. Some of them dreamed of creating a vast southwestern nation, stretching to the Pacific, that would rival the United States-a dream that appealed to European nations eager to counter the growing power of America. England and France quickly recognized and concluded trade treaties with Texas. In response, President Tyler persuaded Texas to apply for statehood again in 1844. But when Secretary of State Calhoun presented an annexation treaty to Congress as if its only purpose were to extend slavery, northern senators rebelled and defeated it. Rejection of the treaty only spurred advocates of Manifest Destiny to greater efforts toward their goal. The Texas question quickly became the central issue in the election of 1844.
Oregon
Control of what was known as Oregon Country, in the Pacific Northwest, was another major political issue in the 1840s. Its half-million square miles included the present states of Oregon, Washington, and Idaho, parts of Montana and Wyoming, and half of British Columbia. Both Britain and the
Disputed United States claimed sovereignty in the
Claims region-the British on the basis of explorations in the 1790s by George Vancouver, a naval officer; the Americans on the basis of simultaneous claims by Robert Gray, a fur trader. Unable to resolve their conflicting claims diplomatically, they agreed in an 1818 treaty to allow citizens of each country equal access to the territory. This arrangement, known as ’’joint occupation, con-
tinued for twenty years.
In fact, by the time of the treaty neither Britain nor the United States had established much of a presence in Oregon Country. White settlement in the region consisted largely of American and Canadian fur traders; and the most significant white settlements were the fur trading post established by John Jacob Astor’s company at Astoria and other posts built by the British Hudson’s Bay Company north of the Columbia River-where residents combined fur trading with farming and recruited Indian labor to compensate for their small numbers.
But American interest in Oregon grew substantially in the 1820s and 1830s. Missionaries considered the territory an attractive target for evangelical efforts, especially after the strange appearance of four Nez Perce and Flathead Indians in St. Louis in 1831. White Americans never discovered what had brought the Indians (who spoke no English) from Oregon to Missouri, and all four died before they could find out. But some missionaries considered the visit a divinely inspired invitation to extend their efforts westward. They were also motivated by a desire to counter the Catholic missionaries from Canada, whose presence in Oregon, many settlers believed, threatened American hopes for annexation. The missionaries had little
luccess with the tribes they attempted to convert, and some-mbittered by Indian resistance to their effortsbegan encour-iging white emigration to the region, arguing that by repudiating Zhristianity the Indians had abdicated their right to the land. When a people refuse or neglect to fill the designs of Provi-ience, they ought not to complain of the results,” said the mission-iry Marcus Whitman, who, with his wife, Narcissa, had established m important, if largely unsuccessful, mission among the Cayuse Indians east of the Cascade Mountains.
Significant numbers of white Americans began emigrating to Oregon in the early 1840s, and they soon substantially outnumbered the British settlers there. They also devastated much of the Indian population, in part through a measles epidemic that spread through the
Zayuse. The tribe blamed the Whitman mission for the plague,
Conflict BETWEEN Settlers and Indians
I
344 . CHAPTER 13
and in 1847 they attacked it and killed thirteen whites, including Marcus and Narcissa. But such resistance did little to stem the white immigration. By the mid-1840s, American settlements had spread up and down the Pacific coast; and the new settlers (along with advocates of Manifest Destiny in the East) were urging the U.S. government to take possession of the disputed Oregon Country.
Westward Migration
The migrations into Texas and Oregon were part of a larger movement that took hundreds of thousands of white and black Americans into the far western regions of the continent between 1840 and 1860. Southerners flocked mainly to Texas. But the largest number of migrants came from the Old Northwest-white men and women, and a few African Americans, who undertook arduous journeys in search of new opportunities. Most traveled in family groups, until the early 1850s, when the great California gold rush attracted many single men (see pp. 351-352). Most were relatively prosperous young people. Poor people could not afford the expensive trip, and those who wished to migrate usually had to do so by joining established families or groups as laborers-men as farm or ranch hands, women as domestic servants, teachers, or, in some cases, prostitutes. The character of the migrations varied according to the destination of the migrants. Groups headed for areas where mining or lumbering was the principal economic activity consisted mostly of men. Those heading for farming regions traveled mainly as families.
All the migrants were in search of a new life, but they harbored many different visions of what a new life would bring. Some-particularly after the discovery of gold in California in 1848-hoped for quick riches. Others planned to take advantage of the vast public lands the federal government was selling at modest prices to acquire property for farming or speculation. Still others hoped to establish themselves as merchants and serve the new white communities developing in the West. Some (among them the Mormons) were on religious missions or were attempting to escape the epidemic diseases plaguing many cities in the East. But the vast majority of migrants were looking for economic opportunities. They formed a vanguard for the expanding capitalist economy of the United States.
Life on the Trail
Most migrants-about 300,000 between 1840 and 1860-traveled west along the great overland trails. They generally gathered in one of several major depots in Iowa and Missouri (Independence, St. Joseph, or Council Bluffs), joined a wagon train led by hired guides, and set off with their belongings piled in covered wagons, livestock trailing behind. The major route west was the 2,000-mile Oregon Trail, which stretched from Independence across the Great Plains and through the South Pass of the Rocky Mountains. From there, migrants moved north into Oregon or south (along Oregon Trail t^Le Calif°rnia Trail) to the northern
California coast. Other migrations moved
WESTWARD HO!
Westward the Course of Empire Takes Its Way, painted by Emanuel Gottlieb Leutze (1816-1868) in 1861, is a pictorial representation of Manifest Destiny. It symbolizes the belief held by many during the mid-1800s that the United States was destined by divine plan and authority for western exploration and expansion. This mural is displayed in the House of Representatives in the United States Capitol building. (Private Collection/© Peter Newark American Pictures/The Bridgeman Art Library) along the Santa Fe Trail, southwest from Independence into New Mexico.
However they traveled, overland migrants faced consider-able hardships-although the death rate for travelers was only slightly higher than the rate for the American population as a whole. The mountain and desert terrain in the later portions of the trip were particularly difficult. Most journeys lasted five or six months (from May to November), and there was always pressure to get through the Rockies before the snows began, not always an easy task given the very slow pace of most
THE IMPENDING CRISIS
• 345 wagon trains (about fifteen miles a day). And although some migrants were moving west at least in part to escape the epidemic diseases of eastern cities, they were not immune from plagues. Thousands of people died on the trail of cholera during the great epidemic of the early 1850s.
In the years before the Civil War, fewer than 400 migrants (about one-tenth of 1 percent) died in conflicts with the tribes. In fact, Indians were usually more helpful than dangerous to the white migrants. They often served as guides through difficult terrain or aided travelers in crossing streams or herding
Gulf of Mexico
ui	f I ' a and establishing farms and businesses in the West, major new trails began to facilitate travel and trade between the
ESTERN TRAILS IN 1860
As settlers began the long process o exp orin ^ow jew of them |ej jnt0 any of the far northern regions of United States territory. Note too the re9'on and the more thickly settled areas to the east. Note how many of the trai s e o "nportant towns and cities that grew up along these trails.
J Q'
Sutter'sXort San Francisco -p (Sacramento) * What forms of transportation later performed the functions that these trails perf p
to the Civil War?
CROSSING THE SIERRAS A
wagon train struggles across the rugged trails over the Sierra Nevada, as migrants travel in California. The image is a black-and-white photograph that was colored by paint. Only a few years later, the same trip could be achieved much easier because of the transcontinental railroad. (© The Granger Collection, New York) livestock. They maintained an extensive trade with the white travelers in horses, clothing, and fresh food. But stories of the occasional conflicts between migrants and Indians on the trail created widespread fear among white travelers, even though more Indians than white people (and relatively few of either) died in those conflicts.
Life on the trail was obviously very different from life on a farm or in a town. But the society of the trail re-created many of the patterns of conventional American society. Families divided tasks along gender lines: the men driving and, when Life on the necessary, repairing the wagons or hunting Trail	game; the women cooking, washing clothes,
and caring for children. Almost everyone, male or female, walked the great majority of the time, to lighten the load for the horses drawing the wagons; and so the women, many of whose chores came at the end of the day, generally worked much harder than the men, who usually
rested when the caravan halted.
Despite the traditional image of westward migrants as rugged individualists, most travelers found the journey a highly collective experience. That was partly because many expeditions consisted of groups of friends, neighbors, or relatives who had decided to pull up stakes and move west together. And it was partly because of the intensity of the experience: many weeks of difficult travel with no other human contacts except, occasionally, with Indians. Indeed, one of the most frequent causes of disaster for travelers was the breakdown of the necessarily communal character of the migratory companies. It was a rare expedition in which there were not some internal conflicts before the trip was over.
EXPANSION AND WAR
The growing number of white Americans in the lands west of the Mississippi put great pressure on the government in Washington to annex Texas, Oregon, and other territory. In the 1840s, these expansionist pressures helped push the United States into a war that-however dubious its origins-became a triumph for the advocates of Manifest Destiny.
The Democrats and Expansion
In preparing for the presidential election of 1844, the two leading candidates-Henry Clay and former president Martin Van Buren-both tried to avoid taking a stand on the controversial issue of the annexation of Texas. Sentiment for expan-
RUSSIAN \ POSSESSIONS
-Fort Simpson - — -‘M'
A
nor+hErn limit OF AMERICAN CJ-AIM

% <'
%
BRITISH
AMERICA
Vanopuve^i £
is/ay Y'yV
PACIFIC
OCEAN
Astori^* Portland
Fort Colville
cP

&


(
Primary area in dispute To Britain, 1846 To United States, 1846 1846 treaty line
*Spokane , t
\
rdrfWa//a Wa//a	v
UNITED'
STATES
Fort" Bridger
SOUTHERN LIMIT OF AMERICAN CLAIM
MEXICO
400 rrjT
400C' J 800 km
THE OREGON BOUNDARY, 1846
One of the last major boundary disputes between the United States and Great Britain involved the territory known as Oregon—the large region on the Pacific coast north of California (which in 1846 was still part of Mexico). For years, America and Britain had overlapping claims on the territory. The British claimed land as far south as the present state of Oregon, while the Americans claimed land extending well into what is now Canada. Tensions over the Oregon border at times rose to the point that many Americans were demanding war, some using the slogan "54-40 or fight," referring to the latitude of the northernmost point of the American claim. • How did President James K. Polk defuse the crisis?
THE IMPENDING CRISIS
• 347 James K. Polk sion was mild within the Whig Party, and Clay had no difficulty securing the nomination despite his noncommittal position. But many southern
Democrats supported annexation, and the party passed over Van Buren to nominate a strong supporter of annexation, the previously unheralded James K. Polk.
Polk was not as obscure as his Whig critics claimed. He had represented Tennessee in the House of Representatives for fourteen years, four of them as Speaker, and had subsequently served as governor. But by 1844, he had been out of public office and for the most part out of the public mind-for three years. What made his victory possible was his support for the position, expressed in the Democratic platform, ’’that the re-occupation of Oregon and the reannexation of Texas at the earliest practicable period are great American measures.” By combining the Oregon and Texas questions, the Democrats hoped to appeal to both northern and southern expansionists. Polk carried the election by 170 electoral votes to 105, although his popular majority was less than 40,000.
Polk entered office with a clear set of goals and with plans for attaining them. John Tyler accomplished the first of Polk’s goals for him. Interpreting the election returns as a mandate for the annexation of Texas, the outgoing president won congressional approval for it in February 1845. That December, Texas became a state.
Polk himself resolved the Oregon question. The British minister in Washington brusquely rejected a compromise Compromise Polk offered that would establish the over Oregon United States-Canadian border at the 49th parallel; he did not even refer the proposal to London. Incensed, Polk again asserted the American claim to all of Oregon. There was loose talk of war on both sides of the Atlantic talk that in the United States often took the form of the bellicose slogan "54-40 or fight!” (a reference to where the Americans hoped to draw the northern boundary of their part of Oregon). But neither country really wanted war. Finally, the British government accepted Polk’s original proposal. On June 15, 1846, the Senate approved a treaty that fixed the boundary at the 49th parallel, where it
remains today.
The Southwest and California
One of the reasons the Senate and the president had agreed so readily to the British offer to settle the Oregon question was that new tensions were emerging in the Southwest-tensions that ultimately led to a war with Mexico. As soon as the United States admitted Texas to statehood in 1845, the Mexican government broke diplomatic relations with Washington. Mexican-American relations grew still worse when a dispute developed over the boundary between Texas and Mexico. Texans claimed the Rio Grande as their western and southern border, a claim that would have added much of what is now New Mexico to Texas. Mexico, although still not conceding the loss of Texas, argued nevertheless that the border had always been the Nueces River, to the north of the Rio Grande. Polk accepted the Texas claim, and in the summer of 1845 he sent a small army under General Zachary Taylor to Texas to protect it against a possible Mexican invasion.
Part of the area in dispute was New Mexico, whose Spanish and Indian residents lived in a multiracial society that by the 1840s had endured for nearly a century and a half. In the 1820s, the Mexican government had invited American traders into the region (just as it invited American settlers into Texas), hoping to speed development of the province. And New Mexico, like Texas, began to become more American than Mexican. A flourishing commerce soon developed between Santa Fe and Independence, Missouri.
Americans were also increasing their interest in an even
A	more distant province of Mexico: California.
/IjME'RICAN	K
Interests in 1r vasr regi°n lived members of several California western Indian tribes and perhaps 7,000
Mexicans, mostly descendants of Spanish colonists. Gradually, however, white Americans began to arrive: first maritime traders and captains of Pacific whaling ships, who stopped to barter goods or buy supplies; then merchants, who established stores, imported merchandise, and developed a profitable trade with the Mexicans and Indians; and finally pioneering farmers, who entered California from the east, by land, and settled in the Sacramento Valley. Some of these new settlers began to dream of bringing California into the United States.
SACRAMENTO IN THE 1850S
The busy river port of Sacramento served the growing agricultural and mining economies of north central California in the 1850s— years in which the new state began the dramatic population growth that a century later would make it the nation's largest. (The Library of Congress (LC-USZC4-2853)) j
348 • CHAPTER 13
THE MEXICAN WAR, 1846-1848
Shortly after the settlement of the Oregon border dispute with Britain, the United States entered a war with Mexico over another contested border. This map shows the movement of Mexican and American troops during the fighting, which extended from the area around Santa Fe south to Mexico City and west to the coast of California. Note the American use of its naval forces to facilitate a successful assault on Mexico City, and other attacks on the coast of California. Note, too, how unsuccessful the Mexican forces were in their battles with the United States. Mexico won only one battle—a minor one at San Pasqual near San Diego—in the war. * How did President Polk deal with the popular clamor for the United States to annex much of present-day Mexico?

President Polk soon came to share their dream and committed himself to acquiring both New Mexico and California for the United States. At the same time that he dispatched troops to Texas, he sent secret instructions to the commander of the Pacific naval squadron to seize the California ports if Mexico declared war. Representatives of the president quietly informed Americans in California that the United States would respond sympathetically to a revolt against Mexican authority there.
The Mexican War
Having appeared to prepare for war, Polk turned to diplomacy
and dispatched a special minister, John Slidell, to try to buy off
the Mexicans. But Mexican leaders rejected SlidelPs offer to
purchase the disputed territories. On January 13, 1846, as soon
as he heard the news, Polk ordered Taylor's army in Texas to
move across tne ixueces
FAILURE OF
_________________ ................. the Slidell	had been stationed, to the Rio Grande. For
Mission	months, the Mexicans refused to fight. But
finally, according to disputed American accounts, some Mexican troops crossed the Rio Grande and attacked a unit of American soldiers. Polk now told Congress: "War exists by the act of Mexico herself.” On May 13, 1846, Congress declared war by votes of 40 to 2 in the Senate and 174 to 14 in the House.
The war had many opponents in the United States. Whig critics charged from the beginning (and not without justification) that Polk had deliberately maneuvered the country into the conflict and had staged the border incident that had pre' cipitated the declaration. Many other critics argued that the hostilities with Mexico were draining resources and attention away from the more important issue of the Pacific Northwest Even when the United States finally reached its agreerneni
THE IMPENDING CRISIS - 349
Opposition to with Britain on the Oregon question, the War opponents claimed that Polk had settled for less than he should have because he was preoccupied with Mexico. Opposition intensified as the war continued and as the public became aware of the casual-
ties and expense.
To others, the war was a moral crime. Ulysses Grant, then an officer in the Mexican War, called it "one of the most unjust ever waged.” Abraham Lincoln criticized the war on the grounds that it gave the president too much power. "Allow the President to invade a neighboring country whenever he shall deem it necessary . . . ,” he said, "and you allow him to make war at pleasure.” Pacifists were particularly dismayed. Henry David Thoreau was so horrified by the war that he refused to pay taxes (which he said financed the conflict) and spent time in jail.
American forces did well against the Mexicans, but victory did not come as quickly as Polk had hoped. The president ordered
Taylor to cross the Rio Grande, seize parts of northeastern Mexico, beginning with the city of Monterrey, and then march on to Mexico City itself. Taylor captured Monterrey in September 1846, but he let the Mexican garrison evacuate without pursuit. Polk now began to fear that Taylor lacked the tactical skill for the planned advance against Mexico City. He also feared that, if successful, Taylor would become a powerful political rival (as, in fact, he did).
In the meantime, Polk ordered other offensives against New Mexico and California. In the summer of 1846, a small army under Colonel Stephen W. Kearny captured Santa Fe Bear Flag	no °PPosition- Then Kearny pro-
Revolution ceeded to California, where he joined a conflict already in progress that was being staged jointly by American settlers, a well-armed exploring party led by John C. Fremont, and the United States Navy: the so-called Bear Flag Revolution. Kearny brought the disparate American forces together under his command, and
b xW'-iWi 9-3* rzl 9
■ IH/Ifi one of the most important conflicts of the Mexican War. Troops under the command of General Zachary Taylor defeated THE BATTLE OF MONTERREY The Battle of Monterrey in 18 was	Mexican army on September 26 was a result of the Americans surrounding the Mexican soldiers. It was an
Mexican forces, but not without significant American casualties. The surre important step in the American victory in the Mexican War. (Historicus, Inc.)
350 ♦ CHAPTER 13
by the autumn of 1846 he had completed the conquest of California.
The United States now controlled the two territories for which it had gone to war. But Mexico still refused to concede defeat. At this point, Polk and General Winfield Scott, the commanding general of the army and its finest soldier, launched a bold new campaign. Scott assembled an army at Tampico, which the navy transported down the Mexican coast to Veracruz. With an army that never numbered more than 14,000, Scott advanced 260 miles along the Mexican National Highway toward Mexico City, kept American casualties low, and never lost a battle before finally seizing the Mexican capital. A new Mexican government took power and announced its willingness to negotiate a peace treaty.
President Polk was now unclear about his objectives. He continued to encourage those who demanded that the United States annex much of Mexico itself. At the same time, concerned about the approaching presidential election, he was growing anxious to finish the war quickly. Polk had sent a special presidential envoy, Nicholas Trist, to negotiate a
Treaty of settlement. On February 2, 1848, Trist Guadalupe reached agreement with the new Mexican
Hidalgo government on the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo, by which Mexico agreed to cede
California and New Mexico to the United States and acknowledge the Rio Grande as the boundary of Texas. In return, the United States promised to assume any financial claims its new citizens had against Mexico and to pay the Mexicans $15 million. Trist had obtained most of Polk’s original demands, but he had not satisfied the new, more expansive dreams of acquiring additional territory in Mexico itself. Polk angrily claimed that Trist had violated his instructions, but he soon realized that he had no choice but to accept the treaty to silence a bitter battle growing between ardent expansionists demanding the annexation of "All Mexico!” and antislavery leaders charging that the expansionists were conspiring to extend slavery to new realms. The president submitted the Trist treaty to the Senate, which approved it by a vote of 38 to 14. The war was over, and America had gained a vast new territory. But it had also acquired a new set of troubling and divisive issues.
PACIFIC
OCEAN
Limit of Spanish territory established by Treaty of 1819
Boundary established by Treaty of
Guadalupe Hidalgo, 1848
Texas, annexed by United States, 1845
Disputed by Texas and Mexico, later by United States and Mexico; ceded by Mexico, 1848
Additional territory ceded by Mexico to United States, 1848
[ Gadsden Purchase by United States > from Mexico, 1853
San Franciscc
G n / f of i\1 ca ico
SOUTHWESTERN EXPANSION, 1845-1853
The annexation of much of what is now Texas in 1845, the much larqer territorial • • u additional land from Mexico in 1853 completed the present continental border of the United States	9 rntorial gains won in the Mexican War in 1848, and the
What great event shortly after the Mexican War contributed to a rapid
eastern United States?
r
i
THE SECTIONAL DEBATE
[ames Polk tried to be a president whose policies transcended sectional divisions. But conciliating the sections was becoming an almost impossible task. Polk gradually earned the enmity of northerners and westerners alike, who believed his policies (particularly his enthusiasm for territorial expansion in the Southwest) favored the South at their expense.
Slavery and the Territories
In August 1846, while the Mexican War was still in progress, Polk asked Congress to appropriate $2 million for purchasing peace with Mexico. Representative David Wilmot of Pennsylvania, an antislavery Democrat, introduced an amendment to the appropriation bill prohibiting slavery in any territory acquired from Mexico. The so-called Wilmot Proviso
Wilmot passed the House but failed in the Senate. Proviso It would be called up, debated, and voted on repeatedly for years. Southern militants, in the meantime, contended that all Americans had equal rights in the new territories, including the right to move their
"property” (slaves) there.
As the sectional debate intensified, President Polk supported a proposal to extend the Missouri Compromise line through the new territories to the Pacific coast, banning slavery north of the line and permitting it south of the line. Other politicians supported a plan, originally known as "squatter
sovereignty” and later by the more dignified phrase "popular sovereignty,” which would allow the people of each territory (acting through their legislature) to decide the status of slavery there. The debate over these various proposals dragged on for many months, and the issue remained unresolved when Polk left office in 1849.
The presidential campaign of 1848 dampened the controversy for a time as both Democrats and Whigs tried to avoid the slavery question. When Polk, in poor health, declined to tun again, the Democrats nominated Lewis Cass of Michigan, a dull, aging party regular. The Whigs nominated General Zachary Taylor of Louisiana, hero of the Mexican War but a man with no political experience. Opponents of slavery found the choice of candidates unsatisfying, and out of their discontent emerged the new Free-Soil Party, which drew from the existing Liberty Party and the antislavery wings of the Whig and Democratic Parties and which endorsed the Wilmot Proviso. Its candidate was former president Martin Van Buren.
Taylor won a narrow victory. But while Van Buren failed to carry a single state, he polled an impressive 291,000 votes (10 Percent of the total), and the Free-Soilers elected ten members
Free-Soil t0 Congress. The emergence of the Free-Soil
Party	Party as an important political force, li e
the emergence of the Know-Nothing and
Liberty Parties before it, signaled the inability of the existing
parties to contain the political passions slavery was creating.
Competing
Plans
THE IMPENDING CRISIS * 351
The California Gold Rush
By the time Taylor took office, the pressure to resolve the question of slavery in the far western territories had become more urgent as a result of dramatic events in California. In January 1848, James Marshall, a carpenter working on one of rancher John Sutter’s sawmills, found traces of gold in the foothills of the Sierra Nevada. Sutter tried to suppress the news, fearing a gold rush would destroy his own substantial empire in the region. But by May, word of the discovery had reached San Francisco; by late summer, it had reached the east coast of the United States and much of the rest of the world. Almost immediately, hundreds of thousands of people from around the world began flocking to California in a frantic search for gold. California’s non-Indian population increased nearly twentyfold in four years: from 14,000 in 1848 to over 220,000 in 1852.
The atmosphere in California at the peak of the gold rush was one of crazed excitement and greed. For a short time, San Francisco was almost completely depopulated as residents raced to the mountains to search for gold; the city’s principal newspaper (which had been criticizing the gold mania) had to stop publication because it could no longer find either staff or readers. "Nothing but the introduction of insane asylums can effect a cure,” one visitor remarked of the gold mania.
Most pre-gold-rush migrants to the Far West had prepared carefully before making the journey. But the gold-rush mi-Forty-niners 8rants (known as "Forty-niners”) threw caution to the winds. They abandoned farms, jobs, homes, families; they piled onto ships and flooded the overland trails-many carrying only what they could pack on their backs. The overwhelming majority of the Forty-niners (perhaps 95 percent) were men, and the society they created on their arrival in California was unusually volatile because of
the absence of women, children, and families.
The gold rush also attracted some of the first Chinese migrants to the western United States. News of the discoveries created great excitement in China, particularly in impoverished areas, where letters from Chinese already in California and reports from Americans visiting in China spread the word. It was, of course, extremely difficult for a poor Chinese peasant to get to America; but many young, adventurous people (mostly men) decided to go anyway-believing that they could quickly become rich and then return to China. Emigration brokers loaned many migrants money for passage to California, which the migrants would pay off out of their earnings there. The migration was almost entirely voluntary (unlike the forced movement of kidnapped "coolies” to such places as Peru and Cuba at about the same time). The Chinese in California were, therefore, free laborers and merchants, looking for gold or, more often, hoping to profit from other economic opportunities the gold boom was creating.
The gold rush created a serious labor shortage in California, as many male workers left their jobs and flocked to the gold fields. This shortage created opportunities for many people who needed work (including Chinese immigrants). It also led to an overt exploitation of Indians that resembled slavery in all
!
352 • CHAPTER 13
LOOKING FOR GOLD
Finding gold in California was not, for the most part, a task for lone prospectors. More common were teams of people who, together, built elaborate mining technologies./ this 1852 photograph shows, the mining teams were often interracial. The white miners on the left stand conspicuously apart from the Chinese workers on the right, but both groups were e of the enterprise. (© The Granger Collection, New York) but name. White vigilantes, who called themselves "Indian hunters,” were already hunting down and killing thousands of Indians before the gold rush (contributing to the process by
Indian	which the Native American population of
Slavery	California declined from 150,000 to 30,000
between the 1850s and 1870). Now a new state law permitted the arrest of "loitering” or orphaned Indians
and their assignment to a term of "indentured” labor.
The gold rush was of critical importance to the growth of California, but not for the reasons most of the migrants hoped. There was substantial gold in the hills of the Sierra Nevada, and many people got rich from it. But only a tiny fraction of the Forty-niners ever found gold, or even managed to stake a claim to land on which they could look for gold. Some disappointed migrants returned home after a while. But many stayed in
California and swelled both the agricultural and urban populations of the territory. By 1856, for example, San Francisco-whose population had been 1,000 before the gold rush (and at one point declined to about 100 as people left for the mines>was the home of over 50,000 people. By the early 1850s, California’s population, which had always been diverse, had become even more so. The gold rush had attracted not just white Americans, but also Europeans, Chinese, South Americans, Mexicans, free blacks, and slaves who accompanied southern migrants. Conflicts over gold intersected with racial and ethnic tensions to make the territory an unusually turbulent place. As a result, pressure grew to create a stable and effective government. The gold rush, therefore, became another factor putting pressure on the United States to resolve the status not only of California, but of all territories—and of slavery within them as well.
THE IMPENDING CRISIS
• 353 Rising Sectional Tensions
Zachary Taylor believed statehood could become the solution to the issue of slavery in the territories. As long as the new lands remained territories, the federal government was responsible for deciding the fate of slavery within them. But once they became states, he thought, their own governments would be able to settle the slavery question. At Taylor’s urging, California quickly adopted a constitution that prohibited slavery, and in December 1849 Taylor asked Congress to admit California as a free state. New Mexico, he added, should also be granted statehood as soon as it was ready and should, like California, be permitted to decide for itself what it wanted to do about slavery.
Congress balked, in part because of several other controversies concerning slavery that were complicating the debate. One was the effort of antislavery forces to abolish slavery in the District of Columbia, a movement bitterly resisted by southerners. Another was the emergence of personal liberty laws in northern states, which barred courts and police officers from helping to return runaway slaves to their owners. In response, southerners demanded a stringent law that would require northern states to return fugitive slaves to their owners. But the biggest obstacle to the president’s program was the white South’s fear that two new free states would be added to the northern majority. The number of free and slave states was equal in 1849 fifteen each. But the admission of California would upset the balance; and New Mexico, Oregon, and Utah might upset it further, leaving the South in a minority in the Senate, as it already was in the House.
Tempers were now rising to dangerous levels. Even many otherwise moderate southern leaders were beginning to talk about secession from the Union. In the North, every state legislature but one adopted a resolution demanding the prohibition of slavery in the territories.
The Compromise of 1850
Faced with this mounting crisis, moderates and unionists spent the winter of 1849 1850 trying to frame a great compromise. The aging Henry Clay, who was spearheading the effort, believed that no compromise could last unless it settled all the issues in dispute between the sections. As a result, he
Clay’s	took several measures that had been pro-
Proposed posed separately, combined them into a Solution single piece of legislation, and presented it to the Senate on January 29, 1850. Among the bill’s provisions were the admission of California as a free state; the formation of territorial governments in the rest of
the lands acquired from Mexico, without restrictions on slav ery; the abolition of the slave trade, but not slavery itself, in the District of Columbia; and a new, more effective fugitive slave law. These resolutions launched a debate that raged for seven monthsboth in Congress and throughout the nation. The debate occurred in two phases, the differences between
Sectional Conflict over Slavery in the Territories
which revealed much about how American politics was changing in the 1850s.
In the first phase of the debate, the dominant voices in Congress were those of old men-national leaders who still remembered Jefferson, Adams, and other founders-who argued for or against the compromise on the basis of broad ideals. Clay himself, seventy-three years old in 1850, appealed to shared national sentiments of nationalism. Early in March, another of the older leaders-John C. Calhoun, sixty-eight years old and so ill that he had to sit grimly in his seat while a colleague read his speech for him-joined the debate. He insisted that the North grant the South equal rights in the territories, that it agree to observe the laws concerning fugitive slaves, that it cease attacking slavery, and that it amend the Constitution to create dual presidents, one from the North and one from the South, each with a veto. Calhoun was making radical demands that had no chance of passage. But like Clay, he was offering what he considered a comprehensive, permanent solution to the sectional problem that would, he believed, save the Union. After Calhoun came the third of the elder statesmen, sixty-eight-year-old Daniel Webster, one of the great orators of his time. Still nourishing presidential ambitions, he delivered an eloquent address in the Senate, trying to rally northern moderates to support Clay’s compromise.
But in July, after six months of this impassioned, nationalistic debate, Congress defeated the Clay proposal. And with that, the controversy moved into its second phase, in which a very different cast of characters predominated. Clay, ill and tired, left Washington to spend the summer resting in the mountains. Calhoun had died even before the vote in July. And Webster accepted a new appointment as secretary of state, thus removing himself from the Senate and from the debate.
In place of these leaders, a new, younger group now emerged. One spokesman was William H. Seward of New York, New	forty-nine years old, a wily political opera-
Leadership tor who staunchly opposed the proposed compromise. The ideals of union were to him less important than the issue of eliminating slavery. Another was Jefferson Davis of Mississippi, forty-two years old, a representative of the new, cotton South. To him, the slavery issue was less one of principles and ideals than one of economic self-interest. Most important of all, there was Stephen A. Douglas, a thirty-seven-year-old Democratic senator from Illinois. A westerner from a rapidly growing state, he was an open spokesman for the economic needs of his section-especially for the construction of railroads. His was a career devoted not to any broad national goals but to sectional gain
and personal self-promotion.
The new leaders of the Senate were able, as the old leaders had not been, to produce a compromise. One spur to the compromise was the disappearance of the most powerful obstacle to it: the president. Zachary Taylor had been adamant that only after California and possibly New Mexico were admitted as states could other measures be discussed. But on July 9, 1850, Taylor suddenly died-the victim of a violent stomach disorder. He was succeeded by Millard Fillmore of New York-a dull, handsome,
354
CHAPTER 13
ME.
OREGON
TERRITORY
MINNESOTA
TERRITORY
1849
WISCONSIN^
1848
MICHIGAN x 1837
N.Y.
UNORGANIZED
TERRITORY
IOWA
1946
OHIO
ILL.
IND.
PA.
CALIFORNIA
1850
PACinc
OCPAA
UTAH TERRITORY 1850
NEW MEXICO TERRITORY 1850
Free states and territories, 1850 Slave states and territories, 1850 Decision left to territories 47.2% Slaves as percentage of total population
Missouri
Compromise,
1820
MEXICO
INDIAN
TERR.
TEXAS
1845
27.3%
MO.
12.8%
KY.
21.4%
VA.
33.2%
TENN.
23.8% .
N.C.
33.2%
W \ 5
\ NH-
MASS.
% '*	CONN.
of N.J.
- DEL. 2.5%
"MD. 15.5%
xSlave trade prohibited in Washington, D.C.
ARKANSAS
1836 "	I
„ 22.4% P	;
MISS. ALA.
... L 51.0% 44.7% LA. - -	; "7;
< 47.2%
C u I f of M ex i
S.C.
57.5%
GA.
42.1%
. \ n
I ip
FLORIDA 1845 <
44.9%
CUBA'
(Sp.)
SLAVE AND FREE TERRITORIES UNDER THE COMPROMISE OF 1850
The acquisition of vast new western lands raised the question of the status of slavery in new territories organized for statehood by the United States. Tension between the North and the South on this question led in 1850 to a great compromise, forged in Congress, to settle this dispute. The compromise allowed California to join the Union as a free state and introduced the concept of "popular sovereignty" for other new territories. * How well did the Compromise of 1850 work?
dignified man who understood the political importance of flexibility. He supported the compromise and used his powers of persuasion to swing northern Whigs into line.
The new leaders also benefited from their own pragmatic tactics. Douglas’s first step, after the departure of Clay, was to break up the "omnibus bill” that Clay had envisioned as a great, comprehensive solution to the sectional crisis and to introduce instead a series of separate measures to be voted on one Temporary	by one. Thus representatives of different
Compromise	sections could support those elements of
the compromise they liked and oppose those they did not. Douglas also gained support with complicated backroom deals linking the compromise to such nonideological matters as the sale of government bonds and the construction of railroads. As a result of his efforts, by mid-September Congress had enacted and the president had signed
all the components of the compromise.
The Compromise of 1850, unlike the Missouri Compromise
thirty years before, was not a product of widespread agree-
ment on common national ideals. It was, rather, a victory of
bargaining and self-interest. Still, members of Congress hailed
the measure as a triumph of statesmanship; and Millard Fillmore, signing it, called it a just settlement of the sectional problem, "in its character final and irrevocable.”
THE CRISES OF THE 1850s
For a few years after the Compromise of 1850, the sectional conflict seemed briefly to have succeeded amid booming prosperity and growth. But the tensions between North and South remained, and the crisis continued to smolder until in 1854 it once more burst into the open.
The Uneasy Truce
Both major parties endorsed the Compromise of 1850 in 1852, and both nominated presidential candidates unidentified with sectional passions. The Democrats chose the obscure New Hampshire politician Franklin Pierce, and the Whigs the military hero General Winfield Scott, a man of unknown political views. But the sectional question was a divisive influence in the election
THE IMPENDING CRISIS - 355
anyway, and the Whigs were the principal victims. They suffered the massive defection of antislavery members angered by the party’s evasiveness on the issue. Many of them flocked to the Free-Soil Party, whose antislavery presidential candidate, John P. Hale, repudiated the Compromise of 1850. The divisions among the Whigs helped produce a victory for the Democrats in 1852.
Franklin Pierce, a charming, amiable man of no particular distinction, attempted to maintain party-and national-harmony by avoiding divisive issues, particularly by avoiding the issue of Opposition to slaverY- But it was an unachievable goal. the Fugitive Northern opposition to the Fugitive Slave
Slave Act Act intensified quickly after 1850, when southerners began appearing in northern states to pursue people they claimed were fugitives. Mobs formed in some northern cities to prevent enforcement of the law, and several northern states also passed their own laws barring the deportation of fugitive slaves. White southerners watched with growing anger and alarm as the one element of the Compromise of 1850 that they had considered a victory seemed to become meaningless as a result of northern defiance.
"Young America”
One of the ways Franklin Pierce hoped to dampen sectional controversy was through his support of a movement in the Democratic Party known as "Young America.” Its adherents saw the expansion of American democracy throughout the world as a way to divert attention from the controversies over slavery. The great liberal and nationalist revolutions of 1848 in Europe stirred them to dream of a republican Europe with governments based on the model of the United States. They dreamed as well of expanding American commerce in the Pacific and acquiring new territories in the Western Hemisphere.
But efforts to extend the nation’s domain could not avoid becoming entangled with the sectional crisis. Pierce had been pursuing unsuccessful diplomatic attempts to buy Cuba from Spain (efforts begun in 1848 by Polk). In 1854, however, a group Ostend	envoYs sent a private document
Manifesto horn Ostend, Belgium, making the case for seizing Cuba by force. When the Ostend
Manifesto, as it became known, was leaked to the public, it enraged many antislavery northerners, who charged the administration with conspiring to bring a new slave state into the Union.
The South, for its part, opposed all efforts to acquire new territory that would not support a slave system. The kingdom of Hawaii agreed to join the United States in 1854, but the treaty died in the Senate because it contained a clause prohib iting slavery in the islands. A powerful movement to annex Canada to the United States-a movement that had the sup Port of many Canadians eager for access to American markets-similarly foundered, at least in part because of slavery.
Slavery, Railroads, and the West
What fully revived the sectional crisis was the same issue that
had produced it in the first place: slavery in the territories. By the
mid-1850s, the line of substantial white settlement had moved beyond the boundaries of Missouri, Iowa, and what became Minnesota into a great expanse of plains, which many white Americans had once believed was unfit for cultivation. Now it was becoming apparent that large sections of this region were, in fact, suitable for farming and ranching. In the states of the Old Northwest, therefore, prospective settlers urged the government to open the area to them, provide territorial governments, and-despite the solemn assurance the United States had earlier given the Indians of the sanctity of their reservations-dislodge the tribes located there to make room for white settlers. There was relatively little opposition from any segment of white society to this proposed violation of Indian rights. But the interest in further settlement raised two divisive issues that gradually became entwined with each other: railroads and slavery.
As the nation expanded westward, the problem of communication between the older states and the areas west of the Mississippi River became more and more critical. As a result, broad support began to emerge for
Railroad and building a transcontinental railroad. Slavery	The problem was where to place it-
and in particular, where to locate the railroad’s eastern terminus, where the line could connect with the existing rail network east of the Mississippi. Northerners favored Chicago, the rapidly growing capital of the free states of the Northwest. Southerners supported St. Louis, Memphis, or New Orleans-all located in slave states. The transcontinental railroad, in other words, had become part of the struggle between the North and the South.
Pierce’s secretary of war, Jefferson Davis of Mississippi, removed one obstacle to a southern route. Surveys indicated that a railroad with a southern terminus would have to pass through an area in Mexican territory. But in 1853 Davis sent James Gadsden, a southern railroad builder, to Mexico, where he persuaded the Mexican government to accept $10
million in exchange for a strip of land that today comprises part of Arizona and New Mexico and that would have facilitated a southern route for the transcontinental railroad. The so-called Gadsden Purchase only accentuated the sectional rivalry.
Gadsden
Purchase
The Kansas-Nebraska Controversy
As a senator from Illinois, a resident of Chicago, and the acknowledged leader of northwestern Democrats, Stephen A. Douglas naturally wanted the transcontinental railroad for his own city and section. He also realized the strength of the principal argument against the northern route west of the Mississippi: that it would run mostly through country with a substantial Indian population. As a result, he introduced a bill in January 1854 to organize (and thus open to white settlement) a huge new territory, known as Nebraska, west of Iowa and Missouri.
Douglas knew the South would oppose his bill because it would prepare the way for a new free state; the proposed territory was in the area of the Louisiana Purchase north of the
356 . CHAPTER 13
Missouri Compromise line (36°30') and hence closed to slavery. In an effort to make the measure acceptable to southerners, Douglas inserted a provision that the status of slavery in the territory would be determined by the territorial legislature-that is, according to "popular sovereignty.” In theory, the region could choose to open itself to slavery (although few believed it actually would). When southern Democrats demanded
Kansas- more, Douglas agreed to an additional Nebraska Act clause explicitly repealing the Missouri Compromise. He also agreed to divide the area into two new territories-Nebraska and Kansas-instead of one. The new, second territory (Kansas) was more likely to become a slave state. In its final form the measure was known as the Kansas-Nebraska Act. President Pierce supported the bill, and after a strenuous debate, it became law in May 1854 with the unanimous support of the South and the partial sup-
port of northern Democrats.
Perhaps no piece of legislation in American history produced so many immediate, sweeping, and ominous consequences. It divided and destroyed the Whig Party, which nearly disappeared by 1856. It divided the northern Democrats (many of whom were appalled at the repeal of the Missouri Compromise, which they considered an almost sacred part of the fabric of the Union) and drove many of them from the party. Most important, it spurred the creation of a new party that was frankly sectional in composition and creed. People in
Birth of the	maj°r Parties w^° opposed Douglas's
Republican bill began t0 call themselves Anti-Nebraska Party	Democrats and Anti-Nebraska Whigs. In
1854, they formed a new organization and named it the Republican Party. It instantly became a major force in American politics. In the elections of that year, the Republicans won enough seats in Congress to permit them, in combination with allies among the Know-Nothings, to organize the House of Representatives.
"Bleeding Kansas”
Events in Kansas in the next two years increased the political turmoil in the North. White settlers from both the North and the South began moving into the territory almost immediately after the passage of the Kansas-Nebraska Act. In the spring of 1855, elections were held for a territorial legislature. There were only about 1,500 legal voters in Kansas by then, but thousands of Missourians, some traveling in armed bands into Kansas, swelled the vote to over 6,000. The result was that pro-slavery forces elected a majority to the legislature, which immediately legalized slavery. Outraged free-staters elected their own delegates to a constitutional convention, which met at Topeka and adopted a constitution excluding slavery. They then chose their own governor and legislature and petitioned Congress for statehood. President Pierce denounced them as traitors and threw the full support of the federal government behind the pro-slavery territorial legislature. A few months later a pro-slavery federal marshal assembled a large posse, consisting mostly of Missourians, to arrest the free-state leaders, who had set up their headquarters in Lawrence. The posse sacked the town, burned the "governor’s” house, and destroyed several printing presses. Retribution came quickly.
Among the most fervent abolitionists in Kansas was John Brown, a fiercely committed foe of slavery who considered himself an instrument of God’s will to destroy slavery. He had moved to Kansas with his sons so that they could fight to make it a free state. After the events in Lawrence, he gathered Potawatomie six followers (including four of his sons)
Massacre and in one night murdered five pro-slavery settlers, leaving their mutilated bodies to discourage other supporters of slavery from entering Kansas. This bloody episode, known as the Potawatomie Massacre, led to more civil strife in Kansas-irregular, guerrilla warfare conducted by armed bands, some of them more interested in
KANSAS”
During the bitter battles over slavery in 1856, the slave state of Missouri tried to prevent antislavery emigrants from passing through their territory en route to Kansas. Free-staters responded by organizing a large emigration through Iowa, circumventing Missouri. Those who entered Kansas by that route tended to arrive armed, some of them with large cannons—among them the one pictured here, which free-staters brought with them to Topeka that year. (© Kansas State Historical Society) THE IMPENDING CRISIS
• 357 land claims or loot than in ideologies. Northerners and southerners alike came to believe that the events in Kansas illustrated (and were caused by) the aggressive designs of the other section. ’'Bleeding Kansas” became a symbol of the sectional
controversy.
Another symbol soon appeared, in the United States Senate. In May 1856, Charles Sumner of Massachusetts-a militant and passionate opponent of slavery-rose to give a speech titled "The Crime Against Kansas.” In it, he gave particular attention to Senator Andrew P. Butler of South Carolina, an outspoken defender of slavery. The South Carolinian was, Sumner claimed, the "Don Quixote” of slavery, having "chosen a mistress . . . who, though ugly to others, is always lovely to him, though polluted in the sight of the world, is chaste in his sight. . . the harlot slavery.”
The pointedly sexual references and the viciousness of the speech enraged Butler’s nephew, Preston Brooks, a member of the House of Representatives from South Carolina. Several days after the speech, Brooks approached Sumner at his desk in the Senate chamber during a recess, raised a heavy cane, and began beating him repeatedly on the head and shoulders. Sumner, trapped in his chair,
rose in agony with such strength that he tore the desk from the bolts holding it to the floor. Then he collapsed, bleeding and unconscious. So severe were his injuries that he was unable to return to the Senate for four years. Throughout the North, he became a hero a martyr to the barbarism of the South. In the South, Preston Brooks became a hero, too. Censured by the House, he resigned his seat, returned to South Carolina, and stood successfully for reelection.
Preston Brooks and Charles Sumner
The Free-Soil Ideology
What had happened to produce such deep hostility between the two sections? In part, the tensions were reflections of the two sections’ differing economic and territorial interests. But
they were also reflections of a hardening of ideas in both North and South. As the nation expanded and political power grew more dispersed, each section became concerned with ensuring that its vision of America’s future would be the dominant one.
In the North, assumptions about the proper structure of society came to center on the belief in "free soil” and "free labor.” Although abolitionists generated some support for their argument that slavery was a moral evil and must be eliminated, most white northerners came to believe that the exis-"Free-Soil”	tence of slavery was dangerous not because
Ideology	of what it did to blacks but because of
what it threatened to do to whites. At the heart of American democracy, they argued, was the right of all citizens to own property, to control their own labor, and to
have access to opportunities for advancement.
According to this northern vision, the South was the an-"Slave Power tithesis of democracy-a closed, static so-Conspiracy” ciety, in which slavery preserved an entrenched aristocracy and in which common whites had no opportunity to improve themselves. While the North was growing and prospering, the South was stagnating, rejecting the values of individualism and progress. The South was, northern free-laborites further maintained, engaged in a conspiracy to extend slavery throughout the nation and thus to destroy the openness of northern capitalism and replace it with the closed, aristocratic system of the South. The only solution to this "slave power conspiracy” was to fight the spread of slavery and extend the nation’s democratic, free-labor ideals to all sec-
tions of the country.
This ideology, which lay at the heart of the new Republican Party, also strengthened the commitment of Republicans to the Union. Since the idea of continued growth and progress was central to the free-labor vision, the prospect of dismemberment of the nation-a diminution of America’s size and economic power was unthinkable.
i ( i I
ANTI-ABOLITIONIST VIOLENCE
This 1838 woodcut depicts the anti-abolitionist riot in Alton, Illinois, in which Elijah P. Lovejoy, publisher of an abolitionist newspaper, was slain on November 7, 1837. The death of Lovejoy aroused the antislavery movement throughout the United States. (The Library of Congress) I
358 CHAPTER 13
The Pro-Slavery
Argument
The Pro-Slavery Argument
In the South, in the meantime, a very different ideology-entirety incompatible with the free-labor ideology-was emerging among southern whites on the issue of slavery. It was a result of many things: the Nat Turner uprising in 1831, which terrified southern whites and made them more determined than ever to make slavery secure; the expansion of the cotton economy into the Deep South, which made slavery unprecedentedly lucrative; and the growth of the Garrisonian abolitionist movement, with its strident attacks on southern society. The popularity of Harriet Beecher Stowe’s Uncle Tom’s Cabin was perhaps the most glaring evidence of the success of those attacks, but other abolitionist writings had been antagonizing white southerners for years.
In response to these pressures, a number of white southerners produced a new intellectual defense of slavery. Professor Thomas R. Dew of the College of William and Mary helped begin that effort in 1832. Twenty years later, supporters of slavery summarized their views in an anthology titled The Pro-Slavery Argument. John C. Calhoun stated the essence of the case in 1837: Southerners should stop apologizing for slavery as a nec-
essary evil and defend it as "a good-a positive good.” It was good for the slaves, white southerners argued, because they enjoyed better conditions than industrial workers in the North. Slavery was good for southern society as a whole because it was the only way the two races could live together in peace. It was good for the entire country because the southern economy, based on slavery, was the key to the prosperity of the nation.
Above all, southern apologists argued, slavery was good because it served as the basis for the southern way of life-a way of life superior to any other in the United States, perhaps in the world. White southerners looking at the North saw a spirit of greed, debauchery, and instability. "The masses of the North are venal, corrupt, covetous, mean and selfish,” wrote one southerner. Others wrote with horror of the factory system and the crowded, pestilential cities filled with unruly immigrants. The South, by contrast, was a stable, orderly society, operating at a slow and human pace. It was free from the feuds between capital and labor plaguing the North. It protected the welfare of its workers. And it allowed the aristocracy to enjoy a refined and accomplished cultural life. It was, in short, an ideal social order in which all elements of the population were secure and content.
The defense of slavery rested, too, on increasingly elaborate arguments about the biological inferiority of African Americans, who were, many white Southerners claimed, inherently unfit to take care of themselves, let alone exercise the rights of citizenship. And just as abolitionist arguments drew strength from Protestant theology in the North, the pro-slavery defense mobilized the Protestant clergy in the South to give the institution a religious and biblical justification.
Buchanan and Depression
In this unpromising climate, the presidential campaign of 1856 began. Democratic Party leaders wanted a candidate who,
Election of unlike President Pierce, was not closely 1856	associated with the explosive question of
"Bleeding Kansas.” They chose Janies Buchanan of Pennsylvania, a reliable Democratic stalwart who as minister to England had been safely out of the country during the recent controversies. The Republicans, participating in their first presidential contest, denounced the Kansas-Nebraska Act and the expansion of slavery but also endorsed a Whiggish program of internal improvements, thus combining the idealism of antislavery with the economic aspirations of the North. As eager as the Democrats to present a safe candidate, the Republicans nominated John C. Fremont, who had made a national reputation as an explorer of the Far West and who had no political record. The Native American, or Know-Nothing, Party was beginning to break apart, but it nominated former president Millard Fillmore, who also received the endorsement of a small remnant of the Whig Party.
After a heated, even frenzied campaign, Buchanan won a narrow victory over Fremont and Fillmore. A slight shift of votes in Pennsylvania and Illinois would have elected the Republican candidate. Particularly significant was that Fremont had attracted virtually no votes in the South while outpolling all other candidates in the North. At the time of his inauguration, Buchanan was, at age sixty-five, the oldest president, except for William Henry Harrison, ever to have taken office. Whether because of age and physical infirmities or because of a fundamental weakness of character, he was a painfully timid and indecisive president at a critical moment in history.
In the year Buchanan took office, a financial panic struck the country, followed by a depression that lasted several years. In the North, the depression strengthened the Republican Party because distressed manufacturers, workers, and farmers came to believe that the hard times were the result of the unsound policies of southern-controlled Democratic administrations. They expressed their frustrations by moving into an alliance with antislavery elements and thus into the Republican Party.
The Dred Scott Decision
On March 6, 1857, the Supreme Court of the United States projected itself into the sectional controversy with one of the most controversial and notorious decisions in its history-its ruling in the case of Dred Scott v. Sandford, handed down two days after Buchanan was inaugurated. Dred Scott was a Missouri slave, once owned by an army surgeon who had taken Scott with him into Illinois and Wisconsin, where slavery was forbidden. In 1846, after the surgeon died, Scott sued his master s widow for freedom on the grounds that his residence in free territory had liberated him from slavery. The claim was well grounded in Missouri law, and in 1850 the circuit court in which Scott filed the suit declared him free. By now, John Sanford, the brother of the surgeon’s widow, was claiming ownership of Scott, and he appealed the circuit court ruling to the state supreme court, which reversed the earlier decision. When Scott appealed to the federal courts, Sanford’s
THE IMPENDING CRISIS
« 359 Taney’s
Sweeping
Opinion
attorneys claimed that Scott had no standing to sue because he was not a citizen, but private property.
The Supreme Court (which misspelled Sanford’s name in its decision) was so divided that it was unable to issue a single ruling on the case. The thrust of the various rulings, however, was a stunning defeat for the antislavery movement. Chief Justice Roger Taney, who wrote one of the majority opinions, declared that Scott could not bring a suit in the federal courts because he was not a citizen. African Americans had no claim to citizenship, Taney argued, and virtually no
rights under the Constitution. Slaves were property, and the Fifth Amendment prohibited Congress from taking property without "due process of law.” Consequently, Taney concluded, Congress possessed no authority to pass a law depriving persons of their slave property in the territories. The Missouri Compromise, therefore, had always been unconstitutional.
The ruling did nothing to challenge the right of an individual state to prohibit slavery within its borders, but the statement that the federal government was powerless to act on the issue was drastic and startling. Few judicial opinions have ever created as much controversy. Southern whites were elated: the highest tribunal in the land had sanctioned some of the most extreme southern arguments. In the North, the decision produced widespread fury and dismay. The decision, the New York Tribune wrote, "is entitled to just so much moral weight as would be the judgment of a majority of those congregated in any Washington bar-room.” Republicans threatened that when they won control of the national government, they would reverse the decision-by "packing” the Court with new members.
Deadlock over Kansas
President Buchanan timidly endorsed the Dred Scott decision. At the same time, he tried to resolve the controversy over Kansas by supporting its admission to the Union as a slave state. In response, the pro-slavery territorial legislature called an election for delegates to a constitutional convention. The free-state residents refused to participate, claiming that the legislature had discriminated against them in drawing district lines. As a result, the pro-slavery forces won control of the convention, which met in 1857 at Lecompton, framed a constitution legalizing slavery, and refused to give voters a chance U reject it. When an election for a new territorial legislature was called, the antislavery groups turned out to vote and won 3 majority. The new legislature promptly submitted the Lecompton constitution to the voters, who rejected it by more than 10,000 votes.
Both sides had resorted to fraud and violence, but it was clear nevertheless that a majority of the people of Kansas opposed slavery. Buchanan, however, pressured Congress to ad-mit Kansas under the Lecompton constitution. Stephen A. Douglas and other western Democrats refused to support the President’s proposal, which died in the House of Representatives. Finally, in April 1858, Congress approved a compromise.
Lecompton
Constitution
Rejected
The Lecompton constitution would be submitted to the voters of Kansas again. If it was approved, Kansas would be admitted to the Union; if it was rejected, statehood would be postponed. Again, Kansas voters decisively rejected the Lecompton constitution. Not until the closing months of
Buchanan’s administration in early 1861, after several southern states had already withdrawn from the Union, did Kansas enter the Union-as a free state.
The Emergence of Lincoln
Lincoln-
Douglas
Debates
Given the gravity of the sectional crisis, the congressional elections of 1858 took on a special importance. Of particular note was the United States Senate election in Illinois, which pitted Stephen A. Douglas, the most prominent northern Democrat, against Abraham Lincoln, who was largely unknown outside Illinois but who quickly emerged as one of the most skillful politicians in the Republican Party.
Lincoln was a successful lawyer who had long been involved in state politics. He had served several terms in the Illinois legislature and one undistinguished term in Congress.
He was not a national figure like Douglas, so he tried to increase his visibility by engaging Douglas in a series of debates. The Lincoln-Douglas debates attracted enor-
mous crowds and received wide attention in newspapers across the country. By the time the debates ended, Lincoln’s increasingly eloquent and passionate attacks on slavery had made him nationally prominent.
At the heart of the debates was a basic difference on the issue of slavery. Douglas appeared to have no moral position on the issue. "One of the reserved rights of the states,” he said, "was the right to regulate the relations between master and servant, on the slavery question.” But Douglas went further, endorsing what was still the dominant sentiment among whites (both North and South) of his time: "I am opposed to negro citizenship in any and every form. I believe this government was made on the white basis. I believe it was made by white men for the benefit of white men and their posterity forever.” Lincoln’s opposition to slavery was different. If the nation could accept that African Americans were not entitled to basic human rights, he argued, then it could accept that other groups-immigrant laborers, for example-could be deprived of rights, too. And if slavery were to extend into the western territories, he claimed, opportunities for poor white laborers to better their lots in life would be lost. The nation’s future, he argued (reflecting the central idea of the Republican Party), rested on the spread of free labor.
Lincoln believed slavery was morally wrong, but he was not an abolitionist. That was in part because he could not envision an easy alternative to slavery in the areas where it already existed. He shared the prevailing view among northern whites that African Americans were not prepared (and
Lincoln s perhaps never would be) to live on equal terms with whites. But even while Lincoln
Position
360
CHAPTER 13
THE HARPERS FERRY ARSENAL
John Brown’s famous raid on Harpers Ferry in 1859 centered on this arsenal, from which he and his followers tried, in vain, to foment slave rebellion throughout the South, (National Park Service, Harper's Ferry, U.S. Department of the Interior/National Archives and Records Administration) accepted the inferiority of black people, he continued to believe that they were entitled to basic rights. *1 have no purpose to introduce political and social equality between the white and the black races.... But I hold that. . . there is no reason in the world why the negro is not entitled to all the natural rights enumerated in the Declaration of Independence, the right to life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness. I hold that he is as much entitled to these as the white man.” Lincoln and his party wanted to "arrest the further spread” of slavery-that is, prevent its expansion into the territories; but they would not directly challenge it where it already existed and would instead trust that the institution would gradually die there of its own accord.
Douglas’s position satisfied his followers sufficiently to win him reelection to the Senate in 1858, but it aroused little enthusiasm and did nothing to enhance his national political ambitions. Lincoln, by contrast, lost the election but emerged with a growing following both in and beyond the state. And outside Illinois, the elections went heavily against the Democrats, who lost ground in almost every northern state. The Democratic Party retained control of the Senate but lost its majority in the House, with the result that the congressional sessions of 1858 and 1859 were bitterly deadlocked.
John Brown's Raid
The battles in Congress, however, were overshadowed by a spectacular event that enraged and horrified the entire South and greatly hastened the rush toward disunion. In the fall of
John Brown’s Raid
1859, John Brown, the antislavery zealot whose bloody actions in Kansas had inflamed the crisis there, staged an even more dramatic episode, this time in the South itself. With private encouragement and financial aid from some prominent eastern abolitionists, he made elaborate plans to seize a mountain fortress in Virginia from which, he believed, he could foment a slave insurrection in the South. On October 16, he and a group of eighteen followers attacked and seized control of a U.S. arsenal in Harpers Ferry, Virginia. But the slave uprising Brown hoped to inspire did not occur, and he quickly found himself besieged by citizens, local militia companies, and, before long, U.S. troops under the command of Robert E. Lee. After ten of his men were killed, Brown surrendered. He was promptly tried in a Virginia court for treason against the state, found guilty, and sentenced to death. He and six of his followers were hanged.
No other single event did more than the Harpers Ferry raid to convince white southerners that they could not live safely in the Union. John Brown’s raid, many southerners believed (incorrectly) had the support of the Republican Party, and it suggested to them that the North was now committed to producing a slave insurrection.
The Election of Lincoln
The presidential election of 1860 had the most momentous consequences of any in American history. It was also among the most complex.
THE IMPENDING CRISIS 361
Candidate (Party)	Electoral Vote	Popular Vote (%)
Abraham Lincoln	180	1,865,593
(Republican)		(39.9)
J. C.
Breckinridge 72 848,356 (Southern Democratic)		(18.1)
John Bell	39	592,906
(Constitutional Union)		(12.6)
Stephen A. Douglas	12	1,382,713
(Northern Democratic)		(29.4)
Nonvoting territories		
81.2% of electorate voting
THE ELECTION OF 1860
The stark sectional divisions that helped produce the Civil War were clearly visible in the results of the 1860 presidential election. Abraham Lincoln, the antislavery Republican candidate, won almost all of the free states. Stephen Douglas, a northern Democrat with no strong position on the issue of slavery, won only one border and one free state, and John Bell, a supporter of both slavery and union, won three border states. John Breckinridge, a strong pro-slavery southern Democrat, carried the entire Deep South. Lincoln won less than 40 percent of the popular vote but, because of the four-way division in the race, managed to win a clear majority of the electoral vote. * What impact did the election of Lincoln have on the sectional crisis?
The Democratic Party was torn apart by a battle between southerners, who demanded a strong endorsement of slavery, and westerners, who supported the idea of popular sovereignty. The party convention met in April in Charleston, South Carolina.
Divided When the convention endorsed popular sov-
Democrats ereignty, delegates from eight states in the lower South walked out. The remaining delegates could not agree on a presidential candidate and finally adjourned after agreeing to meet again in Baltimore in June. The decimated convention at Baltimore nominated Stephen Douglas for president. In the meantime, disenchanted southern Democrats met in Richmond and nominated John C. Breckinridge of Kentucky. Later, a group of conservative ex-Whigs met in Baltimore to form the Constitutional Union Party, with John Bell of Tennessee as their presidential candidate. They endorsed the
Union and remained silent on slavery.
The Republican leaders, in the meantime, were trying to broaden their appeal so as to attract every major interest group in the North. They warned that the South was blocking the North’s economic aspirations. The platform endorsed such traditional Whig measures as a high tariff, internal improvements, a homestead bill, and a Pacific railroad to be built with federal financial assistance. It supported the right of each state to decide the status of slavery within its borders. But it also insisted that neither Congress nor territorial legislatures could legalize slavery in the territories. The Republican convention chose Abraham Lincoln as the party’s presidential nominee. Lincoln was appealing because of his growing reputation for eloquence, because of his firm but moderate position on slavery, and because his relative obscurity ensured that he would have none of the drawbacks of other, more prominent (and therefore more controversial) Republicans. He was a representative of the West, a considerable asset in a race against Douglas.
In the November election, Lincoln won the presidency with a majority of the electoral votes but only about two-fifths of the fragmented popular vote. The Republicans, moreover, failed to win a majority in Congress. Even so, the election of Lincoln became the final signal to many white southerners that their position in the Union was hopeless. And within a few weeks of Lincoln’s victory, the process of disunion began-a Disunion process that would quickly lead to a prolonged and bloody war between two groups of
Americans, each heir to more than a century of struggling toward nationhood, each now convinced that it shared no common ground with the other.
LOOKING BACK
In the decades following the War of 1812, a vigorous sense of nationalism pervaded much of American life, helping to smooth over the growing differences among the very different societies emerging in the regions of the United States. By the 1850s, however, the forces that had worked to hold the nation together in the past were falling victim to new and much more divisive pressures that were working to split the nation apart.
Driving the sectional tensions of the 1850s was a battle
over national policy toward the western territories, which
were clamoring to become states of the Union-and over the
place of slavery within them. Should slavery be permitted in the new states? And who should decide whether to permit it or not? There were strenuous efforts to craft compromises and solutions to this dilemma: the Compromise of 1850, the Kansas-Nebraska Act of 1854, and others. But despite these efforts, positions on slavery continued to harden in both the North and the South until ultimately each region came to consider the other its enemy. Bitter battles in the territory of Kansas over whether to permit slavery there; growing agitation by abolitionists in the North and pro-slavery advocates in
362 CHAPTER 13
the South; the Supreme Court's controversial Dred Scott decision in 1857; the popularity of Uncle Tom’s Cabin; and the emergence of the new Republican Party openly and centrally opposed to slavery: all worked to destroy the hopes for compromise and push the South toward secession.
In 1860, all pretense of common sentiment collapsed when no political party presented a presidential candidate capable of attracting national support. The Republicans nominated Abraham Lincoln of Illinois, a little-known politician recognized
for his eloquent condemnations of slavery in a Senate race two years earlier. The Democratic Party split apart, with its northern and southern wings each nominating different candidates. A third party, devoted to the Constitution and the Union, forlornly nominated a candidate of its own who found almost no constituency. Lincoln won the election easily, but with less than 40 percent of the vote. And almost immediately after his victory, the states of the South began preparing to secede from the Union.
Key Terms/People/Places/Events		
Abraham Lincoln 359	James K. Polk 346	Tejanos 342
Compromise of!850353	John Brown 356	The Alamo 342
Dred Scott decision 358	Kansas-Nebraska Act 356	Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo 350
"Forty-niners” 351	Manifest Destiny 340	Wilmot Proviso 351
Free-Soil Party 351	Oregon Trail 344	Winfield Scott 350
Gadsden Purchase 355	Popular sovereignty 351	"Young America” 355
General Antonio Lopez de	Sam Houston 342	Zachary Taylor 347
Santa Anna 342	Stephen A. Douglas 353	
Harpers Ferry 360	Stephen F. Austin 342	
RECALL AND REFLECT
1.	How were the boundary disputes over Oregon and Texas resolved? Why were the resolutions in the two cases so different?
2.	How did Polk’s decisions and actions as president intensify the sectional conflict?
3.	What was the issue at stake in "Bleeding Kansas,” and how did events in Kansas reflect the growing sectional division between North and South?
4.	What was the Dred Scott decision? What was the decision’s impact on the sectional crisis?
5.	How did the growing sectional crisis affect the nation’s major political parties?
THE IMPENDING CRISIS - 363
SIGNIFICANT EVENTS
1836
Texas declares independence from Mexico
1844
James K. Polk elected president
1854
Kansas-Nebraska Act passed Republican Party formed
1855-1856
Violence breaks out in "Bleeding Kansas"
1845
Texas admitted to Union
1856
James Buchanan elected president
1848
Gold discovered in Sacramento Valley, California, sparking
gold rush
Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo settles Mexican War
1846
Oregon boundary dispute settled
United States declares war on Mexico
Wilmot Proviso introduced in Congress
1857
Supreme Court hands down Dred Scott decision
1850
Compromise of 1850 enacted California admitted to Union
1852
Franklin Pierce elected president
Harriet Beecher Stowe publishes Uncle Tom's Cabin
1858
Pro-slavery Lecompton constitution defeated by popular referendum in Kansas Lincoln and Douglas debate
1860
Democratic Party splits Lincoln elected president
1859
John Brown raids Harpers Ferry
1853
Gadsden Purchase
THE CIVIL WAR
%
LOOKING AHEAD
1.	How did the North's mobilization for war differ from mobilization in the South? What accounts for these differences?
2.	What were the differences between the impact of the war in the North and the South?
UNION SOLDIERS AT REST
The Civil War was one of the bloodiest conflicts in American history. But there were many times at which the armies were not in battle. This photograph of Union soldiers was taken at a large supply base in northern Virginia in 1862—one of many sites in which soldiers spent long, idle periods. (The Library of Congress)
3. What were the military strategies employed by the North and the
South from the opening clashes in 1861 through the Union victory in
1865, and how did these strategies differ?
SETTING THE STAGE
!	i Ifi-fUi-l, i'ffj1	I -	« ,	j,, , , , h,
BY THE END OF 1860,
the cords that had once bound the Union together seemed to have snapped. The romantic vision of America s great national destiny had ceased to be a unifying force; North and South now defined that destiny in different and apparently irreconcilable terms. The stable two-party system could not dampen sectional conflict any longer; that system had collapsed in the 1850s, to be replaced by a new one that accentuated, rather than muted, regional controversy. Above all, the federal government was no longer the remote, unthreatening presence it once had been; the need to resolve the status of the territories had made it necessary for Washington to deal with sectional issues in a direct and forceful way. The divisive forces that had always existed within the United States could no longer be counterbalanced by unifying forces. The election of Abraham Lincoln in 1860—the result of a four-way race in which no candidate achieved close to a majority of the popular vote was itself evidence of the growing divisions within the nation. That the victor was a man who was clearly from the antislavery camp made his election a powerful factor in the movement toward war. In the aftermath of Lincoln s victory, Southern states began to proclaim their secession from the Union, and the new administration was faced with the fateful choice between letting the Union dissolve or engaging in war.
The conflict that followed was one of the most savage in the history of warfare to that point. At least 618,000 Americans died in the Civil War—a level of casualties almost equal to the total number of American deaths in all the nation's other wars combined prior to Vietnam. But the war had many other effects on the character of the nation. Perhaps most important, it led to the end of slavery in the United States. Yet the abolition of slavery did not lead to equality or justice for African Americans. It did, however, mark a major turning point in their—and the nation's—history.
THE SECESSION CRISIS
Almost as soon as the news of Abraham Lincoln's election reached the South, the militant leaders "Southern	reHi°n the champions of the new concept of "Southern nationalism,”
men known both to their contemporaries and to history as the "fire-eaters”-began to demand an end to the Union.
Nationalism*
The Withdrawal of the South
South Carolina, long the hotbed of Southern separatism, seceded first. It called a special convention, which voted unanimously on December 20, 1860, to withdraw the state from the Union. Horace Greeley of the Netw York Tribune wrote three days before secession, "We fully realize that the dilemma of the incoming administration will be a critical one. It must endeavor to uphold and enforce laws, as well against rebellious slaveholders as fugitives.
By the time Lincoln took office, six other states from the lower South-Mississippi (January 9, 1861), Florida (January 10), Alabama (January 11), Georgia (January 19), thTconfederacy Louisiana (January 26), and Texas (February l)-had seceded. In February 1861, representatives of the seven seceded states met at Montgomery,
Alabama, and announced the formation of a new nation, the Confederate States of America. The response from the North was confused and indecisive. President James Buchanan told Congress in December 1860 that no state had the right to secede from the Union but suggested that the federal government had no authority to stop a state if it did.
The seceding states immediately seized the federal property-forts, arsenals, government offices-within their boundaries. Robert Toombs, a Confederate cabinet member and general, said, "Our property has been stolen, our people murdered; felons and assassins have found sanctuary in the arms of the party which elected Mr. Lincoln. The Executive power, the last bulwark of the Constitution to defend us against these enemies of the Constitution, has been swept away, and
• 365
