Jimmy Carter made a strenuous effort to bring a sense of informality to the presidency, in contrast to the "imperial" style many people had complained about during the Nixon years. He began on his inauguration day, when he and his family walked down Pennsylvania Avenue from the Capitol to the White House instead of riding in the traditional limousines. Here, Carter sits in a room in the White House preparing for a 840 * CHAPTER 31
SIGNING THE CAMP DAVID ACCORDS
Jimmy Carter experienced many frustrations during his presidency, but his successful efforts in 1978 to negotiate a peace treaty between Israel and Egypt was his finest hour. Egyptian president Anwar Sadat and Israeli prime minister Menachem Begin join Carter here in the East Room of the White House in March 1979 to sign the accords. (© D.B. Owen/Black Star) In the summer of 1979, instability in the Middle East produced a second major fuel shortage in the United States. OPEC announced another major price increase. Faced with increasing pressure to act (and with a dismal approval rating of 26 percent), Carter retreated to Camp David, the presidential retreat in the Maryland mountains. Ten days later, he emerged to deliver a remarkable television address. It included a series of proposals for resolving the energy crisis. But it was most notable for Carter’s bleak assessment of the national condition. Speaking with unusual fervor, he complained of a "crisis of confidence” that had struck "at the very heart and soul of our national will.” The address became known as the "malaise” speech (although Carter himself had never used that word), and it helped fuel charges that the president was trying to blame his inability to deal with the nation’s problems on the American people.
Human Rights and National Interests
Among Carter’s most frequent campaign promises was a pledge to build a new basis for American foreign policy, one in which the defense of "human rights” would replace the pursuit of "selfish interests.” Carter spoke out sharply and often about violations of human rights in many countries (including, most prominently, the Soviet Union). Beyond that general commitment, the Carter administration focused on several more traditional concerns. Carter completed negotiations begun several years earlier on a pair of treaties to turn over control of the Panama Canal to the government of Panama. After an acrimonious debate, the Senate ratified the treaties by 68 to 32, only one vote more than the necessary two-thirds majority.
Carter’s greatest achievement was his success in arranging a
peace treaty between Egypt and Israel. Middle East negotia-
tions between Egyptian president Anwar Sadat and Israeli
prime minister Menachem Begin had begun in 1977. When
those talks stalled, Carter invited Sadat and Begin to a summit conference at Camp David in September 1978, and persuaded them to remain there for two weeks while he and others helped
Camp David mediate the disputes between them. On Accords September 17, Carter announced agreement on a framework for an Egyptian-Israeli peace treaty. On March 26, 1979, Begin and Sadat returned together to the White House to sign a formal peace treaty-known as the
Camp David accords-between their two nations.
In the meantime, Carter tried to improve relations with
China and the Soviet Union and to complete a new arms agreement. He responded eagerly to the overtures of Deng Xiaoping, the new Chinese leader who was attempting to open his nation to the outside world. On December 15, 1978, Washington and Beijing announced the resumption of formal diplomatic relations. A few months later, Carter traveled to Vienna to meet with the aging Brezhnev to finish drafting the new SALT II arms control agreement. The treaty set limits on the number of long-range missiles, bombers, and nuclear warheads for both the United States and the USSR. Almost immediately, however, SALT II met with fierce conservative opposition in the United States.
The Year of the Hostages
Ever since the early 1950s, the United States had provided political support and military assistance to the government of the shah of Iran, hoping to make his nation a bulwark against Soviet expansion in the Middle East. By 1979, however, many Iranians
Iranian	come to resent his autocratic rule. At the
Revolution same time, Islamic clergies (and much of the fiercely religious populace) opposed his efforts to modernize and Westernize a fundamentalist society. That produced a powerful revolutionary movement. In January
1979, the shah fled the country.
FROM THE “AGE OF LIMITS” TO THE AGE OF REAGAN
• 841 WAITING FOR KHOMEINI
Iranian women, dressed in traditional Islamic garb, stand in a crowd in Teheran waiting for a glimpse of the Ayatollah Khomeini, the spiritual and eventually also political leader of the Iranian Revolution. (© Alain Dejean/Sygma/Corbis) The United States made cautious efforts in the first months after the shah’s abdication to establish cordial relations with the militant regimes that followed. By late 1979, however, revolutionary chaos in Iran was making any normal relations impossible. What power there was resided with a zealous religious leader, the Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini. In late October 1979, the deposed shah arrived in New York to be treated for cancer. Days later, on November 4, an armed group of militants invaded the American embassy in Teheran, seized the diplomats and military personnel inside, and demanded the return of the shah to Iran in exchange for their freedom. Fifty-three Americans remained hostages in the embassy for over a year.
Only weeks after the hostage seizure, on December 27, 1979, Soviet troops invaded Afghanistan, the mountainous Islamic nation lying between the USSR and Iran. The Soviet Union had in fact been a power in Afghanistan for years, and the dominant force since April 1978, when a coup had established a Marxist government there with close ties to the Kremlin. Carter called it the "gravest threat to world peace since World War II’’ and angrily imposed a series of economic sanctions on the Russians, canceled American participation in the 1980 summer Olympic Games in Moscow, and announced
the withdrawal of SALT II from Senate consideration. The Soviet invasion of Afghanistan became a military quagmire and seriously weakened the Soviet regime.
The combination of domestic economic troubles and inter-Carter’s national crises created widespread anxiety, Falling frustration, and anger in the United States-
Popularity damaging President Carter’s already low standing with the public and giving added strength to an alternative political force that had already made
great strides.
THE RISE OF THE NEW
AMERICAN RIGHT
Much of the anxiety in the 1970s was a result of public events
that left many men and women shaken and uncertain about
their leaders and their government. But much of it was also a
result of significant changes in America’s economy, society,
and culture. Together these changes provided the right with
its most important opportunity in generations to seize a posi-
tion of authority in American life.
________________________________________________-
The Mall
0H1LJ ID m°dern mall is the direct descendant of an earlier retail innovation, the automobile-1 oE oriented shopping center, which strove to combine a number of different shops in a single structure, with parking for customers. The first modern shopping center, the Country Club Plaza, opened in Kansas City in 1924. By the mid-1950s, shopping centers—ranging from small "strips" to large integrated complexes—had proliferated throughout the country and were challenging traditional downtown shopping districts, which suffered from lack of parking and from the movement of middle-class residents to the suburbs,
In 1956, the first enclosed, climate-controlled shopping mall—the Southdale Shopping Center-opened in Minneapolis, followed quickly by similar ventures in New York, New Jersey, Illinois, North Carolina, and Tennessee, As the malls spread, they grew larger and more elaborate. By the 1970s, vast "regional malls" were emerging—Tyson's Corner in Fairfax, Virginia; Roosevelt Field on Long Island; the Galleria in Houston, and many others—that drew customers from great distances and dazzled them not only with acres of varied retail space, but also with restaurants, movie theaters, skating rinks, bowling alleys, hotels, video arcades, and large public spaces with fountains, benches, trees, gardens, and concert spaces. "The more needs you fulfill, the longer people stay," one developer observed.
Malls had become self-contained imitations of cities—but in a setting from which many of the troubling and abrasive features of downtowns had been eliminated. Malls were insulated from the elements. They were policed by private security forces, who (unlike real police) could and usually did keep "undesirable" customers off the premises. They were purged of bars, pornography shops, and unsavory businesses. They were off limits to beggars, vagrants, the homeless, and anyone else the managers considered unattractive to their customers, Malls set out to "perfect" urban space, recasting the city as a protected, controlled, and socially homogeneous site attractive to, and in many cases dominated by, white middle-class people.
Some malls also sought to become community centers in sprawling suburban areas that had few real community spaces of their own. A few malls built explicitly civic spaces—meeting halls and conference
SHOPPING CENTER, NORTHERN
VIRGINIA
This small shopping center near Washington, D.C., was characteristic of the new "strip malls” that were emerging in the 1950s to serve suburban customers who traveled almost entirely by automobile. (Photo by Charles Fenno Jacobs/© Time & Life Pictures/Getty Images) centers, where community groups could gather. Some published their own newspapers. Many staged concerts, plays, and dances. But civic activities had a difficult time competing with the principal attraction of the malls: consumption.
Malls were designed with women, the principal consumers in most families, mainly in mind. "I wouldn't know how to design a center for a man," one architect said of the
The Sunbelt and Its Politics
The most widely discussed demographic phenomenon of the 1970s was the rise of what became known as the ’’Sunbelt”
a term coined by the political analyst
^Sunbel™ Kevin Phillips. The Sunbelt included the Southeast (including Florida), the Southwest
(particularly Texas), and above all, California, which became the nation's most populous state, surpassing New York, in 1964. By 1980, the population of the Sunbelt had risen to exceed that of the older industrial regions of the North and the East.
The rise of the Sunbelt helped produce a change in the political climate. The strong populist traditions in the South and the West were capable of producing progressive politics. But more often in the late twentieth century, they produced a strong opposition to the growth of government and a resentment of the proliferating regulations and restrictions that the liberal state was producing. Many of those regulations and restrictions-environmental laws, land-use restrictions, even the 55-mile-per-hour speed limit created during the energy crisis to force motorists to conserve fuel-affected the West more than any other region.
The so-called Sagebrush Rebellion, which emerged in parts of the West in the late 1970s, mobilized conservative opposition to environmental laws and restrictions on development. It sought to portray the West (which had probably benefited more than
_	any other region from federal investment) as
Sagebrush
Rebellion a victim of government control. Its members complained about the large amounts of land the federal government owned in many western states and
demanded that the land be opened for development.
Some of the most conservative communities in America-among them Orange County in southern California-were in
Suburban suburbs. Many suburbs insulated their res-~ Conservatism idents from contact with diverse groups-through the relative homogeneity of the population, through the transferring of retail and even work
space into suburban office parks and shopping malls.
The Politics of Religion
In the 1960s, many social critics had predicted the extinction
of religious influence in American life. Time magazine had
reported such assumptions in 1966 with a celebrated and con-
troversial cover emblazoned with the question "Is God Dead?
842
EARLY MALLS
In the 1960s most malls, such as Bullock's Fashion Square in Sherman Oaks, CA, were outdoor collections of stores focused largely on shopping. AP
Images) TODAY’S MALLS
Contemporary malls, such as the Grove shopping mall, in Los Angeles, CA, combine shopping with entertainment. By 2014 business in many malls began to decrease owing to online purchasing. (© SUNNYphotography. com/Alamy) UNDE^STA'vX; zvi/l/ZE AND EVAl-JA FE
1.	How did the shopping mall change suburban life?
2.	Are malls a unifying influence on social life? In what ways are malls divisive?
3.	Originally, malls were designed to cater largely to women, especially mothers. Has the target audience for malls changed? If so, to whom do malls principally cater today?
complexes he built. They catered to the concerns of mothers about their own and their children's safety, and they offered products of particular interest to them. (Male-oriented stores—men’s clothing, sporting goods, hardware stores were much less visible in most malls than shops marketing women's and children's clothing, jewelry, lingerie, and household goods.)
Malls also became important to teenagers, who flocked to them in the way that earlier generations had flocked to street corners and squares in traditional downtowns. The malls were places for teenagers to meet friends, go to movies, avoid parents, hang out. They were places to buy records, clothes, or personal items. And they were places to work. Low-paying retail jobs, plentiful in malls, were typical first working experiences for many teens.
The proliferation of malls has dismayed many people, who see in them a threat to the sense of community in America. By insulating people from the diversity and conflict of urban life, critics argue, malls divide groups from one another and erode the bonds that make it possible for those groups to understand one another. But malls, like the suburbs they usually serve, also create a kind of community. They are homogeneous and protected, to be sure, but they are also social gathering places in many areas where the alternative is not the rich, diverse life of the downtown but the even more isolated experience of shopping in distant strips—or through catalogs, telephone, and the Internet. •
Evangelical
Christianity
had been the
But religion in America was far from dead. Indeed, in the 1970s the United States experienced the beginning of a major religious revival, perhaps the most powerful since the Second Great Awakening of the early nineteenth century. It continued in various forms into the early twenty-first century.
Some of the new religious enthusiasm found expression in the rise of various cults and pseudo-faiths: the Church of Scientology; the Unification Church of the Reverend Sun Myung Moon; even the tragic People’s Temple, whose members committed mass suicide in their jungle retreat in Guyana in 1978.
But the most important impulse of the religious revival was the growth of evangelical Christianity. Evangelicalism is the basis of many forms of Christian faith, but evangelicals have in common a belief in personal conversion (being wborn again’’) through direct communication with God. Evangelical religion dominant form of Christianity in America
through much of its history, and a substantial subculture since the late nineteenth century. In its modern form, it became increasingly visible during the early 1950s, when evangelicals such as Billy Graham and Pentecostals such as Oral Roberts began to attract huge national (and international) followings for their energetic revivalism.
By the 1970s, more than 70 million Americans described themselves as "born-again” Christians-men and women who had established a "direct personal relationship with Jesus.” Christian evangelicals owned their own newspapers, magazines, radio stations, television networks, and later Internet-based forms of communication. They operated their own schools and universities.
For some evangelicals, Christianity formed the basis for a commitment to racial and economic justice and to world peace. For many other evangelicals, the message of the new religion was very different-but no less political. They were alarmed by what they considered the spread of immorality and disorder in American life. They feared the growth of feminism and the threat they believed it posed to the traditional family. Particularly alarming to them were Supreme Court decisions eliminating religious observance from schools and, later, the decision guaranteeing women the right to an abortion.
Despite the historic antagonism between many evangelical Protestants and the Catholic Church, the growing politicization of religion in the 1970s and beyond brought some former rivals together. Catholics were the first major opponents of the Supreme Court’s decision legalizing abortion in Roe v. Wade,
843
844 . CHAPTER 31
PACIFIC
OCEAN
GROWTH OF THE SUNBELT, 1970-1990
One of the most important demographic changes of the last decades of the twentieth century was the shift of population out of traditional population centers in the Northeast and Midwest and toward the states of the so-called Sunbelt—most notably the Southwest and the Pacific Coast. This map gives a dramatic illustration of the changing concentration of population between 1970 and 1990. The orange/brown states are those that lost population, while the purple and blue states are those that made very significant gains (30 percent or more). • What was the impact of this population shift on the politics of the 1980s?
but evangelical Protestants soon joined them in the battle. The rapidly growing Mormon Church, long isolated from both Catholics and traditional Protestants, also became increasingly engaged with the political struggles of other faiths. Mormons were instrumental in the 1982 defeat of the Equal Rights Amendment to the Constitution, which would have guaranteed women the same rights as men. And they too supported the evangelical agenda of opposition to abortion and homosexuality.
The "New Right”
Conservative Christians were an important part, but only a part, of what became known as the "New Right”-a diverse but powerful coalition that enjoyed rapid growth in the 1970s and early 1980s. Its origins lay in part in the 1964 presidential election. After Republican senator Barry Goldwater's shattering defeat, Richard Viguerie, a conservative activist and organizer, took a list of 12,000 contributors to the Goldwater campaign
and used it to begin a formidable conservative communications and fund-raising organization. Beginning in the 1970s, largely because of these and other organizational advances, conservatives usually found themselves better funded and organized than their opponents. By the late 1970s, there were right-wing think tanks, consulting firms, lobbyists, foundations, and schools.
Another factor in the revival of the right was the emergence of a credible right-wing leadership to replace the defeated con-Ronald servative hero, Barry Goldwater. Ronald Reagan Reagan, a well-known film actor turned political activist, became the hope of the right. As a young man, he had been a liberal and a fervent admirer of Franklin Roosevelt. But he moved decisively to the right after his second marriage, to Nancy Davis, a woman of strong conservative convictions, and after he became embroiled, as president of the Screen Actors Guild, in battles with communists in the union. In the early 1950s, Reagan became a corporate spokesman for General Electric and won a wide following on the right
FROM THE “AGE OF LIMITS” TO THE AGE OF REAGAN
845
with powerful speeches in defense of individual freedom and
private enterprise.
In 1964, Reagan delivered a memorable television speech on behalf of Goldwater. After Goldwater’s defeat, he worked quickly to seize the leadership of the conservative wing of the Republican Party. In 1966, with the support of a group of wealthy conservatives, Reagan won the first of two terms as governor of California.
The presidency of Gerald Ford also played an important role in the rise of the right, by destroying the fragile equilibrium that had enabled the right wing and the moderate wing of the Republican Party to coexist. Ford touched on some of the right’s rawest nerves. He appointed as vice president Nelson Rockefeller, the liberal Republican governor of New York and an heir to one of America’s great fortunes. This appointment was offensive to many conservatives. Ford proposed an amnesty program for draft resisters, embraced and even extended the Nixon-Kissinger policies of detente, presided over the fall of Vietnam, and agreed to cede the Panama Canal to Panama. When Reagan challenged Ford in the 1976 Republican primaries, the president survived, barely, only by dropping Nelson Rockefeller from the ticket and agreeing to a platform largely written by one of Reagan’s allies.
The Tax Revolt
Equally important to the success of the New Right was a new and potent conservative issue: the tax revolt. It had its public beginnings in 1978, when Howard Jarvis, a conservative activist in California, launched the first successful major citizens’ r,	tax revolt in California with Proposition 13,
j j	a referendum question on the state ballot
rolling back property tax rates. Similar antitax movements soon began in other states and eventually
spread to national politics.
The tax revolt helped the right solve one of its biggest problems. For more than thirty years after the New Deal, Republican conservatives had struggled to halt and even reverse the growth of the federal government. But attacking government programs directly, as right-wing politicians from Robert Taft to Barry Goldwater discovered, was not often the way to attract majority support. Every federal program had a political constituency. The biggest and most expensive programs-Social Security, Medicare, Medicaid, and others-had the broadest support.
In Proposition 13 and similar initiatives, members of the right separated the issue of taxes from the issue of what taxes Attacking supported. That helped them achieve some Taxes	°f most controversial elements of the
conservative agenda (eroding the government’s ability to expand and launch new programs) without openly antagonizing the millions of voters who supported specific programs. Virtually no one liked to pay taxes, and as the economy weakened, that resentment naturally rose. The right exploited that resentment and, in the process, greatly expanded
its constituency.
The Campaign of 1980
By the time of the crises in Iran and Afghanistan, Jimmy Carter was in political trouble-his standing in popularity polls lower than that of any president in history. Senator Edward Kennedy, younger brother of John and Robert Kennedy, challenged him in the primaries. And while Carter managed to withstand the confrontation with Kennedy and win his party’s nomination, he entered the fall campaign badly weakened.
The Republican Party, in the meantime, rallied enthusiastically behind Ronald Reagan. He linked his campaign to the spreading tax revolt by promising substantial tax cuts. Equally important, he called for restoration of American "strength” and "pride.” Reagan clearly benefited from the frustration at Carter’s inability to resolve the Iranian hostage crisis. He benefited even more from the accumulated frustrations of more than a decade of domestic and international disappointments.
On election day 1980, the one-year anniversary of the seizure of the hostages in Iran, Reagan swept to victory, winning 51 percent of the vote to 41 percent for Jimmy Carter, and 7 percent for John Anderson-a moderate Republican congressman from Illinois who had mounted an
1980 Election . ,	,	_	. ,	,
independent campaign. Carter carried only
Candidate (Party)
.8 Ronald Reagan 1 (Republican)
Jimmy Carter v (Democrat)
John B. Anderson (Independent)
Other candidates (Libertarian)
Popular Vote (%)
43,901,812
(50.7)
35,483,820
(41.0)
5,719,722
(6.6)
921,299
(1.1)
52.6% of electorate voting
THE ELECTION OF 1980
Although Ronald Reagan won only slightly more than half of the popular vote in the 1980 presidential election, his electoral majority was overwhelming-a reflection to a large degree of the deep unpopularity of President Jimmy Carter in 1980. • l/V/jof had made Carter so unpopular ?

846 ♦ CHAPTER 31
five states and the District of Columbia, for a total of 49 electoral votes to Reagan’s 489. The Republican Party won control of the Senate for the first time since 1952 (53 Republicans versus 46 Democrats), and the Democrats retained a majority in the House by 277 to 158.
On the day of Reagan’s inauguration, the American hostages in Iran were released after their 444-day ordeal. The government of Iran, desperate for funds to support its floundering war against neighboring Iraq, had ordered the hostages freed in return for a release of billions in Iranian assets that the Carter administration had frozen in American banks.
THE “REAGAN REVOLUTION’
Ronald Reagan assumed the presidency in January 1981, promising a change in government more fundamental than any since the New Deal of fifty years before. He had only moderate success in redefining public policy. But he succeeded brilliantly in making his own engaging personality the face of American politics in the 1980s.
The Reagan Coalition
Reagan owed his election to the widespread disillusionment with Carter and to the crises and disappointments that many voters associated with him. But he owed it as well to the emergence of a powerful coalition of conservative groups.
The Reagan coalition included an influential group of wealthy Americans associated with the corporate and financial world.
What united this group was their firm com-
Corporate	1
Elites	mitment to capitalism and unfettered eco-
nomic growth; a belief that the market offers the best solutions to most problems; a deep hostility to most government interference in markets. Central to this group’s agenda in the 1980s was opposition to what it considered the "redistributive” politics of the federal government (especially its highly progressive tax structure) and hostility to the rise of what it believed were "antibusiness” government regulations. Reagan courted these free-market conservatives carefully and effectively.
A second element of the Reagan coalition was even smaller, but also disproportionately influential: a group of intellectuals commonly known as "neo-conservatives,” a firm base among «Neo-	"opinion leaders.” Some of these people
conservatives” had once been liberals and, before that, socialists. But during the turmoil of the
1960s, they had become alarmed by what they considered to be the dangerous and destructive radicalism that they believed was destabilizing American life. Neo-conservatives were sympathetic to the demands of capitalists, but their principal concern was to reaffirm Western democratic, anticommunist values and commitments. Some neo-conservative intellectuals went on to become important figures in the battle against multiculturalism and "political correctness” within academia.
Populist
Conservatives
These two groups joined in an uneasy alliance in 1980 with the populist New Right. But several things differentiated the New Right from the corporate conservatives and the neo-conservatives. Perhaps the most important was the New Right’s fundamental
distrust of the "eastern establishment”: a suspicion of its motives and goals; a sense that it exercised a dangerous, secret power in American life; a fear of the hidden influence of such establishment institutions and people as the Council on Foreign Relations, the Trilateral Commission, Henry Kissinger, and the Rockefellers.
These populist conservatives expressed the kinds of concerns that outsiders, non-elites, have traditionally voiced in American society: an opposition to centralized power and influence, a fear of living in a world where distant, hostile forces are controlling society and threatening individual freedom and community autonomy. It was a testament to Ronald Reagan’s political skills and personal charm that he was able to generate enthusiastic support from these populist conservatives while appealing to elite conservative groups whose concerns were in some ways antithetical to those of the New Right.
Reagan in the White House
Even many people who disagreed with Reagan’s policies found themselves drawn to his attractive and carefully honed public image. Reagan was a master of television, a gifted public speaker, and-in public at least-rugged, fearless, and seemingly impervious to danger or misfortune. He turned seventy weeks after taking office and was the oldest man ever to serve as U.S. president. But through most of his presidency, he appeared to be vigorous, resilient, even youthful. He spent his many vacations on a California ranch, where he chopped wood and rode horses. When he was wounded in an assassination attempt in 1981, he joked with doctors on his way into surgery and appeared to bounce back from the ordeal with remarkable speed.
Reagan was not much involved in the day-to-day affairs of running the government; he surrounded himself with tough, energetic administrators who insulated him from many of the pressures of the office. At times, the president revealed a startling ignorance about the nature of his own policies. Instead, he used the actions of his subordinates. But Reagan made active use of his office to support his administration’s programs by fusing his proposals with a highly nationalistic rhetoric.
"Supply-Side" Economics
Reagans 1980 campaign for the presidency had promised to restore the economy to health by a bold experiment that "Reaganomics” became known as "supply-side” economics or, to some, "Reaganomics.” Supply-side economics operated from the assumption that the woes of the
American economy were in large part a result of excessive taxation, which left inadequate capital available to investors to stimulate growth. The solution, therefore, was to reduce taxes, with particularly generous benefits to corporations and wealthy individuals, in order to encourage new investments. Because a
FROM THE “AGE OF LIMITS” TO THE AGE OF REAGAN * 847
Federal Budget and Surplus/Deficit, 1940-2010 (in trillions of current dollars)
1940	1950	1960	1970	1980	1990	2000	2010
Gross National Product, 1940-2010 (in trillions of current dollars)
1940	1950	1960	1970	1980	1990	2000	2010
Budget and Surplus/Deficit as Percent of GNP, 1940-2010
tax cut would reduce government revenues (at least at first), it would also be necessary to reduce government expenses. A goal of the Reagan economic program was a significant reduction of the federal budget.
Men and women whom Reagan appointed fanned out through the executive branch of government, reducing the role
Deregulation of 8overnment- Secretary of the Interior James Watt, previously a major figure in the
Sagebrush Rebellion, opened up public lands and water to development. The Environmental Protection Agency (before its directors were indicted for corruption) relaxed or entirely eliminated enforcement of many environmental laws and regulations. The Civil Rights Division of the Justice Department eased enforcement of civil rights laws. The Department of Transportation slowed implementation of new rules limiting automobile emissions and imposing new safety standards on cars and trucks. By getting government "out of the way,” Reagan officials promised, they were ensuring economic revival.
By early 1982, the nation had sunk into a severe recession. Unemployment reached 11 percent, its highest level in over forty years. But the economy recovered relatively rapidly. By late 1983, unemployment had fallen to 8.2 percent, and it declined steadily for several years after that. The gross national product had grown 3.6 percent in a year, the largest one-year increase since the mid-1970s. Inflation had fallen below 5 percent. The economy continued to grow, and both inflation and unemployment remained low through most of the decade.
The Fiscal Crisis
The economic revival did little at first to reduce federal budget deficits or to slow the growth in the national debt (the debt the nation accumulates over time as a result of its annual
„	deficits). By the mid-1980s, the sense of a
National Debt growing fiscal crisis had become one of the central issues in American politics. Having entered office promising a balanced budget within four years, Reagan had record budget deficits and accumulated more debt in his eight years in office than the American government had
accumulated in its entire previous history.
The enormous deficits had many causes, some of them
stretching back over decades of American
Welfare public policy decisions. In particular, the Benefits Cut budget suffered from enormous increases
FEDERAL BUDGET SURPLUS/DEFICIT, 1940-2010
These charts help illustrate why the pattern of federal deficits seemed so alarming to Americans in the 1980s, and also why those deficits proved much less damaging to the economy than many economists had predicted. The upper chart shows a dramatic increase in the federal budget from the mid-1960s on. It shows as well a corresponding, and also dramatic, increase in the size of federal deficits. Gross national product (GNP) also increased dramatically, especially in the 1980s and 1990s, as the middle chart shows. When the federal budgets and deficits of these years, shown in the bottom chart, are calculated not in absolute numbers, but as a percentage of GNP, they seem much more stable and much less alarming. After 2000, these deficits rose significantly and became a much larger percentage of GNP. What factors contributed to the increasing deficits of the 1980s? How were
those deficits eliminated in the 1990s?

848 * CHAPTER 31
POVERTY IN AMERICA
The American poverty rate declined sharply beginning in the 1950s and reached a historic low in the late 1970s. But the dramatic increase in income and wealth inequality that began in the mid-1970s gradually pushed the poverty rate upward again. By the mid-1980s, the poverty rate was approaching 15 percent, the highest in twenty years. In the image above, a group of children huddle against a barrier at an emergency center for homeless families in New York City in 1987. (© Richard Falco/BlackStar) in the costs of "entitlement” programs (especially Social Security, Medicare, and Medicaid), a result of the aging of the population and dramatic increases in the cost of health care. But some of the causes of the deficit lay in the policies of the Reagan administration. The 1981 tax cuts, the largest in American history to that point, contributed to the deficit. The massive increase in military spending by the Reagan administration added much more to the federal budget than its cuts in domestic spending removed.
Reagan and the World
Reagan encountered a similar combination of triumphs and difficulties in international affairs. Determined to restore American pride and prestige in the world, he argued that the United States should once again become active and assertive in opposing communism and in supporting friendly governments whatever their internal policies.
Relations with the Soviet Union, which had been steadily deteriorating in the last years of the Carter administration, grew still more chilly in the first years of the Reagan presidency. The
president spoke harshly of the Soviet regime (which he once called the "evil empire”), accusing it of sponsoring world terrorism and declaring that any armaments negotiations must be linked to negotiations on Soviet behavior in other areas.
Although the president had long denounced the SALT II arms control treaty as unfavorable to the United States, he continued to honor its provisions. But Reagan remained skeptical about arms control. In fact, the president proposed the SDI	most arr*bitious new military program in
many years: the Strategic Defense Initiative
(SDI), known to some as "Star Wars.” Reagan claimed that SDI, through lasers and satellites, could provide an effective shield against incoming missiles and thus make nuclear war obsolete. The Soviet Union claimed that the new program would elevate the arms race to new and more dangerous levels and insisted that any arms control agreement begin with an American abandonment of SDI.
The escalation of Cold War tensions and the slowing of arms control initiatives helped produce an important popular movement in Europe and the United States in the 1980s calling for an end to nuclear weapons buildups. In America, the principal goal
FROM THE “AGE OF LIMITS” TO THE AGE OF REAGAN 849
CONTRAS ON PATROL
The Reagan administration's support for the Nicaraguan "contras," who opposed the leftist Sandinista regime, was the source of some of its greatest problems. Here, a small band of contras pause in the Nicaraguan jungle to catch their breath. The machine gunner carries an M-60 American weapon. (© Steven Clevenger/Corbis) Reagan
Doctrine
of the movement was a "nuclear freeze,” an agreement between the two superpowers not to expand their atomic arsenals.
The Reagan administration supported opponents of communism anywhere in the world, whether or not they had any direct connection to the Soviet Union. This new policy became known as the Reagan Doctrine, and it meant a new American
activism in the Third World. In October 1982, the administration sent American soldiers and marines into the tiny Caribbean island of Grenada to oust an anti-American Marxist regime that showed signs of a relationship with Moscow. In Nicaragua, a pro-American dictatorship had fallen to the revolutionary "Sandinistas” in 1979; the new government had grown increasingly anti-American (and increasingly Marxist) throughout the early 1980s. The Reagan administration supported the so-called contras, a guerrilla movement drawn from several antigovernment groups and trying to topple the Sandinista regime.
In June 1982, the Israeli army launched an invasion of Lebanon in an effort to drive guerrillas of the Palestinian Liberation Organization from the country. An American peacekeeping force entered Beirut to supervise the evacuation of PLO forces from Lebanon. American marines then remained in the city to protect the fragile Lebanese government. As a result, Americans became the targets in 1983 of a terrorist bombing of a U.S. military barracks in Beirut that left 241 marines dead. Rather than become more deeply involved in the Lebanese struggle, Reagan withdrew American forces.
The tragedy in Lebanon was an example of the changing
character of Third World struggles: an increasing reliance on
terrorism by otherwise powerless groups to advance their political aims. A series of terrorist acts in the 1980s-attacks on
Terrorism airplanes, cruise ships, commercial and diplomatic posts; the seizing of American and other Western hostages-alarmed and frightened much of the
Western world.
The Election of 1984
Reagan approached the campaign of 1984 at the head of a united Republican Party firmly committed to his candidacy. The Democrats followed a more fractious course. Former vice president Walter Mondale, the early front-runner, fought off challenges from Senator Gary Hart of Colorado and the magnetic Jesse Jackson, who had established himself as the nation’s most prominent spokesman for minorities and the poor. Mondale brought excitement to the Democratic campaign by selecting a woman, Representative Geraldine Ferraro of New York, to be his running mate and the first female candidate to appear on a national ticket.
In the campaign that fall, Reagan spoke of what he claimed was the remarkable revival of American fortunes and spirits under his leadership. His campaign emphasized such phrases as "It’s Morning in America” and "America Is Back.” Reagan’s victory in 1984 was decisive. He won approximately 59 percent of the vote and carried every state but Mondale’s native Minnesota and the District of Columbia. But Reagan was stronger than his party. Democrats gained a seat in the Senate and maintained only slightly reduced control of the House
of Representatives
850 * CHAPTER 31
53.3% of electorate voting
THE ELECTION OF 1984
In 1984, Ronald Reagan repeated (and slightly expanded) his electoral landslide of 1980 and added to it the popular landslide that had eluded him four years earlier. As this map shows, Mondale succeeded in carrying only his home state of Minnesota and the staunchly Democratic District of Columbia. • What were some of the factors that made Reagan so popular in 1984?
AMERICA AND THE WANING OF THE COLD WAR
Many factors contributed to the collapse of the Soviet empire. The long, stalemated war in Afghanistan proved at least as disastrous to the Soviet Union as the Vietnam War had been to America. The government in Moscow had failed to address a long-term economic decline in the Soviet republics and the Eastern-bloc nations. Restiveness with the heavy-handed policies of communist police states was growing throughout much of the Soviet empire. But the most visible factor at the time was the emergence of Mikhail Gorbachev, who succeeded to the leadership of the Soviet Union in 1985 and, to the surprise of almost everyone, very quickly became the most revolutionary figure in world politics in several decades.
The Fall of the Soviet Union
Tiananmen
Square
rigid and unproductive Soviet economy by introducing such elements of capitalism as private ownership and the profit motive.
The severe economic problems at home evidently convinced Gorbachev that the Soviet Union could no longer sustain its extended commitments around the world. As early as 1987, he began reducing Soviet influence in Eastern Europe. And in 1989, in the space of a few months, every communist state in Europe-Poland, Hungary, Czechoslovakia, Bulgaria, Romania, East Germany, Yugoslavia, and Albania-either overthrew its government or forced it to transform itself into a noncommunist (and, in some cases, actively anticommunist) regime.
The challenges to communism were not successful everywhere. In May 1989, students in China launched a mass movement calling for greater democratization. But in June, hard-line leaders seized control of the government and sent military forces to crush the uprising. The result was a bloody assault on June 3,1989, in Tiananmen Square in Beijing, in which a still-unknown
number of demonstrators died. The assault crushed the democracy movement and restored the hard-liners to power. It did not, however, stop China’s efforts to modernize and even Westernize its economy.
Early in 1990, the government of South Africa, long an international pariah for its rigid enforcement of "apartheid” (a system designed to protect white supremacy), began a cautious retreat from its traditional policies. It legalized the chief black party in the nation, the African National Congress (ANC), which had been banned for decades. On February 11, 1990, it released from prison the leader of the ANC, and a revered hero to black South Africans, Nelson Mandela. He had been in jail for twenty-seven years. Over the next several years, the South African government repealed its apartheid laws. And in 1994, after national elections in which all South Africans could participate, Nelson Mandela became the first black president of South Africa.
In 1991, communism began to collapse at the site of its birth: the Soviet Union. An unsuccessful coup by hard-line Soviet leaders on August 19 precipitated a dramatic unraveling of Dissolution communist power. Within days, the coup of the USSR itself collapsed in the face of resistance from the public and, more important, crucial elements within the military. Mikhail Gorbachev returned to power, but it soon became evident that the legitimacy of both the Communist Party and the central Soviet government had been fatally injured. By the end of August, many of the republics of the Soviet Union had declared independence; the Soviet government was clearly powerless to stop the fragmentation. Gorbachev resigned as leader of the now virtually powerless Communist Party and Soviet government, and the Soviet Union
ceased to exist.
Reagan and Gorbachev
Reagan was skeptical when Gorbachev took power in 1985, but he gradually became convinced that the Soviet leader was sincere in his desire for reform. At a summit meeting with Reagan in Reykjavik, Iceland, in 1986, Gorbachev proposed
Gorbachev transformed Soviet politics with two dramatic new initiatives. The first he called glasnost (openness): the dismantling
Mikhail	man^ t^ie rePressive mechanisms that
Gorbachev had been conspicuous features of Soviet life
for over half a century. The other policy
Gorbachev called perestroika (reform): an effort to restructure the
FROM THE “AGE OF LIMITS” TO THE AGE OF REAGAN * 851
THE FALL OF THE BERLIN WALL
The Berlin Wall is widely considered to have “fallen" on November 9, 1989. Starting on that date and in the days and weeks that followed, people used sledgehammers and picks to tear the wall down, often keeping the broken pieces as souvenirs of this symbolic conclusion of the Cold War. DIZ
Miinchen GmbH/'Alamy) reducing the nuclear arsenals of both sides by 50 percent or more, although continuing disputes over Reagan's commitment to the SDI program prevented agreements. But in 1988, after Reagan and Gorbachev exchanged cordial visits to each other’s capitals, the two superpowers signed a treaty eliminating American and Soviet intermediate-range nuclear forces (INF) from Europe-the most significant arms control agreement of the nuclear age. At about the same time, Gorbachev ended the Soviet Union’s long and frustrating military involvement in Afghanistan.
The Fading of the Reagan Revolution
For a time, the dramatic changes around the world and Reagan’s personal popularity deflected attention from a series of political scandals. There were revelations of illegality, corruption, and
Savings and ethical lapses in the Environmental
Loan Crisis Protection Agency, the CIA, the Department of Defense, the Department of Labor, the
Department of Justice, and the Department of Housing and Urban Development. A more serious scandal emerged within the savings and loan industry, which the Reagan administration had helped deregulate in the early 1980s.
But the most politically damaging scandal of the Reagan years came to light in November 1986, when the White House conceded that it had sold weapons to the revolutionary government of Iran as part of a largely unsuccessful effort to secure the release of several Americans being held hostage by radical Islamic groups in the Middle East. Even more damaging was the revelation that some of the money from the arms deal with Iran had been covertly and illegally funneled into a fund to aid the contras in Nicaragua.
In the months that followed, aggressive reporting and
congressional hearings exposed a widespread pattern of illegal
Iran-Contra
Scandal
covert activities orchestrated by the White House and dedicated to advancing the administration’s foreign policy aims.
The Iran-contra scandal, as it became known, did serious damage to the Reagan presidency.
The Election of 1988
The fraying of the Reagan administration helped the Democrats regain control of the U.S. Senate in 1986 and fueled hopes for a presidential victory in 1988. Even so, several of the most popular figures in the Democratic Party refused to run, and the nomination finally went to a previously little-known figure: Michael Dukakis, a three-term democratic governor of Massachusetts. Dukakis was a flat and somewhat dull campaigner. But Democrats were optimistic about their prospects in 1988, largely because their opponent, Vice President George H. W. Bush, had failed to spark public enthusiasm.
Beginning at the Republican Convention, however, Bush staged a remarkable turnaround by making his campaign a long, relentless attack on Dukakis, tying him to all the unpopular social and cultural stances Americans had come to identify with ’’liberals.” The campaign revealed the new political aggressiveness of the Republican right. Bush won a substantial victory in November: 54 percent of the popular vote to Dukakis’s 46 percent, and 426 electoral votes to Dukakis’s 112. But the Democrats retained secure majorities in both houses of Congress.
The First Bush Presidency
The broad popularity George H. W. Bush enjoyed during his first three years in office was partly a result of his subdued, unthreatening public image. But it was primarily because of
852 * CHAPTER 31
Candidate (Party)
George H. W. Bush (Republican)
Michael Dukakis (Democrat)
Electoral Vote
426
112
50% of electorate voting
Popular Vote (%)
47,946,422
(54.0)
41,016,429
(46.0)
THE ELECTION OF 1988
Democrats had high hopes going into the election of 1988, but Vice President George Bush won a decisive victory over Michael Dukakis, who did only slightly better than Walter Mondale had done four years earlier. * What made it so difficult for a Democrat to challenge the Republicans in 1988 after eight years of a Republican administration?
the wonder and excitement with which Americans viewed the dramatic events in the rest of the world. Bush moved cautiously at first in dealing with the changes in the Soviet Union. But like Reagan, he eventually cooperated with Gorbachev and reached a series of significant agreements with the Soviet Union in its waning years. The United States and the Soviet Union moved rapidly toward even more far-reaching arms reduction agreements.
On domestic issues, the Bush administration was less successful. His administration inherited a heavy burden of debt
Political an<^ a ^e(^era^ deficit that had been growing
Gridlock for nearty a decade. The president's pledges to reduce the deficit and simultaneously to promise "no new taxes” were in conflict with one another. Bush faced a Democratic Congress with an agenda very differ-
ent from his own.
The Congress and the White House managed on occasion to agree on significant measures. They cooperated in producing the plan to salvage the floundering savings and loan industry. In 1990, the president bowed to congressional pressure and agreed to a significant tax increase as part of a multiyear "budget package” designed to reduce the deficit-thus violating his own 1988 campaign pledge.
But the most serious domestic problem facing the Bush
administration was one for which neither the president nor
Congress had any answer: a recession that began late in 1990
THE BUSH CAMPAIGN, 1988
Vice President George Bush had never been an effective campaigner, but in 1988 he revived his candidacy with an unabashed attack on his opponent's values and patriotism. Bush missed no chance to surround himself with patriotic symbols, including this red, white, and blue hot-air balloon in Kentucky. (Photo by Cynthia Johnson/© Time & Life Pictures/Getty Images)
1990
Recession
and slowly increased its grip on the national economy in 1991 and 1992. Because of the enormous level of debt that corporations (and individuals) had accumulated in the 1980s, the recession caused an unusual number of bankruptcies. It also increased fear and frustration among middle- and working-class Americans and put pressure on the government to address such problems as the rising cost of health care.
The First Gulf War
The collapse of the Soviet Union in 1989-1991 had left the United States in the unanticipated position of being the only real superpower in the world. One result was that the United States would reduce its military strength and concentrate its energies and resources on pressing domestic problems. Another was that America would continue to use its power actively, not to fight communism but to defend its regional
FROM THE “AGE OF LIMITS” TO THE AGE OF REAGAN . 853
BURNING OIL FIELDS
With the advance of Coalition forces into Kuwait, the retreating Iraqi military set fire to hundreds of oil wells and other oil-related resources to punish Kuwaiti overproduction and to create smoke screens to block "smart weapons” (guided bombs) and satellites. (© Peter Turnley/Corbis) and economic interests. In 1989, that led the administration to order an invasion of Panama, which overthrew the unpopular military leader Manuel Noriega (under indictment in the United States for drug trafficking) and replaced him with an elected, pro-American regime.
On August 2, 1990, the armed forces of Iraq invaded and
Invasion of quickly overwhelmed their small, oil-rich Kuwait neighbor, the emirate of Kuwait. Saddam
Hussein, the militaristic leader of Iraq, soon announced that he was annexing Kuwait and set out to entrench his forces there. After some initial indecision, the Bush administration agreed to lead other nations in a campaign to force Iraq out of Kuwait-through the pressure of economic sanctions if possible, through military force if necessary. Within a few weeks, Bush had persuaded virtually every important government in the world, including the Soviet Union and almost all the Arab and Islamic states, to join in a United Nations-sanctioned trade embargo of Iraq.
At the same time, the United States and its allies (including the British, French, Egyptians, and Saudis) began deploying a large military force along the border between Kuwait and Saudi Arabia, a force that ultimately reached 690,000 troops (425,000 of them American). On November 29, the United Nations, at the request of the United States, voted to authorize military action to expel Iraq from Kuwait if Iraq did not leave by January 15, 1991. On January 12, both houses of Congress voted to authorize the use of force against Iraq. And on January 16, American and allied air forces began a massive bombardment of Iraqi forces in Kuwait and of military and industrial installations in Iraq itself.
The allied bombing continued for six weeks. On February
23, allied (primarily American) forces under the command
of General Norman Schwarzkopf began a major ground
offensive-not primarily against the heavily entrenched Iraqi forces along the Kuwait border, as expected, but to the north of them into Iraq itself. The allied armies encountered almost no resistance and suffered relatively few casualties (141 fatalities). Estimates of Iraqi deaths in the war were 100,000 or more. On February 28, Iraq announced its acceptance of allied terms for a cease-fire, and the brief Persian Gulf War came to an end.
The quick and (for America) relatively painless victory over Iraq was highly popular in the United States. But the tyrannical regime of Saddam Hussein survived, weakened but still ruthless.
The Gulf War preserved an independent nation and kept an important source of oil from falling into the hands of Iraq. But many Muslims, watching Americans attacking their fellow religionists, became incensed by the U.S. presence in the region. The most conservative and militant Muslims were insulted by the presence of women in the United Nations forces. But even more-moderate Middle East Muslims began to believe that America was a threat to their world. Even before the Gulf War, Middle Eastern terrorists had been targeting Americans in the region. Their determination to threaten America grew significantly in its aftermath.
The Election of 1992
President Bush's popularity reached a record high in the immediate aftermath of the Gulf War. But the glow of that victory faded quickly as the recession worsened in late 1991, and as the administration declined to propose any policies for combating it.
Because the early maneuvering for the 1992 presidential election occurred when President Bush's popularity remained high, many leading Democrats declined to run. That gave
854 * CHAPTER 31
THE ELECTION OF 1992
In the 1992 election, for the first time since 1976, a Democrat captured the White House. And although the third-party candidacy of Ross
Perot deprived Bill Clinton of an absolute majority, he nevertheless defeated George
Bush by a decisive margin in both the popular and electoral vote.
* What factors had eroded President Bush's once-broad popularity by 1992? What explained the strong showing of Ross Perot?
Bill Clinton (Democratic)
George H. W. Bush (Republican)
Ross Perot (Independent) Other candidates
44,909,889
(43.0)
39,104,545
(37.5)
19,742,267
(18.9)
669,958
(0.6)
55.2% of electorate voting
Bill Clinton Bill Clinton, the young five-term governor of Arkansas, an opportunity to emerge early
as the front-runner. He went on to run a skillful campaign. Complicating the campaign was the emergence of Ross
Perot, a blunt, forthright Texas billionaire who became an inde-Ross Perot pendent candidate by tapping popular resentment of the federal bureaucracy and by promising tough, uncompromising leadership to deal with the fiscal crisis. At several moments in the spring, Perot led both Bush and Clinton in public opinion polls. In July, as Perot
LOOKING BACK
America in the late 1970s and 1980s was, by the standards of its own recent history, an unusually troubled nation: numbed by the Watergate scandals, the fall of Vietnam, and perhaps most of all, the nation’s increasing economic difficulties. The difficult presidencies of Gerald Ford and Jimmy Carter provided little relief from these accumulating problems and anxieties. Indeed, in the last year of the Carter presidency, the nation’s prospects seemed particularly grim in light of severe economic problems, a traumatic seizure of American hostages in Iran, and a Soviet invasion of Afghanistan.
Reagan’s first term was a dramatic contrast to the trou-
bled presidencies that had preceded it. He won substantial
began to face hostile scrutiny from the media, he abruptly withdrew from the race. But early in October, he reentered and soon regained much (although never all) of his early support.
Clinton won a clear, but hardly overwhelming, victory over Bush and Perot. He received 43 percent of the vote in the three-way race, to the president’s 38 percent and Perot’s 19 percent (the best showing for a third-party or independent candidate since Theodore Roosevelt in 1912). Clinton won 370 electoral votes to Bush’s 168; Perot won none. Democrats retained control of both houses of Congress.
victories in Congress (cutting taxes, reducing spending on domestic programs, building up the military). Perhaps equally important, he made his own engaging personality one of the central political forces in national life. Easily reelected in 1984, he seemed to have solidified the conservative grip on national political life. In his second term, a series of scandals and misadventures-and the president’s own declining energy—limited the administration’s effectiveness. Nevertheless, Reagan’s personal popularity remained high, and the economy continued to prosper-factors that helped his vice president, George H. W. Bush, to succeed him in 1989.
FROM THE “AGE OF LIMITS” TO THE AGE OF REAGAN
855
Bush s presidency was defined not by domestic initiatives, as Reagan’s had been, but by international affairs. The perception of Bush’s disengagement with the nation’s growing economic problems contributed to his defeat in 1992. But a colossal historic event overshadowed domestic concerns during much of Bush’s term in office: the collapse of the Soviet Union and the fall of communist regimes all over Europe and in other parts of the world. The United States was to some degree a dazzled observer of this process. But the end of the Cold War also propelled the United States into the possession of unchallenged global preeminence-and drew it increasingly into the role of international arbiter and peacemaker. The Gulf War of 1991 was only the most dramatic example of the new global role the United States would now increasingly assume.
SIGNIFICANT EVENTS
Key Terms/People/Places/Events
Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini 841
Bill Clinton 854 Camp David accords 840 George H. W. Bush 851 Gerald Ford 838 Glasnost 850 Iran-contra scandal 851 Jimmy Carter 839 Mikhail Gorbachev 850 Neo-conservatives 846 New Right 844
RECALL AND REFLECT
1.	Did the Ford and Carter presidencies fail to repair the damage done to the reputation of the presidency by the Watergate scandal and Nixon’s resignation? If so, why?
2.	Why did the American electorate become increasingly conservative during the 1970s and 1980s? What are some examples that testify to this increasing conservatism?
3.	What groups constituted the Reagan coalition? What shared beliefs united the diverse groups that comprised this coalition?
4.	What philosophy guided foreign policy under Reagan? How did the rise of Mikhail Gorbachev alter Reagan’s foreign policy toward the Soviet Union?
Perestroika 850 Reagan doctrine 849 Reaganomics 846 Ronald Reagan 838 Ross Perot 854 Saddam Hussein 853 Sagebrush Rebellion 842 Sunbelt 842 Strategic Defense
Initiative (SDI) 848 Tiananmen Square 850
1974
"Stagflation" (recession and inflation together) begins Ford pardons Nixon
1977
Panama Canal treaties signed
1979
American diplomats taken hostage in Iran
Soviet Union invades Afghanistan
1981
American hostages in Iran released
Reagan wins major tax and budget cuts
1984
Reagan defeats Walter Mondale in presidential election
1986
Iran-contra scandal revealed
1989
Berlin Wall dismantled and Germany reunifies Eastern European states overthrow communist regimes China suppresses student uprisings with massacre in Tiananmen Square, Beijing 1991
Soviet Union dissolves after failed coup attempt
U.S. leads multinational force in Gulf War against Iraq
1976
Jimmy Carter elected president Mao Zedong dies
1978
Camp David accords signed U.S. and China restore diplomatic relations
1980
Ronald Reagan elected president
U.S. boycotts Moscow Olympics
1982
U.S.
Marines killed in terrorist attack in Beirut Severe recession begins 1985
Mikhail Gorbachev becomes leader of Soviet Union
9 1988
George H. W. Bush defeats Michael Dukakis in presidential
•	election
1990
Iraq invades Kuwait
1992
Clinton defeats Bush in presidential election
I)
THE AGE OF GLOBALIZATION

LOOKING AHEAD
1.	How did increasing partisanship affect the presidential elections of the 1990s and 2000s, and what were the effects on the presidential administrations of those decades?
2.	How did globalization account for the ups and downs of the national economy from the 1980s to the present day?
3.	How did the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001, affect the American citizenry and American foreign policy?
DRONES
Unmanned combat air vehicles (UCAV), also known as drones, have become weapons of choic during many recent US military engagements through the world. Pilots operate these vehicles from remote sites. For example, drones used for combat in Afghanistan may be operated from bases in the westei United States thus raising many ethical questions aboi the contemporary nature of war in the global environment. (© Kirsty Wigglesworth/AP Images) SETTING THE STAGE
nnmumnnnHHnnnnmmmmHmmmummummmnh- f. -	, s , , ,, si h
AT 8.45 A.M. ON THE BRIGHT, sunny morning of September 11, 2001, as tens of thousands of workers were beginning a day s work in lower Manhattan, a commercial airliner crashed into the side of one of the two towers of the World Trade Center, the tallest buildings in New York. The collision created a huge explosion and an intense fire. Less than half an hour later, as thousands of workers fled the burning building, a commercial airliner crashed into the companion tower, creating a second fireball. Within an hour after that, the burning floors of both towers gave way and fell onto the floors below them, pulling one of New York’s (and America s) most famous symbols to the ground. At about the same time, in Washington, D.C., another commercial airliner crashed into a side of the Pentagon—the headquarters of the nation’s military—turning part of the building s facade into rubble. And several hundred miles away, still another airplane crashed in a field not far from Pittsburgh, These four almost simultaneous catastrophes caused the deaths of nearly 3,000 people.
The attacks of September 11, 2001, seemed to many Americans at the time to change everything—to alter fundamentally how they thought about the world and to change decisively the way Americans would have to live. In fact, most aspects of life in the United States quickly returned to their norma, patterns. And in many ways, September 11, rather than being an aberration in American life, was an example of one of the most important realities of the age. The United States, more than at any other time in its history, was becoming deeply entwined in a new age of globalism-—an age that combined great promise with great peril.
A RESURGENCE OF PARTISANSHIP
Bill Clinton took the oath of office in January 1993 with a domestic agenda more ambitious than that of any other president in nearly thirty years. But having won the votes of well under half the electorate, he had no powerful mandate. The Republican leadership in Congress was highly adversarial and opposed the president with unusual unanimity on many issues. A tendency toward reckless personal behavior, both before and during his presidency, caused Clinton continuing problems and gave his many enemies repeated opportunities to discredit him.
William
Jefferson
Clinton
Launching the Clinton Presidency
The Clinton administration encountered many missteps and misfortunes in its first months. Several of his early appointments became so controversial, he had to withdraw them.
Despite its many problems, the Clinton administration could boast of some major achievements in its first year. The president narrowly won approval of a budget that marked a significant turn away from the policies of the Reagan-Bush years. It included a substantial tax increase on the wealthiest Americans, a large reduction in many areas of government spending, and a major expansion of tax credits to low-income working people.
Clinton was a committed advocate of free trade and a proponent of many aspects of what came to be known as globalism. He made that clear through his strong support of a series of new and con-NAFTA	troversial free-trade agreements. After a long and difficult battle, he won approval
NAFTA
Nofth American Free Trade Agreement (or NAFTA), which eliminated most trade barriers among the United States, Canada, and Mexico. Later he won approval of other far-reaching trade agreements negotiated in the General Agreement on Trade and Tariffs (or GATT).
The president’s most ambitious initiative was a major reform of the nation s health-care system.
Early in 1993, he appointed a task force chaired by his wife, Hillary Rodham Clinton. He proposed a sweeping reform designed to guarantee coverage to every American and hold down the costs of medical care. Substantial opposition from the right doomed the plan in 1994.
The foreign policy of the Clinton administration was not without some successes. The small Balkan nation Bosnia was embroiled in a bloody civil war between its two major ethnic groups: one
Failure of Health-Care Reform
