68 CHAPTER 3
in the 1670s the flow began to decline substantially. A decrease in the English birth rate and an increase in English prosperity reduced the pressures on many men and women who might otherwise have considered emigrating. After 1700, those who did travel to America as indentured servants generally avoided the southern colonies, where working conditions were arduous and prospects for advancement were slim, and took advantage of the better opportunities in the mid-Atlantic colonies, especially Pennsylvania and New York. In the Chesapeake, landowners themselves began to find the indenture system less attractive, in part because they were troubled by the instability that former servants created or threatened to create. That was one reason for the increasing centrality of African slavery in the southern agricultural economy.
Birth and Death
At first, new arrivals in most colonies, whatever their background or status, could anticipate great hardship: inadequate food, frequent epidemics, and in an appalling number of cases, early death. Gradually, however, conditions improved enough to allow the non-Indian population to begin to expand. By the end of the seventeenth century, the non-Indian population in the English colonies of North America had grown to over a quarter of a million, of whom about 25 percent were Africans.
Population (thousands) 2,780
2,148
1,594
1,171
906
629 ij| jO M M ■
466 IfjJ !f| O
332
I® IB
IfB Ill ■■ !■ BB8W ■■ ll^B
',n
1700 1710 1720 1730 1740 1750 1760 1770 1780 Year
THE NON-INDIAN POPULATION OF NORTH AMERICA, 1700-1780
The European population of North America grew much more dramatically in the eighteenth century than it had in the seventeenth, exceeding 2 million by 1770. But unlike in the seventeenth century, the most important reason for this expansion was natural increase (children born in America), replacing immigration from Europe. * Why was the natural increase so much larger than in the past?
O S I
s c ro ihc SOUTH-CAROLINA GAZETTE, i
TO BE SOLD,
on board the Georga-Tiram Galley, Thomas Cra/IFrattc Mailer,lying at Frank-lantfs Wharff, fundry Etiglijh SERFsINTS, Men and Women, well recommended, amongft whom are Tradef-men,Hulbandmen, £?<■'. indented for Four Tears. Likc’wife Iundry Englijh Provifions, and a parcel of new iron-bound iizable Water-Calks, handy for the IFcji-India Trade; fundry old Sails, l'ome linail Carriage Guns, Pipes, Earthen Ware, Cheefc,
CflljCtCflS the Subfcriber intends to depart this P^rinvC carlv in the next Spring, he defires all Pcrfons indebted to him, or the Hon. Benjamin Uhitaker, Efq ; to difeharge, or, at leaft, fettle their refpetlive Debts to his Satisfaction, oner be* fore the firlt Day of January next: And thofe who have any Demands on the Subfcriber or the faid Mr. Whitaker, arc requelt* ed to bring them in, that they may be fatisfied by
William George Freeman.
3>mpo
the Loy; grozrum
(0f}t—(, jianncl,-blar.kn*s huttand, tons,—~.i a
jocky (ut itnntm,-kuckaba arracl', (inrst — nail)
—-Jad r fond(rt
«Zr<7,—1 J alt f>ttt bt'jl unt ana fur houfe,
3mi’
SERVANTS FOR SALE
The South-Carolina Gazette of Charles Town ran this advertisement in November 1749 to announce the arrival of a group of English "indentures’— men and women who had accepted passage to America in exchange for their agreement to sell themselves as servants for a fixed period of years once they arrived. Indentures were the most common form of labor in most of the colonies during much of the seventeenth century, but by 1749 the system was already beginning to die out—replaced in the South by the enslavement of Africans. (© Charleston Library Society (Charleston, SC)) AltnougU immigration remained for a time the greatest source of population increase, marked improvement in the re production rate began in New England and the mid-Atlantic colonies in the second half of the seventeenth century. After the 1650s, natural increase became the most important source of population. The New England population more than quadru pled through reproduction alone in the second half of the sev-Exceptional enteenth century. This was less a result ol
unusual fertility (families in New Englanc and in other regions were probably equalb fertile) than of exceptional longevity Indeed, the average life spans of residents of some areas of Nev England were nearly equal to those of people in the twentietl century. In the first generation of American-born colonists, ac cording to one study, men who survived infancy lived to ai average age of seventy-one, women to seventy. The next gener ations life expectancy declined somewhat to sixty-five fo men who survived infancy-but remained at least ten year higher than the English equivalent and approximately twenv years higher than life expectancy in the South. Scholars dis
Longevity in New England
agree on the reasons for these remarkable life spans, but contributing factors probably included the cool climate and the relatively disease-free environment it produced, clean water (a stark contrast to England in these years), and the absence of arge population centers that might breed epidemics.
Conditions improved much more slowly in the South. The mortality rates for whites in the Chesapeake region remained markedly higher than those elsewhere until the mid-eighteenth century (and the mortality rates for Africans higher still). Throughout the seventeenth century, the average life expectancy for white men in the region was just over forty years and, for white women, slightly less. One in four children died in infancy, and fully half died before the age of twenty. The high death rate among adults meant that only about a third of all marriages lasted more than ten years; thus those children who survived infancy often lost one or both of their parents before reaching maturity. Widows, widowers, and orphans formed a substantial proportion of the white population of the Chesapeake. The continuing ravages of disease (particularly malaria) and the prevalence of salt-contaminated water kept the death rate high in the South; only after the settlers developed immunity to the local diseases (a slow process known as ’'seasoning”) did life expectancy increase significantly. Population growth was substantial in the region, but largely as a result of immigration.
Natural increases in the population, wherever they occurred, were largely a result of a steady improvement in the sex ratio through the seventeenth century. In the early years of settlement, more than three-quarters of the white population of the Chesapeake consisted of men. And even in New England, which from the beginning had attracted more fami-More-Balanced lies	t^us more women) than the
Sex Ratio	southern colonies, 60 percent of the
white inhabitants in 1650 were male.
Gradually, however, more women began to arrive in the colonies; and increasing birth rates, which of course produced roughly equal numbers of males and females, contributed to shifting the sex ratio as well. Not until well into the eighteenth century did the ratio begin to match that in England (where women were a slight majority), but by the late seventeenth century, the proportion of males to females in all the colonies was becoming more balanced.
Medicine in the Colonies
The very high death rates of women who bore children illustrate the primitive nature of medical knowledge and practice in the colonies. Seventeenth- and eighteenth-century physicians had little or no understanding of infection and sterilization. As a result, many people died from infections contracted during childbirth or surgery from dirty instruments or dirty hands. Because communities were unaware of bacteria, many were plagued with infectious diseases transmitted by garbage or unclean water.
One result of the limited extent of medical knowledge was that it was relatively easy for people to enter the medical field, even without professional training. The biggest beneficiaries of m-	this ease of access were women, who estab-
Midwives	themselves in considerable numbers
as midwives. Midwives assisted women in childbirth, but they also dispensed other medical advice-usually urging their
SOCIETY AND CULTURE IN PROVINCIAL AMERICA - 69
patients to use herbs or other natural remedies. Midwives were popular because they were usually friends and neighbors of the people they treated, unlike physicians, who were few and therefore not often well known to their patients. Male doctors felt threatened by the midwives and struggled continually to drive them from the field, although they did not make substantial progress in doing so until the nineteenth century.
Midwives and doctors alike practiced medicine on the basis of the prevailing assumptions of their time, most of them derived from the theory of "humoralism” popularized by the second-century Roman physician Galen. Galen argued that the human body was governed by four "humors” that were lodged in four bodily fluids: yellow bile (or "choler”), black bile ("melancholy”), blood, and phlegm. In a healthy body, the four humors existed in balance. Illness represented an imbalance and suggested the need for removing from the body the excesses of whatever fluid was causing the imbalance. That was the rationale that lay behind the principal medical techniques of the seventeenth century: purging, expulsion, and bleeding. Bleeding was the most extreme of the treatments (and the most destructive), and it was practiced mostly by male physicians. Midwives preferred more homeopathic treatments and favored "pukes” and laxatives. The great majority of early Americans, however, had little contact with physicians, or even midwives, and sought instead to deal with illness on their own, confident that their abilities were equal to those of educated physicians-which, given the state of medical knowledge, was often true.
That seventeenth-century medicine rested so much on ideas produced 1,400 years before is evidence of how little support there was for the scientific method-which rests on experimentation and observation rather than on inherited faiths-in England and America at the time. Bleeding, for example, had been in use for hundreds of years, during which time there had been no evidence that it helped people recover from illness; indeed, if anyone had chosen to look for it, there was considerable evidence that bleeding could do great harm. But what would seem in later eras to be the simple process of testing scientific assumptions was not yet a common part of Western thought. Only with the birth of the Enlightenment in the late seventeenth century-with its faith in human reason and its belief in the capacity of individuals and societies to create better lives-would the scientific method begin to find acceptance.
Women and Families
in the Chesapeake
The importance of reproduction in the labor-scarce society of seventeenth-century America had particularly significant effects on women. The high sex ratio meant that few women remained unmarried for long. The average European woman in America Male Authority married for the first time at twenty or
Undermined twenty-one years of age, considerably earlier than in England; in some areas of the
Chesapeake, the average bride was three to four years younger. In the Chesapeake, the most important factor affecting women
70
CHAPTER 3
and families remained, until at least the mid-eighteenth century, the extraordinarily high mortality rate. Under those circumstances, the traditional male-centered family structure of England-by which husbands and fathers exercised firm, even dictatorial control over the lives of their wives and children-was difficult to maintain. Because so few families remained intact for long, rigid patterns of male authority were constantly undermined. Standards of sexual behavior were also more flexible in the South than they were in England or other parts of America. Because of the large numbers of indentured servants who were forbidden to marry until their terms of service expired, premarital sexual relationships were frequent. Female servants who became pregnant before the expiration of their terms could expect harsh treatment: heavy fines, whippings if no one could pay the fines, an extra year or two of service added to their contract, and the loss of their children after weaning. Bastard children were themselves bound out as indentures at a very early age. On the other hand, a pregnant woman whose term of service expired before the birth of her child or whose partner was able to buy her remaining time from her master might expect to marry quickly. Over a third of Chesapeake marriages occurred with the bride already pregnant.
Women in the Chesapeake could anticipate a life consumed with childbearing. The average wife became pregnant every two years. Those who lived long enough bore an average of eight children apiece (up to five of whom typically died in infancy or early childhood). Since childbirth was one of the most frequent causes of female death, relatively few women survived to see all their children grow to maturity.
For all the hardships women encountered in the seventeenth-century South, they also enjoyed more power and
Greater
Independence
in the South
a greater level of freedom than women in other parts of America (or than southern women in later years). Because men were plentiful and women scarce, females had considerable latitude in choosing husbands. (They also often had no fathers or other male relatives nearby trying to control their choices.) Because women generally married at a
much younger age than men, they often outlived their husbands (even though female life expectancy was somewhat shorter than male). Widows were often left with several children and with responsibility for managing a farm or plantation, a circumstance of enormous hardship but one that also gave them significant economic power.
Widows seldom remained unmarried for long, however. Those who had no grown sons to work the tobacco farms and plantations had particular need for male assistance, and marriage was the surest way to secure it. Since many widows married men who were themselves widowers, complex combinations of households were frequent. With numerous stepchildren, half brothers, and half sisters living together in a single household, women often had to play the role of peacemaker a role that may have further enhanced their authority within the family.
By the early eighteenth century, the character of the Chesapeake population was beginning to change, and with it the nature of the typical family. Life expectancy was increasing; indentured servitude was in decline; and natural repro-
duction was becoming the principal source
Revival of r	h h
Patriarchy °* w“ite population increase. The sex ratio was becoming more equal. One result of these changes was that life for white people in the region became less perilous and less arduous. Another result was that
GUIDE TO THE SEASONS
Among their many purposes, almanacs sought to help farmers predict weather and plan for the demands of changing seasons. This illustration, part of a "calendar” of farming images, shows a man and a woman tending fields in July, in preparation for the coming harvest. (© American Antiquarian Society)
SOCIETY AND CULTURE IN PROVINCIAL AMERICA
» 71 women lost some of the power that their small numbers had once given them. As families grew more stable, traditional patterns of male authority revived. By the mid-eighteenth century, southern families were becoming highly ^patriarchal,” that is, dominated by the male head of the family.
Women and Families
in New England
In New England, where many more immigrants arrived with family members and where death rates declined quickly, family structure was much more stable than it was in the Chesapeake and hence much more traditional. Because the sex ratio was reasonably balanced, most men could expect to marry.
Women, however, remained in the minority; and as in the Chesapeake, they married young, began producing children early, and continued to do so well into their thirties. In contrast to the South, however, northern children were more likely to survive (the average family raised six to eight children to maturity), and families were more likely to remain intact. Fewer New England women became widows, and those who did generally lost their husbands later in life. Hence women were less often cast in roles independent of their husbands. Young women, moreover, had less control over the conditions of marriage, both because there were fewer unmarried men vying for them and because their fathers were more often alive and able to exercise control over their choice of husbands.
Among other things, increased longevity meant that, unlike in the Chesapeake (where three-fourths of all children lost at least one parent before the age of twenty-one), white parents in New England usually lived to see their children and even their grandchildren grow to maturity. Still, the lives of most New England women were nearly as consumed by childbearing and child rearing as those of women in the Chesapeake. Even women who lived into their sixties spent the majority of their mature years with young chil-
dren in the home. The longer lives in New England also meant that parents continued to control their children far longer than did parents in the South. Although they were less likely than parents in England to "arrange” marriages for their children, few sons and daughters could choose spouses entirely independent of their parents’ wishes. Men usually depended on their fathers for land-generally a prerequisite for beginning families of their own. Women needed dowries from their parents if they were to attract desirable husbands. Stricter parental supervision of children meant, too, that fewer women became pregnant before marriage than in the South (although even in Puritan New England the premarital pregnancy rate was not insubstantial-as high as 20 percent in some communities).
Puritanism placed a high value on the family, which was the principal economic and religious unit within every com-munity. At the same time, however, P™,P™“v	PUri«niSm ,enforced the ,dea o, need,
absolute male authority and the assumption of female weakness and inferiority. Women were
Life Spans
expected to be modest and submissive. Such popular girls’ names as Prudence, Patience, Chastity, and Comfort suggest something about Puritan expectations of female behavior. A wife was expected to devote herself to serving the needs of her husband and household.
The Beginnings of Slavery
in British America
Almost from the beginning of European settlement in North America, there was a demand for African workers to supplement the always-scarce southern labor supply. The demand grew rapidly once tobacco cultivation became a staple of the Chesapeake economy. But the supply of African laborers was limited during much of the seventeenth century, because the Atlantic slave trade did not at first serve the English colonies in America. Portuguese slavers, who had dominated the trade since the sixteenth century, shipped captive men and women from the west coast of Africa to the new European colonies in South America and the Caribbean. Gradually, Dutch and French navigators joined the slave trade. But a substantial commerce in slaves grew up within the Americas, particularly between the Caribbean islands and the southern colonies of British America. By the late seventeenth century, the supply of African workers in North America was becoming plentiful.
As the commerce in slaves grew more extensive and sophisticated, it also grew more horrible. Before it ended in the nineteenth century, it was responsible for the forced immigration of as many as 11 million Africans to the New World. (Until the late eighteenth century, the number of African immigrants to
The Middle	Americas was higher than that of
Passage	Europeans.) Native African chieftains
captured members of enemy tribes in battle, tied them together in long lines, or "coffles,” and sold them in the flourishing slave marts on the African coast. Then, after some haggling on the docks between the European traders and the African suppliers, the terrified victims were packed into the dark, filthy holds of ships for the horrors of the "mid-
dle passage”-the journey to America.
For weeks, sometimes even months, the African prisoners remained chained in the bowels of the slave ships. Conditions varied from one ship to another. Some captains took care to see that their potentially valuable cargo remained reasonably healthy. Others accepted the deaths of numerous Africans as inevitable and tried to cram as many as possible into their ships to ensure that enough would survive to yield a profit at journey’s end. On such ships, the African prisoners were sometimes packed together in such close quarters that they were unable to stand, hardly able to breathe. Some ships supplied them with only minimal food and water. Women were often victims of rape and other sexual abuse. Those who died en route were simply thrown overboard. Upon arrival in the New World, slaves were auctioned off to white landowners and transported, frightened and bewildered, to their new homes.
DEBATING THE PAST
The Origins of Slavery
m T T C debate among historians over how and why white Americans created a system of slave X H u labor in the seventeenth century—and how and why they determined that people of African descent and no others should populate that system—has been a long and unusually heated one. At its center is the question of whether slavery was a result of white racism or whether slavery created racism.
In 1950, Oscar and Mary Handlin published an influential article, "Origins of the Southern Labor
System," comparing slavery to other systems of "unfreedom" in the colonies. What differentiated slavery from other conditions of servitude, they argued, was that it was restricted to people of African descent, it was permanent, and it passed from one generation to the next. The unique characteristics of slavery, the Handlins maintained, were part of an effort by colonial legislatures to increase the available labor force. White laborers needed an incentive to come to America; black laborers, forcibly imported from Africa, did not. The distinction between the conditions of white workers and the conditions of black workers was, therefore, based on legal and economic motives, not on racism. Racism emerged to justify slavery; it did not cause slavery.
Winthrop D. Jordan was one of a number of historians who later challenged the Handlins' thesis and argued that white racism, more than economic interests, produced African slavery. In White Over Black (1968) and other works, Jordan argued that Europeans had long viewed people of color—and black Africans in particular—as inferior beings appropriate for serving whites. Those attitudes migrated with white Europeans to the New World, and white racism shaped the treatment of Africans in America—and the nature of the slave labor system—from the beginning.
George Fredrickson echoed Jordan's emphasis on the importance of racism as an independent factor reinforcing slavery; but unlike Jordan, he argued that racism did not precede slavery. "The treatment of blacks," he wrote, "engendered a cultural and psycho-social racism that after a certain point took on a life of its own..., Racism, although the child of slavery, not only outlived its parent but grew stronger and more independent after slavery's demise."
In Black Majority (1974), a study of seventeenth-century South Carolina, Peter Wood moved the debate away from racism and back toward social and economic conditions. Wood demonstrated that blacks and whites often worked together on relatively equal terms in the early years of settlement. But as rice cultivation expanded, finding white laborers willing to do the arduous work became more
difficult. The forcible importation of African workers and the creation of a system of permanent bondage was a response to a growing demand for labor and to fears among whites that without slavery a black labor force would be difficult to control.
Edmund Morgan argued similarly in American Slavery, American Freedom (1975) that the southern labor system was at first relatively flexible and later grew more rigid. In colonial Virginia, he claimed, white settlers did not at first intend to create a system of permanent bondage. But as the tobacco economy grew and created a high demand for cheap labor, white landowners began to feel uneasy about their dependence on a large group of dependent white workers, since such workers were difficult to recruit and control. Thus slavery was less a result of racism than of the desire of white landowners to find a reliable and stable labor force.
In The Making of New World Slavery (1996), Robin Blackburn argued that while race was a factor in allowing whites to justify to themselves the enslavement of Africans, the real reasons for slavery were hardheaded economic decisions by ambitious entrepreneurs, who realized early on that a slave-labor system in the labor intensive agricultural world of the American South and the Caribbean was more profitable than a free-labor system. Slavery served the interests of a powerful combination of groups: planters, merchants, governments, industrialists, and consumers.
Race may have been a rationale for slavery, allowing planters and traders to justify to themselves the terrible
human costs of the system. But the most important reason for the system was not just racism, but the pursuit of profit—and the success of the system in producing it. Blackburn concluded that slavery was not an antiquated remnant of an older world but, rather, a recognizably modern labor system that, however ugly, served the needs of an emerging market economy. •
UNDERSTAND, ANALYZE,
AND EVALUATE
1.	What do historians say is the relationship between racism and slavery?
2.	What are the economic arguments put forward by historians to explain the system of slave labor that developed in America? Do these arguments account fully for the development of slavery?
3.	Why was slavery more successful than other labor systems in meeting the labor needs of colonial America’s market economy?
The first African laborers arrived in English North America before 1620, and as English seamen began to establish themselves in the slave trade, the flow of Africans to the colonies gradually increased. But North America was always a much less important market for Africans than were other parts of the New World, especially the Caribbean islands and Brazil, whose labor-intensive sugar economies created an especially large demand for slaves. Less than 5 percent of the Africans imported to the Americas went directly to the English colonies on the mainland. Most blacks who ended up in what became the United States spent time first in the West Indies. Not until the 1670s did traders start importing blacks directly from Africa to North America. Even then, however, the flow remained small for a time, mainly because a single group, the Royal African Company of England, maintained a monopoly on trade in the mainland colonies and managed as a result to keep prices high and supplies low.
, v cunntig ^uuil m me nistory oi the African population in North America came in the mid-1690s, when the Roval African Company’s monopoly was finally broken. With the trade now opened to English and colonial merchants on a competitive basis, prices fell and the number of Africans arriving in North America rapidly increased. By the end of the seventeenth cen
Growing turY> only about one in ten of the residents Slave	°f the colonies were Africans (about 25,06b
Population in all). But because Africans were so heavily concentrated in a few southern colo nies, they were already beginning to outnumber Europeans in some areas. The high ratio of men to women among African immigrants (there were perhaps two males to one female in most areas) retarded the natural increase of the black population. But in the Chesapeake at least, more new slaves were being born by 1700 than were being imported from Africa. In South Carolina, by contrast, the difficult conditions of rice
cultivation-and the high death rates of those who worked in the rice fields-ensured that the black population would barely be able to sustain itself through natural increase until much later.
Between 1700 and 1760, the number of Africans in the colonies increased tenfold to about a quarter of a million. A relatively small number (16,000 in 1763) lived in New England; there were slightly more (29,000) in the middle colonies. The vast majority, however, continued to live in the South. By then the flow of free white laborers to that region had all but stopped, and Africans had become securely established as the
basis of the southern workforce.
It was not entirely clear at first that the status of African laborers in America would be fundamentally different from that of white indentured servants. In the rugged conditions of the seventeenth-century South, it was often difficult for Europeans and Africans to maintain strictly separate roles. In
Uncertain
Status
some areas-South Carolina, for example, where the number of African arrivals swelled more quickly than anywhere else-whites and blacks lived and worked together for a time on terms of relative equality. Some blacks were treated much like white hired servants, and some were freed after a fixed
term of servitude. A few Africans themselves became land-owners, and some apparently owned slaves of their own.
By the early eighteenth century, however, a rigid distinction had become established between black and white. (See "Debating the Past,” above.) Masters were contractually obliged to free white servants after a fixed term of servitude. There was no such necessity to free black workers, and the assumption slowly spread that blacks would remain in service permanently. Another incentive for making the status of Africans
rigid was that the children of slaves provided white landowners with a self-perpetuating labor force.
72
73
74 CHAPTER 3
White assumptions about the inferiority of people of color contributed to the growing rigidity of the system. Such assumptions came naturally to the English settlers. They had already defined themselves as a superior race in their relations with the native Indian population (and earlier in their relations with the Irish). The idea of subordinating a supposedly inferior race was, therefore, already established in the English imagination by the time substantial numbers of Africans appeared in America.
In the early eighteenth century, colonial assemblies began to pass "slave codes,” limiting the rights of blacks in law and ensuring almost absolute authority to white masters. One factor, and Slave Codes one ^actor on^Y’ determined whether a person was subject to the slave codes: color. In contrast to the colonial societies of Spanish America, where people of mixed race had a different (and higher) status than
pure Africans, English America recognized no such distinctions. Any African ancestry was enough to classify a person as black.
Changing Sources of
European Immigration
By the early eighteenth century, the flow of immigrants from England itself began to decline substantiallya result of better economic conditions there and of new government restrictions on emigration in the face of massive depopulation in some regions of the country. But as English immigration declined, French, German, Swiss, Irish, Welsh, Scottish, and Scandinavian immigration continued and increased.
The earliest, although not the most numerous, of these non-English European immigrants were the French Calvinists,
Ar-RICAN SLAVE TRADE This image is from a plate from British author Amelia Opie's poem BlnrU c/ ■ l
Opie s poem depicts the life of an African who was captured by slave traders and h • f u P ■ B k S °VeS H°ld °fthe Slave Ship- or How to M t	□
were narked like remn Fnr 4, i	,	y e traders and chronicles his journey to the West Indies nn i	"	"°W ° Sugar, published in London
packed hke cargo for the long ocean voyage. (© Universe! History Archive/UIG/The Bridgentan Art Ubrary,	°n	Sh'P his -^ed work on the sugar plantations the
SOCIETY AND CULTURE IN PROVINCIAL AMERICA
• 75 Pennsylvania
Dutch
or Huguenots. A royal proclamation, the Edict of Nantes of 1598, had allowed them to become practically a state within the state in Roman Catholic France. In 1685, however, the French government revoked the edict. Soon after that,
Huguenots and HuSuenots beSan leaving the country.
About 300,000 left France in the following decades. A small proportion of them traveled to the English colonies in North
America. Many German Protestants suffered similarly from the arbitrary religious policies of their rulers; and all Germans, Catholics as well as Protestants, suffered from the devastating wars with King Louis XIV of France (the "Sun King”). The Rhineland of southwestern Germany, the area known as the Palatinate, experienced particular hardships. Because it was close to France, its people were particularly exposed to slaughter and ruin at the hands of invaders. The unusually cold winter of 1708-1709 dealt a final blow to the precarious economy of the region. More than 12,000 Palatinate Germans sought refuge in England, and approximately 3,000 of them soon found their way to America. They arrived in New York and tried at first to make homes in the Mohawk Valley, only to be ousted by the powerful landlords of the region. Some of
the Germans moved farther up the Mohawk, out of reach of the patroons; but most made their way to Pennsylvania, where they received a warm welcome (and where they ultimately became known to English settlers as the "Pennsylvania Dutch,” a corruption of their own word for '"German”: "Deutsch”). The Quaker colony became the most common destination for Germans, who came to America in growing numbers. (Among them were Moravians and Mennonites, with religious views similar in many ways to those of the Quakers.) Many German Protestants went to North Carolina as well, especially after the founding of New Bern in 1710 by a company of 600 German-speaking Swiss.
The most numerous of the newcomers were the Scots-Irish-Scottish Presbyterians who had settled in northern Ireland (in the province of Ulster) in the early seventeenth century. The Ulster colonists had prospered for a time despite the barren soil and the constant, never wholly successful, struggle to suppress the Catholic natives. But in the first years of the eighteenth century, Parliament prohibited Ulster from exporting to England the woolens and other products that had become the basis of the northern Irish economy; at the same time, the English government virtually outlawed the practice of the Presbyterian religion
THE SLAVE SHIP SPOOKES
The British slave ship Brookes provided this plan of its "stowage" of slaves to conform to 1798 legislation from Parliament. It illustrates vividly the terrible conditions under which slaves were shipped from Africa to the Americas— human beings squeezed into every available space like cargo for the long, dangerous passage during which many Africans died. (Library of Congress) 76 . CHAPTER 3
Population (thousands) 575
1620 1640 1660 1680 1700 1720 1740 1760 1780
Year
THE AFRICAN POPULATION OF THE BRITISH COLONIES, 1620-1780
From tiny beginnings in the seventeenth century, the African population of the British colonies grew rapidly in the eighteenth century. The growth of slavery was a result of both supply (a readily available population of African workers in the Caribbean islands) and demand (the growth of tobacco, rice, and cotton cultivation in larger areas of the South). The slave population in the colonies also increased naturally in this period at a far greater rate than in the past, largely because living conditions for African workers improved. * Why did slaveowners invest in better conditions for their slaves?
in Ulster and insisted on conformity with the Anglican Church. After 1710, moreover, the long-term leases of many Scots-Irish expired; English landlords doubled and even tripled the rents. Thousands of tenants embarked for America.
Often coldly received at the colonial ports, many of the Scots-Irish pushed out to the edges of European settlement.
There they occupied land without much regard for who actually claimed to own it, whether absentee whites, Indians, or the colonial governments. They were as ruthless in their displacement and
THE “PENNSYLVANIA DUTCH”
This folk art painted dish illustrates the traditional dress of the Pennsylvania Dutch. The Pennsylvania Dutch were, in fact, German immigrants, known to their neighbors as "Dutch" because that was how their native word for their nationality ("Deutsch") sounded to most English speakers. (© The Granger Collection, New York)
Scots-Irish suppression of the Indians as they had been with the native Irish Catholics.
Immigrants from Scotland and southern Ireland added other elements to the colonial population in the eighteenth century. Scottish Highlanders, some of them Roman Catholics who had been defeated in rebellions in 1715 and 1745, immigrated into several colonies, North Carolina above all. Presbyterian Lowlanders, faced in Scotland with high rents in the country and unemployment in the towns, left for America in large numbers shortly before the American Revolution, joining earlier groups of Scots, who had arrived in the late seventeenth century. They became a significant influence in New Jersey and Pennsylvania and helped establish Presbyterianism as an important religion in those colonies. The Catholic Irish migrated steadily over a long period, and by the time of the Revolution they were almost as numerous as the Scots, although less conspicuous. Many of them had by then abandoned their Roman Catholic religion and with it much of their ethnic identity.
Continuing immigration and natural increase contributed to a rapid population growth in the colonies in the eighteenth century. In 1700, the non-Indian population of the colonies totaled less than 250,000; by 1775, it was over 2 million-a nearly tenfold increase. Throughout the colonial period, the non-Indian population nearly doubled every twenty-five years.
THE COLONIAL ECONOMIES
To those who remained in Europe, and even to some who settled in North America, the English colonies often appeared so small and isolated as to seem virtually at the end of the world. But from the beginning, almost all the English colonies were commercial ventures and were tied in crucial ways to other economies. They developed substantial trade with the native population of North America, with the French settlers to the north and, to a lesser extent, with Spanish colonists to the south and west. And over time they developed an even more substantial trade within the growing Atlantic economy of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, of which they became a critical part.
American colonists engaged in a wide range of economic pursuits. But except for a few areas in the West where the small white
SOCIETY AND CULTURE IN PROVINCIAL AMERICA
• 77 populations subsisted largely on the fur and skin trade with the Indians, farming dominated all areas of European and African settlement throughout the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. Some farmers engaged in simple subsistence agriculture; but whenever possible, American farmers attempted to grow crops for the local, intercolonial, and export markets.
The Southern Economy
In the Chesapeake region, tobacco quickly became the basis of the economy. A strong European demand for the crop enabled
Tobacco S°me Planters to &row enormously wealthy
.... :i"!"and at times allowed the region as a whole
to prosper. But production frequently exceeded demand, and as a result the price of tobacco periodically suffered severe declines.
The first major bust in the tobacco economy occurred in 1640, and the boom-and-bust pattern continued throughout the colonial period and beyond. Growing more tobacco only made the problem of overproduction worse, but Chesapeake farmers never understood that. Those planters who could afford to do so expanded their landholdings, enlarged their fields, and acquired additional laborers. After 1700, tobacco plantations employing several dozen slaves or more were common.
The staple of the economies of South Carolina and Georgia was rice. By building dams and dikes along the many tidal rivers, farmers managed to create rice paddies that could be flooded and then drained. Rice cultivation was arduous work, performed standing knee-deep in the mud of malarial swamps under a blazing sun, surrounded by insects. It was a task so difficult and unhealthful that white laborers generally refused to
IMMIGRANT GROUPS IN COLONIAL AMERICA, 1760
Even though the entire Atlantic seaboard of what is now the United States had become a series of British colonies by 1760, the population consisted of people from many nations. As this map reveals, English settlers dominated most of the regions of North America. But note the large areas of German settlement in the western Chesapeake and Pennsylvania; the swath of Dutch settlement in New York and New Jersey; the Scots-Irish areas in the western regions of the South; and the large areas in which Africans were becoming the majority of the population, even if subjugated by the white minority. • What aspects of the history of these colonies help explain their ethnic composition?

ATLANTIC
OCEAN

SOUT
CAROLS
Wilmington
G
ApEOF
Charles
Town
Savannah
Immigrant Groups English Scots-Irish
German
Dutch I African
200
400 km
78 CHAPTER 3
perform it. As a result, planters in South Carolina and Georgia were even more dependent than those elsewhere on African slaves. It was not only because Africans could be compelled to perform difficult work that whites found them so valuable. It was also because they were much better at it. They showed from the beginning a greater resistance to malaria and other local diseases (although the impact of disease on African workers was by no means inconsiderable). And they proved more adept at the basic agricultural tasks required, in part because some of them had come from rice-producing regions of west Africa.
In the early 1740s, another staple crop contributed to the South Carolina economy: indigo. Eliza Lucas, a young Antiguan woman who managed her family's North American plantations, experimented with cultivating the West Indian plant (which was the source of a blue dye in great demand in Europe) on the mainland. She discovered that it could grow on the high ground Indigo	^out^ Carolina, which was unsuitable for
rice planting, and that its harvest came while the rice was still growing. Indigo became an important
complement to rice and a popular import in England.
Because of the South’s early dependence on large-scale cash crops, the southern colonies developed less of a commercial or industrial economy than the colonies of the North. The trading
in tobacco and rice was handled largely by merchants based in London and, later, in the northern colonies. Few cities of more than modest size developed in the South.
Northern Economic and
Technological Life
More Diverse
Economy in the North
In the North, agriculture was the single most important part of the economy. But unlike in the South, the northern colonies were less dominated by farming. The northern economy was more diverse than the economy in the South in part because conditions for farming were less favorable there. In northern New England, in particular, colder weather
and hard, rocky soil made it difficult for colonists to develop the kind of large-scale commercial farming system that southerners were creating. Conditions for agriculture were better in southern New England and the middle colonies, where the soil was fertile and the weather more temperate. New York, Pennsylvania, and the Connecticut River valley were the chief suppliers of wheat to much of New England and to parts of the South. Even there, however, a substantial commercial economy emerged alongside the agricultural one.
r—r- -—-—- .....
K
Th, Sl.,1,,, ColicLilorooy i ' ’ ’ (« *»»» Almost every colonist engaged in a certain amount of industry at home. Occasionally these home industries provided families with surplus goods they could trade or sell. Beyond these domestic efforts, craftsmen and artisans established themselves in colonial towns as cobblers, blacksmiths, rifle-makers, cabinetmakers, silversmiths, and printers. In some areas, entrepreneurs harnessed water power to run small mills for grinding grain, processing cloth, or milling lumber. And in several places, large-scale shipbuilding operations began to flourish.
The first effort to establish a significant metals industry in the colonies was an ironworks established in Saugus, Massachusetts, in the 1640s after iron ore deposits had been Saugus discovered in the region. Iron technology
Ironworks was already advancing rapidly in England, and the colonists attempted to transfer those skills to America. The Saugus works used water power to drive a bellows, which controlled the heat in a charcoal furnace. As the ore melted, it trickled down into molds or was
SOCIETY AND CULTURE IN PROVINCIAL AMERICA < 79
taken in the form of simple "sow bars” to a forge to be shaped into such marketable objects as plows, hoes, axes, pots, and other tools. The Saugus works was a technological success; indeed, it could boast technological capabilities equal to those of any ironworks in Europe at the time. But it was a financial failure. It began operations in 1646; in 1668, its financial problems forced it to close its doors.
Metalworks, however, gradually became an important part of the colonial economy. The largest industrial enterprise anywhere in English North America was the ironworks of the German ironmaster Peter Hasenclever in northern New Jersey. Founded in 1764 with British capital, it employed several hundred laborers, many of them imported from ironworks in Germany. There were other, smaller ironmaking enterprises in every northern colony (with particular concentrations in Massachusetts, New Jersey, and Pennsylvania), and there were ironworks as well in several southern colonies. Even so, these and other growing industries did not become the basis for the kind of explosive industrial growth that Great Britain
COMMERCE IN NEW ENGLAND
This late-eighteenth-century painting of the home, wharves, countinghouse, and fleet of a prosperous New England .	,, commerce was expanding even in such relatively small places as Duxbury, Massachusetts. The owner, Joshua Winsor, was
is erman gives some in i	painting-evidently an effort to celebrate Winsor’s great material success and record it for posterity-was by his
active in the mackerel and cod risning	y H	,	, ,r r p * l CernoN™ idi onni pqu
son-in-law, Dr. Rufus Hathaway. I© Collection American Folk Art Museum, New York. Promised gift of Ralph Esmenan. (Pl.2001.53),
80 * CHAPTER 3
experienced in the late eighteenth century-in part because English parliamentary regulations such as the Iron Act of 1750 restricted metal processing in the colonies. Similar prohibitions limited the manufacture of woolens, hats, and other goods. But the biggest obstacles to industrialization in America were an inadequate labor supply, a small domestic market, and inadequate transportation facilities and energy supplies.
More important than manufacturing were industries that exploited the natural resources of the continent. By the mid-seventeenth century, the flourishing fur trade of earlier years was in decline. Taking its place were lumbering, mining,
and fishing, particularly in the waters off the New England coast. These industries provided commodities that could be exported to England in exchange for manufactured goods. And they helped produce the most distinctive feature of the northern economy: a thriving commercial class.
Extractive
Industries
The Extent and Limits
of Technology
Despite the technological progress that was occurring in some parts of America in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, much of colonial society was conspicuously lacking in even very basic technologies. Up to half the farmers in the colonies were so primitively equipped that they did not even own a plow. Substantial numbers of households owned no pots or kettles for cooking. And only about half the households in the colonies owned guns or rifles-with rural people almost as unlikely to have firearms as urban people. The relatively low levels of ownership of these and other elementary tools was not because such things were difficult to make, but because most Americans remained too poor or too isolated to be able to afford them. Many households had few if any candles, because they were unable to afford candle molds or tallow (wax), or because they had no access to commercially produced candles. In the early eighteenth century, very few farmers owned wagons. Most made do with two-wheeled carts, which could be hauled by hand (or by horse) around the farm but which were not very efficient for transporting crops to market. The most commonly owned tool on American farms was the axe, which suggests how much time most farmers had to spend clearing land. But throughout the colonies, the ability of people to acquire manufactured implements lagged far behind the capacity to produce them.
Even so, few colonists were self-sufficient in the late seventeenth and early eighteenth centuries. The popular image of early American households is of people who had little
Myth of Self- connection t0 the market, who grew their Sufficiency own food, made their own clothes, and bought little from anyone else. In fact, relatively few colonial families owned spinning wheels or looms, which suggests that most people purchased whatever yarn and cloth they needed, or could afford, from merchants. Most farmers who grew grain took it to centralized facilities for
processing.
Shortage of Currency
The Rise of Colonial Commerce
Perhaps the most remarkable feature of colonial commerce in the seventeenth century was that it was able to survive. American merchants faced such bewildering and intimidating obstacles, and lacked so many basic institutions of trade, they managed to stay afloat only with great difficulty. There was, first, no commonly accepted medium of exchange. The colonies had almost no specie
(gold or silver coins). They experimented at times with different forms of paper currency—tobacco certificates, for example, which were secured by tobacco stored in warehouses; or land certificates, secured by property. Such paper was not, however, acceptable as payment for any goods from abroad, and it was in any case ultimately outlawed by Parliament. For many years, colonial merchants had to rely on a haphazard barter system or on crude money substitutes such as beaver skins.
A second obstacle was the near impossibility of imposing order on their trade. In the fragmented, jerry-built commercial world of colonial America, no merchants could be certain that the goods they sold would be produced in sufficient quantity; nor could they be certain of finding adequate markets for them. Few channels of information existed to inform traders of what they could expect in foreign ports; vessels sometimes stayed at sea for several years, journeying from one market to another, trading one commodity for another, attempting to find some way to turn a profit. Engaged in this chaotic commerce, moreover, were an enormous number of small, fiercely competitive companies, which made the problem of stabilizing the system even more acute.
Despite these and other problems, commerce in the colonies not only survived but grew. There was an elaborate coastal trade, through which the colonies did business with one another and sold goods to the West Indies-among them rum, agricultural products, meat, and fish. The mainland colonies Triangular bought sugar, molasses, and slaves from the Trade	Caribbean markets in return. There was
also an expanding transatlantic trade, which linked the North American colonies in an intricate network of commerce with England, continental Europe, and the west coast of Africa. This commerce has often been described, somewhat inaccurately, as the ’’triangular trade,” suggesting a neat process: merchants carried rum and other goods from New England to Africa; exchanged their merchandise for slaves, whom they then transported to the West Indies (hence the term ’’middle passage” for the dreaded journey-it was the second of the three legs of the voyage); and then exchanged the slaves for sugar and molasses, which they shipped back to New England to be distilled into rum. In fact, the system was almost never so simple. The ’’triangular” trade in rum, slaves, and sugar was in fact part of a maze of highly diverse trade routes, between the northern and southern colonies, America and England, America and Africa, the West Indies and Europe, and other combinations.
Out of this complex and highly risky trade emerged a group of adventurous entrepreneurs who by the mid-eighteenth
SOCIETY AND CULTURE IN PROVINCIAL AMERICA - 81
THE “TRIANGULAR TRADE”
This map illustrates the complex pattern of trade that fueled the colonial American economy in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. A simple explanation of this trade is that the American colonies exported raw materials (agricultural products, furs, and others) to Britain and Europe and imported manufactured goods in return. But while that explanation is accurate, it is not complete, largely because the Atlantic trade was not a simple exchange between America and Europe but, rather, a complex network of exchanges involving the Caribbean, Africa, and the Mediterranean. Note the important exchanges between the North American mainland and the Caribbean islands; the important trade between the American colonies and Africa; and the wide range of European and Mediterranean markets in which Americans were active. Not shown on this map, but also very important to colonial commerce, was a large coastal trade among the various regions of British North America.
Why did the major ports of trade emerge almost entirely in the northern colonies?
century were beginning to constitute a distinct merchant class. Concentrated in the port cities of the North (above all, Boston, New York, and Philadelphia), they enjoyed protection
P	from foreign competition within the
Merchant	English colonies-the British Navigation
Class	Acts had excluded all non-British ships
from the colonial carrying trade. They had access to a market in England for such American products as furs, timber, and ships. That did not, however, satisfy all their commercial needs. Many colonial products-fish, flour, wheat, and meat, all of which England could produce for itself-needed markets outside the British Empire. Ignoring laws restricting colonial trade to England and its possessions, many merchants
developed markets in the French, Spanish, and Dutch West Indies, where prices were often higher than in the British colonies. The profits from this illegal commerce enabled the colonies to import the manufactured goods they needed from Europe.
The Rise of Consumerism
Among relatively affluent residents of the colonies, the growing prosperity and commercialism of British America created both new appetites and new opportunities. The result was a growing preoccupation with the consumption of material goods-and of the association of possessions with social status.
82 CHAPTER 3
TEA PARTY IN THE TIME OF GEORGE I
This painting by an unknown artist dates from the 1720s and shows a prosperous Virginian posing with a fashionable and expensive tea service, some of it from China. His eagerness to display his possessions in this way is a sign of the growing interest in the badges of refinement among colonial Americans of means in the eighteenth century. (© The Colonial Williamsburg Foundation) The growth of eighteenth-century consumerism was partly a result of the increasing division of American societies by class. As the difference between the upper and lower classes became more glaring, people of means became more intent on demonstrating their own membership in the upper ranks of society.
Growing	t0 Purchase and display con-
Consumerism sumer goods was an important way of doing so, particularly for affluent people in cities and towns. But the growth of consumerism was also a product of the early stages of the industrial revolution. Although there was relatively little industry in America in the eighteenth century, England and Europe were making rapid advances and producing more and more affordable goods for affluent Americans to buy. The new manufacturing was dependent, of course, on customers for its products. In an increasingly commercial society, therefore, there were many people committed to promoting the purchase of consumer goods as a positive social good. Consumption also grew because of an increasing tendency among colonists to take on debt to finance purchases and be-
cause of the willingness of some merchants to offer credit.
To facilitate the new consumer appetites, merchants and traders began advertising their goods in journals and newspapers. Agents of urban merchants-the first traveling
salesmen-fanned out through the countryside, attempting to interest wealthy landowners and planters in luxury goods. George and Martha Washington, for example, spent considerable time and money ordering elegant furnishings for their home at Mount Vernon, goods that were shipped to them mostly from England and Europe.
Things that had once been considered expensive luxuries gradually became commonplace necessities-among them tea, household linens, glassware, manufactured cutlery, crockery, and Social	furniture, and many others.
Another result of consumerism was the association of material goods-of the quality of a person’s home and possessions and clothing, for ex-ample-with virtue and "refinement.” The ideal of the cultivated "gentleman” and the gracious "lady” became increasingly powerful throughout the colonies in the eighteenth century. That meant striving to become educated and "refined”-”gentlemanly” or "ladylike” in speech and behavior. Americans read books on manners and fashion. They bought magazines about London society. They also commissioned portraits of themselves and their families, devoted large portions of their homes to entertainment, built shelves and cases in which they could display fashionable possessions, constructed formal gardens, and lavished attention on their wardrobes and hairstyles.
The growing importance of consumption and refinement was visible in public spaces as well. Eighteenth-century cities-in America as in England and Europe-began to plan their growth to ensure that there would be elegant and gracious public squares, parks, and boulevards. In the past, social in-
teraction in American communities had largely been between neighbors and relatives, or at most among members of church congregations. Now that a wider "society” was emerging within cities, it became important to create not just private but also public stages for social display.
PATTERNS OF SOCIETY
Although there were sharp social distinctions in the colonies, the deeply entrenched class system of England failed to re-
Social	produce itself in America. In England, land
Mobility was scarce and the population large. The relatively small number of people who owned property had power over the great majority who did not; the imbalance between land and population became a foundation of the English economy and the cornerstone of its
class system.
In early America, the opposite was true. Land was abundant, and people were scarce. Aristocracies emerged in America, to be sure. But they tended to rely less on landown-ership than on control of a substantial workforce, and they
SOCIETY AND CULTURE IN PROVINCIAL AMERICA - 83
were generally less secure and less powerful than their English counterparts. Far more than in England, there were opportunities in America for social mobility-both up and down.
The Plantation
The plantation defined a distinctive way of life for many white and black southerners that would survive, in varying forms, until the Civil War. The first plantations emerged in the early
(	\ NEW
GEORGIA
CSavannah
£
ATLANTIC
OCEAN
Percent of Population That Was Black Per County/Colony in 1775 BM 61 to 71%
51 to 60%
31 to 50%
11 to 30%
0.1 to 10%
100	200 km
AFRICAN POPULATION AS A PROPORTION OF TOTAL POPULATION, C. 1775
This map illustrates the parts of the colonies in which slaves made up a large proportion of the population—in some areas, a majority. The densest African population was in Tidewater Virginia, but there were black majorities as well in South Carolina and parts of North Carolina. The slave population was smallest in the western regions of the southern colonies and in the area north of the Chesapeake, although there remained a significant African population in parts of New Jersey and New York (some slave, some free). What explains the dense concentrations of slaves in certain areas of the South.
Vagaries of the Plantation Economy
settlements of Virginia and Maryland, once tobacco became the economic basis of the Chesapeake.
Some plantations were enormous-much like some of the great estates of England. The Maryland plantation of Charles Carroll of Carrollton, reputedly the wealthiest man in the colonies, covered 40,000 acres and contained 285 slaves. On the whole, however, seventeenth-century colonial plantations were rough and relatively small estates. In the early days in Virginia, most plantations were crude clearings where land-owners and indentured servants worked side by side in conditions so rugged that death was an everyday occurrence. Even in later years, when the death rate declined and the landholdings became more established, plantation workforces seldom exceeded thirty people.
The economy of the plantation, like all agricultural economies, was precarious. In good years, successful growers could earn great profits and expand their operations. But since they could not control their markets, even the largest planters were constantly at risk. When prices for
their crops fell-as tobacco prices did, for example, in the 1660s-they faced ruin.
Because plantations were sometimes far from cities and towns-which were relatively few in the South-they tended to become self-contained communities. Residents lived in close proximity to one another in a cluster of buildings that included the ’’great house"’ of the planter (a house that was usually far from great), the service buildings, the barns, and the cabins of the slaves. Wealthier planters often created something approaching a full town on their plantations, with a school (for white children only), a chapel, and a large population. Smaller planters lived more modestly, but still in a relatively self-sufficient world. In some parts of the South, for example, the region around Charleston, South Carolina, planters often divided their time between the city and their nearby plantations.
On the larger plantations, the presence of a substantial slave workforce altered not only the economic but also the family lives of the planter class. The wives of plantation owners, unlike the wives of small farmers, could rely on servants to perform ordinary household chores. They could thus devote more time to their husbands and children than people in poorer parts of colonial society. But there were also frequent sexual liaisons between their husbands or sons and black women of the slave community. Southern white women generally learned to pretend not to notice these relationships, but they were almost certainly a source of anxiety and resentment. Black women, naturally, had even greater cause to resent such liaisons.
Southern society was highly stratified. Within given areas, great landowners controlled not only the lives of those who worked on their own plantations. Wealthy planters also shaped the livelihoods of small farmers, who could not effectively compete with the wealthy planters and thus depended on them to market crops and receive credit. Small
farmers, working modest plots of land with few or no slaves to help them, formed the majority of the southern agrarian
Stratified
Southern
Society
84 • CHAPTER 3
MULBERRY PLANTATION, 1770
This painting of a rice plantation in South Carolina is unusual in placing the slave quarters in the forefront of the picture. The steep roofs of the slave cabins, which were built by the slaves themselves, reflected African architectural styles. The high roofs helped keep the cabins cool by allowing the heat to rise into the rafters. The master’s house and adjacent chapel, built in conventional European style, are in the background. (View of Mulberry, House and Street, 1805, by Thomas Coram (American, 1756-1811), Oil on paper. © Image Gibbes Museum of Art/Carolina Art Association, (1968.18.01)) population, but it was the planters who dominated the southern agrarian economy. Most landowners lived in rough cabins or houses, with their servants or slaves nearby. Few landowners lived in anything resembling aristocratic splendor.
Plantation Slavery
African slaves, of course, lived very differently than white planters. On the smaller farms with only a handful of slaves, there was not always a rigid social separation between whites and blacks. But by the mid-eighteenth century, over three-fourths of all blacks lived on plantations of at least ten slaves; nearly half lived in communities of fifty slaves or more. In these larger establishments, Africans developed a society and culture of their own-influenced by their white masters, to be sure, but also partly independent of them.
Although whites seldom encouraged formal marriages among slaves, Africans themselves developed an elaborate family structure. This became possible beginning in the eighteenth century as a result of the increased life expectancy of slaves, the gradual equalization of the sex ratio, and the growth of the population through natural increase. Slaves attempted to construct nuclear families, and they managed at times to build stable households, even to work together growing their own food in gardens provided by their masters. But such
efforts were in constant jeopardy. Any family member could be sold at any time to another planter, even to one in another colony. As a result, the black family developed in ways different from its white counterpart. Africans placed special emphasis on extended kinship networks, even creating surrogate "relatives” for those who were separated from their own families. They adapted themselves, in short, to difficult conditions over which they had limited control.
African workers also developed languages of their own. In South Carolina, for example, the early slaves communicated with one another in Gullah, a hybrid of English and Slave Culture African tongues, which enabled them to engage in conversations their white masters could not understand. There emerged, too, a distinctive slave religion, which blended Christianity with African
folklore.
Nevertheless, slave society was heavily tied to white society. African house servants, for example, at times lived in what was, by the standards of slavery, great luxury; but they were also isolated from their own community and under constant surveillance from whites. Black women were often subjected to unwanted sexual advances from owners and overseers and hence to bearing mulatto children, who were rarely recognized by their white fathers but generally accepted as members of the slave community. On some
SOCIETY AND CULTURE IN PROVINCIAL AMERICA
85
plantations, African workers received kindness and even affection from their masters and mistresses and displayed genuine devotion in return. On others, they encountered physical brutality and occasionally even sadism, against which they were powerless.
There were occasional acts of individual resistance by slaves against harsh masters, and at least twice during the colonial period there were actual slave rebellions. In the most import-Stono	ant such revolt, the so-called Stono
Rebellion Rebellion in South Carolina in 1739, about 100 Africans rose up, seized weapons, killed several whites, and attempted to escape south to Florida. Whites quickly crushed the uprising and executed most participants. The most frequent form of resistance was simply running away, but for most slaves that provided no real solu-
tion either. There was nowhere to go.
Most slaves, male and female, worked as field hands (with women also shouldering the additional burdens of cooking and child rearing). On the larger plantations that aspired to
genuine self-sufficiency, some slaves learned trades and crafts: blacksmithing, carpentry, shoemaking, spinning, weaving, sewing, midwifery, and others. These skilled craftsmen and craftswomen were at times hired out to other planters. Some set up their own establishments in towns or cities and shared their profits with their owners. On occasion, they were able to buy their freedom. There was a small free black population living in southern cities by the time of the Revolution.
The Puritan Community
A very different form of community emerged in Puritan New England, but one that was also distinctively American. The characteristic social unit in New England was not the isolated farm, but the town. Each new settlement drew up a "covenant” among its members, binding all residents in a religious and so-
cial commitment to unity and harmony. Some such settlements consisted of people who had emigrated to America
Patterns of Settlement
Concord .Lexington
•Lincoln
Waltham Cambridge
Commonly held land Privately held lots John Goodnow's holdings Residences Meetinghouse
1/4	1/2 km
THE NEW ENGLAND TOWN- SUDBURY, MASSACHUSETTS, 17TH CENTURY
Just as the plantation was a characteristic social form in the southern colonies, the town was the , , th nraanization of Sudbury, Massachusetts, a town west of Boston, in the early years in the seventeenth century, Note the location of the most common social	unit in New England. This	map shows tne orgariizduui i	u,	J.
houses, which are grouped mostly together around a shared pasture (or -commons") and near the church. Note, too, the outlymg del s which were divided among res, ents of the town, even though they were often no, connected to theland on which they lived. The gray areas of the map illustrate the holdings of a single resident of Sudbury, John Goodnow whose house was on the common but whose lands were scattered over a number of areas of Sudbury. (Based on: Sumner Chilton Powell, Puntan Ullage. The Format,on of a New England Town, Copynght 0 1963 bg Wesleyan Un,vers,ty.}
%
F-/
Boston * Newton • What aspects of New England life might help explain the clustering of residences at the center of the town?
88 > CHAPTER 3
Boston
Philadelphia
The growth of commerce
(and of great fortune) occurred later in New York City than in Boston and Philadelphia.
New York City
WEALTH DISTRIBUTION IN COLONIAL CITIES, 1687-1771
Although the gap between rich and poor in colonial America was not as large as it would become in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries, the rise of commerce in the early eighteenth century did produce increasing inequality. This chart shows the distribution of wealth in three important commercial cities—Boston, Philadelphia, and New York. The upper pie charts show the distribution of wealth in the late seventeenth century, and the lower charts show how that distribution had changed by the mid- or late eighteenth century. Note the heavy concentration of wealth in the top 10 percent of the population in the seventeenth century, and the even heavier concentration of wealth in Boston and Philadelphia in the eighteenth century. In New York, by contrast, wealth distribution became slightly more equal between 1695 and 1730, because of the breaking up of the great Dutch estates once the colony came under the control of the British. In later years, New York would show the same pattern of growing inequality that Boston and Philadelphia experienced. * What aspects of colonial commerce helped concentrate so much wealth in the hands of a relatively small group?
area of colonial life (except, of course, in the relationship between masters and slaves), social distinctions were real and visible in urban areas.
Cities were also the centers of much of what industry there was in the colonies, such as ironworks and distilleries for turning imported molasses into exportable rum. And they were the locations of the most advanced schools, the most sophisti-Commercial and	cate(^ cultural activities, and shops
Cultural	where imported goods could be bought.
Importance In addition, they were communities with peculiarly urban social problems: crime, vice, pollution, epidemics, traffic. Unlike smaller towns, cities were required to establish elaborate governments. They set up constables’ offices and fire departments. They developed systems for supporting the urban poor, whose numbers grew steadily and became especially large in times of eco-
nomic crisis.
Cities were also particularly vulnerable to fluctuations in trade. When a market for a particular product became glutted and prices fell, the effects on merchants and other residents could be severe. In the countryside, the impact of economic instability was generally more muted than in cities.
Farmers were still somewhat independent from the larger world of the markets.
Of particular importance for the political future of the colonies, cities became places where new ideas could circulate and be discussed. Because there were printers, it was possible to have regular newspapers. Books and other publications from abroad introduced new intellectual influences. And the taverns and coffeehouses of cities provided forums in which people could gather and debate the issues of the day. It was not surprising that when the revolutionary crisis began to build in the 1760s and 1770s, it was first visible in the cities.
Inequality
New England, for all its belief in community and liberty, was far from an egalitarian society. ’’Some must be rich and some poor,” John Winthrop wrote early in the seventeenth century, and his prediction perhaps exceeded his expectations. Wealthy families and socially distinguished ones (which were usually the same people) had privileges and rights that were not available to poor citizens. Elites were called ’’ladies” and ’’gentleman,” while
people in the lower levels of society were known as “goodman” or "goodwife.” Elites were given the best seats in their churches and had the most influence over the parish. Men had more power than women. Servants had few rights. The church itself taught that inequality reflected God’s intention.
In cities, such economic stratification was significant-although, unlike in later eras, the ranks of the richest were the largest group in the population and, in Boston in the eighteenth century, the majority. That was partly because wealthy people were more likely than poor people to move to cities and participate in commerce. In the agricultural countryside, many fewer people accumulated significant wealth.
AWAKENINGS AND
ENLIGHTENMENTS
Two powerful forces were competing in American intellectual life in the eighteenth century. One was the traditional outlook of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, with its emphasis on a personal God, intimately involved with the world, keeping watch over individual lives. The other was the new spirit of the Enlightenment, a movement sweeping both Europe and America, which stressed the importance of science and human reason. The old views supported such phenomena as the belief in witchcraft, and they placed great value on a stern moral code in which intellect was less important than faith. The Enlightenment, by contrast, suggested that people had substantial control over their own lives and the course of their societies, that the world could be explained and therefore could be structured along rational scientific lines. Much of the intellectual climate of colonial America (and long after) was shaped by the tension between these two impulses.
The Pattern of Religions
Religious toleration flourished in many parts of America to a degree unmatched in any European nation, not because
„	Americans deliberately sought to pro-
Religious	duce k but because conditions virtually
Toleration	required it. Settlers in America brought
with them so many different religious practices that it proved difficult to impose a single religious
code on any large area.
The Church of England was established as the official faith in Virginia, Maryland, New York, the Carolinas, and Georgia. But with few exceptions, the laws establishing the Church of England as the official colonial religion were largely ignored. Even in New England, where the Puritans had originally believed that they were all part of a single faith, there was a growing tendency in the eighteenth century for different congregations to affiliate with different denominations, especially Congregationalism and Presbyterianism. In parts of New York and New Jersey, Dutch settlers had established their own Calvinist denomination, Dutch Reformed, which survived after
SINNERS IN HELL, 1744
This mid-eighteenth-century religious image illustrates both the fears and prejudices of many colonial Christians. The idyllic city of Sion, in the center of the drawing, is threatened on all sides by forces of evil, which include images not just of Satan and sin, but also of some of the perceived enemies of Protestants—the Catholic Church (symbolized by the image of the pope) and Islam (symbolized by Turks). (© The Granger Collection, New York) the colonies became part of the British Empire. American Baptists (considered to have been introduced to Americans by Roger Williams) developed a great variety of sects. All Baptists shared the belief that rebaptism, usually by total immersion, was necessary when believers reached maturity. But while some Baptists remained Calvinists (believers in predestination), others came to believe in salvation by free will.
Protestants extended toleration to one another more readily than they did to Roman Catholics. Many Protestants in Anti-Catholicism America, like many in England, feared and hated the pope. New Englanders, in particular, viewed their Catholic neighbors in New France (Canada) not only as commercial and military rivals but also as dangerous agents of Rome. In most of the English colonies,

The Witchcraft Trials
HP T T T"?
witchcraft trials of the 1690s—which began in Salem, Massachusetts, and spread to 1 O ti other areas of New England-have been the stuff of popular legend for centuries. They have also engaged the interest of generations of historians, who have tried to explain why these seventeenth-century Americans became so committed to the belief that some of their own neighbors were agents of Satan. Although there have been many explanations of the witchcraft phenomenon, some of the most important in recent decades have focused on the central place of women in the story.
Through the first half of the twentieth century, most historians dismissed the witchcraft trials as
"hysteria," prompted by the intolerance and rigidity of Puritan society. This interpretation informed perhaps the most prominent popular portrayal of witchcraft in the twentieth century: Arthur Millers play The Crucible, first produced in 1953, which was clearly an effort to use the Salem trials as a comment on the great anticommunist frenzy of his own time. But at almost the same time, the renowned scholar of Puritanism Perry Miller argued in a series of important studies that belief in witchcraft was not a product of hysteria or intolerance but, rather, a widely shared part of the religious worldview of the seventeenth century. To the Puritans, witchcraft seemed not only plausible, but scientifically rational as well.
A new wave of interpretation of witchcraft began in the 1970s, with the publication of Salem
Possessed (1976), by Paul Boyer and Stephen Nissenbaum. Their examination of the town records of Salem in the 1690s led them to conclude that the witchcraft controversy there was a product of
class tensions between the poor, marginal residents of one part of Salem and the wealthy, privileged residents of another. These social tensions, which could not find easy expression on their own terms, led some poor Salemites to lash out at their rich neighbors by charging them, or their servants, with witchcraft. A few years later, John Demos, in Entertaining Satan (1983), examined witchcraft accusations in a larger area of New England and similarly portrayed them as products of displaced anger about social and economic grievances that could not be expressed otherwise. Demos provided a far more complex picture of the nature of these grievances than had Boyer and Nissenbaum but, like them, saw witchcraft as a symptom of a persistent set of social and psychological tensions.
At about the same time, however, a number of scholars were beginning to look at witchcraft through the scholarly lens of gender. Carol Karlsen's The Devil in the Shape of a Woman (1987) demonstrated
however, Roman Catholics were too few to cause serious conflict. They were most numerous in Maryland, and even there they numbered no more than 3,000. Perhaps for that reason they suffered their worst persecution in that colony. After the overthrow of the original proprietors in 1691, Catholics in Maryland not only lost their political rights but also were forbidden to hold religious services except in private houses.
Jews in provincial America totaled no more than about 2,000 at any time. The largest community lived in New York City. Smaller groups settled in Newport and Charles Town, and there were scattered Jewish families in all the colonies. Nowhere could they vote or hold office. Only in Rhode Island could they practice their religion openly.
By the beginning of the eighteenth century, some Americans were growing troubled by the apparent decline in religious piety in their society. The movement of the population westward and the wide scattering of settlements had caused many communities to lose touch with organized religion. The rise of commercial prosperity created a secular outlook in urban
areas. The progress of science and free thought in Europe-anc the importation of Enlightenment ideas to America-caused a least some colonists to doubt traditional religious beliefs.
Concerns about weakening piety surfaced as early as th< 1660s in New England, where the Puritan oligarchy warned of, decline in the power of the church. Sabbatl
Jeremiads
after Sabbath, ministers preached sermons <
despair (known as "jeremiads”), deploring the signs of waning piety. By the standards of other societies or other eras, the Puritan faith remained remarkably strong. But New Englanders measured their faith by their own standards, and to them the "declension” of religious piety seemed a serious problem.
The Great Awakening
By the early eighteenth century, concerns about declining piety and growing secularism were emerging in other regions and among members of other faiths. The result was the first major American revival: the Great Awakening.
The Great Awakening began in earnest in the 1730s, reached its climax in the 1740s, and brought a new spirit of religious fervor to the colonies. The revival had particular appeal to women (who constituted the majority of converts) and to younger sons of the third or fourth generation of settlers -those who stood to inherit the least land and who faced the most uncertain futures. The rhetoric of the revival emphasized the potential for every person to break away from the constraints of the past and start anew in his or her relationship with God. Such beliefs may have reflected the desires of many people to break away from their families or communities and start a new life.
Powerful evangelists from England helped spread the revival. John and Charles Wesley, the founders of Methodism, visited Georgia and other colonies in the 1730s. George
through intensive scrutiny of records across New England that a disproportionate number of those accused of witchcraft were property-owning widows or unmarried women—in other words, women who did not fit comfortably into the normal pattern of male-dominated families. Karlsen concluded that such women were vulnerable to these accusations because they seemed threatening to people (including many women) who were accustomed to women as subordinate members of the community,
Mary Beth Norton's In the Devil's Snare (2002) placed the witchcraft trials in the context of other events of their time—particularly in the terrifying upheavals and dislocations that the Indian wars of the late seventeenth century created in Puritan communities. In the face of this crisis, in which refugees from King William's War were fleeing towns destroyed by the Indians and flooding Salem and other eastern towns, fear and social instability helped create a more-than-
normal readiness to connect aberrant behavior (such as the actions of unusually independent or eccentric women) to supernatural causes. The result was a wave of witchcraft accusations that
7he Wonder/ of the Jnvifihle World:
Banu au Account of the
T R Y A L S
; - 01 : !
^kfoetal WWtljcs; I
lately Exacted in
NEW-ENGLAND:
And <4 k vci.il remarkable Curtofoies therein Occurring,
|	Together with*
I-	ihe	Nwsbtt, and rhe	thY ’
tv a knot	-
4	<nd	{Ungc	wl&v
lV‘	Ua -
By CUTfON MOTHER.
—~---------------—.
l^iiW the Jpcmi OwaaH «f hAEXCF.lUNCV tfe	*
the Fwbt oj the	i#
( Punted firft, at	-nd Keprirmsd n/.->*-
' ‘Uw, for	ur ! k'AA V'>. nt t he / ■	. soy;.
(The Library of Congress (LC-USZ82-51641))
ultimately led to the execution of at least twenty people, mostly women. •
UNDERSTAND, ANALYZE,
AND EVALUATE
1.	How did the Salem witchcraft trials reflect attitudes toward women and the status of women in colonial New England?
2.	Why were colonial New Englanders willing to believe accusations of witchcraft about their fellow colonists?
3.	What contemporary parallels are there to the Salem witchcraft trials?
Whitefield, a powerful open-air preacher and for a time an associate of the Wesleys, made several evangelizing tours through the colonies and drew tremendous crowds. But the outstanding preacher of the Great Awakening was the New England Congregationalist Jonathan Edwards, a deeply orthodox Puritan but a highly original theologian. From his pulpit in Northampton, Massachusetts, Edwards attacked the new doctrines of easy salvation for all. He preached anew the traditional Puritan ideas of the absolute sovereignty of God, predestination, and salvation by God’s grace alone. His vivid descriptions of hell could terrify his listeners.
The Great Awakening led to the division of congregations between "New Light” revivalists and "Old Light” traditionalists. It also affected areas of society outside the churches. Some of Old Lights the rev^va^sts denounced book learning as and New a hindrance to salvation, and some commu-Lights	nities repudiated secular education. But
other evangelists saw education as a means of furthering religion, and they founded or led schools for the
training of New Light ministers.
The Enlightenment
The Great Awakening caused one great upheaval in the culture of the colonies. The Enlightenment, a very different-and in many ways competing—phenomenon, caused another.
The Enlightenment was largely the product of some of the great scientific and intellectual discoveries in seventeenth-century Europe. As scientists and other thinkers discovered natural laws that they believed regulated the workings of nature, they came to celebrate the power of human reason and scientific inquiry. Enlightenment thinkers argued that reason, not just faith, could create progress and advance knowledge. They argued that humans had a moral sense on which they could rely to tell the difference between right and wrong-that they did not need always to turn to God for guidance in making decisions. They insisted that men and women could, through the power of their own reason, move civilization to ever-greater heights.
In celebrating reason, the Enlightenment slowly helped undermine the power of traditional authority-something the Great Awakening did as well. But unlike the Great Awakening, the Enlightenment encouraged men and women to look to themselves-not to God-for guidance as to how to live their
_	lives and to shape society. Enlightenment
Traditional ,	.	. . .	,	.	°
Authority thought, with its emphasis on human ratio-Challenged nality, encouraged a new emphasis on edu-
cation and a heightened interest in politics and government (for through governments, the believers in reason argued, society had its best chance of bettering itself). Most Enlightenment figures did not challenge religion and insisted that rational inquiry would support, not undermine,
91
Colonial Almanacs
.were scarce and expensive in colonial America, and many families owned only D U w O one: the Bible. But starting very early in the life of the English colonies, men and women had another important source of information: almanacs, the most popular nonreligious literature in early America.
Almanacs first appeared in America in 1638 or 1639 when printers in Cambridge, Massachusetts, began publishing the Philomath Almanac, which combined an elaborate calendar of religious holidays with information about astronomy, astrology, and other popular interests. By the 1680s, the Farmers Almanac, a heavily illustrated publication that added medical advice, practical wisdom, navigational information, and humor, began to rival the Philomath. Through a combination of superstition, popular folklore, and astronomical (and astrological) devices, the Farmers Almanac also predicted weather patterns throughout the year, crop yields, and many other things. Almanac predictions were notoriously unreliable, but many people relied on them nevertheless.
By 1700, there were dozens, perhaps hundreds, of almanacs circulating throughout the colonies and even in the sparsely settled lands to the west and north. The most popular almanacs sold tens of thousands of copies every year. Most families had at least one, and many had several. It is easy to prove," one almanac writer claimed in the mid-eighteenth century, "that no book we read (except the Bible) is so much valued and so serviceable to the community." America was a multilingual society, and although most almanacs were in English, some appeared in French, Dutch, Hebrew, Norwegian, Spanish, German, and various Indian languages. For five years just after the Revolution, Benjamin Banneker of Maryland was the only African American almanac writer, publishing a book that occasionally included harsh commentary on slavery and the slave trade.
The best-known almanac in the colonies in the years before the American Revolution was Poor Richard’s Almanack, published in Philadelphia by Benjamin Franklin under the pseudonym Richard Saunders. "I endeavor'd to make it both entertaining and useful," Franklin later wrote in his autobiography. "And observing that it was generally read,... I consider'd it as a proper vehicle for conveying instruction among the common people, who bought scarcely any other books." In issue after issue,
Franklin accompanied his calendars, astronomical information, and other standard almanac fare with "proverbial sentences, chiefly such as inculcated industry and frugality." Poor Richard's many sayings became among the most familiar passages in America. Franklin was among many writers who used the almanac to promote the new scientific discoveries of his time and to try to discredit what he considered the backward superstitions standing in the way of knowledge.
Almanacs were the only widely read publications in America that contained popular humor, and they are one of the best sources today for understanding what early Americans considered funny. Not unlike later generations, they delighted in humor that ridiculed the high and mighty (aristocrats, lawyers, clergymen, politicians), made fun of relationships between men and women, and expressed stereotypes about racial and ethnic groups. In the 1760s and 1770s, almanac humor was often used to disguise political ideas, in the way it ridiculed British officials and American Tories. During the war itself, humorous anecdotes about military officers and political leaders reflected the uneasy views of Americans about the long and difficult struggle.
During and after the Revolution, much almanac humor consisted of admiring anecdotes about the man who was by then perhaps the most famous and beloved man in
Christianity. But they challenged the notion of some religious groups that the answer to all questions about human society should, or could, come directly from God.
In the early seventeenth century, Enlightenment ideas in America were largely borrowed from abroad-from such earlier giants as Francis Bacon and John Locke, and from more contemporary Enlightenment thinkers in England and Scotland. Few Americans had yet made important contributions of their own to the new age of science and reason. Later, however, such Americans as Benjamin Franklin, Thomas Jefferson, Thomas Paine, and James Madison made their own contributions to the Enlightenment tradition.
Education
Even before Enlightenment ideas became common in America, colonists had placed a high value on education, despite the difficulties they confronted in gaining access to it. Some families tried to teach their children to read and write at home, although the heavy burden of work in most agricultural households limited the time available for schooling. In Massachusetts, a 1647
law required every town to support a pi many communities failed to comply, a modest network of edu cational establishments emerged as a result. Elsewhere, the Quakers and other sects operated church schools. And in some communities, widows or unmarried women conducted "dame schools” by holding private classes in their homes. In cities, mas ter craftsmen set up evening schools for their apprentices; a least a hundred such schools appeared between 1723 and 1770 Only a relatively small number of children received educa tion beyond the primary level; but white male Americans, a
High White least’ achieved a hiSh degree of literacy. B} Literacy Rates tde time °ftde Revolution, well over hal °f all white men could read and write, ■ rate substantially higher than in most European countries. Th< large number of colonists who could read helped create a mai ket for the first widely circulated publications in America othe

than the Bible: almanacs (see "Patterns of Popular Culture,” above). The literacy rate of women lagged behind that of men until the nineteenth century; and while opportunities for education beyond primary school were scarce for males, they were almost nonexistent for females. Nevertheless, in their early years
92 »
II
Mofh April hath xxx days* Kind Katharine to her husband ktfiM theft words * Mine own Greet how dearly I love thee J* If true (quoth Will) the World no fueh ad’ordi And that its true I durft his warrant be ;
For ne’er heard I of Woman good or ill.
But always loved heft, her own facet Wilt
f All Fools.
z Ifet weather t or
3	7 ♦ fee 9 o
4
5	Cloudy and likely 4
fee rain.
8|G z Sand. p. Bader
2	0 «nters y $ 7 ♦ fee $ $0
4	Days 15 k 20 w
5	^jrwd ffrvfcKwirr,
$ Sund. p. Eattcr 17* fet 8 21
3	and tain.
4I Beware e$ meat tfwice boil'd, & an 3
Bald foe reconcil'd.	4
7 Days inc. 4 h. 26 5 i k Sund. pJSaftcr 2g^0eorge £ X ? io« $]Troy burnt |7 4pt. Mark, Evang jS d Cloudy with hitfby Gwtndt' and periapt 10 7p*fct?4.7 jit G jRogationbupday »1 p|«
2915
Yli
»5
295
*M$
®’$
22k w!$
10 i<s^ uxSry 2z’y
’A$
*$$
r?
22$
t<5
29,$
$
24$
*$
zzy
r$
2V
$2 Threat
> t 7 little Deere.
50 yjNew 1> 3 day, 29 71 at 4 morn,
2? 7] > fets 9*29 aft uS 7 z/ rich rogue, js 24,1 a fat hog,who 23 * never doetgeedtii
22 7« dead at a fog. 2t 7 Fidl Quarter. 20 7 > fees 1 44$ mo. 19 7 Relatimwithaut 18 7 faendfrip, friend-17 7 pipwithoutpow-16 i tr,power without t$ 7 >fets4 7 mor.
. 14 7FullS at 1 oat 13 7 night,
12 7 will, Will withe. 11 7 tfflh ejfefl with 1 ) rif it aftern 7 otrtpreft'%?'graft without Virtue, are net Laft Quarter. worth a forte. >uf 1 5: mor.
Days 14 ho us 7 * let ? 54
TOWN AND COUNTRY-MAN’S ALMANACK
As the population of colonial cities and towns grew, almanacs—originally targeted mainly at farmers—began to make explicit appeal to townspeople as well. (© Universal Images Group/Getty Images) America—Poor Richard himself, Benjamin Franklin. Much less reverential, and probably funnier to readers, was the often-ribald ethnic and racial humor in almanacs. In Beer's Almanac of 1801, an Irishman boasted that he had owned a large estate in Ireland before leaving for America. Why, he was asked, had he left it to come to the United States? "Ah," he replied, "It was indeed under a small encumbrance; for another man’s land lay right a top of it.”
Almanacs remained enormously popular throughout the nineteenth century, and some are still published today. But they had their greatest influence in the early years of European settlement when, for thousands of Americans, they were virtually the only source of printed information available. "A good Almanac," the printer Isaac Briggs wrote in 1798, in a preface to one of his own, "is, like iron, far more valuable (although much less valued) than gold, if we estimate its value by its absolute usefulness to the common purposes of life." •
UNDERSTAND, ANALYZE, AND EVALUATE
POOR RICHARD’S ALMANACK
This page from a 1757 edition of Poor Richard's Almanack illustrates the wide range of material that almanacs presented to their readers—an uplifting poem, a calendar of holidays and weather predictions, and such scattered pieces of advice and wisdom as "A rich rogue is like a fat hog, who never does good till as dead as a log." (© Fotosearch/Getty Images) 1.	Why were almanacs so popular in colonial America?
2.	What can almanacs tell us about life in colonial America?
3.	The Farmer's Almanac is still popular today, distributing more than 4 million copies a year. Why do you think it continues to be popular?
colonial girls often received the same home-based education as boys, and their literacy rate too was substantially higher than that of their European counterparts. African slaves had virtually no access to education. Occasionally a master or mistress would teach slave children to read and write, but they had few real incentives to do so. Indeed, as the slave system became firmly entrenched, strong social (and ultimately legal) sanctions developed to discourage any efforts to promote black literacy, lest it encourage slaves to question their station. Indians, too, remained largely outside the white educational system-to a large degree by choice; most tribes preferred to educate their children in their own way. But some white missionaries and philanthropists established schools for Native Americans and helped create a small but significant population of Indians literate in spoken and written English.
Nowhere was the intermingling of the influences of traditional religiosity and the new spirit of the Enlightenment clearer than in the colleges and universities that grew up in colonial America. Of the six colleges in operation by 1763, all but two were founded by religious groups primarily for the training of preachers. Yet in almost all, the influences of the
new scientific, rational approach to knowledge could be felt. Harvard, the first American college, was established in 1636 by the General Court (legislature) of Massachusetts at the behest of Puritan theologians, who wanted to create a training center for ministers. The college was named for a Charlestown minister, John Harvard, who had died and left his library and half his estate to the college. Decades later, in 1693, William and Mary College (named for the English king and queen) was established in Williamsburg, Virginia, by Anglicans; like Harvard, it was conceived as an academy to train clergymen. In 1701, conservative Congregationalists, dissatisfied with what they considered the growing religious liberalism of Harvard, founded Yale (named for one of its first benefactors, Elihu Yale) in New Haven, Connecticut. Out of the Great Awakening emerged the College of New Jersey, founded in 1746 and known later as Princeton (after the town in which it is located). One of its first presidents was Jonathan Edwards.
Despite the religious basis of these colleges, students at most of them could derive something of a secular education from the curricula, which included not only theology, but logic, ethics,
93
94 CHAPTER 3
GEORGE WHITEFIELD
Whitefield succeeded John Wesley as leader of the Calvinist Methodists in Oxford, England. Like Wesley, he was a major force in promoting religious revivalism in both England and America. He made his first missionary journey to the New World in 1738 and returned in the mid-1740s for a celebrated journey through the colonies that helped spark the Great Awakening. (© Francis G. Mayer/Corbis) Time cuts down all Both great and fma
IZrztfAVbeaureousWife Made David leek his
Life.
Whales in the Sea. God’s Voice obey,.
Xerxes the great did die,
And fo mull you & I.
Toutb forward flips Death foonell Dips.
Zacbeus he Did climb the Tree-. His Lord to fee.
iM.1	, .	..
! 7V„w lie Cbi.’d being entred in bit Letters and Spelling, let bun learn tbrje and fucb like Sentences by Heart, whereby/ be will be both inflrufted in bis Duty, tnd encouraged in bis Learning. Tbe Dutiful Cbilts Protnifes,
I
Will fear GOD,and honour *hc KING. I will honour my Father & Mother. I will Obey my Superiours.
I will Submit to my Elders.
I will Love my Friends.
I will hate no M-m.
I will forgive my Enemies, and pray to God for them.
1 Will as much as in me lies keep afl God’* HoJy Commandments.
A “DAME SCHOOL” PRIMER
More than the residents of any other region of North America (and far more than those of most of Europe), the New England colonists strove to educate their children and achieved perhaps the highest level of literacy in the world. Throughout the region, young children attended institutions known as dame schools" (because the teachers were almost always women) and learned from primers like this one. Puritan education emphasized both basic skills (the alphabet and reading) and moral and religious precepts, as this sample page suggests. (© American Antiquarian Society) Liberal
Curricula
physics, geometry, astronomy, rhetoric, Latin, Hebrew, and Greek as well. From the beginning, Harvard attempted not only to provide an educated ministry but also to "advance learning and perpetuate it to posterity.” Members of the Harvard faculty
made strenuous efforts to desseminate new scientific ideas-particularly the ideas of Copernican astronomy-to a larger public, often publishing their ideas in popular almanacs. By doing so, they hoped to stamp out popular belief in astrology, which they considered pagan superstition.
King’s College, founded in New York in 1754 and later renamed Columbia, was even more devoted to the spread of secular knowledge. Although it was founded in part by the Anglican Trinity Church in New York, it had no theological faculty and was interdenominational from the start. The Academy and College of Philadelphia, which became the University of Pennsylvania, was a completely secular institution, founded in 1755 by a group of laymen under the inspiration of Benjamin Franklin. It offered courses in utilitarian subjects-mechanics, chemistry, agriculture, government, commerce, and modern languages-as well as in the liberal arts. It also became the site of the first medical school in British America, founded in 1765.
The Spread of Science
The clearest indication of the spreading influence of the Enlightenment in America was an increasing interest in scientific knowledge. Most of the early colleges established chairs in the natural sciences and introduced some of the advanced scientific theories of Europe, including Copernican astronomy and Newtonian physics, to their students.
But the most vigorous promotion of science in these years occurred outside the colleges, through the private efforts of amateurs and the activities of scientific societies. Leading merchants, planters, and even theologians became corresponding members of the Royal Society of London, the leading English scientific organization. Benjamin Franklin, the most celebrated amateur scientist in America, won international fame through his experimental proof of the nature of lightning and electricity and his invention of the lightning rod. His 1752 demonstration, using a kite, of his theory that lightning and electricity were the same was widely celebrated in the colonies.
The high value that influential Americans were beginning to place on scientific knowledge was clearly demonstrated by the most daring and controversial
Smallpox	scientific experiment of the eigh-
Inoculation	teenth century: inoculation
against smallpox. The Puritan theologian Cotton Mather heard, reportedly from his own slave, of the practice of deliberately infecting people with mild cases of smallpox in order to immunize them against the deadly disease. He learned, too, that experiments in inoculation were being conducted, with some success, in England. Mather was not,

SOCIETY AND CULTURE IN PROVINCIAL AMERICA
• 95 
EXPERIMENTS
AN D
OBSERVATIONS
O N
ELECTRICITY,
MADE AT
PHILADELPHIA in AMERICA,
Fam, of tbe Royal Society w
B Y
BENJAMIN FRANKLIN, L.L.D.
and F.R.S. Member of the Royal Academy of Sciences at SBMlrf the Batavian Society in Hollaed, « at Pbiiadelpbia.
To which are added,
LETTERS and PAPERS
O K
philosophical subjects.
The Whole correded, methodized, improved, and now collected into one Volume, end illuSreted with Co»z, I'latis.
THB FIFTH EDITION.
i 0 If D t> X:
Print* (6, F. N.wmv, « Ae C««r of St. WChenh-y^.
M^KXJJCtW.

BENJAMIN FRANKLIN ON ELECTRICITY
The discovery of electricity was one of the great scientific events of the eighteenth century, even though large-scale practical use of electrical energy emerged much later. Benjamin Franklin was one of the first Americans, and certainly the most famous one, to experiment with electricity. This is the frontispiece for a book, originally published in 1750 in Philadelphia, that describes his "experiments and observations." The pages shown here are from the London edition, which appeared in 1774. (© Getty Images) certainly, a wholly committed scientist. He continued to believe that disease was a punishment for sin. Yet, despite strong opposition from many of his neighbors, he urged inoculation on his fellow Bostonians during an epidemic in the 1720s. The results confirmed the effectiveness of the technique. Other theologians (including Jonathan Edwards) took up the cause, along with many physicians. By the mid-eighteenth century, inoculation had become a common medical procedure in America.
Concepts of Law and Politics
In seventeenth- and eighteenth-century law and politics, as in other parts of their lives, Americans of European descent believed that they were re-creating in the New World the practices and institutions of the Old. But as in other areas, they managed to create something very different.
Changes in the law in America resulted in part from the scarcity of English-trained lawyers, who were almost unknown in the colonies until after 1700. Not until well into the eighteenth century did authorities
PUNISHMENT IN NEW ENGLAND
New England communities prescribed a wide range of punishments for misconduct and crime in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. Among the more common punishments were public humiliations—placing offenders in stocks, forcing them to wear badges of shame, or, as in this woodcut, publicly ducking them in a stream or pond to create both discomfort and embarrassment. (© Fotosearch/Getty Images)
Colonial Legal System
96 . CHAPTER 3
in England try to impose the common law and the statutes of the realm upon the provinces. By then, it was already too late. Although the American legal system adopted most of the essential elements of the English system, including such ancient rights as trial by jury, significant differences had already become well established. Pleading and court procedures were simpler in America than in England, and punishments were different. Instead of the gallows or prison, colonists more commonly resorted to the whipping post, the branding iron, the stocks, and (for "gossipy” women) the ducking stool. In a labor-scarce society, it was not in the interests of communities to execute or incarcerate potential workers. Crimes were redefined. In England, a printed attack on a public official, whether true or false, was considered libelous. In the 1734-1735 trial of the New York publisher John Peter Zenger, who was powerfully defended by the Philadelphia lawyer Andrew Hamilton, the courts ruled that criticisms of the government were not libelous if factually true-a verdict that removed some restrictions on the freedom of the press: there was a subtle but decisive transformation in legal philosophy. Some colonists came to think of law as a reflection of the divine will; others saw it as a result of the natural order. In neither case did they consider it an expression of the power of an earthly sovereign.
Colonial	Even more significant for the future of
Governments the relationship between the colonies and England were important differences between the American and British political systems. Because the royal government was so far away, Americans created a group of institutions of their own that gave them-in reality, if not
LOOKING BACK
What began as a few small, isolated, precarious settlements in the wilderness had evolved by the mid-eighteenth century into a large and complex society. The English colonies in America grew steadily between the 1650s and the 1750s: in population, in the size of their economies, and in the sophistication-and diversity-of their cultures. In many ways the colonies had become more like England by the mid-eighteenth century than they had been during their frail early years. In other ways, life in America and life in Britain had begun to diverge.
Many distinct societies developed in the colonies, but the greatest distinction was between the colonies of the North and those of the South. In the North, society was dominated
Regional	by small family farms and by towns and
Differences	cities of growing size. A thriving commer-
cial class was developing and, with it, an increasingly elaborate urban culture. In the South, there were many family farms as well. But there were also large plantations cultivating tobacco, rice, indigo, and cotton for export.
in theory-a large measure of self-government. In most colonies, local communities grew accustomed to running their own affairs with minimal interference from higher authorities. Communities also expected to maintain strict control over their delegates to the colonial assemblies, and those assemblies came to exercise many of the powers that Parliament exercised in England (even though in theory Parliament remained the ultimate authority in America). Provincial governors appointed by the Crown had broad powers on paper, but in fact their influence was sharply limited. They lacked control over appointments and contracts; such influence resided largely in England or with local colonial leaders. They could never be certain of their tenure in office; because governorships were patronage appointments, a governor could be removed any time his patron in England lost favor. And in many cases, governors were not even familiar with the colonies they were meant to govern. Some governors were native-born Americans, but most were Englishmen who came to the colonies for the first time to assume their offices. The result of all this was that the focus of politics in the colonies became a local one. The provincial governments became accustomed to acting more or less independently of Parliament, and a set of assumptions and expectations about the rights of the colonists began to take hold in America that policymakers in England did not share. These differences caused few problems before the 1760s, because the British did little to exert the authority they believed they possessed. But when, beginning in 1763, the English government began attempting to tighten its control over the American colonies, a great imperial crisis developed.
By the late seventeenth century, these plantations were relying heavily on African workers who had been brought to the colonies forcibly as slaves. There were few significant towns and cities in the South, and little commerce other than the marketing of crops.
The colonies did, however, also have much in common. Most white Americans accepted common assumptions about racial inequality. That enabled them to accept (and at times celebrate) the enslavement of African men and women and to justify a campaign of displacement and often violence against Native Americans that would continue for two centuries. Most white Americans (and, in different ways, most nonwhite Americans as well) were deeply religious. The Great Awakening, therefore, had a powerful impact throughout the colonies, North and South. And most white colonists shared a belief in certain basic principles of law and politics, which they considered embedded in the English constitution, and which in the years after the 1750s would lead to a great imperial crisis.
SOCIETY AND CULTURE IN PROVINCIAL AMERICA
• 97 Key Terms/People/Places/Events
SIGNIFICANT EVENTS
Cotton Mather 94 Covenant 85 George Whitefield 94 Great Awakening 90 GULLAH 84 Huguenots 75 Indentured servitude 66 Indigo 78 Jeremiad 90
John and Charles Wesley 90
John Peter Zenger 96 Jonathan Edwards 91 Middle passage 71 Primogeniture 86 Saugus ironworks 79 Scots-Irish 76 Slave codes 74 Stono Rebellion 85 Triangular trade 80 The Enlightenment 89
1636
Harvard College founded in Massachusetts
1662
Halfway Covenant established in New England
1647
Massachusetts law requires a public school in every town
RECALL AND REFLECT
1.	How did patterns of family life and attitudes toward women differ in the northern and southern colonies?
2.	How did the lives of African slaves change over the course of the first century of slavery?
3.	Which groups emigrated to North America in the seventeenth century, and why did they come?
4.	What was the intellectual culture of colonial America, as expressed in literature, philosophy, science, education, and law?
5.	How and why did life in the English colonies diverge from life in England?
1685
Edict of Nantes revoked in France; Huguenots begin migrating to North America
1692
Witchcraft trials begin in Salem
1697
Slave importations increase
_____ 1720 _____
Cotton Mather initiates smallpox inoculations in Massachusetts
1739
George Whitefield arrives in North America
Stono slave rebellion in South Carolina
1746
College of New Jersey founded at Princeton
_____ 1755
Academy and College of Philadelphia (later University of Pennsylvania) founded
1670s
Slave traders begin importing slaves directly from Africa to North America
1691
Official toleration of Catholics ends in Maryland
1693
College of William and Mary founded in Virginia
1701
Yale College founded in Connecticut
1734
Great Awakening begins in Massachusetts Peter Zenger tried in New York
1740s
Indigo production begins in South Carolina
1754
King’s College (later Columbia University) founded in New York
THE EMPIRE IN TRANSITION
LOOKING AHEAD
1.	How did the Seven Years' War change the balance of power in North America and throughout the world?
2.	What policies did Parliament implement with regard to the colonies in the 1760s and 1770s, and why did Britain adopt these policies?
3.	How did the colonists respond to Parliament's actions?
TOPPLING GEORGE III
In the immediate aftermath of the Declaration of Independence, patriots in New York pulled down a statue of King George III from its pedestal in the center of the city. Among those pulling down the statue were a number of African Americans—both free blacks and slaves. This print is a French illustration of the event, with captions in both French and German. (The Library of Congress (ppmsca 17521)) in
SETTING THE STAGE
......
AS LATE AS THE 1750S,
few Americans objected to their membership in the British Empire, The imperial system provided them with many benefits: opportunities for trade and commerce, military protection, political stability. And for the most part, the English government left the colonies alone. Beginning in 1763, however, the British government embarked on a series of new policies toward its colonies—policies dictated by changing international realities and new political circumstances within England itself. In the beginning, most Americans reacted to the changes with relative restraint. Gradually, however, as crisis followed crisis, a large group of Americans found themselves fundamentally disillusioned with the imperial relationship. By the mid-1770s, the relationship between the American colonies and their British rulers had become so strained, so poisoned, so characterized by suspicion and resentment, the once seemingly unbreakable bonds of empire were ready to snap. And in the spring of 1775, the first shots were fired in a war that would ultimately win America its independence.
LOOSENING TIES
After the Glorious Revolution of 1688 in England and the collapse of the Dominion of New England in America, the English government (which became the British government after 1707, when a union of England and Scotland created Great Britain) made no serious or sustained effort to tighten its control over the colonies for over seventy years. During those years, an increasing number of colonies were brought under the direct control of the king. New Jersey in 1702, North and South Carolina in 1729, Georgia in 1754-all became royal colonies, bringing the total to eight; in all of them, the king had the power to appoint the governors and other colonial officials. During those years, Parliament also passed new laws supplementing the original Navigation Acts and strengthening the mercantilist program-laws restricting colonial manufactures, prohibiting paper currency, and regulating trade. On the whole, however, the British government remained uncertain and divided about the extent to which it ought to interfere in colonial affairs. The colonies were left, within broad limits, to go their separate ways.
A
Tradition of Neglect In the fifty years after the Glorious Revolution, the British Parliament established a growing supremacy over the king. During the reigns of George I (1714-1727) and George II (1727-1760), both
Growing of whom were German born and unaccustomed to English ways, the prime
Power of minister and his cabinet ministers began to become the nation’s real execu-Parliament tives. They held their positions not by the king’s favor but by their ability to
control a majority in Parliament.
These parliamentary leaders were less inclined than the seventeenth-century monarchs had been to try to tighten imperial organization. They depended heavily on the support of the great merchants and landholders, most of whom feared that any such experiments would require large expenditures, increase taxes, and diminish the profits they were earning from the colonial trade. The first of the modern prime ministers, Robert Walpole, deliberately refrained from strict enforcement of the Navigation Acts, believing that relaxed trading restrictions would stimulate commerce.
Meanwhile, the day-to-day administration of colonial affairs remained decentralized and inefficient. There was no colonial office in London. The nearest equivalent was the Board of Trade and Plantations, established in 1696-a mere advisory body that had little role in any actual decisions. Real authority rested in the Privy Council (the central administrative agency for the government as a whole), the admiralty, and the treasury. But those agencies were responsible for administering laws at
home as well as overseas; none could concentrate on colonial affairs. To complicate matters
Decentralized
Colonial
Administration
99
