366 CHAPTER 14
we now stand without a shield, with bare bosoms presented to our enemies/’ At first they did not have sufficient military power to seize two fortified offshore military installations: Fort Sumter, on an island in the harbor of Charleston, South Carolina, garrisoned by a small force under Major Robert Anderson; and Fort Pickens, in the harbor of Pensacola, Florida. South Carolina sent commissioners to Washington to ask for the surrender of Sumter; but Buchanan, timid though he was, refused to yield it. Indeed, in January 1861 he ordered an unarmed merchant ship to proceed to Fort Sumter with additional troops and supplies. Confederate guns on shore fired at the vessel-the first shots between North and South-and turned it back. Still, neither section was yet ready to concede that war had begun. And in Washington, efforts began once more to forge a compromise.
The Failure of Compromise
Gradually, compromise forces gathered behind a proposal first submitted by Senator John J. Crittenden of Kentucky and known
Crittenden as Crittenden Compromise. It called for Compromise several constitutional amendments, which would guarantee the permanent existence of slavery in the slave states and would satisfy Southern demands on such issues as fugitive slaves and slavery in the District of Columbia. But the heart of Crittenden’s plan was a proposal to reestablish the Missouri Compromise line in all present and future territory of the United States: Slavery would be prohibited north of the line and permitted south of it. The remaining Southerners in the Senate seemed willing to accept the plan, but the Republicans were not. The compromise would have required the Republicans to abandon their most fundamental
position: that slavery not be allowed to expand.
And so nothing had been resolved when Abraham Lincoln arrived in Washington for his inauguration-sneaking into the city in disguise on a night train to avoid assassination as he passed through the slave state of Maryland. In his inaugural address, which dealt directly with the secession crisis, Lincoln laid down several basic principles. Since the Union was older than the Constitution, no state could leave it. Acts of force or violence to support secession were insurrectionary. And the government would "hold, occupy, and possess” federal property in the seceded states-a clear reference to Fort Sumter.
Fort Sumter
Conditions at Fort Sumter were deteriorating quickly. Union forces were running short of supplies; unless they received fresh provisions, the fort would have to be evacuated. Lincoln believed that if he surrendered Sumter, his commitment to maintaining the Union would no longer be credible. So he sent a relief expedition to the fort, carefully informing the South Carolina authorities that there would be no attempt to send troops or munitions unless the supply ships met with resistance.
The War Begins
The new Confederate government now faced a dilemma. Permitting the expedition to land would seem to be a tame submission to federal authority. Firing on the ships or the fort would seem (to the North at least) to be aggression. But Confederate leaders finally decided that to appear cowardly would be worse than to appear belligerent, and they ordered General P. G. T. Beauregard, commander of Confederate forces at Charleston, to take the island, by force if necessary. When
Anderson refused to surrender the fort, the Confederates bombarded it for two days, April 12-13, 1861. On April 14, Anderson surrendered. The Civil War had begun.
As the southern states began to secede, Abraham Lincoln spoke of American liberty: "It was not the mere matter of the separation of the Colonies from the motherland; but that sentiment in the Declaration of Independence which gave liberty, not alone to the people of this country, but, 1 hope, to the world, for all future time. It was that which gave promise that in due time the weight would be lifted from the shoulders of all men. This is a sentiment embodied in the Declaration of Independence. Now, my friends, can this country be saved upon that basis? If it can, I will consider myself one of the happiest men in the world, if I can help to save it. If it cannot be saved, upon that principle, it will be truly awful.”
Almost immediately, Lincoln began mobilizing the North for war. And equally promptly, four more slave states seceded from the Union and joined the Confederacy: Virginia (April 17, 1861), Arkansas (May 6), North Carolina (May 20), and Tennessee (June 8). The four remaining slave states-Maryland, Delaware, Kentucky, and Missouri-cast their lot with the Union (under heavy political and even military pressure from Washington).
Was there anything that Lincoln (or those before him) could have done to settle the sectional conflict peaceably? That question has preoccupied historians for more than a century without resolution. (See "Debating the Past,” pp. 372-373.) There were, of course, actions that might have prevented a war: if, for example, Northern leaders had decided to let the South withdraw in peace. The real question, however, is not what hypothetical situations might have reversed the trend toward war but whether the preponderance of forces in the nation were acting to hold the nation together or to drive it apart. And by 1861, it seems clear that in both the North and the South, sectional antagonisms—whether justified or nothad risen to such a point that the existing terms of union had become untenable.
People in both regions had come to believe that two distinct and incompatible civilizations had developed in the United States and that those civilizations were incapable of living together in peace. Ralph Waldo Emerson, speaking f°r much of the North, said at the time: "I do not see how a barbarous community and a civilized community can constitute one state. And a slaveowner, expressing the sentiments of much of the South, said shortly after the election of Lincoln: “These [Northern] people hate us, annoy us, and would have us
J
THE CIVIL WAR - 367
FORT SUMTER DURING THE
BOMBARDMENT
This graphic drawing shows the interior of Fort Sumter during its bombardment by Confederate forces in April 1861. Union forces faced the dual problem of heavy Confederate artillery and cannon fire, and dwindling supplies—since the Confederates had blockaded the Charleston harbor to prevent the North from resupplying the fort. (© The Granger Collection, New York) PA. ,	,-S.N.J,!
COLORADO
TERRITORY
NEBRASKA
TERRITORY
IOWA
ILLINOIS INDIANA
OHIO
KANSAS
MISSOURI
INDIAN
TERRITORY
ARKANSAS
May 6, 1861
9
KENTUCKY
TENNESSEE
June 8, 1861 z
11
t'WEST
VIRGINIA/ /’RG’NJA
April 17, 1864-^
J....r— '"'-“'NORTH
CAROLINA J
May 20,1861
10 f
TEXAS
Feb. 1,1861
7
LOUISIANA ( Jan. 26,1861 ?
'ZZBBZZ
—SOUTH ' CAROLINA
i	. Dec. 20, I860,;
/	{	V	\ 1	/
ALABAMA',
Ja^WBI '''■'9 ,|Jan.9 1861j Jan861 V, 2	3
Border states
(slave states that did not secede)
States that seceded before the fall of Fort Sumter
States that seceded after the fall of Fort Sumter
5 Order in which states seceded (dates)
Gulf of Mexico
ATLANTIC
OCEAN

z



'P_X'yJ ’'-'p

Cx

d’d te of the antislavery Republican Party, to the presidency had the immediate result of inspiring many of the states in the Deep THE PROCESS OF SECESSION The election of Lincoln, the	g month after the November election. Other states nearer the northern border of the slaveholding region remained
South to secede from the Union, beginning with South Carolina only a itt e more	^Qrt , new Confederate army) mobilized the upper South to secede as well. Only enormous
in the Union for a time, but the U.S. attempt to resupply Fort Sumter (and t e om a	Missouri in the Union.
Pressure from the federal government kept the slaveholding states of Maryland. Delaware, rent^ y.-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
e What accounted [or the creation of the state of l/Vesf Virginia in 18
368
CHAPTER 14
assassinated by our slaves if they dared. They are a different people from us, whether better or worse, and there is no love between us. Why then continue together?”
That the North and the South had come to believe these things helped lead to secession and war. Whether these things were actually true-whether the North and the South were really as different and incompatible as they thought-is another question, one that the preparations for and conduct of the war help to answer.
The Opposing Sides
As the war began, only one thing was clear: all the important material advantages lay with the North. Its population was more
Union	than twice as lar8e as t^iat of t^ie South (and
Advantages	nearly four times as large as the nonslave
population of the South), so the Union had a much greater manpower reserve for both its armies and its workforce. The North had an advanced industrial system and was able by 1862 to manufacture almost all its own war materials. The South had almost no industry at all and, despite impressive efforts to increase its manufacturing capacity, had to
rely on imports from Europe throughout the war.
In addition, the North had a much better transportation
system than did the South and, in particular, more and better railroads: twice as much trackage as the Confederacy and a much better integrated system of lines. During the war, moreover, the already inferior Confederate railroad system steadily deteriorated and by the beginning of 1864 had almost collapsed.
But in the beginning the North's material advantages were not as decisive as they appear in retrospect. The South was, for the most part, fighting a defensive war on its own land
South

Population
North

Railroad Mileage
UNION AND CONFEDERATE RESOURCES
Virtually all the material advantages-population, manufacturing, railroads, wealth, even agriculture-lay with the North during the Civil War, as this chart shows. ‘ What advantages did the South have in the conflict?
and thus had the advantage of local support and familiarity with the territory. The Northern armies, on the other hand, were fighting mostly within the South, with long lines of communications, amid hostile local populations, and with access only to the South's own inadequate transportation system. The commitment of the white population of the
Southern South to the war was, with limited excep-Advantages tions, clear and firm. In the North, opinion about the war was divided and support for it remained shaky until near the end. A major Southern victory at any one of several crucial moments might have proved decisive by breaking the North's will to continue the struggle. Finally, many Southerners believed that the dependence of the English and French textile industries on American cotton would require those nations to intervene
on the side of the Confederacy.
THE MOBILIZATION
OF THE NORTH
In the North, the war produced considerable discord, frustration, and suffering. But it also produced prosperity and economic growth by giving a major stimulus to both industry and agriculture.
Republican
Economic
Policy
Economic Measures
With Southern forces now gone from Congress, the Republican Party could exercise virtually unchallenged authority. During the war, it enacted an aggressively nationalistic program to promote economic development, particularly in the West. The Homestead Act of 1862 permitted any citizen or prospective citizen to claim 160 acres of public land and to purchase it for a small fee after living on it for five years. The Morrill Land Grant Act of the same year transferred substantial public acreage to the state governments, which were to sell the land and use the proceeds to finance public education. This act
led to the creation of many new state colleges and universities, the so-called land-grant institutions. Congress also passed a series of tariff bills that by the end of the war had raised duties to the highest level in the nation’s history-a great boon to domestic industries eager for protection from foreign competition.
Congress also moved to complete the dream of a transcontinental railroad. It created two new federally chartered corporations: the Union Pacific Railroad Company, which was to build westward from Omaha, and the Central Pacific, which was to build eastward from California, settling the prewar conflict over the location of the line. The two projects were to meet in the middle and complete the link. The government provided free public lands and generous loans to the companies.
The National Bank Acts of 1863-1864 created a new national banking system. Existing or newly formed banks could join the system if they had enough capital and were willing to
THE CIVIL WAR * 369
WAR BY RAILROAD
Union soldiers pose beside a mortar mounted on a railroad car in July 1864, during the siege of Petersburg, Virginia. Railroads played a critical role in the Civil War, and the superiority of the North's rail system was an important factor in its victory. It was appropriate, perhaps, that the battle for Petersburg, the last great struggle of the war, was over control of critical railroad lines. (National Archives and Records Administration) National Bank Acts
invest one-third of it in government securities. In return, they could issue U.S. Treasury notes as currency. The new system eliminated much of the chaos and uncertainty in the nation's cur-rencY and created a uniform system of national bank notes.
■More difficult than promoting economic growth was financing the war. The government tried to do so in three ways: by levying taxes, issuing paper currency, and borrowing. Congress levied new taxes on almost all goods and services; and in 1861 the government levied an income tax for the first
Financing thf time’ with rates that eventua11^ rose t0 10
War	percent on incomes above $5,000. But tax-
ation raised only a small proportion of the
funds necessary for financing the war, and strong popular
resistance prevented the government from raising the rates. At least equally controversial was the printing of paper currency, or "greenbacks.” The new currency was backed not by gold or silver, but simply by the good faith and credit of the government (much like today's currency). The value of the greenbacks fluctuated according to the fortunes of the Northern armies. Early in 1864, with the war effort bogged down, a greenback dollar was worth only 39 percent of a gold dollar. Even at the close of the war, it was worth only 67 percent of a gold dollar. Because of the difficulty of making purchases with this uncertain currency, the government used greenbacks sparingly. The Treasury issued only $450 million worth of paper currency-a small proportion of the cost of the war but enough to produce significant inflation.
370 < CHAPTER 14
By far the largest source of financing for the war was loans from the American people. In previous wars, the government had sold bonds only to banks and to a few wealthy investors. Now, however, the Treasury persuaded ordinary citizens to buy over $400 million worth of bonds-the first example of mass financing of a war in American history. Still, bond purchases by individuals constituted only a small part of the government’s borrowing, which in the end totaled $2.6 billion. Most of the loans to finance the war came from banks and large financial interests.
Raising the Union Armies
Over 2 million men served in the Union armed forces during the course of the Civil War. But at the beginning of 1861, the regular army of the United States consisted of only 16,000 troops, many of them stationed in the West to protect white settlers from Indians. So the Union, like the Confederacy, had to raise its army mostly from scratch. Lincoln called for an increase of 23,000 in the regular army, but the bulk of the fighting, he knew, would have to be done by volunteers in state militias. When Congress convened in July 1861, it authorized enlisting 500,000 volunteers for three-year terms (as opposed to the customary three-month terms). This voluntary system of recruitment produced adequate forces only briefly. After the first flush of enthusiasm for the war, enlistments declined. By March 1863, Congress was forced to pass a national draft law. Virtually all young adult males were eligible to be drafted; but a man could escape service by hiring someone to go in his place or by paying the government a fee of $300. Only about 46,000 men were ever actually conscripted, but the draft greatly increased voluntary enlistments.
To a people accustomed to a remote and inactive national government, conscription was strange and threatening.
Opposition to the law was widespread, particularly among la-Draft Riots borers, immigrants, and Democrats opposed to the war (known as "Peace Democrats” or
"Copperheads” by their opponents). Occasionally, opposition to the draft erupted into violence. Demonstrators against the draft rioted in New York City for four days in July 1863, after the first names were selected for conscription. It was among the most violent urban uprisings in American history. More than 100 people died. Irish workers were at the center of the violence. They were angry because black strikebreakers had been used against them in a recent longshoremen’s strike; and they blamed African Americans generally for the war, which they thought was being fought for the benefit of slaves who would soon be competing with white workers for jobs. The rioters lynched a number of African Americans, burned down homes and businesses (mostly those of free blacks), and even destroyed an orphanage for African American children. Only the arrival of federal troops subdued the rioters.
Wartime Politics
When Abraham Lincoln arrived in Washington early in 1861, many politicians-noting his lack of national experience and his folksy, unpretentious manner-considered him a minor politician from the prairies, a man whom the real leaders of his party would easily control. But the new president moved quickly to establish his own authority. He assembled a cabinet representing every faction of the Republican Party and every segment of Northern opinion-men of exceptional prestige and influence and in some cases arrogance, several of whom believed that they, not Lincoln, should be president. Lincoln moved boldly as well to use the war powers of the presidency, ignoring what he considered inconvenient parts of the Constitution
SENDING THE BOYS OFF TO WAR
In this painting, The Departure of the Seventh Regiment to the War, by Thomas Nast, New York’s Seventh Regiment parades down Broadway in April 1861, to the cheers of exuberant, patriotic throngs, shortly before departing to fight in what most people then assumed would be a brief war. Thomas Nast is better known for his famous political cartoons of the 1870s. (© The Granger Collection, New York) because, he said, it would be foolish to lose the whole by being afraid to disregard a part. He sent troops into battle without asking Congress for a declaration of war. (Lincoln insisted on calling the conflict a domestic insurrection, which required no formal declaration of war, to ask for a declaration would he believed, constitute implicit recognition of the Confederacy as an independent nation.) He increased the size of the regular army without receiving legislative authority to do so. He unilaterally proclaimed a naval blockade of the South.
Lincoln’s greatest political problem was the widespread popular opposition to the war, mobilized by factions in the Democratic Party. The Peace Democrats feared that the agricultural Northwest was losing influence to the industrial East
Wartime	and that Republican nationalism was erod-
Repression	ing states’ rights. Lincoln used extraordi-
nary methods to suppress them. He ordered military arrests of civilian dissenters and suspended the right of habeas corpus (the right of a person to be released by a judge or court from unlawful detention, as in the case of insufficient evidence). At first, Lincoln used these methods only in sensitive areas such as the border states; but in 1862, he
HANGING A .‘U’.GUO
Ii( L'f.A HK.’fOM STHKhf. THE NEW YORK CITY DRAFT RIOT, 1863
Opposition to the Civil War draft was widespread in the North and in July 1863 produced a violent four-day uprising in New York City in which as many as 100 people died. The riot began on July 13 with a march by 4,000 men, mostly poor Irish laborers, who were protesting the provisions by which some wealthy peop e could be exempted from conscription. "Rich man s war, poor man s fight, the demons cried (just as some critics of the war chanted at times in the South). Many New Yorkers a feared that the war would drive black workers north to compete for their jobs. The ® turned violent when officials began drawing names for the draft. The crowd burned t e building and then split into factions. Some rioters attacked symbols of wealth such shops and mansions. Others terrorized black neighborhoods and lynched some r
contemporary engraving depicts one such lynching. Only by transferring five regiments o city from Gettysburg (less than two weeks after the great battle there) was the go to restore order. (© The Granger Collection, New York)
THE CIVIL WAR
• 371 proclaimed that all persons who discouraged enlistments or engaged in disloyal practices were subject to martial law. In all, more than 13,000 persons were arrested and imprisoned for varying periods. The most prominent Copperhead in the country-Ohio Congressman Clement L. Vallandigham-was seized by military authorities and exiled to the Confederacy after he made a speech claiming that the purpose of the war was to free the blacks and enslave the whites. Lincoln defied all efforts to curb his authority to suppress opposition, even those of the Supreme Court. When Chief Justice Taney issued a writ (Ex parte Merrymari) requiring him to release an imprisoned Maryland secessionist leader, Lincoln simply ignored it. (After the war, in 1866, the Supreme Court ruled in Ex parte Milligan that military trials in areas where the civil courts existed were unconstitutional.)
Repression was not the only tool the North used to strengthen support for the war. In addition to arresting "disloyal” Northerners, Lincoln’s administration used new tools of persuasion to build popular opinion in favor of the war. In addition to pro-war pamphlets, posters, speeches, and songs, the war mobilized a significant corps of photographers-organized by the renowned Mathew Brady, one of the first important photographers in American history-to take pictures of the war. The photographs that resulted from this effort-new to warfare-were among the grimmest ever made to that point, many of them displaying the vast numbers of dead on the Civil War battlefields. For some Americans, the images of death contributed to a revulsion from the war. But for most Northerners, they gave evidence of the level of sacrifice that had been made for the preservation of the Union and thus spurred the nation on to victory. (Southerners used similar propaganda in the Confederacy, although less effectively.)
The presidential election of 1864 occurred, therefore, in the midst of considerable political dissension. The Republicans had suffered heavy losses in the congressional elections of 1862, and in response leaders of the party tried to create a broad coalition of all the groups that supported the war. They called the new organization the Union Party, but in reality it was little more than the Republican Party and a small faction of War Democrats. The Union Party nominated Lincoln for another term as president and Andrew Johnson of Tennessee, a War Democrat who had opposed his state’s decision to secede, for the vice presidency.
The Democrats nominated George B. McClellan, a celebrated former Union general who had been relieved of his command by Lincoln. The party adopted a platform denouncing the war and calling for a truce. McClellan repudiated that demand, but the Democrats were clearly the peace party in the campaign, trying to profit from growing war weariness and from the Union’s discouraging military position in the summer of 1864.
At this crucial moment, however, several Northern military victories, particularly the capture of Atlanta, Georgia, early in 1864 Election September, rejuvenated Northern morale and boosted Republican prospects. Lincoln won
DEBATING THE PAST
The Causes of the Civil War
T WT
secor>d inaugural address in March 1865, Abraham Lincoln looked back at the beginning I INI of the Civil War four years earlier. "All knew," he said, that slavery "was somehow the cause of the war." Few historians doubt the basic truth of Lincoln's statement, but they have disagreed ON TO LIBERTY
This painting by Theodore Kaufmann shows a group of fugitive slaves escaping from the South in the late years of the Civil War. Thousands of former slaves crossed the Union lines, where they were given their freedom. Many of them joined the Union army. (© The Granger Collection, New York)
sharply about whether slavery was the only, or even the principal, cause of the war.
This debate began even before the war itself. In 1858, Senator William H. Seward of New York took note of two competing explanations of the sectional tensions that were then inflaming the nation. On one side, he claimed, stood those who believed the sectional hostility to be "accidental, unnecessary, the work of interested or fanatical agitators.’’ Opposing them stood those (like Seward himself) who believed there to be "an irrepressible conflict between opposing and enduring forces."
The "irrepressible conflict" argument dominated historical discussion of the war from the 1860s to the 1920s. Because the North and the South had reached positions on the issue of slavery that were both irreconcilable and seemingly unalterable, some historians claimed, the conflict had become "inevitable," James Rhodes, in his seven-volume History of the United States from the Compromise of 1850... (1893-1900), placed greatest emphasis on the moral conflict over slavery, but he suggested as well that the struggle also reflected fundamental differences between the Northern and Southern economic systems. Charles and Mary Beard, in The Rise of American Civilization (2 vols., 1927), also viewed the war as an irrepressible economic, rather than moral, conflict. Ultimately, however,
reelection comfortably, with 212 electoral votes to McClellan's 21; the president carried every state except Kentucky, New Jersey, and Delaware. But Lincoln’s lead in the popular vote was a modest 10 percent. Had Union victories not occurred when they did, and had Lincoln not made special arrangements to allow Union troops to vote, McClellan might have won.
The Politics of Emancipation
Despite their surface unity in 1864 and their general agreement on most economic matters, the Republicans disagreed sharply on the issue of slavery. Radicals-led in Congress by such men as Representative Thaddeus Stevens of Pennsylvania and Senators Charles Sumner of Massachusetts and Benjamin Wade of Ohio-wanted to use the war to abolish slavery immediately and completely. Conservatives favored a slower, more gradual, and, they believed, less disruptive process for ending slavery. In the beginning, at least, they had the support of the president.
372
Despite Lincoln’s cautious view of emancipation, momentum began to gather behind it early in the war. In 1861, Congress passed the Confiscation Act, which declared that all Confiscation slaves used for ’’insurrectionary” purposes Acts	(that is, in support of the Confederate mili-
tary effort) would be considered freed.
Subsequent laws in the spring of 1862 abolished slavery in Washington, D.C., and in the western territories, and compensated owners. In July 1862, the Radicals pushed through Congress the second Confiscation Act, which again declared free the slaves of persons aiding and supporting the insurrection (whether or not the slaves themselves were doing so) and which also authorized the president to employ African Americans, including freed slaves, as soldiers. As the war progressed, much of the North seemed slowly to accept emancipation as a central war aim; nothing less would justify the enormous sacrifices of the struggle, many Northerners believed. As a result, the Radicals increased their influence within the Republican Party—a development that did not g°
«( of (hose who believed he C.v.l War to have been "irrepressible" returned to an emphasis on social and cultural factors. Allan Nevins, in The Ordeal of the Union (8 vols., 1947-1971) arqued that the "problem of slavery” lay at the root of the cultural differences between the North and the South but that the “fundamental assumptions, tastes, and cultural aims" of the two regions were diverging in other ways as well.
More-recent proponents of the "irrepressible conflict" argument have taken different views of the Northern and Southern positions on the conflict but have been equally insistent on the role of culture and ideology in creating them. Eric Foner, in Free Soil, Free Labor, Free Men (1970) and other writings, emphasized the importance of the free-labor ideology to Northern opponents of slavery. Most Northerners (including Abraham Lincoln), Foner claimed, opposed slavery largely because they feared it might spread to the North and threaten the position of free white laborers. Eugene Genovese, writing of Southern slaveholders in The Political Economy of Slavery (1965), argued that just as Northerners were becoming convinced of a Southern threat to their economic system, so Southerners believed that the North had aggressive and hostile designs on the Southern way of life. Like Foner, therefore, Genovese saw cultural differences as the source of an all but inevitable conflict.
Other historians have argued that the Civil War might have been avoided, that the differences between North and South were not so fundamental as to have necessitated war. The idea of the war as avoidable gained wide recognition among historians in the 1920s and 1930s, when a group known as the "revisionists'' began to offer new accounts of the origins of the conflict. One of the leading revisionists was James G. Randall, who saw in the social and economic systems of the North and the South no differences so fundamental as to require a war. Avery Craven, another leading revisionist, argued similarly in The Coming of the Civil War (1942) that slave laborers were not much worse off than Northern industrial workers, that the institution was already on the road to "ultimate extinction," and that war could therefore have been averted had skillful and responsible leaders worked to produce compromise.
More-recent students of the Civil War have emphasized the role of political agitation and ethnocultural conflicts in the coming of the war. Michael Holt, in The Political Crisis of the 1850s (1978), emphasized the role of political parties and especially the collapse of the Second Party System, rather than the irreconcilable differences between sections, in explaining the conflict, although he avoided placing blame on any one group. Along with Paul Kleppner, Joel Silbey, and William Gienapp, Holt was one of the creators of an "ethnocultural” interpretation of the war. These scholars argue that the Civil War began in large part because the party system—the most effective instrument for containing and mediating sectional differences—collapsed in the 1850s and produced a new Republican Party that aggravated, rather than calmed, the divisions in the nation, William Gienapp, in The Origins of the Republican Party, 1852-1856 (1987), argued that the disintegration of the party system in the early 1850s was less a result of the debate over slavery in the territories than of such ethnocultural issues as temperance and nativism. Gienapp and the other ethnoculturalists would not entirely dispute Lincolns claim that slavery was "somehow the cause of the war. But they do challenge the arguments of Eric
Foner and others that the "free labor ideal" of the North— and the challenge slavery, and its possible expansion into the territories, posed to that ideal—was the principal reason for the conflict. Slavery became important, they suggest, less because of irreconcilable differences of attitude than because of the collapse of parties and other structures that might have contained the conflict. •
UNDERSTAND, ANALYZE, AND EVALUATE
1.	Some arguments regarding the Civil War as inevitable focus on economic differences between the North and the South. What were these differences and how might they have led—inevitably— to war?
2.	Some revisionist scholars attribute the Civil War to a "blundering generation" of political leaders. Who were these leaders and what blunders did they make? Could better decisions have avoided war?
3.	According to the ethnoculturalists, what was the role of political parties in the cominq of the Civil War?
nnoticed by the president, who decided to seize the leader-lip of the rising antislavery sentiment himself.
On September 22, 1862, after the Union victory at the attle of Antietam, the president announced his intention to se his war powers to issue an executive order freeing all slaves C	in the Confederacy. And on January 1,
he formally signed
Proclamation, which declared forever tree laves in all areas of the Confederacy except those already un-er Union control: Tennessee, western Virginia, and southern ouisiana. The proclamation did not apply to the border slave tates, which had never seceded from the Union and therefore ^ere not subject to the president’s war powers. On the ay o mancipation, Ralph Waldo Emerson wrote a "Boston Hymn .
Pay ransom to the owner,
And fill the bag to the brim,
Who is the owner? The slave is owner,
And ever was. Pay him.
Source: English Poetry III: From Tennyson to Whitman. Vol. XLII.
The Harvard Classics, edited by Charles W. Eliot (New York: P. F.
Collier & Son, 1909-1914).
The immediate effect of the proclamation was limited, since it applied only to slaves still under Confederate control. But the document was of great importance nevertheless, because it clearly and irrevocably established that the war was being fought not only to preserve the Union but also to eliminate slavery. Eventually, as federal armies occupied much of the South, the proclamation became a practical reality and led directly to the freeing of thousands of slaves. Even in areas not directly affected by the proclamation, the antislavery impulse gained strength.
The U.S. government’s tentative measures against slavery were not, at first, a major factor in the liberation of slaves. Instead, the
Today unbind the captive
So only are ye unbound;
Lift up a people from the dust,
Trump of their rescue sound . . .
373
CONSIDER THE SOURCE
ll!llHllillllllHiUllllliltilllllilll!IHIIitl!f!ll!tnillinB!lf!IHlilli!il!!IIIIHIIHIIIi!l!)l!lllllllllltlttt!!Ulltlt!Itlflitllllll!(}tUl!ll!infllIH!llil(ll!i!l!
THE CAUSES OF WARS
are rather different from their meanings. Presidents often WARTIME ORATORY use wartime speeches to shape public understanding of those meanings-to articulate their visions of what wars are really about. They tend to emphasize broad principles and cherished ideals rather than more-narrow economic concerns or even national security arguments.
More than four months after the pivotal battle at Gettysburg, President Abraham Lincoln traveled there to dedicate a military cemetery. A crowd of 15,000 listened first to the famed orator Edward Everett’s two-hour account of the battle. Then came Lincoln. His speech was much shorter-just over two minutes. The President touched briefly on American history before turning to the Civil War and what it meant. The Gettysburg Address is reproduced here in its entirety (the "1863” document).
Almost a hundred and fifty years later, President George W. Bush also appealed to the past in explaining the conflict of his time, the war on terrorism of the early twenty-first century. The occasion was Bush’s second inaugural address, delivered in January 2005 after his victory over the Democratic nominee, John Kerry. His speech came in the middle of the ongoing wars in Iraq and Afghanistan that had been prompted by the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001. Though the context couldn’t have been more different, Bush devoted part of his address to themes similar to Lincoln’s so many years before. That excerpt is included here as the "2005” document.
LINCOLN-1863
The Gettysburg Address, November 19, 1863
Four score and seven years ago our fathers brought forth on this continent, a new nation, conceived in Liberty, and dedicated to the proposition that all men are created equal.
Now we are engaged in a great civil war, testing whether that nation, or any nation so conceived and so dedicated, can long endure. We are met on a great battle-field of that war. We have come to dedicate a portion of that field, as a final resting place for those who here gave their lives that that nation might live. It is altogether fitting and proper that we should do this.
But, in a larger sense, we can not dedicate-we can not consecratewe can not hallow-this ground. The brave men, living and dead, who struggled here, have consecrated it, far above our poor power to add or detract. The world will little note, nor long remember what we say here, but it can never forget what they did here. It is for us the living rather to be dedicated here to the unfinished work which they who fought here have thus far so nobly advanced. It is rather for us to be here dedicated to the great task remaining before us-that from these honored dead we take increased devotion to that cause for which they gave the last full measure of devotion-that we here highly resolve that these dead shall not have died in vain-that this nation, under God, shall have a new birth of freedom-and that government of the people, by the people for the people, shall not perish from the earth.	7 h H ’
Source: abrahamlincolnonline.org
UNDERSTAND, ANALYZE, AND EVALUATE
1.	What is the meaning of the war, in Lincoln's address? What has it been fought for?
2.	When Lincoln refers to "a new birth of freedom," what is he talking about? Freedom for whom?
3.	What is the role of religion in Lincolns understanding of the war? What role does religion play in his understanding of the United States more broadly?
BUSH-2005
George W. Bush’s Second Inaugural Address, January 20, 2005
We are led, by events and common sense, to one conclusion: The survival of liberty in our land increasingly depends on the success of liberty in other lands. The best hope for peace in our world is the expansion of freedom in all the world.
America’s vital interests and our deepest beliefs are now one. From the day of our Founding, we have proclaimed that every man and woman on this earth has rights, and dignity, and matchless value, because they bear the image of the Maker of Heaven and earth. Across the generations we have proclaimed the imperative of self-government, because no one is fit to be a master, and no one deserves to be a slave. Advancing these ideals is the mission that created our Nation.
It is the honorable achievement of our fathers. Now it is the urgent requirement of our nation’s security, and the calling of our time.
So it is the policy of the United States to seek and support the growth of democratic movements and institutions in every nation and culture, with the ultimate goal of ending tyranny in our world.
This is not primarily the task of arms, though we will defend ourselves and our friends by force of arms when necessary. Freedom, by its nature, must be chosen, and defended by citizens, and sustained by the rule of law and the protection of minorities. And when the soul of a nation finally speaks, the institutions that arise may reflect customs and traditions very different from our own. America will not impose our own style of government on the unwilling. Our goal instead is to help others find their own voice, attain their own freedom, and make their own way.
Source: http://georgewbush-whitehouse.archives.gov
MAKE CONNECTIONS
1.	What is the war on terrorism "about,” for Bush? Why has America fought?
2.	How does Bush's concept of “freedom" compare to Lincoln’s? How does Bush use the history of freedom in Lincolns era to justify America's war on terrorism? Whose freedom is Bush concerned about?
3.	How does Bush's understanding of the role of religion in American policy compare with Lincolns.
376
CHAPTER 14
war helped African Americans to liberate themselves, and they did so in increasing numbers as the war progressed. Many slaves were taken from their plantations and put to work building defenses and other chores. Once transported to the front, many of them found ways to escape across Northern lines, where they were treated as "contraband” -goods seized from people who had no right to them. They could not be returned to their masters. By 1862, the Union army often penetrated deep into the Confederacy. Almost everywhere they went, escaped slaves, often whole families, flocked to join them by the thousands. Some of them joined the Union army, others simply stayed with the troops until they could find their way to free states. When the Union captured New Orleans and much of southern Louisiana, slaves refused to work for their former masters, even though the Union occupiers had not made any provisions for liberating African Americans.
By the end of the war, slavery had been abolished in two Union slave states-Maryland and Missouri-and in three Confederate states occupied by Union forces-Tennessee, Arkansas, and Louisiana. The final step came in 1865, when Congress approved and the necessary states ratified the Thirteenth Amendment, abolishing slavery as an institution in all parts of the United States. After more than two centuries, legalized slavery finally ceased to exist in the United States.
African Americans
and the Union Cause
About 186,000 emancipated African Americans served as soldiers, sailors, and laborers for the Union forces, joining a significant number of free blacks from the North. The services of
Black
Enlistment
Mistreatment of Black Soldiers
African Americans to the Union military were significant in many ways, not least because of the substantial obstacles many black men had to surmount in order to enlist.
In the first months of the war, African Americans were largely excluded from the military. A few black regiments eventually took shape in some of the Union-occupied areas of the Confederacy, mainly because they were a ready source
of manpower in these defeated regions. But once Lincoln issued the Emancipation Proclamation, black enlistment increased rapidly and the Union military began actively to recruit African American soldiers and sailors in both the North and, where possible, the South.
Some of these men were organized into fighting units. The best known was probably the Fifty-fourth Massachusetts Infantry, which (like most black regiments) had a white commander: Robert Gould Shaw, a member of an aristocratic Boston family. Shaw and more than half his regiment died during a battle near Charleston, South Carolina, in the summer of 1863.
Most black soldiers, however, were assigned menial tasks behind the lines, such as digging trenches and transporting water. Even though fewer African Americans than whites died in combat, the black mortality rate was higher than the rate for white soldiers because so many died of disease from working long, arduous hours in unsanitary
conditions. Conditions for blacks and whites were unequal in other ways as well. African American soldiers were paid a third less than were white soldiers (until Congress changed the law in mid-1864). But however dangerous, onerous, or
AFRICAN AMERICAN TROOPS
Although most of the black soldiers who enlisted in the Union army durinq the Civil War nerf A i. ho black combat regunents-members of one of which are pictured here-who fought with great success and valor in criticalbltfe	' ""S’
THE CIVIL WAR
• 377 menial the tasks black soldiers were given, most of them felt enormous pride in their service- pride they retained throughout their lives and often through the lives of their descendants. Many moved from the army into politics and other forms of leadership (in both the North and, after the war, the Reconstruction South).
Black fighting men captured by the Confederates were, unlike white prisoners, not returned to the North in exchange for Southern soldiers being returned to the South. They were sent back to their masters (if they were escaped slaves) or often executed. In 1864, Confederate soldiers killed more than 260 African Americans after capturing them in Tennessee.
The War and Economic Development
The Civil War did not, as some historians used to claim, transform the North from an agrarian to an industrial society. Industrialization was already far advanced when the war began, and in some areas, the war retarded growth-by cutting manufacturers off from their Southern markets and sources of raw material, and by diverting labor and resources to military purposes.
On the whole, however, the war sped the economic development of the North. That was in part a result of the political dominance of the Republican Party and its promotion of nationalistic economic legislation. But it was also because the war itself required the expansion of certain sectors of the economy. Coal production increased by nearly 20 percent during the war. Railroad facilities improved-mainly through the adoption of a standard gauge (track width) on new lines. The loss of farm labor to the military forced many farmers to increase the mechanization of agriculture.
The war was a difficult experience for many American workers. For industrial workers, there was a substantial loss of purchasing power, as prices in the North rose by more than 70 percent during the war, while wages rose only about 40 percent. That
was partly because liberalized immigration laws permitted a flood of new workers into the labor market and helped keep wages
Hard Times 1°w- was a^so ^ecause increasing mech-for Workers anization of production eliminated the jobs of many skilled workers. One result of these changes was a substantial increase in union membership in many industries and the creation of several national unions, for coal miners, railroad engineers, and others-organizations bitterly
opposed and rigorously suppressed by employers.
Women, Nursing, and the War
Responding not only to the needs of employers for additional labor, but to their own, often desperate, need for money, women found themselves, by either choice or necessity, thrust into new and often unfamiliar roles during the war. They took over positions vacated by men and worked as teachers, retail salesclerks, office workers, and mill and factory hands.
Above all, women entered nursing, a field previously dominated by men. The U.S. Sanitary Commission, an organization U S Sanitary civi^ian volunteers led by social reformer Commission Dorothea Dix, mobilized large numbers of female nurses to serve in field hospitals. By the end of the war, women were the dominant force in nursing; by 1900, nursing had become an almost entirely female profession. Female nurses not only cared for patients but also performed other tasks considered appropriate for women:
cooking, cleaning, and laundering.
Female nurses encountered considerable resistance from male doctors, many of whom considered women too weak _	for medical work and who, in any case,
Gender Roles thought it inappropriate that women Reinforced were taking care of men who were strangers to them. The Sanitary Commission tried to counter such arguments by attributing to nursing
THE U.S. SANITARY COMMISSION
Mathew Brady took this photograph of female nurses and Union soldiers standing before an infirmary at Brandy Station, Virginia, near Petersburg, in 1864. The infirmary was run by the U.S. Sanitary Commission, the government-supported nursing corps that became important to the medical care of wounded soldiers during the Civil War. (National Archives and Records Administration) 
378 * CHAPTER 14
many of the domestic ideals that American society attributed to women’s work in the home: women as nurses would play the same maternal, nurturing, instructive role they played as wives and mothers. "The right of woman to her sphere, which includes housekeeping, cooking, and nursing, has never been disputed,” one Sanitary Commission official insisted. But not all women who worked for the commission were content with a purely maternal role; some challenged the dominance of men in the organization and even stood up against doctors whom they considered incompetent, increasing the resentment felt toward them by many men. In the end, though, the work of female nurses was so indispensable to the military that the complaints of male doctors were irrelevant.
Nurses, and many other women, found the war a liberating experience, in which (as one Sanitary Commission nurse later wrote) the American woman "had developed potencies and possibilities of which she had been unaware and which surprised her, as it did those who witnessed her marvelous achievement.” Some women, especially those who had been committed to feminist causes earlier, came to see the war as an opportunity to win support for their own goals. Elizabeth Cady Stanton and Susan B. Anthony, who together founded the National Woman’s Loyal League in 1863, worked simultaneously for the abolition of slavery and the awarding of suffrage to women. Clara Barton, who was active during the war in collecting and distributing medical supplies and who later became an important figure in the nursing profession (and a founder of the American Red Cross), said in 1888: "At the war’s end, woman was at least fifty years in advance of the normal position which continued peace would have assigned her.” That may have been an exaggeration; but it captured the degree to which many women looked back on the war as a crucial moment in the redefinition of female roles and in the awakening of a sense of independence and new possibilities.
Whatever nursing may have done for the status of women, it had an enormous impact on the medical profession and on Nursing and r^e treatment of wounded soldiers during
Medicine the war. The U.S. Sanitary Commission not only organized women to serve at the front; it also funneled medicine and supplies to badly overtaxed field hospitals. The commission also (as its name suggests) helped spread ideas about the importance of sanitary conditions in hospitals and clinics and probably contributed to the relative decline of death by disease in the Civil War. Nevertheless, twice as many soldiers died of diseases-malaria, dysentery, typhoid, gangrene, and others-as died in combat during the war.
Even minor injuries could lead to fatal infections.
THE MOBILIZATION OF THE SOUTH
Many Southerners boasted loudly of the differences betweer their new nation and the nation they had left. The difference; were real. But there were also important similarities betweer
the Union and the Confederacy, which became clear as the two sides mobilized for war: similarities in their political systems, in the methods they used for financing the war and conscripting troops, and in the way they fought.
The Confederate Government
The Confederate constitution was largely identical to the Constitution of the United States, but with several significant exceptions: it explicitly acknowledged the sovereignty of the individual states (although not the right of secession), and it specifically sanctioned slavery and made its abolition (even by one of the states) practically impossible.
The constitutional convention at Montgomery named a provisional president and vice president: Jefferson Davis of Mississippi and Alexander H. Stephens of Georgia, who were later chosen by the general electorate, without opposition, for six-year terms. Davis had been a moderate secessionist before the war; Stephens had argued against secession. The Confederate government, like the Union government, was dominated throughout the war by moderate leaders. Also like the Union’s, it was dominated less by the old aristocracy of the East than by the newer aristocrats of the West, of whom Davis was the most prominent example.
Davis was, in the end, an unsuccessful president. He was a reasonably able administrator and the dominating figure in his government, encountering little interference from the Davis’s	generally tame members of his unstable
Leadership cabinet and serving as his own secretary of war. But he rarely provided genuinely national leadership. One shrewd Confederate official wrote: "All the revolutionary vigor is with the enemy. . . . With us
timidity-hair splitting.”
There were no formal political parties in the Confederacy, but its congressional and popular politics were rife with dissension nevertheless. Some white Southerners (and of course most African Americans who were aware of the course of events) opposed secession and war. Many white people in poorer "backcountry” and "upcountry” regions, where slavery was limited, refused to recognize the new Confederate government or to serve in the Southern army; some worked or
even fought for the Union. Most white Southerners supported the war; but as in the North, many were openly critical of the government and the military, particularly as the tide of battle turned against the South and the Confederate economy decayed.
Southern
Divisions
Money and Manpower
Financing the Confederate war effort was a monumental and ultimately impossible task. It involved creating a national revenue system in a society unaccustomed to significant tax burdens. It depended on a small and unstable banking system that had little capital to lend. Because most wealth in the South was invested in slaves and land, liquid assets were scarce; and
THE CIVIL WAR - 379
the Confederacy’s only gold-seized from U.S. mints located in the South-was worth only about $ 1 million.
The Confederate congress tried at first not to tax the people directly but to requisition funds from the individual states. Most of the states, however, were also unwilling to tax their
Funding	citizens and paid their shares, when they
Problems	paid them at all, with bonds or notes of
dubious worth. In 1863, the congress enacted an income tax-which planters could pay "in kind” (as a percentage of their produce). But taxation never provided the Confederacy with much revenue; it produced only about 1 percent of the government’s total income. Borrowing was not much more successful. The Confederate government issued bonds in such vast amounts that the public lost faith in them and stopped buying them. Efforts to borrow money in Europe
using cotton as collateral fared no better.
As a result, the Confederacy had to pay for the war through the least stable, most destructive form of financing: paper currency, which it began issuing in 1861. By 1864, the Confederacy had issued the staggering total of $1.5 billion in paper money, more than twice what the Union had produced. And unlike
VOLUNTEERS
Young Southern soldiers posed for t is p o ogr First Battle of Bull Run. The Civil War was the first major military con ic in g iy, and it launched the careers of many of America s early photograp ers. Richmond History Center)
Raising the Confederate Army
the Union, the Confederacy did not establish a uniform currency system; the national government, states, cities, and private banks all issued their own notes, producing widespread chaos and confusion. The result was a disastrous inflation, far worse than anything the North experienced. Prices in the North rose 80 percent in the course of the war; in the South they rose 9,000 percent, with devastating effects on the South’s morale.
Like the United States, the Confederacy first raised a military by calling for volunteers. And as in the North, by the end of 1861 voluntary enlistments were declining. In April 1862, therefore, the congress enacted a Conscription Act, which subjected all white males between the ages of eighteen and thirty-five to military service for three years. As in the
North, a draftee could avoid service if he furnished a substitute. But since the price of substitutes was high, the provision aroused such opposition from poorer whites that it was repealed in 1863. Even more controversial was the exemption from the draft of one white man on each plantation with twenty or more slaves, a provision that caused smaller farmers to make the same complaint some Northerners made: "It’s a rich man’s war but a poor man’s fight.” Many more white Southerners were exempted from military service than were Northerners.
Even so, conscription worked for a time. At the end of 1862, about 500,000 men were in the Confederate military. (A total of approximately 900,000 served in the course of the entire war.) That number did not include the many slave men and slave women recruited by the military to perform such services as cooking, laundry, and manual labor, hence freeing additional white manpower for fighting. After 1862, however, conscription began producing fewer men-in part because the Union had by then begun to seize large areas of the Confederacy and thus had cut off much of the population from conscription or recruitment.
Early in 1864, the government faced a critical manpower shortage. In a desperate move, the Confederate congress began trying to draft men as young as seventeen and as old as fifty. But in a nation suffering from intense war weariness, where many had con-
cluded that defeat was inevitable, nothing could attract or retain an adequate army any longer. In 1864-1865 there were 100,000 desertions. In a frantic final attempt to raise men, the Confederate congress authorized the conscription of 300,000 slaves, but the war ended before the government could attempt this incongruous experiment.
States’ Rights versus
Centralization
The greatest sources of division in the South, however, were differences of opinion over the doctrine of states’
Manpower
Shortage
380 > CHAPTER 14
rights. States’ rights had become such a cult among many white Southerners that they resisted all efforts to exert national authority, even those necessary to win the war. They restricted Davis’s ability to impose martial law and suspend habeas corpus. They obstructed conscription. Recalcitrant governors such as Joseph Brown of Georgia and Zebulon M. Vance of North Carolina tried at times to keep their own troops apart from the Confederate forces and insisted on hoarding surplus supplies for their own states’ militias.
Even so, the Confederate government did make substantial strides in centralizing power in the South. By the
Centralization end of the war’the Confederate bureau-cracy was larger than its counterpart in
Washington. The central government experimented, successfully for a time, with a "food draft”-which permitted soldiers to feed themselves by seizing crops from farms in their path. The government impressed slaves, often over the objections of their owners, to work as laborers on military projects. The Confederacy seized control of the railroads and shipping; it imposed regulations on industry; it limited corporate profits. States’ rights sentiment was a significant handicap, but the South nevertheless took important steps in the direction of centralization-becoming in the process increasingly like the region whose institutions it was fighting to escape.
Economic and Social Effects
of the War
The war had a devastating effect on the economy of the South. It cut off Southern planters and producers from the markets in the North on which they had depended; it made the sale of cotton overseas much more difficult; it robbed farms and industries that did not have large slave populations of a male workforce, leaving some of them unable to function effectively. While in the North production of all goods, agricultural and industrial, increased somewhat during the war, in the South production declined by more than a third.
Most of all, perhaps, the fighting itself wreaked havoc on the Southern economy. Almost all the major battles of the war occurred within the Confederacy; both armies spent most of their time on Southern soil. As a result of the savage fighting, the South’s already inadequate railroad system was nearly destroyed; much of its most valuable farmland and many of its most successful plantations were ruined by Union troops (especially in the last year of the war).
Once the Northern naval blockade became effective in 1862, the South experienced massive shortages of almost everything. The region was overwhelmingly agricultural, but since it had concentrated so single-mindedly on producing cotton and other export crops, it did not grow enough food
Economic	t0 meet its own needs- And desPite the
Woes	efforts of women and slaves to keep farms
functioning, the departure of white male workers seriously diminished the region’s ability to keep up
what food production there had been. Large numbers of doctors were conscripted to serve the needs of the military, leaving many communities without any medical care. Blacksmiths, carpenters, and other craftsmen were similarly in short supply.
As the war continued, the shortages, the inflation, and the suffering created increasing instability in Southern society. There were major food riots, some led by women, in Georgia, North Carolina, and Alabama in 1863, as well as a large demonstration in Richmond that quickly turned violent. Resistance to conscription, food impressment, and taxation increased throughout the Confederacy, as did hoarding and black-market commerce.
Despite the economic woes of the South, the war transformed Confederate society in many of the same ways that it was changing the society of the Union. The changes were par-
__	ticularly significant for Southern women.
for Women Because so many men left the farms and plantations to fight, the task of keeping families together and maintaining agricultural production fell increasingly to women. Slaveowners’ wives often became responsible for managing large slave workforces; the wives of modest farmers learned to plow fields and harvest crops. Substantial numbers of females worked as schoolteachers or in government agencies in Richmond. Even larger numbers chose nursing, both in hospitals and in temporary facilities set up to
care for wounded soldiers.
The long-range results of the war for Southern women are more difficult to measure but equally profound. The experience of the 1860s forced many women to question the prevailing Southern assumption that females were unsuited for certain activities, that they were not fit to participate actively in the public sphere. A more concrete legacy was the decimation of the male population and the creation of a major gender imbalance in the region. After the war, there were many thousands more women in the South than there were men. In Georgia, for example, women outnumbered men by 36,000 in 1870; in North Carolina by 25,000. The result, of course, was a large number of unmarried or widowed women who, both during and after the war, had to find employment-thus, by necessity rather than choice, expanding the number of acceptable roles for women in Southern society.
Even before emancipation, the war had far-reaching effects on the lives of slaves. Confederate leaders, who were more terrified of slave revolts during the war than they had been in peacetime, enforced slave codes and other regulations with particular severity. Even so, many slaves-especially those near the front—found ways to escape their masters and cross behind Union lines in search of freedom-Those who had no realistic avenue for escape seemed, to their owners at least, to be particularly resistant to authority during the war. That was in part because on many planta tions, the masters and overseers for whom they were accus tomed to working were away at war; they found it easier to resist the authority of the women and boys left behind to manage the farms.
THE CIVIL WAR - 381
ATLANTA AFTER THE BURNING
General Sherman captured Atlanta on September 2, 1864, evacuated most of the population, and set fire to the city. This photograph shows the extent of the devastation. The destruction of Atlanta was the beginning of Sherman s famous "March to the Sea.” It also signaled the beginning of a new kind of warfare, waged not just against opposing armies but also against the economies and even the populations of the enemy. (© Corbis) STRATEGY AND DIPLOMACY
Militarily, the initiative in the Civil War lay mainly with the North, since it needed to destroy the Confederacy, while the South needed only to avoid defeat. Diplomatically, however, the initiative lay with the South. It needed to enlist the recognition and support of foreign governments; the Union wanted to preserve the status quo prior to the war.
The Commanders
The most important Union military commander was Abraham Lincoln, whose previous military experience consisted only
Lincoln’s °F brief service in his state militia during Leadership the Black Hawk War. Lincoln was a successful commander in chief because he realized that numbers and resources were on his side, and because he took advantage of the North’s material advantages. He realized, too, that the proper objective of his armies was the destruction of the Confederate armies, not the occupation of Southern territory. It was important that Lincoln bad a good grasp of strategy, because many of his generals did flot. The problem of finding adequate commanders for the troops in the field plagued him throughout the first three
years of the war.
From 1861 to 1864, Lincoln tried time and again to find a chief of staff capable of orchestrating the Union war effort. He turned first to General Winfield Scott, the aging hero of the Mexican War. But Scott was unprepared for the magnitude of
the new conflict and retired on November 1, 1861. Lincoln replaced him with the young George B. McClellan, commander of the Union armies in the East, the Army of the Potomac; but the proud, arrogant McClellan had a wholly inadequate grasp of strategy and returned to the field in March 1862. For most of the rest of the year, Lincoln had no chief of staff. And when he finally appointed General Henry W. Halleck to the post, he found him an Ineffectual strategist who left all substantive decision making to the president. Not until March 1864 did Lincoln finally find a general he trusted to command the war effort: Ulysses S. Grant, who shared Lincoln’s belief in making enemy armies and resources, not enemy territory, the target of military efforts. Lincoln gave Grant a relatively free hand, but the general always submitted at least the broad outlines of his plans to the president for advance approval.
Lincoln’s (and later Grant’s) handling of the war effort faced constant scrutiny from the Committee on the Conduct of the War, a joint investigative committee of the two houses of Congress and the most powerful voice the legislative branch has ever had in formulating war policies. Established in December 1861 and chaired by Senator Benjamin F. Wade of Ohio, it complained constantly of the insufficient ruthlessness of Northern generals, which Radicals on the committee attributed (largely inaccurately) to a secret sympathy among the officers for slavery. The committee’s efforts often seriously interfered with the conduct of the war.
Southern command arrangements centered on President Davis, who, unlike Lincoln, was a trained professional soldier. Nevertheless, he failed to create an effective command system.
382 • CHAPTER 14
ULYSSES S. GRANT
One observer said of Grant (seen here posing for a photograph during the Wilderness campaign of 1864): "He habitually wears an expression as if he had determined to drive his head through a brick wall, and was about to do it." It was an apt metaphor for Grant's military philosophy, which relied on constant, unrelenting assault. One result was that Grant was willing to fight when other Northern generals held back. Another was that Grant presided over some of the worst carnage of the Civil War. (The Library of Congress) Early In 1862, Davis named General Robert E. Lee as his principal military adviser. But in fact, Davis had no intention of sharing Robert E Lee contr°l °f strategy with anyone. After a few months, Lee left Richmond to command forces in the field, and for the next two years Davis planned strategy alone. In February 1864, he named General Braxton Bragg as a military adviser; but Bragg never provided much more than technical advice. Not until February 1865 did the Confederate
Congress create the formal position of general in chief. Davis named Lee to the post but made clear that he expected to continue to make all basic decisions. In any case, the war ended before this last command structure had time to take shape.
At lower levels of command, men of markedly similar backgrounds controlled the war in both the North and the South. Many of the professional officers on both sides were graduates of the U.S. Military Academy at West Point and the U.S. Naval Academy at Annapolis, and thus had been trained in similar ways. Many were closely acquainted, even friendly, with their counterparts on the other side. And all were imbued with the classic, eighteenth-century models of warfare that the service
ROBERT E. LEE
Lee, who was a moderate by the standards of Southern politics in the 1850s, opposed secession and was ambivalent about slavery. But he could not bring himself to break with his region, and he left the U.S. Army to lead Confederate forces beginning in 1861. He was (and remains) the most revered of all the white Southern leaders of the Civil War. For decades after his surrender at Appomattox, Lee was a symbol to white Southerners of the Lost Cause." (© Corbis)
academies still taught. The most successful officers were those who, like Grant and William Tecumseh Sherman, were able to see beyond their academic training and envision a new kind of warfare in which destruction of resources was as important as battlefield tactics.
Amateur officers played an important role in both armies as commanders of volunteer regiments. In both North and South, such men were usually economic or social leaders in their communities who appointed themselves officers and rounded up troops to lead. This system was responsible for recruiting considerable numbers of men into the armies of the two nations. Only occasionally, however, did it produce officers of real ability.
The Role of Sea Power
The Union had an overwhelming advantage in naval power, and it gave its navy two important roles in the war. One was enforcing a blockade of the Southern coast, which the president ordered on April 19, 1861. The other was assisting the Union armies in field operations.
THE CIVIL WAR
• 383 The blockade of the South was never fully effective, but it had a major impact on the Confederacy nevertheless. The U S
The Union Navy could generaby keep oceangoing
Blockade shiPs out Confederate ports. For a time, small blockade runners continued to slip through. But gradually, federal forces tightened the blockade by seizing the ports themselves. The last important port in Confederate hands Wilmington, North Carolina-fell to the
Union early in 1865.
The Confederates made bold attempts to break the blockade with new weapons. Foremost among them was an ironclad warship, constructed by plating with iron a former U.S. frigate, the Merrimac, which the Yankees had scuttled in
Ironclads Norfolk harbor when Virginia seceded. On March 8, 1862, the refitted Merrimac, renamed the Virginia, left Norfolk to attack a blockading squadron of wooden ships at nearby Hampton Roads. It destroyed two of the ships and scattered the rest. But the Union government had already built ironclads of its own. And one of them, the
Monitor, arrived off the coast of Virginia only a few hours after the Virginia’s dramatic foray. The next day, it met the Virginia in the first battle between ironclad ships. Neither vessel was able to sink the other, but the Monitor put an end to the Virginia’s raids and preserved the blockade. The Confederacy experimented as well with other naval innovations, such as small torpedo boats and hand-powered submarines. But despite occasional small successes with these new weapons, the South never managed to overcome the Union’s naval advantages.
As a supporter of land operations, the Union navy was particularly important in the western theater of war-the vast region between the Appalachian Mountains and the Mississippi River where the major rivers were navigable by large vessels. The navy transported supplies and troops and joined in attacking Confederate strong points. With no significant navy of its own, the South could defend only with fixed land fortifications, which proved no match for the mobile land-and-water forces of the Union.
Europe and the Disunited States
Judah P. Benjamin, the Confederate secretary of state for most of the war, was a clever and intelligent man, but he confined most of his energy to routine administrative tasks. William Seward, his counterpart in Washington, gradually became one of the great American secretaries of state. He had invaluable assistance from Charles Francis Adams, the American minister to London, who had inherited the considerable diplomatic talents of his father, John Quincy Adams, and his grandfather, John Adams.
At the beginning of the war, the ruling classes of Englan ^d France, the two nations whose support was most crucia to both sides, were generally sympathetic to the Confederacy, for several reasons. The two nations imported much Southern c°tton for their textile industries; they were eager to we^ the United States, an increasingly powerful commercia
and some British and French citizens admired the supposedly aristocratic social order of the South, which they believed resembled the hierarchical structures of their own societies. But France was unwilling to take sides in the conflict unless England did so first. And in England, the government was reluctant to act because there was powerful popular support for the Union. Important English liberals such as John Bright and Richard Cobden considered the war a struggle between free and slave labor and urged their followers to support the Union cause. The politically conscious but largely unenfranchised workers in Britain expressed their sympathy for the North frequently and unmistakably-in mass meetings, in resolutions, and through their champions in Parliament. After Lincoln issued the Emancipation Proclamation, these groups worked particularly avidly for the Union.
Southern leaders hoped to counter the strength of the British antislavery forces by arguing that access to Southern King Cotton c°tton was vital to the English and French Diplomacy textile industries. But this "King Cotton diplomacy,” on which the Confederacy had staked so many of its hopes, failed. English manufacturers had a surplus of both raw cotton and finished goods on hand in 1861 and could withstand a temporary loss of access to American cotton. Later, as the supply of American cotton began to diminish, both England and France managed to keep some of their mills open by importing cotton from Egypt, India, and other sources. Equally important, English workers, the people most seriously threatened by the cotton shortage, did not clamor to have the blockade broken. Even most of the 500,000 English textile workers thrown out of jobs as a result of mill closings continued to support the North. In the end, therefore, no European nation offered diplomatic recognition to the Confederacy or intervened in the war. No nation wanted to antagonize the United States unless the Confederacy seemed likely to win, and the South never came close enough to vic-
tory to convince its potential allies to support it.
Even so, there was considerable tension, and on occasion near hostilities, between the United States and Britain, beginning in the first days of the war. Great Britain declared itself neutral as soon as the fighting began, followed by France and other nations. The Union government was furious: neutrality implied that the two sides to the conflict had equal stature. Leaders in Washington were insisting that the conflict was simply a domestic insurrection, not a war between two legitimate governments.
A more serious crisis, the so-called Trent affair, began in late 1861. Two Confederate diplomats, James M. Mason and John Slidell, had slipped through the then-ineffective Union blockade to Havana, Cuba, where they
boarded an English steamer, the Trent, for England. Waiting in Cuban waters was the American frigate San Jacinto, commanded by the impetuous Charles Wilkes. Acting without authorization, Wilkes stopped the British vessel, arrested the diplomats, and carried them in triumph to Boston. The British government demanded the release of the prisoners, reparations, and an apology. Lincoln and Seward, aware that Wilkes had violated
Trent Affair
Baseball and the Civil War
I 'B T
before the great urban stadiums, long before the lights and the cameras and the CJ tj multimillion-dollar salaries, long before the Little Leagues and the high school and college teams, baseball was the most popular game in America. And during the Civil War, it was a treasured pastime for soldiers, and for thousands of men (and some women) behind the lines, in both North and South.
The legend that baseball was invented by Abner Doubleday, who probably never even saw the game, came from Albert G, Spalding, a patriotic sporting-goods manufacturer eager to prove that the game had purely American origins and to dispel the notion that it came from England. In fact, baseball was derived from a variety of earlier games, especially the English pastimes of cricket and rounders. American baseball took its own distinctive form beginning in the 1840s, when Alexander Cartwright, a shipping clerk, formed the New York Knickerbockers, laid out a diamond-shaped field with four bases, and declared that batters with three strikes were out and that teams with three outs were retired.
Cartwright moved west in search of gold in 1849, ultimately grew rich, and settled finally in Hawaii (where he brought the game to Americans in the Pacific). But the game did not languish in his absence. Henry Chadwick, an English-born journalist, spent much of the 1850s popularizing the game (and regularizing its rules). By 1860, baseball was being played by college students and Irish workers, by urban elites and provincial farmers, by people of all classes and ethnic groups from New England to Louisiana. It was also attracting the attention of women. Students at Vassar College formed "ladies'' teams in the 1860s, and in Philadelphia, free black men formed the first of what would become a great network of African American baseball teams, the Pythians. From the beginning, they were barred from playing against most white teams.
When young men marched off to war in 1861, some took their bats and balls with them. Almost from the start of the fighting, soldiers in both armies took advantage of idle moments to lay out
baseball diamonds and organize games. There were games in prison camps; games on the White House lawn (where Union soldiers were sometimes billeted!; and games on battlefields that were sometimes interrupted by gunfire and cannonfire. "It is astonishing how indifferent a person can become to danger," a soldier wrote home to Ohio in 1862. "The report of musketry is heard but a very little distance from us, . . . yet over there on the other side of the road is most of our company, playing Bat Ball." After a skirmish in Texas, another Union soldier lamented that, in addition to casualties, his company had lost "the only baseball in Alexandria, Texas." Far from discouraging baseball, military commanders—and the U.S. Sanitary Commission, the Union army’s medical arm—actively encouraged the game during the war. It would, they believed, help keep up the soldiers' morale.
Away from the battlefield, baseball continued to flourish. In New York City, games between local teams drew crowds of ten or twenty thousand. The National Association of Baseball Players (founded in 1859) had recruited ninety-one clubs in ten northern states by
maritime law and unwilling to risk war with England, stalled the negotiations until American public opinion had cooled off, then released the diplomats with an indirect apology. A second diplomatic crisis lasted for years. Unable to construct large vessels itself, the Confederacy bought six ships, known as commerce destroyers, from British shipyards. The best known of them were the Alabama, the Florida, and the Shenandoah. The United States protested that this sale of military equipment to a belligerent violated the laws of neutrality, and the protests became the basis, after the war, of damage claims by the United States against Great Britain.
The American West and the War
Except for Texas, which joined the Confederacy, all the western states and territories remained officially loyal to the Union-but not without controversy and conflict. Southerners and Southern sympathizers were active throughout the West. And, in some places, there was actual combat between Unionists and secessionists.
There was particularly vicious fighting in Kansas and Missouri, the scene of so much bitterness before the war. The same pro-slavery and free-state forces who had fought one another in the 1850s continued to do so, with even more deadly results. William C. Quantrill, an Ohio native who had spent 384
Guerrilla
War in the West
band were an
much of his youth in the West, became a captain in the Confederate army after he organized a band of guerrilla fighters (mostly teenage boys) with which he terrorized areas around the Kansas-Missouri border. Quantrill and his exceptionally murderous group, notorious for
killing almost everyone in their path. Their most infamous act was a siege of Lawrence, Kansas, during which they slaughtered 150 civilians, adults and children alike. Union troops killed Quantrill shortly after the end of the war. Union sympathizers in Kansas, organized in bands known as the Jayhawkers, were only marginally less savage, as they moved across western Missouri exacting reprisals for the actions of Quantrill and other Confederate guerrillas. One Jayhawk unit was jointly commanded by the son of John Brown and the brother of
Susan B. Anthony, men who brought the fervor of abolitionists to their work. Even without a major battle, the border areas of Kansas and Missouri were among the bloodiest and most terrorized places in the United States during the Civil War.
Not long after the war began, Confederate agents tried to negotiate alliances with the Five Civilized Tribes living in Indian Territory (later Oklahoma), in hopes of recruiting their support against Union forces in the West. The Indians themselves were divided. Some wanted to support the South, both because they resented the way the U.S. government had treated them and
r
1865; a North Western Association of Baseball Players, organized in Chicago in 1865, indicated that the game was becoming well established in the West as well. In Brooklyn, William Cammeyer drained a skating pond on his property, built a board fence around it, and created the first enclosed baseball field in America—the Union grounds. He charged 10 cents admission. The professionalization of the game was under way.
Despite the commercialization and spectacle that became associated with baseball in the years after the Civil War, the game remained for many Americans what it was to millions of young men
fighting in the most savage war in the nation’s history— an American passion that at times, even if briefly, erased the barriers dividing groups from one another. "Officers and men forget, for a time, the differences in rank,” a Massachusetts private wrote in 1863, "and indulge in the invigorating sport with a schoolboy's ardor." •
UNDERSTAND, ANALYZE, AND EVALUATE
BATS BEHIND BARS
Baseball was a popular recreation for troops on both sides of the Civil War. This image depicts Union prisoners playing the game while incarcerated in a prison camp at Salisbury, North Carolina, in about 1863. (© Archive Photos/Getty Images) 1.	How could a competitive game of baseball erase "the barriers dividing groups from one another”?
2.	The United States today is engaged in wars in Iraq and Afghanistan. Are the cultural pastimes or recreations available to the men and women fighting these wars to help relieve the stress of war and bridge the differences between the opposing sides as successful in these aims as was baseball during the Civil War? Why or why not?
3.	Baseball during the Civil War crossed the lines of cultural differences between the North and the South. Does baseball today—professional or amateur—continue to cross lines of cultural differences?
because some tribal leaders were themselves slaveholders. But other Indians supported the North out of a general hostility to slavery (in both the South and their own nation).
One result of these divisions was a civil war within Indian Territory. Another was that Indian regiments fought for both the Union and the Confederacy during the war. But the tribes themselves never formally allied themselves with either side.
THE COURSE OF BATTLE
In the absence of direct intervention by the European powers, the two contestants in America were left to resolve the con-j|IGH	flict between themselves. They did so in four
Casualties long years of bloody combat that produced more carnage than any war in American history, before or since. More than 618,000 Americans died in the Civil War, far more than the 115,000 who perished in World War I or the 318,000 who died in World War Il-more, indeed, than died in all other American wars combined prior to Vietnam. There were nearly 2,000 deaths for every 100,000 of population during the Civil War. In World War I, the comparable figure was 109 deaths; in World War II, 241 deaths. Massive death, and along with it massive grief, shadowed both North
and South during and after the war.
Despite the gruesome cost, the Civil War has become the most romanticized and the most intently studied of all American wars. In part, that is because the conflict produced-in addition to terrible fatalities-a series of military campaigns of classic strategic interest and a series of military leaders who displayed unusual brilliance and daring.
The Technology of Battle
Much of what happened on the battlefield in the Civil War was a result of new technologies that transformed the nature of combat. The Civil War has often been called the first "modern” war and the first "total” war. The great conflict between the North and the South was unlike any war fought before it, and it suggested what warfare would be like in the future.
The most obvious change in the character of warfare in the 1860s was the nature of the armaments that both sides used in battle. Among the most important was the introduction of repeating weapons. Samuel Colt had patented a repeating pistol
(the revolver) in 1835, but more important for military purposes was the repeating rifle, introduced in 1860 by Oliver Winchester. Also important were greatly improved cannons and artillery, a result of advances in iron and steel technology of the previous decades.
Repeating
Weapons
* 31
T
AMERICA IN THE WORLD
The Consolidation of Nations
m TT D American Civil War was an event largely rooted in conditions particular to the United 1 H u States. But it was also a part of a worldwide movement in the nineteenth century to create large, consolidated nations. A commitment to preserving the Union—to consolidating, rather than dismantling, the nation—was one of the principal motives for the North s commitment to fighting a war against the seceding states. Similar efforts at expansion, consolidation, and unification were occurring in many other nations around the same time.
The consolidation of nation-states was, of course, not new to the nineteenth century. The revolutions in America and France in the late eighteenth century—and the subsequent strengthening of the French concept of nationhood under Napoleon in the early nineteenth century—inspired new nationalist enthusiasms in other parts of Europe. Nationalist sentiment also grew among peoples who
THE UNIFICATION OF ITALY
This engraving shows the Battle of Volturno, which was really a series of skirmishes that took place in September and October 1860. The main battle, between Garibaldi's volunteers and the troops of the Kingdom of the Two Sicilies, occurred on October 1. Although the immediate aftermath of the battle left Garibaldi's forces exhausted, they did go on to successfully unify Italy under King Victor Emmanuel II. (Italy © Tarker Archive/The Image Works) shared language, culture, ethnicity, and tradition and who came to believe that a consolidated nation was the best vehicle for strengthening their common bonds.
In 1848, a wave of nationalist revolutions erupted in Italy, France, and Austria, challenging the imperial powers that many Europeans believed were subjugating national cultures. Those revolutions failed, but they helped lay the groundwork for the two most important national consolidations of nineteenth-century Europe.
One of these consolidations occurred in Germany, which was divided into numerous small, independent states in the early nineteenth century but where popular sentiment for German unification had been growing for decades. It was spurred in part by new histories of the German Volk (people) and by newly constructed images of German traditions, visible in such literature as the Grimms' fairy tales—an effort to record and popularize German folk traditions and make them the basis of a shared sense of a common past. In 1862, King Wilhelm I of Prussia—the leader of one of the most powerful of the scattered German states—appointed an aristocratic landowner, Otto von Bismarck, as his prime minister Bismarck exploited the growing nationalism throughout the various German states and helped develop a strong popular base for unification. He did so in part by launching Prussian wars against Denmark, Austria, and France—wars Prussia easily won, inspiring pride in German power that extended well beyond Prussia, The Franco-Prussian War of 1870 was particularly important, because Prussia fought it to take possession of the French provinces of Alsace and Lorraine—provinces the Prussians claimed were part of the German national community" because its people, although legally French citizens, were ethnically and linguistically German. In 1871, capitalizing on the widespread nationalist sentiment the war had created throughout the German-speaking states, Bismarck persuaded the German king to proclaim himself emperor (or Kaiser] of a new empire that united all German peoples except those in Austria and Switzerland.
These devastating advances in the effectiveness of arms an< artillery changed the way soldiers in the field fought. It wa now impossibly deadly to fight battles as they had been fough for centuries, with lines of infantry soldiers standing erect ii the field firing volleys at their opponents until one side with drew. Fighting in that way now produced almost inconceiv able slaughter, and soldiers quickly learned that the prope position for combat was staying low to the ground and behin<
cover. For the first time in the history of organized warfare infantry did not fight in formation, and the battlefield became a more chaotic place. Gradually, the deadliness of the new weapons encouraged armies on both sides to spend a great deal of time building elaborate fortifications and trenches to protect themselves from enemy fire. The sieges of Vicksburg and Petersburg, the defense of Richmond, and many other sieges led to the construction of vast fortifications around
THE CIVIL WAR *
387
The second great European movement for national unification occurred in Italy, which had long been divided into small kingdoms, city-states, and regions controlled by the Vatican. Beginning in the early nineteenth century, Italian nationalists formed what became known as the "Young Italy” movement, under the leadership of Giuseppe Mazzini. The movement demanded an end to foreign control in Italy and the unification of the Italian people into a single nation. Peoples with common language, culture, and tradition, Mazzini believed, should be free to unite and govern themselves. More important than this growing popular nationalism as a cause of Italian unification were the efforts of powerful and ambitious leaders. The most powerful Italian state in the mid-nineteenth century was the kingdom of the Piedmont and Sardinia, in the northwestern part of the peninsula. Its king, Victor Emmanuel II, appointed his own version of Bismarck—Camillo di Cavour—as prime minister in 1852. Cavour joined forces with nationalists in other areas of Italy to drive the Spanish and the Austrians out of Italian territory. Having first won independence for northern Italy, Cavour joined forces with the southern nationalist leader Giuseppe Garibaldi, who helped win independence in the south and then agreed to a unification of the entire Italian nation under Victor Emmanuel II in 1860.
Other nations in these years were also trying to create, preserve, and strengthen nation-states. Some failed to do so—Russia, for example, despite the reform efforts of several tsars, never managed to create a stable nation-state from among its broad and diverse peoples. But others succeeded—Meiji Japan, for example, instituted a series of reforms in the 1880s and 1890s that created a powerful new Japanese nation-state.
In fighting and winning the Civil War, the nationalists of the Northern parts of the United States not only preserved the unity of their nation. They also became part of a movement toward the consolidation of national cultures and national territories that extended through many areas of the globe. •
UNDERSTAND, ANALYZE, AND EVALUATE
1.	How did the problems facing Bismarck differ from those facing Lincoln?
2.	Which man—Mazzini, Cavour, or Garibaldi—in the struggle to achieve the unification of Italy most closely parallels Lincoln and the fight to preserve the Union?
3.	Does Mazzini s argument—that peoples with common language, culture, and tradition should be free to unite and govern themselves—apply to the North's attempt to preserve the Union, or does it better fit the South’s attempt to secede and form a separate nation?
cities and attacking armies. (They were the predecessors to t e great network of trenches that became so central a part o World War I.)
Other weapons technologies were less central to the tng of the war, but important nevertheless. There was spora use of the relatively new technology of hot-air balloons, em ployed intermittently to provide a view of enemy formations in the field. (During one battle, a Union balloonist took a teie-
graph line aloft with him in his balloon and tapped out messages about troop movements to the commanders below.) Ironclad ships such as the Merrimac (or Virginia) and the Monitor, torpedoes, and submarine technology all suggested the dramatic changes that would soon overtake naval warfare, although none played a major role in the Civil War.
Critical to the conduct of the war, however, were two other relatively new technologies: the railroad and the telegraph. The railroad was particularly important in a war in Importance of which millions of soldiers were being mo-the Railroad bilized and transferred to the front, and in which a single field army could number as many as 250,000 men. Transporting such enormous numbers of soldiers, and the supplies necessary to sustain them, would have been almost impossible without railroads. But they also limited mobility. Railroad lines and stations are, of course, in fixed positions. Commanders, therefore, were forced to organize their campaigns around the location of the railroads whether the location was optimal or not.
The impact of the telegraph on the war was limited both by the scarcity of qualified telegraph operators and by the difficulty of bringing telegraph wires into the fields where battles were being fought. The situation improved somewhat after the new
U.S.
Military Telegraph Corps, headed by Thomas Scott and Andrew Carnegie, trained and employed over 1,200 operators. Gradually, too, both the Union and Confederate armies learned to string telegraph wires along the routes of their troops so that field commanders were able to stay in close touch with one another during battles. Both the North and the South sent spies behind enemy lines who tried to tap the telegraph lines of their opponents and send important information back about troop movements and formations. The
Telegraph
The Opening Clashes, 1861
The Union and the Confederacy fought their first major battle of the war in northern Virginia. A Union army of over 30,000 men under the command of General Irvin McDowell was stationed just outside Washington. About thirty miles away, at the town of Manassas, was a slightly smaller Confederate army under General P. G. T. Beauregard. If the Northern army could destroy the Southern one, Union leaders believed, the war might end at once. In mid-July, McDowell marched his inexperienced troops toward Manassas. Beauregard moved his troops behind Bull Run, a small stream north, of Manassas, and called for reinforcements, which reached him the day before the battle. The two armies were now approximately
the same size.
On July 21, in the First Battle of Bull Run, or First Battle of Manassas, McDowell almost succeeded in dispersing the Confederate forces. But the Southerners stopped a last strong Union assault and then began a savage counterattack. The Union troops, exhausted after hours of hot, hard fighting, suddenly panicked. They
First Battle of Bull Run
broke ranks and retreated chaotically.
388
CHAPTER 14
Wilson’s
Creek
McDowell was unable to reorganize them, and he had to order a retreat to Washington-a disorderly withdrawal complicated by the presence along the route of many civilians who had ridden down from the capital, picnic baskets in hand, to watch the battle from nearby hills. The Confederates, as disorganized by victory as the Union forces were by defeat, and short of supplies and transportation, did not pursue. The battle was a severe blow to Union morale and to President Lincoln’s confidence in his officers. It also dispelled the illusion that the war would be a brief one.
Elsewhere in 1861, Union forces were achieving some small but significant victories. In Missouri, rebel forces gathered behind Governor Claiborne Jackson and other state officials who wanted to secede from the Union. Nathaniel Lyon, who com-
manded a small regular army force in St. Louis, moved his troops into southern Missouri to face the secessionists. On August 10, at the Battle of Wilson’s Creek, Lyon was defeated and killed-but not before he had seriously weakened the striking power of the Confederates. Union forces were subsequently able to hold most of the state.
Meanwhile, a Union force under George B. McClellan moved east from Ohio into western Virginia. By the end of 1861, it had ’’liberated” the anti-secession mountain people of the region. They created their own state government loyal to the Union and were admitted to the Union as West Virginia in 1863. The occupation of western Virginia was of limited military value, since the mountains cut the area off from the rest of Virginia. It was, however, an important symbolic victory for the North.
The Western Theater
After the First Battle of Bull Run, military operations in the East settled into a long and frustrating stalemate. The first decisive operations in 1862 occurred in the West. Union forces were trying to seize control of the southern Mississippi River, which would divide the Confederacy and give the North easy transportation into the heart of the South. Northern soldiers advanced on the river from both the north and south, moving downriver from Kentucky and upriver from the Gulf of Mexico toward New Orleans.
In April, a Union squadron of ironclads and wooden vessels commanded by David G. Farragut gathered in the Gulf of Mexico, then smashed past weak Confederate forts near the KT _	mouth of the Mississippi, and from there
Captured sailed up to New Orleans, which was defenseless because the Confederate high command had expected the attack to come from the north. The city surrendered on April 25-the first major Union victory and an important turning point in the war. From then on, the mouth of the Mississippi was closed to Confederate trade; and the South’s largest city and most important banking center was in Union hands.
Farther north in the western theater, Confederate troops under the command of Albert Sidney Johnston were stretched
out in a long defensive line centered at two forts in Tennessee, Fort Henry and Fort Donelson, on the Tennessee and Cumberland Rivers, respectively. But the forts were well behind the main Southern flanks, a fatal weakness that Union commanders recognized and exploited. Early in 1862, Ulysses S. Grant attacked Fort Henry, whose defenders, awed by the ironclad riverboats accompanying the Union army, surrendered with almost no resistance on February 6. Grant then moved both his naval and ground forces to Fort Donelson, where the Confederates put up a stronger fight but finally, on February 16, had to surrender. By cracking the Confederate center, Grant had gained control of river communications and forced Confederate forces out of Kentucky and half of Tennessee.
With about 40,000 men, Grant now advanced south along the Tennessee River to seize control of railroad lines vital to the Confederacy. From Pittsburg Landing, he marched to Shiloh	nearby Shiloh, Tennessee, where a force
almost equal to his own, commanded by
Albert Sidney Johnston and P. G. T. Beauregard, caught him by surprise. The result was the Battle of Shiloh, April 6-7. In the first day’s fighting (during which Johnston was killed), the Southerners drove Grant back to the river. But the next day, reinforced by 25,000 fresh troops, Grant recovered the lost ground and forced Beauregard to withdraw. After the narrow Union victory at Shiloh, Northern forces occupied Corinth, Mississippi, the hub of several important railroads, and established control of the Mississippi River as far south as Memphis.
Braxton Bragg, who succeeded Johnston as commander of the Confederate army in the West, gathered his forces at Chattanooga, in eastern Tennessee, which the Confederacy still controlled. He hoped to win back the rest of the state and then move north into Kentucky. But first he had to face a Union army (commanded by Don Carlos Buell and later William S. Rosecrans), whose assignment was to capture Chattanooga. The two armies maneuvered for advantage inconclusively in northern Tennessee and southern Kentucky for several months until they finally met, December 31-january 2, in the Battle of Murfreesboro, or Stone’s River. Bragg was forced to withdraw to the south, his campaign a failure. By the end of 1862, Union forces had made considerable progress in the West. But the major conflict remained in the East, where they were having much less success.
The Virginia Front, 1862
Union operations were being directed in 1862 by George B. McClellan, commander of the Army of the Potomac and the most controversial general of the war. McClellan was a superb trainer of men, but he often appeared reluctant to commit his troops to battle. Opportunities for important engagements came and went, and McClellan seemed never to
George	ta^e advantage of themclaiming always
McClellan r^at his preparations were not yet complete or that the moment was not right.
THE CIVIL WAR * 389
200 mi
pmm
. 200
400 km
OHIO
TEXAS

ILLINOIS
INDIANA

ZV
MISSOURI
Springfield
Wilson's Creek August 10,1861

Pea Ridge March 7-8,1862
ARKANSAS
Cairo
Island No. 10 7/	V i',	Ft. PoneW
April 8,1862^	....^k^Fehruaiy it
'.fl E« dNashvi,,:^
Memphis? June 6,1862
Vicksburg bombarded'
June 26, 1862 C
MobileX
LOUISIANA
New Orleans April 25,1862
/St. Louis
Ohio
io K^'cV
Perryville October 8,1862
VIRGINIA
ALABAMA

Gulf of Mexico
< .... Union forces
Union victories
---- Confederate forces
Confederate victories
Union-held territory at start of war Union gains Confederate states
.	,. ■	■	■ x/ir-ninia wppp meetina with repeated frustrations, the Union armies in the West were scoring notable successes in the first two
E WAR IN THE WEST, 1861-1863
Whi e the Un,on arnttes ,r Wrgtma » -e rneehng w rs of the war. This map shows a series of Union drives in e wes	f„jpratP armv out of Kentucky and western Tennessee. These battles culminated in the Union victory at Shiloh, which
le forces farther north under the command of Ulysses S. Grant drove the Confederate army
to Union control of the upper Mississippi River.	.... ..................................... ...........................................
vas control of the Mississippi so important to both sides?
the winter of 1861 1862, McClellan concentrated on his army of 150,000 men near Washington. Finally, gned a spring campaign whose purpose was to cap-e Confederate capital at Richmond. But instead of 1 overland directly toward Richmond, McClellan a complicated, roundabout route that he thought circumvent the Confederate defenses. The navy carry his troops down the Potomac to a peninsula east HTond, between the York and James Rivers. The army approach the city from there. It became known as the alar campaign.
McClellan began the campaign with only part of his army. Approximately 100,000 men accompanied him down the Potomac. Another 30,000-under General Irvin McDowell-remained behind to protect Washington. McClellan insisted that Washington was safe as long as he was threatening Richmond, and finally persuaded Lincoln to promise to send him the additional men. But before the president could do so, a Confederate army under Thomas J. ("Stonewall”) Jackson changed his plans. Jackson staged a rapid march north through the Shenandoah Valley, as if he were planning to cross the Potomac and attack Washington. Alarmed, Lincoln dispatched
390 CHAPTER 14
VIRGINIA
2, Fair Oaks Mayll-JtiheJ/1862
Bichmoncf®
JSattle of tjie Seven Dafe^x^X June 2$tJuly 1,1862^4
Jackson's
campaign
May-June1862
/ /
/
y
/	f	Port Republic
/McDowell w	} , VTiune 9,1862
/May 8,1862	jX
July 1861-July 1862
McClelfafibrcecttb ftH&i,
retreat by Lee*, May 5, iwz j; reinforced by Jackson	/\x v/
Siege of Yorfctowr x >•' April S-May 4,1862
August-December 1862
VIRGINIA	" />
/
\y
—►	Confederate forces
—►	Union forces
	Confederate victories
	Union victories
	Inconclusive Union-held territory at start of war Confederate states
THE VIRGINIA THEATER, 1861-1863
Much of the fighting during the first two years of the Civil War took nlarP in	.
extended north into Maryland and Pennsylvania. The Union hoped for a quick victory over the newly created Confederate »«. o.! 'T™ n0Wn “ 'he Vlr9'nia theater-although the campaigns in this region e top left shows the battles of 1861 and the first half of 1862, almost all of them won by the Confederates The mao at low I ft ft B u	mapS Sh°W' ‘he S°Utllern forces consistently thwarted such hopes. The map
of their engagements—although Northern forces drove the Confederates bach from Maryland in September The man „ A Tl*	m°n'hS °f 18®2' durin9 which lhe Southerners again defeated the Union ir
>Whu were the Union forces unnhie t r, f u	eThe on *>e r,9h' shows the troop movements that led to the climactic battle of Gettysburg in 1863.
* were the Umon forces unable to prof, morefront the, material advantages during these first years of the war?
THE CIVIL WAR
391
McDowell’s corps to head off Jackson. In the brilliant Valley campaign of May 4-June 9, 1862, Jackson defeated two separate Union forces and slipped away before McDowell could catch him.
Meanwhile, Confederate troops under Joseph E. Johnston Seven Pines were attacking McClellan’s advancing army outside Richmond. But in the two-day
Battle of Fair Oaks, or Seven Pines (May 31-June 1), they could not repel the Union forces. Johnston, badly wounded, was replaced by Robert E. Lee, who then recalled Stonewall Jackson from the Shenandoah Valley. With a combined force of 85,000 to face McClellan’s 100,000, Lee launched a new offensive, known as the Battle of the Seven Days (June 25-July 1). Lee wanted to cut McClellan off from his base on the York River and then destroy the isolated Union army. But McClellan fought his way across the peninsula and set up a new base on the James. There, with naval support, the Army of the Potomac was safe.
McClellan was now only twenty-five miles from Richmond, with a secure line of water communications, and thus in a good position to renew the campaign. Time and again, however, he found reasons for delay. Instead of replacing McClellan with a more aggressive commander, Lincoln finally ordered the army to move to northern Virginia and join a smaller force under John Pope. The president hoped to begin a new offensive against Richmond on the direct overland route that he himself had always preferred.
As the Army of the Potomac left the peninsula by water, Lee moved north with the Army of Northern Virginia to strike Pope before McClellan could join him. Pope was as rash as McClellan was cautious, and he attacked the approaching Confederates without waiting for the arrival of all of McClellan’s troops. In the ensuing Second Battle of Bull Run, or Second Battle of Manassas (August 29-30), Lee threw back the assault and routed Pope’s army, which fled to Washington. With hopes for an overland campaign against Richmond now in disarray, Lincoln removed Pope from command and put McClellan in charge of all the Union forces in the region.
Lee soon went on the offensive again, heading north through western Maryland, and McClellan moved out to meet him. McClellan had the good luck to get a copy of
Antietam Lee’s orders, which revealed that a part of the Confederate army, under
Stonewall Jackson, had separated from the rest to attack Harpers Ferry. But instead of attacking quickly before the Confederates could recombine, McClellan delayed and gave Lee time to pull most of his forces together behind Antietam Creek, near the town of Sharpsburg. There, on September 17, in the bloodiest single-day engagement of the war, McClellan’s 87,000-man army repeatedly attacked Lee’s force of 50,000, with enormous casualties on both sides. Six thousand soldiers died, and 17,000 sustained injuries. Late in the day, just as the Confederate line seemed ready to break, the last of Jackson’s troops arrived from Harpers Ferry to reinforce it. McClellan might have
broken through with one more assault. Instead, he allowed Lee to retreat into Virginia. Technically, Antietam was a Union victory, but in reality, it was an opportunity squandered. In November, Lincoln finally removed McClellan from command for good.
McClellan’s replacement, Ambrose E. Burnside, was a shortlived mediocrity. He tried to move toward Richmond by crossing the Rappahannock at Fredericksburg, the strongest defensive point on the river. There, on December 13, he launched a series of attacks against Lee, all of them bloody, all of them hopeless. After losing a large part of his army, Burnside withdrew to the north bank of the Rappahannock. He was relieved at his own request.
The Progress of the War
Why did the Union-with its much larger population and its much better transportation and technology than the Confederacy-make so little progress in the first two years of the war? Had there been a decisive and dramatic victory by either side early in the war-for example, a major victory by the Union at the First Battle of Bull Run-the conflict might have ended quickly by destroying the Confederacy’s morale. But no such decisive victory occurred in the first two years of the war.
Many Northerners blamed the military stalemate on timid or incompetent Union generals, and there was some truth to that view. But the more important reason for the drawn-out conflict was that it was not a traditional war of tactics and military strategy. It was, even if the leaders of both sides were not yet fully aware of it, a war of attrition. Winning or losing battles here and there would not determine the outcome of the war. What would bring the war to a conclusion was the steady destruction of the resources that were necessary for victory. More than two bloody years of fighting was still to
THE FIRST CONNECTICUT ARTILLERY
Mathew Brady's photograph shows the First Connecticut Artillery at Fort Richardson, Virginia. (The Library of Congress (LC-B8184-10601)} 392 CHAPTER 14
come. But those last years were a testimony to the slow, steady deterioration of the Confederacy's ability to maintain the war and to the consistent growth of the resources that allowed the Union armies to grow steadily stronger.
With the federal blockade growing tighter and tighter, the Confederacy found it difficult to secure food. On April 2, 1863, a Confederate soldier received a letter from Richmond from a friend. "Something very sad has just happened in Richmond,” she said, '"something that makes me ashamed of all my ... hats, bonnets, gowns, stationery, books, magazines, dainty food.” She saw hundreds of young women and men looking for food. "The crowd now rapidly increased and numbered, I am sure, more than a thousand women and children. It grew and grew until it reached the dignity of a mob-a bread riot. . . . While I write women and children are still standing in the streets, demanding food.”
1883: Year of Decision
At the beginning of 1863, General Joseph Hooker was in command of the still formidable Army of the Potomac, whose 120,000 troops remained north of the Rappahannock, opposite Fredericksburg. But despite his reputation as a fighter (his popular nickname was "Fighting Joe"), Hooker showed little resolve as he launched his own campaign in the spring. Taking part of his army, Hooker crossed the river above Fredericksburg and moved toward the town and Lee’s army. But at the last minute, he apparently lost his nerve and drew back to a defensive position in a desolate area of brush and scrub trees known as "the Wilderness.’’ Lee had only half as many men as
Battle of	Hooker did, but he boldly divided his
Chancellorsville forces for a dual assault on the Union army. In the Battle of Chancellorsville,
May 1-5, Stonewall Jackson attacked the Union right and Lee himself charged the front. Hooker barely managed to escape with his army. Lee had defeated the Union objectives, but he had not destroyed the Union army. And his ablest officer, Jackson, was wounded during the battle and subsequently died of pneumonia.
While the Union forces were suffering repeated frustrations in the East, they were continuing to achieve important
Vicksburg victories in the West. In the spring of 1863, Ulysses S. Grant was driving at Vicksburg, Mississippi, one of the Confederacy’s two remaining strongholds on the southern Mississippi River. Vicksburg was well protected, surrounded by rough country on the north and low, marshy ground on the west, and with good artillery coverage of the river itself. But in May, Grant boldly moved men and supplies-overland and by water-to an area south of the city, where the terrain was better. He then attacked Vicksburg from the rear. Six weeks later, on July 4, Vicksburg-whose residents were by then literally starving as a result of a prolonged siege-surrendered. At almost the same time, the other Confederate strong point on the river, Port Hudson, Louisiana, also surrendered-to a Union force that had moved north from New Orleans. The Union had achieved one

&
-nunj-T-

Union forces Union victory Proposed Union drive Confederate defenses Confederate victory
LOUISIANA
THE SIEGE OF VICKSBURG, MAY-JULY 1863
In the spring of 1863, Grant began a campaign to win control of the final piece of the Mississippi River still controlled by the Confederacy. To do that required capturing the Southern stronghold at Vicksburg—a well-defended city sitting above the river. Vicksburg's main defenses were in the North, so Grant boldly moved men and supplies around the city and attacked it from the south. Eventually, he cut off the city s access to the outside world, and after a six-week siege, its residents finally surrendered. ® What impact did the combined victories at Vicksburg and Gettysburg have on Northern commitment to the war?
of its basic military aims: control of the whole length of the Mississippi. The Confederacy was split in two, with Louisiana, Arkansas, and Texas cut off from the other seceded states. The victories on the Mississippi were among the great turning points of the war.
During the siege of Vicksburg, Lee proposed an invasion of Pennsylvania, which would, he argued, divert Union troops north and remove the pressure on the lower Mississippi-
THE CIVIL WAR
393
July 2-3,1863
Confederate forces Union (Federal) forces Confederate forces Union forces Roads
July 1,1863
Confederates under ( Lee's command on July 1 drive Federals \ to south of town /
GETTYSBURG, JULY 1-3, 1863
Gettysburg was the most important single battle of the Civil War. The map on the left shows the distribution of Union and Confederate forces at the beginning of the battle, July 1, after Lee had driven the Northern forces south of town. The map on the right reveals the pattern of the attacks on July 2 and 3. Note, in particular, Pickett's bold and costly charge, whose failure on July 3 was the turning point in the battle and, some chroniclers have argued, the war. Why did Robert E. Lee believe that an invasion of Pennsylvania would advance the Confederate cause?
i i	'
surther, he argued, if he could win a major victory on Northern soil, England and France might come to the confederacy’s aid. The war-weary North might even quit the var before Vicksburg fell.
In June 1863, Lee moved up the Shenandoah Valley into Maryland and then entered Pennsylvania. The Union Army of ho Potomac, commanded first by Hooker and then by George - Meade, also moved north, parallel with the Confederates’ movement, staying between Lee and Washington. The two irmies finally encountered each other at the small town of J0ttysburg, Pennsylvania. There, on July 1-3, 1863, they ought the most celebrated battle of the war.
Meade’s army established a strong, well-protected position )n the hills south of the town. The confident and combative Gettysburg Lee attacked, even though his army was outnumbered 75,000 to 90,000. His first issault on the Union forces on Cemetery Ridge failed. A day ater he ordered a second, larger effort. In what is remembered ls Pickett’s Charge, a force of 15,000 Confederate soldiers dvanced for almost a mile across open country while being
swept by Union fire. Only about 5,000 made it up the ridge, and this remnant finally had to surrender or retreat. By now Lee had lost nearly a third of his army. On July 4, the same day as the surrender of Vicksburg, he withdrew from Gettysburg-another major turning point in the war. Never again were the weakened Confederate forces able to threaten Northern territory seriously.
Before the end of 1863, there was a third important turning point, this one in Tennessee. After occupying Chattanooga on September 9, Union forces under William Rosecrans began an unwise pursuit of Bragg’s retreating Confederate forces. Bragg was waiting for them just across the Georgia line, with reinforcements from Lee’s army. The two armies engaged in the Battle of Chickamauga (September 19-20), one of the few battles in which the Confederates enjoyed a numerical superiority (70,000 to 56,000). Union forces could not break the Confederate lines and retreated back to Chattanooga.
Bragg now began a siege of Chattanooga itself, seizing the heights nearby and cutting off fresh supplies to the
394
CHAPTER 14
Battle of Chattanooga
Union forces. Grant came to the rescue. In the Battle of Chattanooga (November 23-25), the reinforced Union army drove the Confederates back into Georgia. Northern troops then occupied most of eastern Tennessee. Union forces
had now achieved a second important objective: control of the Tennessee River. Four of the eleven Confederate states were now effectively cut off from the Southern nation. No longer could the Confederacy hope to win independence through a decisive military victory. They could hope to win only by holding on and exhausting the Northern will to fight.
The Last Stage, 1864-1863
By the beginning of 1864, Ulysses S. Grant had become general in chief of all the Union armies. At long last, President Lincoln had found a commander whom he could rely on to pursue the war doggedly and tenaciously. Grant was not a subtle strategic or tactical general; he believed in using
the North's overwhelming advantage in troops and material resources to overwhelm the South. He was not afraid to absorb massive casualties as long as he was inflicting similar casualties on his opponents.
Grant planned two great offensives for 1864. In Virginia, the
Army of the Potomac (technically under Meade’s command, but
really now under Grant’s) would advance toward Richmond and
_	,	force Lee into a decisive battle. In Georgia
GRANT S
° ’ Strategy	western army, under William Tecumseh
Sherman, would advance east toward Atlanta and destroy the remaining Confederate force farther south, which was now under the command of Joseph E. Johnston. The northern campaign began when the Army of the Potomac, 115,000 strong, plunged into the rough, wooded Wilderness area of northwestern Virginia in pursuit of Lee’s 75,000-man army. After avoiding an engagement for several weeks, Lee turned Grant back in the Battle of the Wilderness (May 5-7). But Grant was undeterred. Without stopping to rest or reorganize, he resumed his march toward Richmond. He met Lee again in the bloody, five-day Battle of Spotsylvania Court
Lee surrenders to Grant Appomattox Court House April 9,1865
April 1,1865
** Railroad
—.....» Union forces
—> Confederate forces -rT-n- Confederate defense line & Confederate victory Union victory
Ml 4 \ //( 0(1 L\
VIRGINIA CAMPAIGNS, 1864-1865
From the Confederate defeat and retreat from Gettysburg until the end of the war f ,u ,S. Grant was commander of all Union forces and had taken over the Army of the Potomac. Although Confederate forces won h t ?	63	'9h"n9 '°°k P'ace Vir9'nia' By “ *
grew steadily stronger and the Southern forces steadily weaker. Grant believed that the Union strategy should reflect the North , 'mp°rtant ba,tles durin9 the Vir9inia camPal9n'lhe Un,on ar”y
....,	-	—..................... S 9reatest advantage: its superiority in men and equipment.
effect did this decision have on the level of casualties?
THE CIVIL WAR -
395
MOBILE BAY, 1864
This image by Currier and Ives portrays a famous naval battle at the entrance to Mobile Bay between a Union sloop-of-war, the USS Richmond, part of a fleet commanded by Admiral David Farragut, and a Confederate ironclad, the CSS Tennessee. Although Confederate mines were scattered across the entrance to the harbor, Farragut ordered his ships into battle with the memorable command "Damn the torpedoes! Full speed ahead!" The Union forces defeated the Confederate flotilla and three weeks later captured the forts defending the harbor—thus removing from Confederate control the last port on the Gulf Coast available to the blockade runners who were attempting to supply the South's war needs. (© Archive Photos/Getty Images) Gulf o f Mexico
Mobile
Mobile Bay, August ^, W4
Troop movements »■»	Union —►	Confederate	Victories &
Extent of Union control	
1862	1864
1863	1865

arinq Lee down in Virginia, General William Tecumseh Sherman was moving east across Georgia. After a series of SHERMAN'S MARCH TO THE SEA, 1864-1865 While rant,^nW^archecj unimpeded to Savannah, on the Georgia coast—deliberately devastating the towns and plantations through battles in Tennessee and northwest Georgia, Sherman captured Atlanta an t en	movinq north through the Carolinas. A few days after Lee surrendered to Grant at Appomattox,
which his troops marched. Note that after capturing Savannah by Christmas 1864, Sherman g
Confederate forces farther south surrendered to Sherman.	---------------------------------------------------------------------------—... ..............
• What did Sherman believe his devastating March to the Sea weald accomplish?
396 • CHAPTER 14
I
j
I
i
House, in which 12,000 Union troops and a large but unknown number of Confederates died or were wounded. Despite the enormous losses, Grant kept moving. But victory continued to elude him.
Lee kept his army between Grant and the Confederate capital and on June 1-3 repulsed the Union forces again, just northeast of Richmond, at Cold Harbor. The month-long Wilderness campaign had cost Grant 55,000 men (killed, wounded, and captured) to Lee’s 31,000. And Richmond still had not fallen.
Grant now changed his strategy. He moved his army east of Richmond, bypassing the capital altogether, and headed south toward the railroad center at Petersburg. If he could seize Petersburg, he could cut off the capital’s communications with the rest of the Confederacy. But Petersburg had strong defenses; and once Lee came to the city’s relief, the assault became a prolonged siege, which lasted nine months.
In Georgia, meanwhile, Sherman was facing less ferocious resistance. With 90,000 men, he confronted Confederate forces of 60,000 under Johnston, who was unwilling to risk a direct engagement. As Sherman advanced, Johnston tried to delay him by maneuvering. The two armies fought only one real battle-at Kennesaw Mountain, northwest of Atlanta, on June 27-where Johnston scored an impressive victory. Even so, he was unable to stop the Union advance toward Atlanta. Capture of President Davis replaced Johnston with Atlanta the combative John B. Hood, who twice daringly attacked Sherman’s army but accomplished nothing except seriously weakening his own forces. Sherman took Atlanta on September 2. News of the victory electrified the North and helped unite the previously divided Republican Party behind President Lincoln.
A young Union drummer boy, William Bircher, left an account of the burning of Atlanta. "At night we destroyed the city by fire,” he wrote. ”A grand and awful spectacle it presented to the beholder. . . . The heaven was one expanse of lurid fire; the air was filled with flying, burning cinders. Buildings, covering two hundred acres, were in ruins or in flames; every instant there was the sharp detonation of the smothered booming sound of exploding shells and powder concealed in the buildings, and then the sparks and flames would shoot up into the black and red roof.... I heard the real fine band of the Thirty-third Massachusetts playing, John Brown’s soul goes marching on.’”
Hood now tried unsuccessfully to draw Sherman out of Atlanta by moving back up through Tennessee and threatening an invasion of the North. Sherman did not take the bait. But he did send Union troops to reinforce Nashville. In the Battle of Nashville, on December 15-16, 1864, Northern forces practically destroyed what was left of Hood’s army.
Meanwhile, Sherman had left Atlanta to begin his soon-to-be-famous March to the Sea. Living off the land, destroying supplies it could not use, his army cut a sixty-mile-wide swath of desolation across Georgia. "War is all hell,” Sherman had once said. By that he meant not that war is a terrible thing to
N .	.	>
-kN vk	V> T'A
X	,	•	'''	. V -
VXNv	Vim wmU
F V I
WANIN'*kN
I ’Vxrv-fr
A LETTER FROM THE FRONT
Charles Wellington Reed, a nineteen-year-old Union soldier who was also a talented artist, sent illustrated letters to the members of his family throughout the war. In this 1863 letter to his mother, he portrays the Ninth Massachusetts Battery leaving Centreville, Virginia, on its way to Gettysburg. Two weeks later, Reed fought in the famous battle and eventually received the Congressional Medal of Honor for his bravery there. "Such a shrieking, hissing, seathing I never dreamed was imaginable," he wrote of the fighting at the time. (Manuscript Division, The Library of Congress) March to	be avoided, but that it should be made as
the Sea	horrible and costly as possible for the oppo-
nent. He sought not only to deprive the
Confederate army of war materials and railroad communications but also to break the will of the Southern people, by burning towns and plantations along his route. By December 20, he had reached Savannah, which surrendered two days later. Sherman offered it to President Lincoln as a Christmas gift. Early in 1865, having left Savannah largely undamaged, Sherman continued his destructive march northward through South Carolina. He was virtually unopposed until he was well inside North Carolina, where a small force under Johnston could do no more than cause a brief delay.
In April 1865, Grant’s Army of the Potomac-still engaged in the prolonged siege at Petersburg-finally captured
THE CIVIL WAR * 397
APPOMATTOX a vital railroad junction southwest of the Courthouse tOwn. Without rail access to the South, cut off from other Confederate forces’,
Lee could no longer hope to defend Richmond. With the remnant of his army, now about 25,000 men, Lee began moving west in the forlorn hope of finding a way around the Union forces so that he could head south and link up with Johnston in North Carolina. But the Union army pursued him and blocked his escape route. Finally recognizing that further bloodshed was futile, Lee arranged to meet Grant at a private home in the small town of Appomattox Court House, Virginia. There, on April 9, he surrendered what was left of his forces. Nine days later, near Durham, North Carolina, Johnston surrendered to Sherman.
In military terms, at least, the long war was now effectively over, even though Jefferson Davis refused to accept defeat. He fled south from Richmond and was finally captured in Georgia. A few Southern diehards continued to fight, but even their resistance collapsed before long. Well before the last shot was fired, the difficult process of reuniting the shattered nation had begun.
The war ensured the permanence of the Union, but many other issues remained far from settled. What would happen to the freedmen (the term used for slaves who were now liberated)? Could the South and the North reconcile? Would the massive industrial growth in the North during the Civil War spread to the South, or would the South remain an agrarian region with much less wealth than in the North? The end of the war was the beginning of more than a generation of struggle to determine the legacy of the Civil War.
LOOKING BACK
The American Civil War began with high hopes and high ideals on both sides. In both the North and the South, thousands of men enthusiastically enlisted in local regiments; marched down the streets of their towns and cities dressed in uniforms of blue or gray to the cheers of family, friends, and neighbors; and went off to war. Four years later, more than 600,000 of them were dead and many more maimed and traumatized for life. A fight for "principles” and "ideals”-a fight few people had thought would last more than a few months-had become one of the longest wars, and by far the bloodiest war, in American history, before or since.
During the first two years of fighting, the Confederate forces seemed to have all the advantages. They were fighting on their own soil. Their troops seemed more committed to the cause than those of the North. Their commanders were exceptionally talented, while Union forces were for a time erratically led. Gradually, however, the Union’s advantages began to assert themselves. The Union had a stabler political system led by one of the greatest leaders in the nation’s history (as op posed to the Confederacy’s untested government led by a relatively weak president). It had a much larger population, a far more developed industrial economy, superior financial institu tions, and a better railroad system. By the middle of 1863, the tide of war had changed; and over the next two years, Union
forces gradually wore down the Confederate armies before finally triumphing in 1865.
The North’s victory was not just a military one. The war strengthened the North’s economy, giving a spur to industry and railroad development. It greatly weakened the South’s, by de-Impact of stroying millions of dollars of property and the North’s depleting the region’s young male popula-Victory	tion. Southerners had gone to war in pan
because of their fears of growing Northern dominance. The war itself, ironically, confirmed and strengthened that dominance. There was no doubt by 1865 that the future of the United States lay in the growth of industry and commerce,
which would occur for many years primarily outside the South.
But most of all, the Civil War was a victory for the millions of African American slaves, over whose plight the conflict had largely begun in the first place. The war produced Abraham Lincoln’s epochal Emancipation Proclamation and, later, the Thirteenth Amendment to the Constitution, which abolished slavery. It also encouraged hundreds of thousands of slaves to free themselves, to desert their masters and seek refuge behind Union lines-at times to fight in the Union armies. The future of the freed slaves was not to be without challenges and hardships, but 3.5 million people who had once lived in bondage emerged from the war as free men and women.
398
CHAPTER 14
Key Terms/People/Places/Eyents
SIGNIFICANT EVENTS
Abraham Lincoln 375 Antietam 391	Jefferson Davis 378 March to the Sea 396	I860
Appomattox Court	Morrill Land Grant	South Carolina secedes from
House 397	Act 368	Union
First Battle of Bull	Robert E. Lee 382	
Run 387	Shiloh 388	
Clara Barton 378	Thomas ("Stonewall”)	
Emancipation	Jackson 389	
Proclamation 373	Ulysses S. Grant 381	
Fort Sumter 366	U.S. Sanitary	
George B. McClellan 371	Commission 377	1862
Gettysburg 393	William Tecumseh	Battles of Shiloh, Second Bull
Greenbacks 369	Sherman 394	Run, Antietam, Fredericksburg
Homestead Act		
of 1862 368		Robert E. Lee named
		commander of Confederate
		armies
RECALL AND REFLECT
Homestead Act and Morrill Land Grant Act passed
Confederacy enacts military draft
1861
Confederate States of America formed
Jefferson Davis named president of Confederacy
Conflict at Fort Sumter, South Carolina (April 12-14), begins
Civil War
First Battle of Bull Run
1.	Assess the advantages of the North and those of the South at the beginning of the Civil War. How did the advantages of each side change over the course of the war?
2.	How did the Confederate government differ from the federal government of the United States?
3.	How did the Civil War affect the West?
4.	How did the war affect the lives of women in the North and in the South?
5.	Compare Lincoln and Davis as heads of government and commanders in chief
6.	Why did Lincoln issue the Emancipation Proclamation, and what were its effects?
1864
Sherman captures Atlanta (September 2)
Grant named commander of Union armies
Battle of the Wilderness (May 5-7)
Sherman's "March to the Sea” begins
Lincoln reelected president
1863
Battles of Chancellorsville, Gettysburg, Chattanooga
Lincoln issues Emancipation Proclamation (January 1)
Vicksburg surrenders (July 4) Union enacts military draft Antidraft riots break out in New
York City
West Virginia admitted to Union
1865
Lee surrenders to Grant at Appomattox Court House
(April 9)
Thirteenth Amendment, abolishing slavery, ratified
O RECONSTRUCTION IO AND THE NEW
SOUTH
LOOKING AHEAD
t What were the various plans for Reconstruction proposed by Lincoln, Johnson, and Congress? Which plan was enacted and w y.
2.	What were the effects of Reconstruction for blacks and whites in the South?
3.	What were the political achievements and failures of the Grant administration?
THE GENIUS OF FREEDOM
This 1874 lithograph portrays a series of important moments in the history of African Americans in the South during Reconstruction—among them the participation of black soldiers in the Civil War, a speech by a black representative in the North Carolina legislature, and the movement of African American workers from slavery into a system of free labor. It also portrays some of the white leaders (among them Lincoln and Charles Sumner) who had promoted the cause of the freedmen. (The Library of Congress (LC-USZ62-2247)) SETTING THE STAGE
FEW PERIODS IN THE HISTORY OF THE UNITED STATES
have produced as much bitterness or created such enduring controversy as the era of Reconstruction-the years following the Civil War, when Americans attempted to reunite their shattered nation. To many white Southerners, Reconstruction was a destructive experience-a time when vindictive Northerners inflicted humiliation and revenge on the prostrate South and unnecessarily delayed a genuine reunion of the sections. Northern defenders of Reconstruction, in contrast, argued that their policies and forceful federal intervention were the only way to keep unrepentant Confederates from restoring Southern society as it had been before the war. To most African Americans at the time, and to many people of all races since, Reconstruction was notable for other reasons. Neither a vicious tyranny, as white Southerners charged, nor a thoroughgoing reform, as many Northerners claimed, it was, rather, a small but important first step in the effort by former slaves to secure civil rights and economic power. Reconstruction did not provide African Americans with either the legal protections or the material resources to assure them real equality. When it came to an end, finally, in the late 1870s, the freed slaves found themselves abandoned by the federal government to face a system of economic peonage and legal subordination. Yet for all its shortcomings, Reconstruction did help African Americans create institutions and legal precedents that in the twentieth century would become the basis for their efforts to win freedom and equality.
THE PROBLEMS OF PEACEMAKING
In 1865, as it became clear that the war was almost over, no one in Washington had yet formed a plan for what would happen to the defeated South. Lincoln could not negotiate a treaty with the Confederate government; he continued to insist that the Confederate government had no legal right to exist. Yet neither could he simply readmit the Southern states into the Union as if nothing had happened.
Devastated
South
The Aftermath of War and Emancipation
The Civil War was a catastrophe for the South with no parallel in America’s experience as a nation. Towns had been gutted, plantations burned, fields neglected, bridges and railroads destroyed. The	Many white Southerners, stripped of their slaves through emancipation and
stripped of the capital they had invested in now-worthless Confederate bonds and currency, had almost no personal property. Many families had to rebuild their fortunes without the help of adult males, massive numbers of whom had
died in the war. Some white Southerners faced starvation and homelessness.
The more than 258,000 Confederate soldiers who had died in the war constituted over 20 percent of the adult white male population of the region; thousands more returned home wounded or sick. Almost all surviving white Southerners had lost people close to them in the fighting. A cult Myth of the °f ritualized mourning developed throughout the region in the late 1860s, "Lost Cause” particularly among white women-many of whom wore mourning clothes (and jewelry) for two years or longer. At the same time, white Southerners began to romanticize the Lost Cause and its leaders, and to look back nostalgically at the South as it had existed before the terrible disruptions of war. Such Confederate heroes as Robert E. Lee, Stonewall Jackson, and (later) Jefferson Davis were treated with extraordinary reverence, almost as religious figures. Communities throughout the South built elaborate monuments in town squares to commemorate their war dead. The tremendous sense of loss that pervaded the white South reinforced the determination of many whites to protect what remained of their now-vanished world.
If conditions were bad for many Southern whites, they were worse for most Southern blacks-the 4 million men and women emerging from bondage. Some of them had also seen service during he war as servants to Confederate officers or as teamsters and laborers for the Southern armies.
RECONSTRUCTION AND THE NEW SOUTH * 401
IICHMOND, 1865 By the time Union forces captured Richmond in early 1865, the Confederate capital had been under siege for months and much of the city lay in ruins, as this photograph eveals. On April 4, President Lincoln, accompanied by his son Tad, visited Richmond. As he walked through the streets of the shattered city, hundreds of former slaves emerged from the rubble to ratch him pass. "No triumphal march of a conqueror could have equalled in moral sublimity the humble manner in which he entered Richmond," a black soldier serving with the Union army wrote. "It tas a great deliverer among the delivered. No wonder tears came to his eyes. (The Library of Congress)
Nearly 200,000 had fought for the Union, and 38,000 had died. Others had worked as spies or scouts for Union forces in the >outh. Many more had flocked to the Union lines to escape hvery. Even before Emancipation, thousands of slaves in nany parts of the South had taken advantage of wartime dis-uptions to leave their owners and move off in search of freedom. As soon as the war ended, hundreds of thousands more ormer slaves-young and old, healthy and sick-left their plan-ations. Some went in search of family members who had been >old by their former masters. But many others had nowhere to ?o. Some trudged to the nearest town or city, roamed the countryside camping at night on the bare ground, or gathered around Union occupation forces, hoping for assistance. Virtually none owned any land or property. Most had no possessions except the clothes they wore.
In 1865, in short, Southern society was in vast disarray. Blacks and whites, men and women faced a future of great uncertainty. Yet all Southerners faced this future with some very clear aspirations. For both blacks and whites, Reconstruction became a struggle to define the meaning of
freedom. But the former slaves and the defeated whites had very different conceptions of what freedom meant.
Competing Notions of Freedom
For African Americans, freedom meant above all an end to slavery and to all the injustices and humiliation they associated with it. But it also meant the acquisition of rights and protections that would allow them to live as free men and women in the same way white people did. *If I cannot do like a white man,” one African American man told his former master, WI am not free.”
African Americans differed with one another on how to achieve that freedom. Some demanded a redistribution of economic resources, especially land, because, as a convention of Alabama freedmen put it in a formal resolution, "The Freedom for ProPertY which they hold was nearly all the Ex-Slaves	earned by the sweat of our brows.” Others
asked simply for legal equality, confident that given the same opportunities as white citizens they
