36 CHAPTER 2
THE ENGLISH COME TO THE AMERICAS
Jamestown was the first English settlement in the Americas. Supported by the London Company, it was established in 1607. (© Peter Newark Pictures/Bridgeman Art Library)
local streams. Without what they learned from the natives, the early settlers would not have survived. Despite this help, the settlers often expressed hostilities toward the natives believing that English civilization was superior to that of these "savages.”
Jamestown remained a tiny colony for more than a decade. The natives were far more powerful than the English for years. Coastal Virginia had numerous tribes: the Algonquins, Sioux, and Iroquois, which were all part of the Powhatan Confederacy, named after the great chief who controlled a large area near the coasts. What the English called Virginia, the natives called Tsenacommacah.
Within a few months of settling in Virginia, only 38 men of the original 144 were alive, the rest killed by disease and famine. These men owed their survival to the help provided by the Indians and to the leadership of Captain John Smith, who at age 27 was already a famous world traveler. Smith imposed work and order on the settlement and created a shaky relationship with the natives (sometimes negotiating for food and at other times stealing it).
Reorganization ano Expansion
As Jamestown struggled to survive, the London Company (now renamed the Virginia Company) was already dreaming of bigger things. In 1609, it obtained a new charter from the king, which increased its power and enlarged its territory. It offered stock in the company to planters who were willing to migrate at their own expense. And it provided free passage to Virginia for poorer people who would agree to serve the company for seven years. In the spring of 1609, two years after the first arrival of the English, a fleet of nine vessels was dispatched to Jamestown with approximately 600 people, including some women and children.
The Starving Time
Nevertheless, disaster followed. One of the Virginia-bound ships was lost at sea in a hurricane. Another ran aground in the Bermuda Islands and was unable to sail again for months.
Many of the new settlers succumbed to fevers before winter came. The winter of 1609-1610 was especially severe, a period
known as the "starving time.” By then the natives realized that the colonists were a threat to their civilization and stopped them from moving farther inland into Indian lands. Barricaded within a small palisade and unable to hunt or cultivate food, the colonists lived on what they could find: "dogs, cats, rats, snakes, toadstools, horsehides,” and even "the corpses of dead men,” as one survivor recalled. When the migrants who had run aground in Bermuda finally arrived in Jamestown the following- May, they found only 60 emaciated people still alive. The new arrivals took the survivors onto their ship and sailed for England. But as the refugees proceeded down the James, they met an English ship coming up the river part of a fleet bringing supplies and the colonies’ first governor, Lord De La Warr. The departing settlers agreed to return to Jamestown. New relief expeditions soon began to arrive and the fort began to thrive.
New settlements began lining the river above and below Jamestown. There settlers discovered tobacco, which was tor them a new crop that was already popular among the Spanish colonies to the south. In 1612, the Jamestown planter John Rolfe began cultivating the crop in Virginia. Soon other planters in the area followed. Tobacco was the first profitable crop in the new colony for the settlers, and it encouraged tobacco planters to move farther inland deeper into the natives’ farmlands.
De La Warr and his successors (Sir Thomas Dale and Sir Thomas Gates) imposed a harsh and rigid discipline on the colony: they organized settlers into work
De La Warr’s Harsh Discipline
TRANSPLANTATIONS AND BORDERLANDS
• 37 V, PENNSYLVANIA
Boundary claimed byword Baltimor^l 632 Boundary settlement, 1750^
Virginia Colony Fairfax Proprietary To Lord Baltimore, 1632 Granville Proprietary (1682) Date settlement founded 50jnr-
Elizabeth City (1793)
North-CaroOn/’
TOBACCO PLANT
This 1622 woodcut, later hand-colored, represents the tobacco plant cultivated by English settlers in Virginia in the early seventeenth century after John Rolfe introduced it to the colonists. On the right is an image of a man smoking the plant through a very large pipe. (© Getty Images) THE GROWTH OF THE CHESAPEAKE, 1607-1750
This map shows the political forms of European settlement in the region of the Chesapeake Bay in the seventeenth and early eighteenth centuries. Note the several different kinds of colonial enterprises: the royal colony of Virginia, controlled directly by the English Crown after the failure of the early commercial enterprises there; and the proprietary regions of Maryland, northern Virginia, and North Carolina, which were under the control of powerful English aristocrats. Did these political differences have any significant effect on the economic activities of the various Chesapeake colonies?
gangs, and they sentenced offenders to be flogged, hanged, or broken on the wheel. But this communal system of labor did not function effectively for long. Settlers often evaded work. Governor Dale soon concluded that the colony would fare better if the colonists had personal incentives to work. He began to permit the private ownership and cultivation of land. Landowners would repay the company with part-time work and contributions of grain to its storehouses.
Under the leadership of these first, harsh governors, Virginia was not always a happy place. But it survived and even expanded. New settlements began lining the river above and below Jamestown. The expansion was partly a result of the order and discipline the governors at times managed to impose. It was partly a product of increased military assaults on the local Indian tribes, which provided protection for the new settlements. But it also occurred because the colonists had at last discovered a marketable crop: tobacco.
Tobacco
Europeans had become aware of tobacco soon after Columbus's first return from the West Indies, where he had seen the Cuban natives smoking small cigars (tabacos), which they inserted in the nostril. By the early seventeenth century, tobacco from the Spanish colonies was already in wide use in Europe. Some critics denounced it as a poisonous weed, the cause of many diseases. King James I himself led the attack with "A Counterblaste to Tobacco” (1604), in which he urged his people not to imitate The barbarous and beastly manners of the wild, godless, and slavish Indians, especially in so vile and stinking a custom.” Other critics were concerned because England’s tobacco purchases from the Spanish colonies meant a drain of English gold to the Spanish importers. Still, the demand for tobacco soared.
Then in 1612, the Jamestown planter John Rolfe began to experiment in Virginia with a harsh strain of tobacco that local Indians had been growing for years. He produced crops of high
Emergence of quality and found readY buyers in England.
Tobacco cultivation quickly spread up and down the James. The character of this tobacco economy-its profitability, its
uncertainty, its land and labor demands-transformed
Chesapeake society in fundamental ways.
the Tobacco Economy
38 « CHAPTER 2
Of most immediate importance was that tobacco cultivation required territorial expansion. Tobacco growers needed large areas of farmland to grow their crops; and because tobacco exhausted the soil after only a few years, the demand for land increased even more. English farmers began establishing plantations deeper and deeper in the interior, moving from the center of European settlement at Jamestown into the territory the natives considered their own.
Expansion
The
Headright
System
Even the discovery of tobacco cultivation was not enough to help the Virginia Company. By 1616, there were still no profits, only land and debts. Nevertheless, the promoters continued to hope that the tobacco trade would allow them finally to turn the corner. In 1618, they launched a last great campaign to attract settlers and make the colony profitable.
Part of that campaign was an effort to recruit new settlers and workers to the colony. The company called it the "headright” system. Headrights were fifty-acre grants of land, which new settlers could acquire in a variety of ways. Those who already lived in the colony received 100 acres
apiece. Each new settler received a single headright for himself or herself. This system encouraged family groups to migrate together, since the more family members traveled to America, the larger the landholding the family would receive. In addition, anyone (new settler or old) who paid for the passage of other immigrants to Virginia would receive an additional headright for each new arrival-thus, the company hoped, inducing the prosperous to import new laborers to America. Some colonists were able to assemble sizable plantations with the combined headrights they received for their families and their servants. In return, they contributed a small quitrent (one shilling a year for each headright) to the company.
The company added other incentives as well. To diversify the colonial economy, it transported ironworkers and other skilled craftsmen to Virginia. In 1619, it sent 100 Englishwomen to the colony (which was still overwhelmingly male) to become the wives of male colonists. (The women were purchased for 120 pounds of tobacco. Their status was somewhere between indentured servants and free people, depending on the good-will-or lack of it-of their husbands.) The company promised the colonists the full rights of Englishmen (as provided in the original charter of 1606), an end to the strict and arbitrary rule of the communal years, and even a share in self-government. On July 30, 1619, in the Jamestown church, delegates from the various communities met as the House of Burgesses. It was the first meeting of an elected legislature within what was to become the United States.
A month later, another event in Virginia established a very different but no less momentous precedent. As John Rolfe recorded, "about the latter end of August’ a Dutch ship brought in "20 and odd Negroes.” The status and fate of these first Africans in the English colonies remains obscure. There is some reason to
Suppression of the Powhatan Indians
believe that the colonists did not consider them slaves, that they thought of them as servants to be held for a term of years and then freed, like the white servants with whom the planters were already familiar. For a time, moreover, the use of black labor remained limited. Although Africans continued to trickle steadily into the colony, planters continued to prefer European indentured servants until at least the 1670s, when white servants began to become scarce and expensive. But whether or not anyone realized it at the time, the small group of black people who arrived in 1619 marked a first step toward the enslavement of Africans within what was to be the American republic.
The expansion of the colony was able to proceed only because of effective suppression of local Indians who resisted the expanding English presence. For two years, Sir Thomas Dale led unrelenting assaults against the Powhatan Indians and in the process kidnapped the great chief
Powhatan’s daughter Pocahontas. When Powhatan refused to ransom her, she converted to Christianity and in 1614 married John Rolfe. (Pocahontas accompanied her husband back to England, where, as a Christian convert and a gracious woman, she stirred interest in projects to "civilize” the Indians. She died while abroad.) At that point, Powhatan ceased his attacks on the English in the face of overwhelming odds. But after his death several years later, his brother, Opechancanough, became head of the native confederacy. Recognizing that the position of his tribe was rapidly deteriorating, he resumed the effort to defend tribal lands from European encroachments. On a March morning in 1622, tribesmen called on the white settlements as if to offer goods for sale, then suddenly attacked. Not until 347 whites of both sexes and all ages lay dead or dying were the Indian warriors finally forced to retreat. The surviving English struck back mercilessly at the Indians and turned back the threat for a time. Only after Opechancanough failed in another uprising in 1644 did the Powhatans finally cease to challenge the eastern regions of the colony.
By then the Virginia Company in London was defunct. The company had poured all its funds into its profitless Jamestown Demise of the venture and, in the aftermath of the 1622 Virginia Indian uprising, faced imminent bank-Company ruptcy. In 1624, James I revoked the company’s charter, and the colony came under the control of the Crown. It would remain so until 1776.
Exchanges of Agricultural Technology
The hostility of the early English settlers toward their Indian neighbors was in part a result of their conviction that their own civilization was greatly superior to that of the natives and above all that they were more technologically advanced. The English, after all, had great oceangoing vessels, muskets and other a vanced implements of weaponry, and many other tools that t e Indians had not developed. Indeed, when |ohn Smith and ot er early Jamestown residents grew frustrated at their inabil-y to find gold and other precious commodities, they often
ame t eir failure on the backwardness of the natives.
TRANSPLANTATIONS AND BORDERLANDS
• 39 Population (thousands) 87.5
1607 1620 1630 1640 1650 1660 1670 1680 1690 1700
Year
THE NON-INDIAN POPULATION OF THE CHESAPEAKE, 1607-1700
This graph shows the rapid growth of the population of the Chesapeake during its first century of European settlement. Note the dramatic increases in the first half of the century and the somewhat slower increase in the later decades. If the forcibly imported slave population were not counted in the last two decades of the century, the non-Indian population would not have grown at all. * What impact did the growth of African slavery have on the rate of immigration by Europeans?
Yet the survival of Jamestown was, in the end, largely a result of agricultural technologies developed by Indians and Indian	borrowed from them by the English.
Agricultural Native agriculture was far better adapted
Techniques to the soil and climate of Virginia than were the agricultural traditions the English settlers brought with them. The Indians of Virginia had built successful farms with neatly ordered fields in which grew a variety of crops, some previously unknown to the English. Some of the Indian farmlands stretched over hundreds of acres
and supported substantial populations.
The English settlers did not adopt all the Indian agricultural techniques. Natives cleared fields not, as the English did, by cutting down and uprooting all the trees. Instead, they killed
trees in place by "girdling” them (that is, making deep incisions around the base) in the areas in which they planted or by setting fire to their roots; and they planted crops not in long, straight rows, but in curving patterns around the dead tree trunks. But in other respects, the English learned a great deal from the Indians about how to grow food in North America. In particular, they quickly recognized the great value of corn, which proved
to be easier to cultivate and to produce much greater yields than any of the European grains the English had known at home. Corn was also attractive to the settlers because its stalks could be a source of sugar and because it spoiled less easily than other grains. The English also learned the advantages of growing beans alongside corn to enrich the soil.
Maryland and the Calverts
Maryland was founded under circumstances very different from those of Virginia, but it nonetheless developed in ways markedly similar to those of its neighbor to the south. The new colony was the dream of George Calvert, the first Lord Baltimore, a recent convert to Catholicism and a shrewd businessman. Calvert envisioned establishing a colony both as a great speculative venture in real estate and as a retreat for English Catholics, many of whom felt oppressed by the Anglican establishment at home. He died before he could receive a charter from the king. But in 1632, his son Cecilius, the second Lord Baltimore, received a charter remarkable not only for the extent of the territory it granted him-an area that encompassed parts of what are now Pennsylvania, Delaware, and Virginia, in addition to present-day Maryland-
„	but also for the powers it bestowed on
Proprietary	.	.
Rule	him. an<a “1S hmrs were to hold their
province as "true and absolute lords and proprietaries,” and were to acknowledge the sovereignty of
the king only by paying an annual fee to the Crown.
Lord Baltimore named one of his brothers, Leonard Calvert,
governor and sent him with another brother to oversee the settlement of the province. In March 1634, two ships-the Ark and the Dope-bearing 200 to 300 passengers entered the Potomac River and turned into one of its eastern tributaries. On a high and dry bluff, these first arrivals laid out the village of St. Mary's (named, diplomatically, for the queen). The neighboring Indians, who were more worried about rival tribes in the region than they were about the new arrivals, befriended the settlers, provided them with temporary shelter, sold them land, and supplied them with corn. Unlike the Virginians, the early Marylanders experienced no Indian assaults, no plagues, no starving time.
The Calverts had invested heavily in their American possessions, and they needed to attract many settlers to make the effort profitable. As a result, they had to encourage the immigration of Protestants as well as their fellow English Catholics, who were both relatively few in number (about 2 percent of
Religious	population of England) and generally
Toleration reluctant to emigrate. The Protestant settlers (mostly Anglicans) outnumbered the
Catholics from the start, and the Calverts quickly realized that Catholics would always be a minority in the colony. They prudently adopted a policy of religious toleration. To appease the non-Catholic majority, Calvert appointed a Protestant as governor in 1648. A year later, he sent from England the draft of an "Act Concerning Religion,” or the Toleration Act, which assured freedom of worship to all Christians.
40
CHAPTER 2
THE MARYLAND PROPRIETOR, C. 1670
In a detail of a portrait by the court painter to King Charles II, the young Cecilius Calvert reaches for a map of Maryland. His grandfather and namesake, the second Lord Baltimore (1606-1675), holds it out to him. George Calvert, the father of the elder Cecilius, began negotiations to win a royal charter for Maryland; his son completed them in 1632 and became the first proprietor of the colony. He published the map shown here in 1635 as part of an effort to attract settlers to the colony. By the time this portrait was painted, Lord Baltimore's son, Charles, was governor of Maryland. The boy Cecilius, the heir apparent, died in 1681 before he could assume his title. (© Peter Newark Pictures/Bridgeman Art Library) Nevertheless, politics in Maryland remained plagued for years by tensions between the Catholic minority (which included the proprietor) and the Protestant majority. Zealous Jesuits and crusading Puritans frightened and antagonized their opponents with their efforts to establish the dominance of their own religion. At one point, the Protestant majority barred Catholics from voting and repealed the Toleration Act. There was frequent violence, and in 1655 a civil war temporarily unseated the proprietary government and replaced it with one dominated by Protestants.
By 1640, a severe labor shortage in the colony had forced a change in the land grant procedure; and Maryland, like Virginia, adopted a "headright” system-a grant of 100 acres to each male settler, another 100 for his wife and each servant, and 50 for each of his children. Like Virginia, Maryland became a center of tobacco cultivation; and as in Virginia, planters worked their land with the aid, first, of indentured servants imported from England and then, beginning late in the seventeenth century, with slaves imported from Africa.
Virginia’s
Westward
Expansion
Turbulent Virginia
By the mid-seventeenth century, the Virginia colony had survived its early disasters. Both its population and the complexity and profitability of its economy were increasing. It was also grow-ing more politically contentious, as emerging factions within the province began to compete for the favor of the government. Perhaps the most important dispute involved policy
toward the natives. As settlement moved west, farther into Indian lands, border conflicts grew increasingly frequent. Much of the tension within English Virginia in the late seventeenth century revolved around how to respond to those conflicts.
Sir William Berkeley arrived in Virginia in 1642 at the age of thirty-six, having been appointed governor by King Charles 1. With but one interruption, he remained in control of the govern ment until the 1670s. Berkeley was a popular governor at first as he sent explorers across the Blue Ridge Mountains to open up the western interior of Virginia. He organized the force that put down the 1644 Indian uprising. The defeated Indians ceded a large area of land to the English. In return, Berkeley agreed to prohibit white settlement west of a line he negotiated with the tribes.
This attempt to protect Indian territory like many such attempts later in American history was a failure from the start, largely because of the rapid growth of the Virginia population. Oliver Cromwell’s victory in 1649 in the English Civil War (see p. 49) and the flight of many of his defeated opponents to the colony contributed to what was already a substantial population increase. Between 1640 and 1650, Virginia’s population doubled from 8,000 to 16,000. By 1660, it had more than doubled again, to 40,000. As the choice lands along the tidewater became scarce, new arrivals and indentured servants completing their terms or escaping from their masters pressed westward into the piedmont. By 1652, English settlers had established three counties in the territory promised to the Indians. Unsurprisingly, there were frequent clashes between natives and whites.
By the 1660s, Berkeley had gradually become an autocrat in the colony. When the first burgesses were elected in 1619, all men aged seventeen or older were entitled to vote. By 1670, the vote was restricted to landowners, and elections were rare. The same burgesses, loyal and subservient to the governor, remained in office year after year. Each county continued
to have only two representatives, even though some of the new counties of the interior contained many more people than the older ones of the tidewater area. Thus the more recent settlers in the "backcountry” were underrepresented or (if living in areas not yet formally organized as counties) not represented.
Representation in the backcountry was not the only source of turbulence in Virginia. The system of indentured servants also played a role. The system of indentured servants also played a role. By the 1670s, many young men had finished their term as indentures and found themselves without a home or money. Many of them moved around the colony working, begging, or stealing. They would soon become a factor in what became known as Bacon’s Rebellion.
Berkeley’s
Autocratic
Rule
TRANSPLANTATIONS AND BORDERLANDS
• 41 Bacon's Rebellion
In 1676, backcountry unrest and political rivalries combined to create a major conflict. Nathaniel Bacon, a wealthy young graduate of Cambridge University, arrived in Virginia in 1673. He purchased a substantial farm in the west and won a seat on the governor’s council. He established himself, in other words, as a member of the backcountry gentry.
But the new and influential western landowners were soon
squabbling with the leaders of the tidewater region in the east.
They disagreed on many issues but, above Backcountry n	1
Grievances a ’ on Pollcies toward the natives. The backcountry settlements were in constant danger of attack from Indians, because many of them had been established on lands reserved for the tribes by treaty. White settlers in western Virginia had long resented the governor’s attempts to hold the line of settlement steady so as to avoid
antagonizing the natives.
Bacon, an aristocratic man with great political ambitions, had additional reasons for unhappiness with Berkeley. He resented his exclusion from the inner circle of the governor’s council (the so-called Green Spring group, whose members enjoyed special access to patronage). Bacon also fumed about Berkeley’s refusal to allow him a piece of the Indian fur trade. He was developing grievances that made him a natural leader of an opposing faction.
Bloody events thrust him into that role. In 1675, some Doeg Indians-angry about the European intrusions into their lands-raided a western plantation and killed a white servant. Bands of local whites struck back angrily and haphazardly, attacking not only the small Doeg tribe but the powerful Susquehannock as well. The Indians responded with more raids on plantations and killed many more white settlers. As the fighting escalated, Bacon and other concerned landhold-ers-unhappy with the governor’s cautious response to their demand for help-defied Berkeley and struck out on their own against the Indians. Berkeley proclaimed him and his men rebels. At that point, what had started as an unauthorized assault on the Indians became a military challenge to the colonial government, a conflict known as Bacon’s Rebellion. It was the largest and most powerful insurrection against established authority in the history of the colonies, one that would not be surpassed until the Revolution.
Twice, Bacon led his army east to Jamestown. The first time, he won a temporary pardon from the governor; the second time, after the governor reneged on the agreement, he burned the city and drove the governor into exile. In the midst of widespread social turmoil throughout the colony, Bacon stood on the verge of taking command of Virginia. Instead, he died suddenly of dysentery; and Berkeley, his position bolstered by the arrival of British troops, soon managed to regain control. In 1677, the Indians (aware of their inability to defeat the white forces militarily) reluctantly signed a new treaty that opened additional lands to white settlement.
Bacon’s Rebellion was significant for several reasons. It was part of the continuing struggle to define the boundary
Significance of Bacon’s Rebellion
between eastern
between Indian and white lands in Virginia; it showed how unwilling the English settlers were to abide by earlier agreements with the natives, and how unwilling the Indians were to tolerate further white movement into their territory. It revealed the bitterness of the competition and western landowners. But it also re-
vealed something that Bacon himself had never intended to unleash: the potential for instability in the colony’s large population of free, landless men. These men-most of them former indentured servants, propertyless, unemployed, with no real prospects-had formed the bulk of Bacon’s constituency during the rebellion. They had become a large, unstable, floating population eager above all for access to land. Bacon had for a time maintained his popularity among them by exploiting their hatred of Indians. Gradually, however, he found himself unintentionally leading a movement that reflected the animosity of these landless men toward the landed gentry of which Bacon himself was a part.
One result was that landed people in both eastern and western Virginia began to recognize a common interest in preventing social unrest from the former indentures. That was one of several reasons that they turned increasingly to the African slave trade to fulfill their need for labor. Enslaved blacks might pose dangers too, but the events of 1676 persuaded many colonists that the perils of importing a large white subordinate class were even greater.
THE GROWTH OF NEW ENGLAND
The first enduring settlement in New England-the second in English America-resulted from the discontent of a congregation of Puritan Separatists in England. For years, Separatists had been periodically imprisoned and even executed for defying
Religious	^e 8overnment aRd the Church of England;
Repression some of them, as a result, began to contemplate leaving England permanently in search of freedom to worship as they wished-even though
Puritans did not believe in religious freedom for all others.
Plymouth Plantation
It was illegal to leave England without the consent of the king. In 1608, however, a congregation of Separatists from the hamlet of Scrooby began emigrating quietly, a few at a time, to Leyden, Holland, where they could worship without interference. They were, however, barred from the Dutch craft guilds and had to work at unskilled and poorly paid jobs. They were also troubled by the effects of the tolerant atmosphere of Dutch society, which threatened their dream of a close-knit Christian community. As a result, some of the Separatists decided to move again, this time across the Atlantic, where they hoped to create the kind of community they wanted and where they could spread "the gospel of the Kingdom of Christ in those remote parts of the world.”
42 CHAPTER 2
Leaders of the Scrooby group obtained permission from the Virginia Company to settle in British America. From the king, they received informal assurances that he would "not molest them, provided they carried themselves peaceably.” (This was a historic concession by the Crown, for it opened British America to settlement not only by the Scrooby group but by other dissenting Protestants as well.) Several English merchants agreed to advance the necessary funds in exchange for a share in the profits of the settlement at the end of seven years.
The migrating Puritans "knew they were pilgrims” even before they left Holland, their leader and historian, William Bradford, later wrote. In September 1620 they left the port of Plymouth, on the English coast, in the Mayflower with thirty-five "saints” (Puritan Separatists) and sixty-seven "strangers” (people who were not full members of the Puritan church) aboard. By the time they sighted land in November, it was too late in the year to go on. Their original destination was probably the mouth of the Hudson River, in what is now New York. But they found themselves instead on Cape Cod. After exploring the region for a while, they chose a site for their settlement just north of the cape, an area Captain John Smith had named "Plymouth” (after the English port from which the Puritans had sailed) during an exploratory journey some years before. Plymouth lay outside the London Company's territory, and the settlers realized they had no legal basis for settling there. As a jHE	result, forty-one male passengers signed a
Mayflower document, the Mayflower Compact, which
Compact established a civil government and proclaimed their allegiance to the king. Then, on December 21, 1620, the immigrants, called Pilgrims,
stepped ashore at Plymouth Rock.
They settled on cleared land that had once been an Indian village until, three years earlier, a mysterious epidemic-known as "the plague” and probably brought by earlier European explorers-had swept through the region and substantially depopulated it. The Pilgrims' first winter was a difficult one; half the colonists perished from malnutrition, disease, and exposure. Still, the colony survived.
Bradford became the governor at Plymouth, an office he would hold for more than twenty years. Despite the death of his wife, and many other losses, he managed his plantation for many years.
Like the Spanish and Portuguese colonists in the southern regions of the Americas, the Pilgrims (and other future English colonists) brought more to the New World than people and ideas. They also made profound changes in the natural landscape of New England. A smallpox epidemic caused by English carriers almost eliminated the Indian population in the areas around Plymouth in the early 1630s. The English demand for furs, animal skins, and meat greatly depleted the number of wild animals in the areas around Plymouth, one reason colonists worked so hard to develop stocks of domestic animals such as horses, cattle, sheep, and hogs. The Pilgrims and later English settlers also introduced new crops (wheat, barley, oats, and others), while incorporating many native foods (among
them corn, potatoes, and peas) into their own diets-and eventually exporting them back to England and the rest of Europe. Gradually, colonial society imposed a European pattern onto the American landscape, as the settlers fenced in pastures, meadows, orchards, and fields for cultivation.
The Pilgrims’ experience with the Indians was, for a time, very different from the experiences of the early English settlers farther south. That was in part because the remaining natives in the region-their numbers thinned by disease were significantly weaker than their southern neighbors and realized they had to get along with the Europeans. In the end, the survival and growth of the colony depended crucially on the assistance they received from natives. Important Indian friends-Squanto and Samoset, among others showed them
how to gather seafood, cultivate corn, and hunt local animals. Relations Squanto, a Pawtuxet who earlier in his life
WITH THE
Indians had been captured by an English explorer and taken to Europe, spoke English and was particularly helpful to the settlers in forming an alliance with the local Wampanoags, under Chief Massasoit. After the first harvest, in 1621, the settlers marked the alliance by inviting the Indians to join them in an October festival, the first Thanksgiving.
But the good relationship between the settlers and the local Indians did not last. Thirteen years after the Pilgrims’ arrival, a devastating smallpox epidemic a result of contact with English settlers-wiped out much of the Indian population around Plymouth.
The Pilgrims could not hope to create rich farms on the sandy, marshy soil, and their early fishing efforts produced no profits. In 1622 the military officer Miles Standish, one of the leaders of the colony, established a semi-military regime to impose discipline on the settlers. Eventually the Pilgrims began to grow enough corn and other crops to provide them with a modest trading surplus. They also developed a small fur trade with the Abenaki Indians of Maine. From time to time new colonists arrived from England, and in a decade the population reached 300.
The people of "Plymouth Plantation,” as they called their settlement, chose William Bradford again and again to be their
William governor. As early as 1621, he persuaded
Bradford the Council for New England (the successor to the old Plymouth Company, which had charter rights to the territory) to give them legal permission to live there. He ended the communal labor plan Standish had helped create, distributed land among the families, and thus, as he explained it, made "all hands very industrious.” He and a group of fellow "undertakers” took over the colony’s debt to its original financiers in England and, with earnings from the fur trade, finally paid it off even though the financiers had repeatedly cheated them and had failed to send them
promised supplies.
The Pilgrims were always a poor community. As late as the 1640s, they had only one plow among them. But they clung to the belief that God had put them in the New World to live a truly Christian community; and they were content to live
t etr lives in what they considered godly ways.
TRANSPLANTATIONS AND BORDERLANDS * 43
At times, they spoke of serving as a model for other Christians. Governor Bradford wrote in retrospect: "As one small candle may light a thousand, so the light here kindled hath shone to many, yea in some sort to our whole nation.” But the Pilgrims were less committed to grand designs, less concerned about how they were viewed by others, than were the Puritans who settled the larger and more ambitious English colonies to their north.
The Puritan Experiment
Massachusetts Bay Company
Turbulent events in England in the 1620s (combined with the example of the Plymouth colony) created strong interest in colonization among other groups of Puritans. King James I had been creating serious tensions for years between himself and Parliament through his effort to claim the divine right of kings and by his harsh, repressive policies toward the Puritans. The situation worsened after his death in 1625, when he was succeeded by his son, Charles I. By favoring Roman Catholicism and trying to destroy religious nonconformity, Charles I started the nation down the road that in the 1640s would lead to civil war. The Puritans were particular targets of Charles’s policies. Some were imprisoned for their beliefs, and many began to consider the climate of England intolerable. The king’s disbanding of Parliament in 1629 (it was not to be recalled until 1640) ensured that there would be no political solution to the Puritans’ problems.
In the midst of this political and social turmoil, a group of Puritan merchants began organizing a new enterprise designed to take advantage of opportunities in America. At first their interest was largely an economic one. They obtained
a grant of land in New England for most of the area now comprising Massachusetts and New Hampshire; they acquired a charter from Charles I (who was evidently unaware that they were Puritans) allowing them to create the Massachusetts Bay Company and to establish a colony in the New World; and they bought equipment and supplies from a defunct fishing and trading company that had attempted (and failed) to establish a profitable enterprise in North America earlier. In 1629, they were ready to dispatch a substantial group of settlers to New England.
Among the members of the Massachusetts Bay Company, however, were a number of Puritans who saw the enterprise as something more than a business venture. They began to consider emigrating themselves and creating a haven for Puritans in New England. Members of this faction met secretly in Cambridge in the summer of 1629 and agreed to buy out the other investors and move en masse to America.
As governor, the new owners of the company chose John Winthrop, an affluent, university-educated gentleman with a deep piety and a forceful character.
Winthrop Winthrop had been instrumental in orga-nizing the migration, and he commanded the expedition that sailed for New England in 1630: seventeen ships and 1,000 people (who were, unlike the earlier
migrants to Virginia, mostly family groups). It was the largest single migration of its kind in the seventeenth century. Winthrop carried with him the charter of the Massachusetts Bay Company, which meant that the colonists would be responsible to no company officials in England, only to themselves.
The Massachusetts migration quickly produced several different new settlements. The port of Boston, at the mouth of the Charles River, became the company’s headquarters and the colony’s capital. But in the course of the next decade, colonists moved into a number of other new towns in eastern Massachusetts: Charlestown, Newtown (later renamed Cambridge), Roxbury, Dorchester, Watertown, Ipswich, Concord, Sudbury, and others.
The Massachusetts Bay Company soon transformed itself into a colonial government. According to the original company charter, the eight stockholders (or "freemen”) were to meet as a general court to choose officers and adopt rules for the corporation. But eventually the definition of "freemen” changed to include all male citizens, not just the stockholders. John Winthrop dominated colonial politics just as he had dominated the original corporation, but after 1634 he and most other officers of the colony had to face election each year.
COLONIAL CURRENCY
This seal was created in 1690 by the Massachusetts Bay Company to validate the paper "bills of credit” with which colonists conducted many financial transactions. Paper money met considerable resistance at first. Many people doubted its value and would not accept it, preferring instead the Spanish silver coins that were in wide circulation. Gradually, however, a shortage of silver required increasing reliance on this and other paper devices. The seal shows an Indian saying "Come over and help us," which represents the English belief in the superiority of white European society. (© Bettmann/Corbis) 44 CHAPTER 2
PORTRAIT OF A BOSTON WOMAN
Anne Pollard, a member of the original Winthrop expedition to Boston, was 100 years old when this portrait was painted in 1721. In 1643, thirteen years after her arrival in Massachusetts, she married a Boston innkeeper with whom she had 13 children. After her husband's death in 1679, she continued to manage the tavern on her own. When she died in 1725, at the age of 104, she left 130 direct descendants. The artist who painted this early portrait is unknown, but is assumed to be an American working in the primitive style common in New England before the arrival in 1729 of the first academically trained portraitists from England. (© Massachusetts Historical Society, Boston, MA, USA / The Bridgeman Art Library)
The
Congregational
Church
Unlike the Separatist founders of Plymouth, the founders of Massachusetts had no intention of breaking from the Church of England. Yet, if they continued to feel any real attachment to the Anglican establishment, they gave little sign of it. In every town, the community church had (in the words of the prominent minister John Cotton) "complete liberty to stand alone,” unlike churches
in the highly centralized Anglican structure in England. Each congregation chose its own minister and regulated its own affairs. In both Plymouth and Massachusetts, this form of parish organization eventually became known as the Congregational Church.
The Puritans, although nominally members of the Anglican Church, were in fact worshipers of a very different faith. They did not accept the authority of either the Roman Catholic hierarchy or the Church of England. They did not
follow traditional ceremonial worship and did not receive sacraments from priests. They learned, instead, from reading the Bible and from listening to ministers who spoke from their own knowledge and belief, not from the orthodoxies of traditional institutional faith. They accepted the doctrines of John Calvin’s vision that everyone was destined at birth for either salvation or damnation-that nothing in people’s earthly life could change their fate after death. But living a good and productive life might be a sign of salvation. Puritans not only sought salvation. They also sought freedom-not the kind of freedom Americans understand today, but the right to worship without interference from England or from established churches. That did not mean that they were free to behave as they liked; the community expected obedience to authority. But authority was based largely within the community itself and monitored by its members. It did not come from England or from centralized institutions in America.
The Massachusetts Puritans were not grim or joyless, as many observers would later portray them. They were, however, serious and pious. They strove to lead useful, conscientious lives of thrift and hard work, and they honored material success as evidence of God’s favor. "We here enjoy God and Jesus Christ,” Winthrop wrote to his wife soon after his arrival; "is this not enough?” He and the other Massachusetts founders believed they were founding a holy common-wealth-a "city upon a hill”-that could serve as a model for the rest of the New World.
If Massachusetts was to become a beacon to other emigrants, it had first to maintain its own "holiness.” Ministers .	had no formal political power, but they
Society	exerted great influence on church mem
bers, who were the only people who could vote or hold office. The government in turn protected the ministers, taxed the people (members and nonmembers alike) to support the church, and enforced the law requiring attendance at services. Dissidents had no more freedom ot worship in America than the Puritans themselves had had in England. Colonial Massachusetts was in many ways a "theocracy,” a society in which the line between the church and
the state was hard to see.
Like other new settlements, the Massachusetts Bay colony had early difficulties. During their first winter, an unusually severe one, nearly a third of the colonists died; others left in the spring. But more rapidly than Jamestown or Plymouth, the colony grew and prospered. The Pilgrims and neighboring Indians helped with food and advice. Affluent incoming settlers brought needed tools and other goods, which they exchanged for the cattle, corn, and other produce of the established colonists and the natives. The large number of fam ily groups in the colony (in sharp contrast to the early years at Jamestown) helped ensure a feeling of commitment to the community and a sense of order among the settlers. It also a owed the population to reproduce itself more rapidly. The strong religious and political hierarchy ensured a measure of social stability.
TRANSPLANTATIONS AND BORDERLANDS
• 45 The Expansion of New England
As the population grew, more and more people arrived in Massachusetts who were not Puritan "saints” and hence could
Growing not vote‘ Newcomers had a choice of con-
Religious forming to the religious practices of the
Dissent colony or leaving. Many left, helping to begin a process that would spread settlement
throughout present-day New England and beyond.
The Connecticut Valley, about 100 miles west of the edge of European settlement around Boston, began attracting English families as early as the 1630s. The valley appealed in particular to Thomas Hooker, a minister of Newtown (Cambridge), who defied the Massachusetts government in 1635 and led his congregation through the wilds to establish the town of Hartford. Four years later, the people of Hartford and of two other towns established a colonial government of their own and adopted a constitution known as the Fundamental Orders of Connecticut.
Another Connecticut colony, the project of a Puritan minister and a wealthy merchant from England, grew up around New Haven on the Connecticut coast. It reflected impatience with what its founders considered increasing religious laxity in Massachusetts. The Fundamental Articles of New Haven (1639) established a religious government even stricter than that in Boston. New Haven remained independent until 1662, when a royal charter combined it with Hartford to create the colony of Connecticut.
Rhode Island had its origins in the religious and political dissent of Roger Williams, an engaging but controversial young minister who lived for a time in Salem, Massachusetts. Even John Winthrop, who considered Williams a heretic, called him Roger	a "sweet and amiable” man, and William
Williams Bradford described him as "a man godly and zealous.” But he was, Bradford added,
"very unsettled in judgment.” Williams, a confirmed Separatist, argued that the Massachusetts church should abandon all allegiance to the Church of England. More disturbing to the clergy, he called for a complete separation of church and state-to protect the church from the corruption of the secular world. The colonial government, alarmed at this challenge to its spiritual authority, banished him. During the bitter winter of 1635-1636, Williams took refuge with Narragansett tribesmen; the following spring he bought a tract of land from them and, with a few followers, created the town of Providence on it. Other communities of dissidents followed him to what became Rhode Island, and in 1644 Williams obtained a charter from Parliament permitting him to establish a government. Rhode Island’s government gave no support to the church and allowed "liberty in religious concernments.” For a time, it was the only colony in which members of all faiths (including jews) could worship without interference.
An even greater challenge to the established order in Massachusetts Bay emerged in the person of Anne Hutchinson, an intelligent and charismatic woman from a substantial Boston family. Hutchinson had come to Massachusetts with
her husband in 1634. She antagonized the leaders of the colony by arguing vehemently that the members of the Massachusetts clergy who were not among the "elect”-that is, had not undergone a conversion experience-had no right to spiritual office. Over time, she claimed that many clergy-among them her own uninspiring minister-were among the non-elect and had no right to exercise authority over their congregations. She eventually charged that all the ministers in Massachusetts-save community leader John Cotton and her own bother-in-law-were not among the elect. Alongside such teachings (which her critics called "Antinomianism,” from the
Anne	Greek word meaning "hostile to the law”),
Hutchinson Hutchinson also created alarm by affronting prevailing assumptions about the proper role of women in Puritan society. She was not a retiring, deferential wife and mother, but a powerful religious
figure in her own right.
Hutchinson developed a large following among women, to whom she offered an active role in religious affairs. She also attracted support from merchants, young men, and dissidents of many sorts who resented the oppressive character of the colonial government. As her influence grew, the Massachusetts leadership mobilized to stop her. Hutchinson’s followers were numerous and influential enough to prevent Winthrop’s reelection as governor in 1636, but the next year he returned to office and put her on trial for heresy. Hutchinson embarrassed her accusers by displaying a remarkable knowledge of theology; but because she continued to defy clerical authority (and because she claimed she had herself communicated directly with the Holy Spirit-a violation of the Puritan belief that the age of such revelations had passed), she was convicted of sedition and banished as "a woman not fit for our society.” Her unorthodox views had challenged both religious belief and social order in Puritan Massachusetts. With her family and some of her followers, she moved to Rhode Island and then into New Netherland (later New York), where in 1643 she died during an Indian uprising.
Alarmed by Hutchinson’s heresy, male clergy began to restrict further the already-limited public activities of women within congregations. As a result, many of Hutchinson’s followers began to migrate out of Massachusetts Bay, especially to New Hampshire and Maine.
Colonies had been established there in 1629 when two English proprietors, Captain John Mason and Sir Ferdinando Gorges, had received a grant from the Council for New New	England and divided it along the
Hampshire Piscataqua River to create two separate and Maine provinces. But despite their lavish promotional efforts, few settlers had moved into these northern regions until the religious disruptions in Massachusetts Bay. In 1639, John Wheelwright, a disciple of Anne Hutchinson, led some of his fellow dissenters to Exeter, New Hampshire. Other groups-of both dissenting and orthodox Puritans-soon followed. New Hampshire became a separate colony in 1679. Maine remained a part of
Massachusetts until 1820.
46 CHAPTER 2
THE GROWTH OF NEW ENGLAND, 1620-1750
The European settlement of New England, as this map reveals, traces its origins primarily to two small settlements on the Atlantic coast. The first was the Pilgrim settlement at Plymouth, which began in 1620 and spread out through Cape Cod, southern Massachusetts, and the islands of Martha's Vineyard and Nantucket. The second, much larger settlement began in Boston in 1630 and spread rapidly through western Massachusetts, north into New Hampshire and Maine, and south into Connecticut.
• Why did the settlers of Massachusetts Bay expand more rapidly and expansively than those of Plymouth?
NEW HAMPSHIRE
<
MAINE
(MASS.)
> Portland
Dover.
A II A N IIC OCIW
'• Portsmouth
• Newbury
z Salem
NEW
YORK
Deerfield^
Northampton^
MASS.
♦
Marblehead
oston
Hartford(
CONN.
Worcester1 .Springfield ,	-	- Plymoi
i Providence^; PLYMOI
5 *■ /
R.i. i
s 5A
**	Newport

Danbury
Nevy, Haven,
•'Greenwich Long Island
.Southampton
Settlers and Natives
By the mid-1630s, the native population, small to begin with, had been almost extinguished by the European epidemics. The surviving Indians sold much of their land to the English (a great boost to settlement, since much of it had already been cleared). Some natives-known as "praying Indians”-even converted to Christianity and joined Puritan communities.
Indians provided crucial assistance to the early settlers as
they tried to adapt to the new land. Whites learned from
,	the natives about vital local food crops:
Importance	,	, .	,
of Indian	corn, beans, pumpkins, and potatoes.
Assistance	They also learned such crucial agricul-
tural techniques as annual burning for fertilization and planting beans to replenish exhausted soil. Natives also served as important trading partners to European immigrants, particularly in the creation of the thriving North American fur trade. They were an important
market for such manufactured goods as iron pots, blankets, metal-tipped arrows, eventually guns and rifles, and (often tragically) alcohol. Indeed, commerce with the Indians was responsible for the creation of some of the first great fortunes in British North America and for the emergence of wealthy families who would exercise influence in the colonies (and later the nation) for many generations.
But as in other areas of white settlement, there were also conflicts; and the early peaceful relations between whites and Indians did not last. Tensions soon developed as a result of the white colonists’ continuing appetite for land. The expanding white demand for land was also a result of a change in the colonists’ agrarian economy. As wild animals began to disappear from overhunting, colonists began to concentrate more and more on raising domesticated animals: cattle, sheep, hogs, horses, and others. As the herds expanded, so did the colonists’ need for new land. As a result, the colonists moved steadily into territories such as the Connecticut
TRANSPLANTATIONS AND BORDERLANDS
« 47 Valley where they came into conflict with natives who were more numerous and more powerful than those along the Massachusetts coast.
The character of those conflicts-and the brutality with
Shifting which whites assaulted their Indian foes-
Attitudes changed Puritan attitudes toward the natives. At first, many white New Englanders had looked at the Indians with a slightly condescending admiration. Before long, however, they came to view them primarily as "heathens” and "savages,” and hence as a constant threat to the existence of a godly community in the New World. Some Puritans believed the solution to the Indian "problem” was to "civilize” the natives by converting them to Christianity and European ways, and some English missionaries had modest success in producing converts. One such missionary, John Eliot, even translated the Bible into an Algonquian language. Other Puritans, however, envisioned a harsher "solution”: displacing or, if that failed, exterminating
the natives.
To the natives, the threat from the English was very direct. European settlers were penetrating deeper and deeper into the interior, seizing land, clearing forests, driving away much of the wild game on which the tribes depended for
food. English farmers often let their livestock run wild, and the animals frequently destroyed natives’ crops. Land and food shortages exacerbated the drastic Indian population decline that had begun as a result of epidemic diseases. There had been more than 100,000 Indians in New England at the beginning of the seventeenth century; by 1675, only 10,000 remained. This decline created despair among New England natives. It drove some Indians to alcoholism and others to conversion to Christianity. But it drove others to war.
The Pequot War, King Philip's War, and the Technology of Battle
The first major conflict came in 1637, when hostilities broke out The Pequot between English settlers in the Connecticut War	Valley and the Pequot Indians of the region
as a result of competition over trade with the Dutch in New Netherland and friction over land. In what became known as the Pequot War, English settlers allied with the Mohegan and Narragansett Indians (rivals of the Pequots).
The greatest savagery in the conflict was the work of the English. In the bloodiest act of the war, white raiders under Captain John Mason marched against a palisaded Pequot stronghold and set it afire. Hundreds of Indians either burned to death in the flaming
Population (thousands) 93.0
1620 1630 1640 1650 1660 1670 1680 1690 1700
Year
THE NON-INDIAN POPULATION OF NEW ENGLAND, 1620-1700
As in the Chesapeake colonies, the European population of New England grew very rapidly after settlement began in 1620. The most rapid rate of growth, unsurprisingly, came in the first thirty ^ears, when even a modest wave of immigraton could double or triple the small existing aopulation. But the largest numbers of new immigrants arrived between 1650 and 1680. ANNE HUTCHINSON PREACHING IN HER HOUSE IN BOSTON
Anne Hutchinson was alarming to many of Boston’s religious leaders not only because she openly challenged the authority of the clergy, but also because she implicitly challenged norms of female behavior in Puritan society. (© Bettmann/Corbis) * What events in England in those years might have led to increased emigration to America in that period?
waiah.1.
48
CHAPTER
2
King Philip’s War
stockade or were killed as they attempted to escape.
Those who survived were hunted down, captured, and sold as slaves. The Pequot tribe was almost wiped out.
The most prolonged and deadly encounter between whites and Indians in the seventeenth century began in 1675, a conflict that the English would remember for generations as King Philip’s War. As in the earlier Pequot War in Connecticut, an Indian tribe-in this case the Wampanoags, under the leadership of a chieftain known to the white settlers as King Philip and among his own people as
Metacomet-rose up to resist the English. The Wampanoags had not always been hostile to the settlers; indeed, Metacomet’s grandfather had once forged an alliance with the English, and Metacomet himself was well acquainted with the colonists. But by the 1670s, he had become convinced that only armed resistance could protect the Wampanoags from English incursions into their lands and, more immediately, from the efforts by the colonial governments to impose English law on them. (A court in Plymouth had recently tried and hanged several Wampanoags for murdering a member of their own tribe.)
For three years, the natives-well organized and armed with guns-terrorized a string of Massachusetts towns, destroying twenty of them and causing the deaths of as many as a thousand people (including at least one-sixteenth of the white males in the colony). The war greatly weakened both the society and economy of Massachusetts. But, in 1676, the white settlers fought back and gradually prevailed. They received critical aid from the Mohawks, longtime rivals of the Wampanoags, and guides, spies, and soldiers recruited from among the so-called praying Indians (Christian converts) of the region. While white militiamen attacked Indian villages and destroyed native food supplies, a group of Mohawks ambushed, shot, and killed Metacomet, then bore his severed head to Boston to present to the colonial leaders. After that, the fragile alliance that Metacomet had managed to forge among local tribes collapsed. Europeans were soon able to crush the uprising. Some Wampanoag leaders were executed; others were sold into slavery in the West Indies. The Wampanoags and their allies, their populations depleted and their natural resources reduced, were now powerless to resist the English.
Yet these victories by the white colonists did not end the danger to their settlements. Other Indians in other tribes survived and were still capable of attacking English settlements. The New England settlers also faced competition from the natives and also from the Dutch and the French, who claimed the territory on which some of the outlying settlements were established. The French, in particular,
A PEQUOT VILLAGE DESTROYED
An English artist drew this view of a fortified Pequot village in Connecticut surrounded by English soldiers and their allies from other tribes during the Pequot War in 1637. The invaders massacred more than 600 residents of the settlement. (The Library of Congress (LC USZ62 320jj posed a constant threat to the English through their alliance with the Algonquins. In later years, the French would join forces with Indians in their attacks on the New England frontier.
The character of the Pequot War, King Philip’s War, and many other conflicts between natives and settlers in the years that followed was crucially affected by earlier exchanges of technology between the English and the tribes. In particular, the Indians made effective use of a new
Flintlock	weapon introduced to New England by
Musket	Miles Standish and others: the flintlock
rifle. It replaced the earlier staple of colonial musketry, the matchlock rifle, which proved too heavy, cumbersome, and inaccurate to be useful in the kind of combat characteristic of Anglo-Indian struggles. The match lock had to be steadied on a fixed object and ignited with a match before firing; the flintlock could be held up with out support and fired without a match. (Indians using bows and arrows often outmatched settlers using the clumsy
matchlocks.)
Many English settlers were slow to give up their cumber some matchlocks for the lighter flintlocks. But the Indians recognized the advantages of the newer rifles right away and began purchasing them in large quantities as part of their regular trade with the colonists. Despite rules forbidding colonists to instruct natives on how to use and repair the weapons, the natives learned to handle the rifles, and even to repair them, very effectively on their own. They even built a substantial orge for shaping and repairing rifle parts. In King Philip’s War,
r e^yery casualties on both sides were a result of the use ot these more advanced rifles.
TRANSPLANTATIONS AND BORDERLANDS
• 49 Indians also used more traditional military technologies in their conflicts with the English-especially the construction of forts. The Narragansetts, allies of the Wampanoags in King Philip’s War, built an enormous fort in the Great Swamp of Rhode Island in 1675, which became the site of one of the bloodiest battles of the war before English attackers burned it down. After that, a band of Narragansetts set out to build a large stone fort, with the help of a member of the tribe who had learned masonry while working with the English. When English soldiers discovered the stone fort in 1676, after the end of King Philip’s War, they killed most of its occupants and destroyed it. In the end, the technological skills of the Indians (both those they borrowed from the English and those they drew from their own traditions) proved no match for the overwhelming advantages of the English settlers in both numbers and firepower.
THE RESTORATION
COLONIES
By the end of the 1630s, English settlers had established six significant colonies in the New World: Virginia, Massachusetts, Maryland, Connecticut, Rhode Island, and New Hampshire. (Maine remained officially part of Massachusetts until after the American Revolution.) But for nearly thirty years after Lord Baltimore received the charter for Maryland in 1632, the English government launched no additional colonial ventures. It was preoccupied with troubles of its own at home.
The English Civil War
England’s problems had begun during the rule of James I, who Origins attracted widespread opposition before he died in 1625. James, however, did not openly challenge Parliament. His son, Charles I, was not so prudent. He dissolved Parliament in 1629 and began ruling as an absolute monarch, steadily alienating a growing number of his subjects-especially the members of the powerful Puritan community. Finally, desperately in need of money, Charles called
Parliament back into session and asked it to levy new taxes. But he antagonized the members by dismissing them again twice in two years. In 1642, some of them organized a military challenge to the king, thus launching the English Civil War.
The conflict between the Cavaliers (the supporters of the king) and the Roundheads (the forces of Parliament, who were mostly Puritans) lasted seven years. Finally, in 1649, the Roundheads defeated the king’s forces, captured Charles himself, and-in an action that horrified not only much of continental Europe at the time but also future generations of English men and women-beheaded the monarch. To replace him, they elevated the stern Roundhead leader Oliver Cromwell to the position of "protector,” from which he ruled for the next nine years. When Cromwell died in 1658, his son and heir proved unable to maintain his authority. Two years later, King Charles II, son of the beheaded monarch, returned from exile and claimed the throne.
Charles II faced some of the same problems as his father, mostly because of the belief held by many that secretly he was a Roman Catholic. The king supported religious toleration, which, to the dismay of many Protestants, allowed Catholicism in England once again. The Parliament refused to agree, and prudently Charles did not fight them for the right of Catholics to worship openly. He did, however, make a private agreement with Louis XIV of France that he would become Catholic, which he did only on his deathbed. His son James II continued to face many of the same difficulties.
Among the many results of the Stuart Restoration-the return of Charles II, a member of the Stuart
Proprietary royal familY_was the resumption of coloni-
Colonies zation in America. Charles II quickly began to reward faithful courtiers with grants of land in the New World; and in the twenty-five years of his reign, he issued charters for four additional colonies: Carolina, New York, New Jersey, and Pennsylvania. The new colonies were all proprietary ventures (modeled on Maryland rather than on Virginia and Massachusetts), thus exposing an important change in the nature of American settlement. No longer were private companies interested in launching colonies, realizing at last that there were no quick profits to be had in the New World. The goal of the new colonies was not so much quick commercial success as permanent settlements that
would provide proprietors with land and power.
The Carolinas
Carolina (a name derived from the Latinate form of "Charles”) was, like Maryland, carved in part from the original Virginia grant. Charles II awarded the territory to a group of eight court favorites, all prominent politicians already active in colonial affairs. In successive charters issued in 1663 and 1665, the eight proprietors received joint title to a vast territory stretching south to the Florida peninsula and west to the Pacific Ocean. Like Lord Baltimore, they received almost kingly powers over their grant.
Also like Lord Baltimore, they expected to profit as landlords and land speculators. They reserved large estates for themselves, and they proposed to sell or give away the rest in smaller tracts (using a headright system similar to those in Virginia and Maryland) and to collect annual payments ("quit-rents”) from the settlers. Although committed Anglicans themselves, they welcomed any settlers they could get. The charter of the colony guaranteed religious freedom to everyone who would worship as a Christian. The proprietors also promised a Incentives for measure of political freedom; laws were to Settlement be made by a representative assembly.
With these incentives, they hoped to attract settlers from the existing American colonies and thus
to avoid the expense of financing expeditions from England.
Their initial efforts failed dismally, and some of the original proprietors gave up. But one man-Anthony Ashley Cooper, soon to become the Earl of Shaftesbury-persisted. Cooper convinced his partners to finance migrations to Carolina from
i
50 * CHAPTER 2
CHARLES TOWN, SOUTH CAROLINA
This map, drawn on deerskin by an Indian chief around 1730, illustrates the close juxtaposition of the ordered English settlement in Charles Town, South Carolina, seen on the left, and the more fluid Indian settlements near the town, on the right. It also illustrates the way in which southeastern Indians understood political relations as a series of linked circles. (© Getty Images) England. In the spring of 1670, the first of these expeditions-a party of 300-set out from England. Only 100 people survived the difficult voyage; those who did established a settlement in the Port Royal area of the Carolina coast. Ten years later they founded a city at the junction of the Ashley and Cooper Rivers, which in 1690 became the colonial capital. They called it Charles Town. (It was later renamed Charleston.)
The Earl of Shaftesbury, troubled by the instability in England, wanted a planned and well-ordered community. With Fundamental tbe aid of the English philosopher John Constitution Locke, he drew up the Fundamental for Carolina Constitution for Carolina in 1669, which created an elaborate system of land distribution and an elaborately designed social order. In fact, however, Carolina developed along lines quite different from the utopian vision of Shaftesbury and Locke. For one thing, the colony was never united in anything more than name. The northern and southern regions remained socially and economically distinct from one another. The northern settlers were mainly backwoods
farmers, isolated from the outside world, scratching out a meager existence through subsistence agriculture. They developed no important aristocracy and for many years imported virtually no African slaves. In the south, fertile lands and the good harbor at Charles Town promoted a prosperous economy and an aristocratic society. Settlements grew up rapidly along the Ashley and Cooper Rivers, and colonists established a flourishing trade in corn, lumber, cattle, pork, and (beginning in the 1690s) rice-which was to become the colony’s principal commercial crop. Traders from the interior used Charles Town to market furs and hides they had acquired from Indian trading partners; some also marketed Indian slaves, generally natives captured by rival tribes and sold to the white traders.
Southern Carolina very early developed close ties to the large (and now overpopulated) English colony on the island of Barbados. For many years, Barbados was Carolina’s most important trading partner. During the first ten years of settlement, most of the new settlers in Carolina were Barbadians, some of whom arrived with large groups of African workers
TRANSPLANTATIONS AND BORDERLANDS * 51
and established themselves quickly as substantial landlords. African slavery had taken root on Barbados earlier than in any of the mainland colonies (see pp. 54-56); and the white Caribbean migrants-tough, uncompromising profit seekers-established a similar slave-based plantation society in Carolina. The proprietors, four of whom had a financial interest in the African slave trade, also encouraged the importation of Africans.
For several decades, Carolina remained one of the most unstable English colonies in America. There were tensions between the small farmers of the Albemarle region in the north and the wealthy planters in the south. There were conflicts between the rich Barbadians in southern Carolina and the North and smaller landowners around them. After South	Lord Shaftesbury’s death, the proprietors
Carolina proved unable to establish order, and in 1719 the colonists seized control of the colony from them. Ten years later, the king divided the region
into two royal colonies, North and South Carolina.
New Netherland, New York,
and New Jersey
In 1664, one year after he issued the Carolina charter, Charles II granted to his brother James, the Duke of York, all the
territory lying between the Connecticut and Delaware Rivers. But much of the territory included in the grant was already claimed by the Dutch, who had established substantial settlements at New Amsterdam and other strategic points beginning in 1624.
The growing conflict between the English and the Dutch in America was part of a larger commercial rivalry between the two nations throughout the world. But the English particularly resented the Dutch presence in America, because it served as a wedge between the northern and southern English colonies and because it provided bases for Dutch smugglers evading English customs laws. And so in 1664, an English fleet under the command of Richard Nicolls sailed into the lightly defended port of New Amsterdam and extracted a surrender from its unpopular Dutch governor, Capture Peter Stuyvesant, who had failed to mobi-of New lize resistance to the invasion. Under the
Amsterdam Articles of Capitulation, the Dutch colony surrendered to the British in return for assurances that the Dutch settlers would not be displaced. In 1673, the Dutch briefly reconquered New Amsterdam.
But they lost it for good in 1674.
James, the Duke of York, his title to New Netherland now
clear, renamed the colony New York and prepared to govern

NEW AMSTERDAM
The small Dutch settlement on Manhattan Island, known before 1664 as New Amsterdam, fell to the English in 1664. This painting shows buildings clustered at the southern tip of the island, which remained the center of what would become New York City until the nineteenth century. (© Bettmann/Corb.sl 52
CHAPTER 2
a colony of extraordinary diversity. New York contained not only Dutch and English, but Scandinavians, Germans, French, Africans (imported as slaves by the Dutch West India Company), and members of several different Indian tribes. There were, of course, many different religious faiths among these groups. James made no effort to impose his own Roman Catholicism on the colony. Like other proprietors before him, he remained in England and delegated powers to a governor and a council. But he provided for no representative assembly in New York perhaps because a parliament had executed his own father, Charles I. The laws did, however, establish local governments and guarantee religious toleration. Nevertheless, there were immediate tensions over the distribution of power in the colony. The great Dutch "patroons” (large landowners) survived with their economic and political power largely intact. James granted large estates as well to some of his own political supporters in an effort to create a class of influential land-owners loyal to him. Power in the colony thus remained widely and unequally dispersed-among wealthy English landlords, Dutch patroons, fur traders (who forged important alliances with the Iroquois), and the Duke of York’s political appointees. Like Carolina, New York would for many years be a highly fractious society.
It was also a growing and generally prosperous colony. By 1685, when the Duke of York ascended the English throne as James II, New York contained approximately 30,000 people, about four times as many as when James had received his grant twenty years before. Most of
them still lived within the Hudson Valley, close to the river itself, with the largest settlement at its mouth, in the town of New York (formerly New Amsterdam).
Originally, James’s claims in America extended south of the Hudson to the Delaware Establishment Valley and beyond. But of New Jersey shortly after receiving his charter, James gave a large portion of that land to a pair of political allies,
Sir John Berkeley and Sir George Carteret, both of whom were also Carolina proprietors.
Carteret named the territory New Jersey, after the island in the English Channel on which he had been born. In 1702, after nearly a decade of political squabbling and economic profitlessness, the proprietors ceded control of the territory back to the Crown and New Jersey became a royal colony.
Like New York (from which much of the population had come), New Jersey was a place of enormous ethnic and religious diversity. But unlike New York, New Jersey developed no important class of large landowners; most of its residents remained small farmers. Nor did New Jersey (which, unlike New York, had no natural harbor) produce any single major city.
The Quaker Colonies
Pennsylvania, like Massachusetts, was born out of the efforts of dissenting English Protestants to find a home for their own religion and their own distinctive social or-
The Society	Society of Friends (also known as
of Friends	x . .	,	.	,
"Quakers”) originated in mid-seventeenth-century England and grew into an important force as a result of the preachings of George Fox, a Nottingham shoemaker, and Margaret Fell. Their followers came to be known as Quakers because Fox urged them to "tremble at the name of the Lord.” Unlike the Puritans, Quakers rejected the concepts of predestination and original sin. All people had divinity within themselves (an "Inner Light,” which could guide them along the path of righteousness), and all who cultivated that divinity could attain salvation. Also unlike the Puritans, Quakers granted women a position within the church generally equal to that of men. Women and men alike could become preachers and define church doctrine, an equality symbolized by the longtime partnership between Fox and Fell.
Of all the Protestant sectarians of the time, the Quakers were the most anarchistic and democratic. They had no church government, only periodic meetings of representatives from congregations. They had no paid clergy, and in their worship they spoke up one by one as the spirit moved them. Disregarding distinctions of gender and class, they addressed one another with the terms "thee” and "thou,” words then
i the
A QUAKER MEETING
Egbert van Heemskerck the Elder fc Netherlands, who worked in England from about 1673 until his death H h ’ Pa'n‘er Haarlem’" to English viewers of his timp fpat	■■	. death. His subject matter, familiar to the Dutch but new
Heemskerck shows a gathering ofLakers'TcaTef’thesTet"	TT''h'S ‘"'‘‘a'*'1	P’""in9' ’a"
believed that all people were equal in thp pvpq f p j m Y ° Friends' as the Quakers were formally known, their religious services. (Private Collection /6	aBXimP°Sed °° 'a™'	°"
iridgeman Art Library
TRANSPLANTATIONS AND BORDERLANDS
• 53 commonly used in other parts of English society only in speaking to servants and social inferiors. And as confirmed pacifists, they refused to fight in wars. The Quakers were unpopular enough in England as a result of these beliefs and practices. They increased their unpopularity by occasionally breaking up other religious groups at worship. Many were jailed.
As a result, like the Puritans before them, the Quakers looked to America for asylum. A few went to New England. But except in Rhode Island, they were greeted there with fines, whippings, and banishment; three men and a woman who refused to leave were put to death. Others migrated to northern Carolina, where they became the fastest-growing religious community in the region. They were soon influential in colonial politics. But many Quakers wanted a colony of their own. As a despised sect, they had little chance of getting the necessary royal grant without the aid of someone influential at
William Penn court- But fortunately for Fox and his followers, a number of wealthy and prominent men had become attracted to the faith. One of them was
William Penn-the son of an admiral in the Royal Navy who was a landlord of valuable Irish estates. He had received the gentleman’s education expected of a person of his standing, but he resisted his father in moving to untraditional religions. Converted to the doctrine of the Inner Light, the younger Penn became an evangelist for Quakerism. With George Fox, he visited the European continent and found Quakers there who, like Quakers in England, longed to emigrate to the New World. He set out to find a place for them to go.
Penn turned his attention first to New Jersey and soon became an owner and proprietor of part of the colony. But in 1681, after the death of his father, Penn inherited his father’s Irish lands and also his father’s claim to a large debt from the king. Charles II, short of cash, paid the debt with a grant of territory between New York and Marylandan area larger than England and Wales combined and which (unknown to him) contained more valuable soil and minerals than any other province of English America. Penn would have virtually total authority within the province. At the king’s insistence, the territory was named Pennsylvania, after Penn’s late father.
Like most proprietors, Penn wanted Pennsylvania to be profitable for him and his family. And so he set out to attract settlers from throughout Europe through informative and honest advertising in several languages. Pennsylvania soon became the best known of all the colonies among ordinary people in England and on the European continent, and also the most cosmopolitan. Settlers flocked to the province from throughout Europe, joining several hundred Swedes and Finns who had been living in a small trading colony-New Sweden-established in 1638 at the mouth of the Delaware River. But the colony was never profitable for Penn and his descendants. Indeed, Penn himself, near the end of his life, was imprisoned in England for debt and died in poverty in 1718.
Penn was more than a mere real estate promoter, however, and he sought to create in Pennsylvania what he called a holy experiment. In 1682, he sailed to America and supervised the laying out of a city between the Delaware and Schuylkill Rivers,
which he named Philadelphia ("Brotherly Love”). With its rectangular streets, like those of Charles Town, Philadelphia helped set the pattern for most later cities in America. Penn believed,
„	as had Roger Williams, that the land be-
Pennsylvania	°
Founded longed to the Indians, and he was careful to see that they were reimbursed for it, as well as to see that they were not debauched by the fur traders’ alcohol. Indians respected Penn as an honest white man, and during his lifetime the colony had no major conflicts with the natives. More than any other English colony, Pennsylvania prospered from the outset (even if its proprietor did not), because of Penn’s successful recruitment of emigrants, his thoughtful planning,
and the region’s mild climate and fertile soil.
Penn maintained good relations with the Indians owing to his religious beliefs. Quakerism was against participation in war or violence of any kind and held that all people, whatever their background, were capable of becoming Christian. Penn worked to respect the natives and their culture. He recognized Indians’ claims to the land in the province and was usually scrupulous in reimbursing them for their land. In later years, however, the relationships between the English residents of Pennsylvania and the natives were not always peaceful.
By the late 1690s, some residents of Pennsylvania were beginning to resist the nearly absolute power of the proprietor. Southern residents in particular complained that the government in Philadelphia was unresponsive to their needs. As a result, a substantial opposition emerged to challenge Penn. Pressure from these groups grew to the point that in 1701, shortly before he departed for England for the last time, Penn agreed to a Charter of Liberties for the colony. The charter established a representative assembly (consisting, alone among the English colonies, of only one house), which greatly limited the authority of the proprietor. The charter also permitted The Charter of lower counties” of the colony to establish
Liberties their own representative assembly. The three counties did so in 1703 and, as a result, became a separate colony: Delaware-although until the American
Revolution, it had the same governor as Pennsylvania.
BORDERLANDS AND
MIDDLE GROUNDS
The English colonies along the Atlantic seaboard of North America eventually united, expanded, and became the beginnings of a great nation. But in the seventeenth and early eighteenth centuries, they were small, frail settlements surrounded by other, competing societies. The British Empire in North America was, in fact, much smaller and weaker than the great Spanish Empire to the south, and not clearly stronger than the enormous French Empire to the north.
The continuing contest for control of North America, and the complex interactions among the diverse peoples populating the continent, were most clearly visible in areas
54 * CHAPTER 2
MAKING MOLASSES IN BARBADOS
African slaves, who constituted the vast majority of the population of the flourishing sugar-producing island of Barbados, work here in a sugar mill grinding sugarcane and then boiling it to produce refined sugar, molasses, and-after a later distillation process not pictured here—rum. (© Giraudon/Bridgeman Art Library) around the borders of English settlement-the Caribbean and along the northern, southern, and western borders of the coastal colonies.
The Caribbean Islands
Throughout the first half of the seventeenth century, the most
important destination for English immigrants was not the main-
„	land, but rather the islands of the Caribbean
The English	.	, _	,
Caribbean anc* t ie northern way station of Bermuda.
More than half the English migrants to the
New World in those years settled on these islands. The island societies had close ties to English North America from the beginning and influenced the development of the mainland colonies in several ways. But they were also surrounded by, and sometimes imperiled by, outposts of the Spanish Empire.
Before the arrival of Europeans, most of the Caribbean islands had substantial native populations-the Arawaks, the Caribs, and
Imperial r^e Cib°neY-but beginning with Christopher
Conflict Columbus's first visit in 1492, and accelerating after the Spanish established their first colony on Hispaniola in 1496, the native population was all but wiped out by European epidemics. Indians were never a significant factor in European settlement of the Caribbean. Indeed, by the time significant European settlement of the islands began,
many were almost entirely deserted.
The Spanish Empire claimed title to all the islands in the Caribbean, but there was substantial Spanish settlement only on the largest of them: Cuba, Hispaniola, and Puerto Rico. English, French, and Dutch traders began settling on some of the smaller islands early in the sixteenth century, although these weak colonies were always vulnerable to Spanish attack. After Spain and the Netherlands went to war in 1621 (distracting the Spanish navy and leaving the English in the Caribbean relatively unmolested), the pace of English colonization increased. By midcentury, there were several substantial English settlements on the islands, the most important of them on Antigua, St. Kitts, Jamaica, and Barbados. Even so, through the seventeenth century, the English settlements in the Caribbean were the targets of almost constant attacks and invasions by the Spanish, the Portuguese, the French, the Dutch, and the remaining Indians of the region. The world of the Caribbean was a violent and turbulent place.
The Caribbean colonies built their economies on raising crops for export. In the early years, English settlers experimented unsuccessfully with tobacco and cotton. But they soon discovered that the most lucrative crop was sugar, for which there was a substantial and growing market in Europe. Sugarcane could also be distilled into rum, for which there was a booming market abroad. Within a decade of the introduction of sugar cultivation to the West Indies, planters were devoting almost all of their land to sugarcane. In their appetite for more
TRANSPLANTATIONS AND BORDERLANDS
55
;SPANIS\
J <S>

Gulf of Mexico
ATLANTIC
OCEAN
Havana
" Sancti-^--—
Virgin Islands,
Tortuga
A x DOMINGUE 47V^iI£S
JOMIN^O^
St. Croix S^paniola^^.	pUERT0
Domingo RICO
St. Eustatius
' \B ^Anguilla &Antigua
Sf.X”	%
& Nevis ^Dominka
^Martinique
JAMAICA
Caribbean Sea
^’•UMds4^
V q, Curasao /
Ar«bfl« i ■’Bonflire
NEW SPAIN
THE SEVENTEENTH-CENTURY CARIBBEAN
At the same time that European powers were expanding their colonial presence on the mainland of the American continents, they were also establishing colonies in the islands of the Caribbean. In some cases, these islands were even more important to the Atlantic economy than many of the mainland possessions, particularly the large, heavily populated sugar-growing islands (among them Jamaica and Barbados), in which the majority of the population consisted of African slaves. * What role did the Caribbean islands play in the spread of slavery in North America?
1ESS£R ^L^Bar^ ANTILLES ®St. Vincent
QGrenada
Caracas
Territorial and Political Changes in the Caribbean (1600-1700) English-held areas Dutch settlements
French settlements Spanish settlements
land for sugarcane, they cut down forests and destroyed the natural habitats of many animals, which greatly reduced the amount of land available for growing food.
Because sugar was a labor-intensive crop, and because the remnant of the native population was too small to provide a Sugar and workforce, English planters soon found it Slavery necessary to import laborers. As in the Chesapeake, they began by bringing indentured servants from England. But the arduous work discouraged white laborers; many found it impossible to adapt to the harsh tropical climate so different from that of England. By midcentury, therefore, the English planters in the Caribbean (like the Spanish colonists who preceded them) were relying more and more on an enslaved African workforce, which soon
substantially outnumbered them.
On Barbados and other islands where a flourishing sugar economy developed, the English planters were a tough, aggressive, and ambitious breed. Some of them grew enormously wealthy; and since their livelihoods depended on their
workforces, they expanded and solidified the system of African slavery there remarkably quickly. By the late seventeenth century, there were four times as many African slaves as there were white settlers. By then the West Indies had ceased to be an attractive destination for ordinary English immigrants; most now went to the colonies on the North American mainland instead.
Masters and Slaves in the Caribbean
A small, mostly wealthy white population and a large African population held in bondage made for a potentially explosive combination. As in other English colonies in the New World in which Africans came to outnumber Europeans, whites in the Caribbean grew fearful of slave revolts. They had good
Slave Revolts reason’ f°r rhere were at least seven major slave revolts in the islands, more than the
English colonies of North America experienced in their entire history as slave societies. As a result, white planters monitored
56 • CHAPTER 2
their labor forces closely and often harshly. Beginning in the 1660s, all the islands enacted legal codes to regulate relations between masters and slaves and to give white people absolute authority over Africans. A master could even murder a slave with virtual impunity.
There was little either in the law or in the character of the economy to compel planters to pay much attention to the welfare of their workers. Many white slaveowners concluded that it was cheaper to buy new slaves periodically than to protect the well-being of those they already owned, and it was not uncommon for masters to work their slaves to death. Few African workers survived more than a decade in the brutal Caribbean working environment-they either were sold to planters in North America or died. Even whites, who worked far less hard than did the slaves, often succumbed to the harsh climate; most died before the age of forty-often from tropical diseases to which they had no immunity.
Establishing a stable society and culture was extremely difficult for people living in such harsh and even deadly conditions. Many of the whites were principally interested in getting rich and had no long-term commitment to the is-
Unstable	lands. Those who could returned to
Societies	England with their fortunes and left their
estates in the hands of overseers. A large proportion of the European settlers were single men, many of whom either died or left the islands at a young age. Those who remained, many of them common white farmers and laborers living in extreme poverty, were too poor to contribute to the development of the society. With few white women on the islands and little intermarriage between blacks and whites, Europeans in the Caribbean lacked many of the institutions that gave stability to the North American settle-
ments: church, family, community.
Africans in the Caribbean faced even greater difficulties, of course, but they managed to create a world of their own despite the hardships. They started families (although many of them were broken up by death or the slave trade); they sustained African religious and social traditions (and showed little interest in Christianity); and within the rigidly controlled world of the sugar plantations, they established patterns of resistance.
The Caribbean settlements were connected to the North American colonies in many ways. They were an important part Connection to of the Atlantic trading world in which many Americans became involved-a source of sugar and rum and a market for goods made in the mainland colonies and in England. They were the principal source of African slaves for the mainland colonies; well over half the slaves in North America came from the islands, not directly from Africa. And because Caribbean planters established an elaborate plantation system earlier than planters in North America, they provided models that many mainland people consciously or unconsciously copied. In the American South, too, planters grew wealthy at the expense of poor whites and, above all, of African slaves.
British North America
The Southwestern Borderlands
By the end of the seventeenth century, the Spanish Empire had established only a small presence in the regions that became the United States. In Mexico and regions farther south, however, the Spanish had established a sophisticated and impressive empire. Their capital, Mexico City, was the most dazzling metropolis in the Americas. The Spanish residents, numbering well over a million, enjoyed much greater prosperity than all but a few English settlers in North America.
The principal Spanish colonies north of Mexico Florida, Texas, New Mexico, Arizona, and California-attracted religious ,	minorities, Catholic missionaries, indepen-
Northern dent ranchers fleeing the heavy hand of Colonies imperial authority, and Spanish troops defending the northern flank of the empire.
These colonies remained weak and peripheral parts of the great empire to their south.
New Mexico was the most prosperous and populous of these Spanish outposts. Once the Spanish quelled the Pueblo revolt there in 1680 (see p. 17), they worked effectively with the natives of the region to develop a flourishing agriculture. By the early nineteenth century, New Mexico had a non-Indian population of over 10,000-the largest European settlement west of the Mississippi and north of Mexico and it was steadily expanding through the region. But New Mexico was prosperous only when compared to other borderlands. Its residents were far less successful than the Spanish in Mexico and other more densely settled regions.
The Spanish began to colonize California once they realized that other Europeans-among them English merchants and French and Russian trappers-were beginning to estab-California lish a presence in the region. Formal Spanish settlement of California began in the 1760s, when the governor of Baja California was ordered to create outposts of the empire farther north. Soon a string of missions, forts (or presidios), and trading communities were springing up along the Pacific coast, beginning with San Diego and Monterey in 1769 and eventually San Francisco (1776), Los Angeles (1781), and Santa Barbara (1786). As in other areas of European settlement, the arrival of the Spanish in California (and the diseases they imported) had a devastating effect on the native population. Approximately 65,000 at the time of the first Spanish settlements, by 1820 it had declined by two-thirds. As the new settlements spread, however, the Spanish insisted that the remaining natives convert to Catholicism. That explains the centrality of missions in almost all the major Spanish outposts in California. But the Spanish colonists were also intent on creating a prosperous agricultural economy, and they enlisted Indian laborers to help them do so. California’s Indians had no choice but to accede to the demands of the Spanish, although there were frequent revolts by natives against the harsh conditions imposed upon them. Already decimated by disease, the tribes now declined further as a result of malnutrition and over-
work at the hands of the Spanish missions.
TRANSPLANTATIONS AND BORDERLANDS * 57
Importance of the Spanish Borderlands
In the late seventeenth and early eighteenth centuries, the Spanish considered the greatest threat to the northern borders of their empire to be the growing ambitions of the French. In the 1680s, French explorers traveled down the Mississippi Valley to the mouth of the river and claimed the lands they had traversed for their king, Louis XIV. They called the territory Louisiana. Fearful of French incursions farther west, and unsettled by the nomadic Indians driven into the territory by the French, the Spanish began to fortify their claim to Texas by establishing new forts, missions, and settlements there, including San Fernando (later San Antonio) in 1731. The region that is now Arizona was also becoming increasingly tied to the Spanish Empire. Northern Arizona was a part of the New Mexico colony and was governed from Santa Fe. The rest of Arizona (from Phoenix south) was controlled by the Mexican region of Sonora. As in California, much of the impetus for these settlements came from Catholic missionaries (in this case Jesuits), eager to convert the natives to Catholicism. But the missionary project met with little success. Unlike the sedentary Pueblos around Santa Fe, the Arizona natives were nomadic peoples, unlikely to settle down or to Christianize, frequently at war with rival tribes, and-like natives elsewhere-tragically vulnerable to smallpox, measles, and other imported diseases. As in California, epidemics reduced the native population of Arizona by two-thirds in the early eighteenth century.
Although peripheral to the great Spanish Empire to the south, the Spanish colonies in the Southwest nevertheless helped create enduring societies very unlike those being established by the English along the Atlantic seaboard. The Spanish colonies were committed not to displacing the native populations but, rather, to enlisting them. They sought
to convert them to Catholicism, to recruit them (sometimes forcibly) as agricultural workers, and to cultivate them as trading partners. The Spanish did not consider the natives to be their equals, certainly, and they did not treat them very well. But neither did they consider them merely as obstacles to their own designs, as many English settlers along the Atlantic seaboard did.
The Southeastern Borderlands
A more direct challenge to English ambitions in North America was the Spanish presence in the southeastern areas of what is now the United States. After the establishment of the Spanish claim to Florida in the 1560s (see p. 17), missionaries and traders began moving northward into Georgia and westward into what is now known as the panhandle. Some ambitious Spaniards began to dream of expanding their empire still farther north, into what became the Carolinas, and perhaps beyond. The founding of Jamestown in 1607 replaced those dreams with fears. The English colonies, they believed, could threaten their existing settlements in Florida and Georgia. As a result, the Spanish built forts in both regions to defend themselves against the slowly increasing English presence there. Throughout the eighteenth century, the area between the
Carolinas and Florida was the site of continuing tension, and frequent conflict, between the Spanish and the English-and, to a lesser degree, between the Spanish and the French, who were threatening their northwestern borders with settlements in Louisiana and in what is now Alabama.
There was no formal war between England and Spain in these years, but that did not dampen the hostilities in the Southeast. English pirates continually harassed the Spanish settlements and, in 1668, sacked St. Augustine. Both sides in this Hostilities in conflict sought to make use of the native the Southeast tribes. The English encouraged Indians in Florida to rise up against the Spanish missions. The Spanish, for their part, offered freedom to African slaves owned by Carolina settlers if they agreed to convert to Catholicism. About 100 Africans accepted the offer, and the Spanish later organized some of them into a military regiment to defend the northern border of New Spain. The English correctly viewed the Spanish recruitment of their slaves as an effort to undermine their economy. By the early eighteenth century, the constant fighting in the region had driven almost all the Spanish settlers out of Florida. The dwindling Spanish presence became almost entirely confined to St. Augustine on the Atlantic coast to Pensacola on the Gulf Coast, and to the modest colonies that surrounded the forts there. Because they were so few and so weak, they came to rely-far more than most British did-on natives and Africans and intermarried fre-
quently with them.
Eventually, after more than a century of conflict in the southeastern borderlands, the English prevailed-acquiring Florida in the aftermath of the Seven Years’ War (known in America as the French and Indian War; see pp. 103-107) and rapidly populating it with settlers from their colonies to the north. Before that point, however, protecting the southern boundary of the British Empire in North America was a continual concern to the English and contributed in crucial ways to the founding of the colony of Georgia.
The Founding of Georgia
Georgia was unique in its origins. Its founders were a group of unpaid trustees led by General James Oglethorpe, a member of Parliament and military hero. They were interested in economic success, but they were driven pri-
Oglethorpe’s marilY by military and philanthropic Vision	motives. They wanted to erect a military
barrier against the Spanish lands on the southern border of English America, and they wanted to provide a refuge for the impoverished, a place where English men
and women without prospects at home could begin anew. The need for a military buffer between South Carolina and
the Spanish settlements in Florida was particularly urgent in the first years of the eighteenth century. In a 1676 treaty, Spain had recognized England’s title to lands already occupied by English settlers. But conflict between the two colonizing powers had continued. In 1686, a force of Indians and Creoles from Florida, directed by Spanish agents, attacked and
Native Americans and the "Middle Ground"
C n in many generations, historians chronicling the westward movement of European settlement a U Jrt. in North America incorporated Native Americans into the story largely as weak and inconvenient obstacles swept aside by the inevitable progress of 'civilization.'' Indians were presented either as murderous savages or as relatively docile allies of white people, but rarely as important actors of their own. Francis Parkman, the great nineteenth-century American historian, described Indians as a civilization "crushed” and "scorned" by the march of European powers in the New World. Many subsequent historians departed little from his assessment.
Challenges to this traditional view have come from many more-recent historians—among them, Gary Nash in Red, White, and Black (1974) and Ramon Gutierrez in When Jesus Came, the Corn Mothers Went Away (1991). They, and other scholars, rejected the optimistic, progressive view of white triumph over adversity and presented, instead, a picture of conquest that affected both the conqueror and the conquered and did not bring to an end their influence on one another.
A new, more recent view of the relationship between the peoples of the Old and New Worlds sees Native Americans and Euro-Americans as uneasy partners in the shaping of a new society in which, for a time at least, both were a vital part. In The Middle Ground (1991), Richard White examined the culture of the Great Lakes region in the eighteenth century, in which Algonquin Indians created complex trading and political relationships with French, English, and American settlers and travelers in the region. In this "borderland" between the growing European settlements in the East and the still largely intact Indian civilizations farther west, a new kind of hybrid society emerged in which many cultures intermingled. In Into the American Woods (1999), James Merrell examined the world of negotiators and go-betweens along the western Pennsylvania frontier in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. Like White, he emphasized the complicated blend of European and Native American diplomatic rituals that allowed both groups to conduct business, make treaties, and keep the peace.
Daniel Richter extended the idea of a "middle ground" further in The Ordeal of the Longhouse (1992) and Facing East from Indian Country (2001). Richter demonstrates that the Iroquois
Confederacy was an active participant in the power relationships in the Hudson River basin. In his later book, he tells the story of European colonization from the Native American perspective, revealing how western myths of "first contact" such as the story of John Smith and Pocahontas look entirely different when seen through the eyes of Native Americans, who remained in many ways the more powerful of the two societies in the seventeenth century.
How did these important collaborations collapse? What happened to the "middle ground"? Over time, the delicate partnerships along the frontiers of white settlement gave way to the sheer numbers of Europeans (and, in some places, Africans) who moved westward, Joyce Chaplin in Subject Matter (2001) argued as well that Old World Americans at first admired the natives as a kind of natural nobility until European diseases ravaged the tribes, helping strengthen the Europeans' sense of superiority that had been a part of their view of Indians from the beginning. In The Name of War (1998), Jill Lepore described how the violence of King Philip's War in seventeenth-century New England helped transform English views of the tribes both because of the white victory over the Indians and because of their success in turning this victory into a rationale
destroyed an outlying South Carolina settlement south of the treaty line. And when hostilities broke out again between Spain and England in 1701 (known in England as Queen Anne’s War and on the Continent as the War of the Spanish Succession), the fighting renewed in America as well.
Oglethorpe, a veteran of Queen Anne’s War, was keenly aware of the military advantages of an English colony south of the Carolinas. Yet his interest in settlement rested even more on his philanthropic commitments. As head of a parliamentary committee investigating English prisons, he had grown appalled by the plight of honest debtors dying in confinement. Such prisoners, and other poor people in danger of succumbing to a similar fate, could, he believed, become the farmer-soldiers of the new colony in America.
In 1732, King George II granted Oglethorpe and his fellow trustees control of the land between the Savannah and
GENERAL JAMES OGLETHORPE
Oglethorpe was one of the founders of the English colony of Georgia. He and his followers established the colony to stand as a military buffer between South Carolina and the Spanish settlements in Florida. They also wanted a refuge for British men and women without economic prospects in England. (© Stock Montage/Getty Images) 58	®
TRADING PARTNERS
Ralph Hamor Visits Powhatan with a Proposal is an etching by Theodor de Bry (1528-1598) showing how Europeans and Native Americans sometimes made economic deals for mutual gain. (© Virginia Historical Society, Richmond, Virginia, USA / The Bridgeman Art Library) increasingly unequal, the cultural "middle ground" that for many decades characterized much of the contact between the Old and New Worlds gradually disappeared. By the time historians began seriously chronicling this story in the late nineteenth century, the Indian tribes had indeed become the defeated, helpless "obstacles" that they portrayed. But for generations before, the relationship between white Americans and Native Americans was a much less unequal one than it would later become. •
UNDERSTAND, ANALYZE, AND EVALUATE
1.	How have historians' views of Native Americans and their role in the European colonization of North America changed over time?
2.	Why did the "middle ground" between Native Americans and European settlers disappear?
3.	Is there a "middle ground" in the United States today? If so, where? How is this "middle ground" similar to and different from the middle ground between Native Americans and Euro-American settlers in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries?
for the moral superiority of Europeans by portraying the Indians as brutal, uncivilized people. (In reality, the Europeans had used as much "savagery" against the natives as the natives had used against them.) As the pressures of white settlement grew, as the Indian populations weakened as a result of disease and war, and as the relationship between the tribes and the European settlers grew
Altamaha Rivers. Their colonization policies reflected the vital military purposes of the colony. They limited the size of land-
_	, holdings to make the settlement compact
Military	aRd easier to defend against Spanish and
Rationale	Indian attacks. They excluded Africans, free
or slave; Oglethorpe feared slave labor would produce internal revolts and that disaffected slaves might turn to the Spanish as allies. The trustees prohibited rum (both because Oglethorpe disapproved of it on moral grounds and because the trustees feared its effects on the natives). They strictly regulated trade with the Indians, again to limit the possibility of wartime insurrection. They also excluded Catholics for fear they might collude with their coreli-
gionists in the Spanish colonies to the south.
Oglethorpe himself led the first colonial expedition to Georgia, which built a fortified town at the mouth of the Savannah River in 1733 and later constructed additional forts south of the Altamaha. In the end, only a few debtors were released from jail and sent to Georgia. Instead, the trustees brought hundreds of impoverished tradesmen and artisans from England and Scotland and many religious refugees from
Switzerland and Germany. Among the immigrants was a small group of Jews. English settlers made up a lower proportion of the European population of Georgia than of any other English colony.
The strict rules governing life in the new colony stifled its early development and ensured the failure of Oglethorpe's vision. Settlers in Georgia-many of whom were engaged in labor-intensive agriculture-needed a workforce as much as those in other southern colonies. Almost from the start they began demanding the right to buy slaves. Some opposed the restrictions on the size of individual property holdings. Many resented the nearly absolute political power of Oglethorpe and the trustees. As a result, newcomers to the region generally preferred to settle in South Carolina, where there were fewer restrictive laws.
Oglethorpe (whom some residents of Georgia began calling "our perpetual dictator”) at first bitterly resisted the demands of the settlers for social and political reform. Over time, however, he wearied of the conflict in the colony and grew frustrated at its failure to grow. He also suffered military disappointments, such as a 1740 assault on the Spanish outpost at St. Augustine, Florida, which ended in failure. Oglethorpe, now disillusioned
® 59
60 < CHAPTER 2
with his American venture, began to loosen his grip. Even before the 1740 defeat, the trustees had removed the limitation on individual landholdings. In 1750, they re-
Transformation movej the han On slavery. A year later of Georgia	i , , . . c	a
they ended the prohibition ol rum and returned control of the colony to the king, who immediately permitted the summoning of a representative assembly. Georgia continued to grow more slowly than the other southern colonies, but in other ways it now developed along lines roughly similar to those of South Carolina. By 1770, there were over
20,000 non-Indian residents of the colony, nearly half of them African slaves.
Middle Grounds
The struggle for the North American continent was, of course, not just one among competing European empires. It was also a contest between the new European immigrants and the native populations.
In some parts of the British Empire-Virginia and New England, for example-English settlers quickly established their dominance, subjugating and displacing most natives until they had established societies that were dominated almost entirely by Europeans. But elsewhere the balance of Conflict and power remained far more precarious. Accommodation Along the western borders of English settlement, in particular, Europeans and Indians lived together in regions in which neither side was able to establish clear dominance. In these "middle grounds,” as they have been called, the two populations-de-spite frequent conflicts-carved out ways of living together, with each side making concessions to the other. Here the Europeans found themselves obliged to adapt to tribal expectations at least as much as the Indians had to adapt to
European ones.
To the Indians, the European migrants were both menacing and appealing. The Indians feared the power of these strange people: their guns, their rifles, their forts. But they also wanted the French and British settlers to behave like "fathers”to help them mediate their own internal disputes, to offer them gifts, to help them moderate their conflicts. Europeans came from a world in which the formal institutional and military power of a nation or empire governed relationships between societies. But the natives had no understanding of the modern notion of a "nation” and thought much more in terms of ceremony and kinship. Gradually, Europeans learned to fulfill at least some of their expectations.
In the seventeenth century, before many English settlers had entered the interior of the continent, the French were particularly adept at creating mutually beneficial relationships with the tribes. They welcomed the chance to form close relationships Mutually with-even to marry within-the tribes. Beneficial	They also recognized the importance of
Relations	treating tribal chiefs with respect and
channeling gifts and tributes through them. But by the mid-eighteenth century, French influence in the interior was in decline, and British settlers gradually became
the dominant European group in the "middle grounds.” It took the British a considerable time to learn the lessons the French had long ago absorbed-that simple commands and raw force were much less effective in creating a workable relationship with the tribes than were gifts and ceremonies and mediation. Eventually they did so, and in large western regions-especially those around the Great Lakes-they established a precarious peace with the tribes that lasted for several decades.
But as the British and (after 1776) American presence in the region grew, the balance of power between Europeans and natives shifted. Newer settlers had difficulty adapting to the complex rituals of gift-giving and mediation that the earlier migrants had developed. The stability of the relationship between the Indians and whites deteriorated. By the early nine-The Shifting teenth century, the "middle grounds” had Balance collapsed, replaced by a European world in which Indians were ruthlessly subjugated and eventually removed. Nevertheless, it is important to recognize that for a considerable period of early American history, the story of the relationship between whites and Indians was not simply a story of conquest and subjugation, but also in some regions-a story of a difficult but stable accommodation and mutual adaptation. The Indians were not simply victims in the story of the growth of European settlement in North America. They were also important actors, sometimes obstructing and sometimes facilitating the development of the
new societies.
THE EVOLUTION OF THE
BRITISH EMPIRE
The English colonies in America had originated as separate projects, and for the most part they grew up independent of one another. But by the mid-seventeenth century, the growing commercial success of the colonial ventures was producing pressure in England for a more rational, uniform structure to the empire.
The Drive for Reorganization
Imperial reorganization, many people in England claimed, would increase the profitability of the colonies and the power of the English government to supervise them. Above all, it would contribute to the success of the mercantile system, the foundation of the English economy. Colonies would provide a market for England s manufactured goods and a source for raw materials it could not produce at home, thus increasing the total wealth of the nation. But for the new possessions truly to promote mercantilist goals, England would have to exclude foreigners (as Spain had done) from its colonial trade. According to mercantil-Mercantilism ist theory, any wealth flowing to another nation could come only at the expense of
England itself. Hence the British government sought to monopolize trade relations with its colonies.
TRANSPLANTATIONS AND BORDERLANDS - 61
SAVANNAH IN 1734
This early view of the English settlement at Savannah by an English artist shows the intensely orderly character of Georgia in the early moments of European settlement there. As the colony grew, its residents gradually abandoned the rigid plan created by Georgia's founders. (© Historic Map Works/Getty Images) In theory, the mercantile system offered benefits to the colonies as well by providing them with a ready market for the raw materials they produced and a source for the manufactured goods they did not. But some colonial goods were not suitable for export to England, which produced wheat, flour, and fish and had no interest in obtaining them from America. Colonists also found it more profitable at times to trade with the Spanish, French, or Dutch even in goods that England did import. Thus, a considerable trade soon developed between the English colonies and non-English markets.
For a time, the English government made no serious efforts to restrict this challenge to the principles of mercantilism. But gradually London began passing laws to regulate colonial trade. During Oliver Cromwell’s "Protectorate,” in 1650 and 1651, Parliament passed laws to keep
Navigation Dutch ships °ut of the English colomes-Acts	After the Restoration, the government of
Charles II adopted three Navigation Acts
designed to regulate colonial commerce even more strictly. The first of them, in 1660, closed the colonies to all trade except that carried in English ships. This law also required the colonists to export certain items, among them tobacco, only to England or English possessions. The second act, in 1663, provided that all goods being shipped from Europe to the colonies had to pass through England on the way; that would make it possible for England to tax them. The third act, in 1673, was a response to the widespread evasion of the first two laws by the colonial shippers, who frequently left port claiming to be heading for another English colony but then sailed to a foreign port. It imposed duties on the coastal trade among the English colonies, and it provided for the appointment of customs officials to enforce the Navigation Acts. These acts formed the legal basis of England’s mercantile system in America for a century.
The system created by the Navigation Acts had obvious advantages for England. But it had some advantages for the
62 CHAPTER 2
colonists as well. By restricting all trade to British ships, the laws encouraged the colonists (who were themselves legally British subjects) to create an important shipbuilding industry of their own. And because the English wanted to import as many goods as possible from their own colonies (as opposed to importing them from rival nations), they encouraged-and at times subsidized-the development of American production of goods they needed, among them iron, silk, and lumber. Despite the bitter complaints the laws provoked in America in the late seventeenth century, and the bitter conflicts they would help to provoke decades later, the system of the Navigation Acts served the interests of the British and the Americans alike reasonably well through most of the eighteenth century.
The Dominion of New England
Enforcement of the Navigation Acts required not only the stationing of customs officials in America, but also the establishment of an agency in England to oversee colonial affairs. In 1679, Charles II attempted to increase his control over Massachusetts (which behaved at times as if its leaders considered it an independent nation) by stripping the colony of its authority over New Hampshire and chartering a separate, royal colony there whose governor he would himself appoint. Five years later, after the Massachusetts General Court defied instructions from Parliament to enforce the Navigation Acts, Charles revoked the Massachusetts corporate charter and made it a royal colony.
Charles IPs brother and successor, James II, who came to the throne in 1685, went much further. In 1686, he created a single Dominion of New England, which combined the government of Massachusetts with the governments of the rest of the New England colonies and, in 1688, with those of New York and New Jersey as well. He eliminated the existing assemblies within the new Dominion and appointed a single governor, Sir Edmund Andros, to supervise the entire Sir Edmund	region from Boston. Andros was an able
Andros	administrator but a stern and tactless
man; his rigid enforcement of the
Navigation Acts, his brusque dismissal of the colonists’ claims to the rights of Englishmen,” and his crude and arbitrary tactics made him highly unpopular. He was particularly despised in Massachusetts, where he tried to strengthen the Anglican Church.
The "Glorious Revolution0
James II, unlike his father, was openly Catholic. Not only that, he made powerful enemies as he appointed his fellow Catholics to high offices. The restoration of Catholicism led to fears among Protestants that the pope would soon overtake England and that the king would defer to him. At the same time, James II tried to control Parliament and the courts to make himself an absolute monarch. By 1688, the
opposition to the king was so great that the Parliament voted to force James II from the throne. James didn’t resist giving up the crown, remembering his grandfather’s execution. He eventually left the country and spent the rest of his life in France. His daughter, Mary II, and her husband, William of Orange of the Netherlandsboth Protestants replaced James II to reign jointly. No Catholic monarch has reigned since. This bloodless coup came to be known as the "Glorious Revolution.”
When Bostonians heard of the overthrow of James II, they moved quickly to unseat his unpopular viceroy in New England. Andros managed to escape an angry mob, but he was arrested and imprisoned as he sought to flee the city dressed as a woman. The new sovereigns in England chose not to con-End of the test the toPPlin8 of Andros and quickly ac-
Dominion quiesced in what the colonists had, in effect, already done: abolishing the
Dominion of New England and restoring separate colonial governments. They did not, however, accede to all the colonists’ desires. In 1691, they combined Massachusetts with Plymouth and made it a royal colony. The new charter restored the General Court (Massachusetts’s legislature), but it gave the Crown the right to appoint the governor. It also replaced church membership with property ownership as the basis for voting and officeholding and required the Puritan leaders of the colony to tolerate Anglican worship.
Andros had been governing New York through a lieutenant governor, Captain Francis Nicholson, who enjoyed the support of the wealthy merchants and fur traders of the prov-ince-the same groups who had dominated the colony for years. Other, less favored colonists farmers, mechanics, small traders, and shopkeepers-had a long accumulation of grievances against both Nicholson and his allies. The leader of the New York dissidents was Jacob Leisler, a German immigrant and a prosperous merchant who had married into a prominent Dutch family but had never won acceptance as one of the colony’s ruling class. Much like Nathaniel Bacon in Virginia, the ambitious Leisler resented his exclusion and eagerly grasped the opportunity to challenge the colonial elite. In May 1689, when news of the Glorious Revolution in England and the fall of Andros in Boston reached New York, Leisler raised a militia, captured the city fort, drove Nicholson into exile, and proclaimed himself the new head of government in New York. For two years, he tried in vain to stabilize his power in the colony amid fierce factional rivalry. In 169L when William and Mary appointed a new governor, Leisler briefly resisted this challenge to his authority. Although he soon yielded, his hesitation allowed his many political enemies to charge him with treason. He and one of his sons-in-law were hanged, drawn, and quartered. Fierce rivalry between what became known as the "Leislerians” and the anti-Leislerians dominated the politics of New York for many years thereafter.
In Maryland, many people erroneously assumed when they heard news of the Glorious Revolution that their proprietor,
TRANSPLANTATIONS AND BORDERLANDS - 63
John Coode’s	Cat^°^ic Lorc^ Baltimore, who was liv-
Rebellion	England, had sided with the Catholic
James II and opposed William and Mary. So in 1689, an old opponent of the proprietor's government, John
Coode, started a new revolt, which drove out Lord Baltimore’s officials in the name of Protestantism. Through an elected convention, his supporters chose a committee to run the government and petitioned the Crown for a charter as a royal colony. In 1691, William and Mary complied, stripping the proprietor of his authority. The colonial assembly established the Church of England as the colony’s official religion and forbade Catholics to hold public office, to vote, or even to practice their religion in public. Maryland became a proprietary colony again in 1715, but only after the fifth Lord Baltimore joined the Anglican Church.
As a result of the Glorious Revolution, the colonies revived their representative assemblies and successfully thwarted the
plan for colonial unification. In the process, they legitimized the idea that the colonists had some rights within the empire, that the English government needed to consider their views in making policies that affected them. But the Glorious Revolution in America was not, as many Americans would later come to believe, a clear demonstration of American resolve to govern itself or a clear victory for colonial self-rule. In New York and Maryland, in particular, the uprisings had more to do with local factional and religious divisions than with any larger vision of the nature of the empire. And while the insurgencies did succeed in eliminating the short-lived Dominion of New England, their ultimate results were governments that increased the Crown’s potential authority in many ways. As the first century of English settlement in America came to its end and as colonists celebrated their victories over arbitrary British rule, they were becoming more a part of the imperial system than ever before.
LOOKING BACK
The English colonization of North America was part of a larger effort by several European nations to expand the reach of their increasingly commercial societies. Indeed, for many years, the British Empire in America was among the smallest and weakest of the imperial ventures there, overshadowed by the French to the north and the Spanish to the south.
In the British colonies along the Atlantic seaboard, new agricultural and commercial societies gradually emerged-in the South, centered on the cultivation of tobacco and cotton and reliant on slave labor; and in the northern colonies, centered on traditional food crops and based mostly on free labor. Substantial trading centers emerged in such cities as Boston, New York, Philadelphia, and Charles Town, and a growing proportion of the population became prosperous and settled in these increasingly complex communities. By the early eighteenth century, English settlement had spread from northern New England (in what is now Maine) south into Georgia.
But this growing British Empire coexisted with, and often found itself in conflict with, the presence of other Europeans-most notably the Spanish and the French-in other areas of North America. In these borderlands, societies did not assume the settled, prosperous form they were taking in the Tidewater and New England. They were raw, sparsely populated settlements in which Europeans, including over time increasing numbers of English, had to learn to accommodate not only one another but also the still-substantial Indian tribes with whom they shared these interior lands. By the middle of the eighteenth century, there was a significant European presence across a broad swath of North America-from Florida to Maine, and from Texas to Mexico to California-only a relatively small part of it controlled by the British. But changes were under way within the British Empire that would soon lead to its dominance through a much larger area of North America.
Key Terms/People/Places/Events
Anne Hutchinson 45
Antinomianism 45
Bacon’s Rebellion 40 Dominion of New England 62 George and Cecilius Calvert 40 Glorious Revolution 62 Headright 38
Jacob Leisler 62
James Oglethorpe 57 John Smith 36
John Winthrop 43
King Philip’s War 48 Massachusetts Bay Company 43 Mayflower Compact 42 Metacomet 48
Middle ground 60
Navigation Acts 61
Pequot War 47
Plymouth Plantation 42 Powhatan 36
Quakers 52
Quitrent 38
Roger Williams 45
Sir William Berkeley 40 Theocracy 44
Virginia House of Burgesses 38 William Bradford 42 William Penn 53
64 CHAPTER 2
RECALL AND REFLECT
1.	Compare patterns of settlement and expansion in the Chesapeake with those in New England. What were the major differences? Were there any similarities?
2.	What were the reasons for the revolts and rebellions that occurred in the colonies of Virginia, Maryland, Massachusetts, and New York between 1660 and 1700? How were these rebellions resolved?
3.	How did the institution of slavery in England’s Atlantic seaboard colonies differ from slavery in the Caribbean? What accounted for these differences?
4.	What were the middle grounds, and how did conditions there differ from conditions in the colonies along the Atlantic seaboard?
5.	How did the Glorious Revolution in England affect England’s North American colonies?
SIGNIFICANT EVENTS
1607		
Jamestown		1619
founded	• -	First African workers arrive
1620	. .. Q	in Virginia
Pilgrims found		Virginia House of Burgesses
Plymouth colony	•	meets for first time 1624 Dutch establish settlement on
1629	•	Manhattan Island
New Hampshire and Maine	__		
established	•	Puritans establish
1634		Massachusetts Bay colony
	•	at Boston
First English settlements		
founded in Maryland	•	1635 Hartford settled in Connecticut
1636	•	
Roger Williams founds		
settlement in Rhode Island	•	1637 Anne Hutchinson expelled from
1638	•	Massachusetts Bay colony
Swedes and Finns establish New Sweden on the Delaware River		1642-1649
	•	
1649		English Civil War
Charles I executed	•	
	•	1660 English Restoration: Charles II
1663		becomes king 1664
Carolina colony chartered	• •	
English capture New Netherland
King Philip’s War in	•	New Jersey chartered
New England	•	1676
1681		Bacon’s Rebellion in Virginia
William Penn receives charter	•	
for Pennsylvania	•	1686
1688		Dominion of New England established
Glorious Revolution in England:	•	
William and Mary	A ..	1732
ascend throne		Georgia chartered
SOCIETY AND CULTURE IN PROVINCIAL AMERICA
LOOKING AHEAD
HsHuinnHnniiniiHUNHnnnuuinHhnBHHnnfHunNnnuHUHnHHHnHnHnnnHHHHHUHMHnHnHHHHHHhdhhhHiunHnHHH
1.	What accounted for the rapid increase in the colonial population in the seventeenth century?
LIFE IN THE AMERICAN
COLONIES
This colored engraving shows the domestic life of Americans during the eighteenth century. Depicted are family members at work in their cozy surroundings. Their industriousness is shown to be a singular virtue of the era. (© Bettmann/Corbis)
2.	Why did African slavery expand so rapidly in the late seventeenth century?
3,	How did religion shape and influence colonial society?
SETTING THE STAGE
BY THE EARLY EIGHTEENTH CENTURY,
the British colonies were the outposts of the British world. As the colonies grew and became more prosperous, they also became more English. The colonists adopted the tastes, styles, and customs of England, bought goods made in England, read books and pamphlets published in England, and modeled most of their political, cultural, and educational institutions on their English equivalents. Many, perhaps most, colonists considered themselves Englishmen and Englishwomen just as much as the men and women in England itself did. At the same time, however, life in the colonies was diverging in many ways from life in England. The physical environment was very different-vaster and less tamed. The population was more diverse as well. The area that would become the United States was a magnet for immigrants from many lands other than England: Scotland, Ireland, the European continent, as well as migrants from the Spanish and French Empires already established in America. And beginning with the first importation of slaves into Virginia, English North America became the destination for thousands of forcibly transplanted Africans. In addition, Europeans and Africans were interacting constantly with a native population. Despite the efforts of the colonists to isolate themselves from Indian society and create a culture all their own, the European, African, and Native American worlds could not remain entirely separate.
The colonists emulated English society and they were becoming more and more like one another. To the degree that they were shaped by the character of their own regions, they were becoming more and more diverse. Although Americans would ultimately discover that they had enough in common to join together to form a single nation, these regional differences continued to affect their society well beyond the colonial period.
THE COLONIAL POPULATION
and Natural Increase
Not until long after the beginning of European colonization did Europeans and Africans in North America outnumber the native population. But after uncertain beginnings at Jamestown and Immigration Plymouth, the nonnative population grew rapidly and substantially, through continued immigration and through natural increase, until by the late seventeenth century Europeans and Africans became the dominant population groups along the Atlantic coast.
A lew of the early English settlers were members of the upper classes-usually the younger sons of the lesser gentry, men who stood to inherit no land at home and aspired to establish estates for themselves in America. For the most part, however, the early English population was very unaristocratic. It included some members of the emerging middle class, businessmen who migrated to America for religious or commercial reasons, or (like John Winthrop) both. But the dominant element was English laborers. Some came to the New World independently. The religious dissenters who formed the bulk of the population of early New England, for example, were men and women of modest means who arranged their own passage, brought their families with them, and established themselves immediately on their own land. But in the Chesapeake, at least three-fourths of the immigrants in the seventeenth century arrived as indentured servants.
Indentured Servitude
The system of temporary servitude in the New World developed out of existing practices in England. Young men and women bound themselves to masters for a fixed term of servitude (usually four to five years). In return they received passage to America, food, and shelter. Upon completion of their
Origins terms of service> male indentures were supposed to receive such benefits as clothing, tools, and occasionally land; in reality, however, many left service without anything, unprepared and unequipped to begin earning a living on their own. Roughly one-ourth of the indentures in the Chesapeake were women, most of whom worked as domestic servants. Because men greatly outnumbered women in the region in the seventeenth century,
66 .
SOCIETY AND CULTURE IN PROVINCIAL AMERICA
67
PACIFIC
OCEAN
\ . El Pasd del Norte 5X1659) \
\ v.......„
Forests
Area of non-Indian settlement
Forts
Towns or outposts
.A*
Fort St. Louis (1685)
LaFoii
St.E
v . , supe/f,, SauItSte. Marie <>*1'	'.(1641)
Fort Mackinac
ntdu	61700}» /
Esprit (1666)
■ .Green Bay .£ S (1634) -
t
Fort St. ^ouis — (1&2)*,''
Fort Creveccyeur* ,. (1680) •/
FortTadoussac> / (1600) /
//?'
Quebec^ Trois Rivieres
(1634j^v
“C P9"?xr
Fort Frontenac -J •»	)	' ’
(1B73)^' IW*.
V1633&
Plymouth 0 io Boston (1630) e (1620) i Providence <1$36)C* V
Hartford (1635j4~ <’ , New Haven (1636)*	' ’
’New Amsterdam
Fort St. Joseph (1680)
^Cahokia (1698) ^Kaskaskia (1700)
'' -- y
x *fz Fort Prudhomme Arkansas Post*)' (Memphis) (1682)
-- ,..,(1686) ‘
Fort Maurepas 1	(1699)
? '<•’
Philadelphia (1682) (New York City) Annapolis
(1626)
(c. 1648)>f Wilmington j .^(1-665)
St. Mary’s (1634)*' ’
Jamestown (1607) w'	\ J J ANTIC
Edenton (1658).„ - OCEAN
Charles Town (Charleston)
(1670).
Port Royal* (1683)
Pensacola
.(1696)
Gulf of Mexico
Wilmington (1665)
# Fort San Mateo *St Augustine
- \St. Lucia~-\,
\5751 \
Saltillo (1575).
"Y
(17^0) u S,


NORTH AMERICA IN 1700
This map reveals how tiny a proportion of North America was settled by Europeans in 1700, nearly a century after the first English settlements began there. The largest area of settlement was the thin fringe of colonies along the northern Atlantic seaboard. There were additional scattered settlements, almost all of them tiny, in eastern Canada, along the southern Atlantic coast, in the Mississippi Valley, and in the Southwest. * What accounted for the isolated colonies in noncoastal areas of North America?
women could reasonably expect to marry when their terms of servitude expired. Male domestic servants, however, usually had no such options.
Most indentured servants came to the colonies voluntarily, but not all. Beginning as early as 1617, the English government occasionally dumped shiploads of convicts in America to be sold into servitude, although some criminals, according to Captain John Smith, Mid chuse to be hanged ere they would go thither, and were.” The government also sent prisoners taken in battles with the Scots and the Irish in the 1650s, as well as other groups deemed undesirable: orphans, vagrants, paupers, and those who were “lewd and dangerous. Other involuntary immigrants were neither dangerous nor indigent but were simply victims of kidnapping, or “impressment, by aggressive and unscrupulous investors and promoters.
It was not difficult to understand why the system of indentured servitude proved so appealing to colonial employers—particularly once it became clear, as it quickly did, that the Indian population could not easily be transformed into a servile workforce. The indenture system provided a means of coping with the severe labor shortage in the New World. In the Chesapeake, the headright system (by which masters received additional land
grants for every servant they imported) offered another incentive. For the servants themselves, the attractions were not always so clear. Those who came voluntarily often did so to escape troubles in England; others came in the hope of establishing themselves on land or in trades of their own when their terms of service expired. Yet the reality often differed sharply from the hope.
Some former indentures managed to establish themselves successfully as farmers, tradespeople, or artisans. Others (mostly males) found themselves without land, without employment, without families, and without prospects. A large floating pop-Realffies of ulation of young single men traveled restlessly from place to place, often in groups, in search of work or land and were a potential (and at times actual) source of social
unrest, particularly in the Chesapeake. Even free laborers who found employment or land and settled down with families often did not stay put for very long. The phenomenon of families simply pulling up stakes and moving to another, more promising location every several years was one of the most prominent characteristics of the colonial population.
Indentured servitude remained an important source of population growth well into the eighteenth century, but beginning
Indentured
Servitude
