554 * CHAPTER 20
BOSSES OF THE SENATE”
(1889), BY JOSEPH KEPPLER Keppler was a popular political cartoonist of the late nineteenth century who shared the growing concern about the power of the trusts—portrayed here as bloated, almost reptilian figures standing menacingly over the members of the U.S. Senate, to whose chamber the "people's entrance" is "closed." (© The Granger Collection, New York) one of the first, was Hull House, which opened in 1889 in Chicago as a result of the efforts of the social worker Jane Addams. It became a model for more than 400 similar institutions throughout the nation. Staffed by members of the educated middle class, settlement houses sought to help immigrant families adapt to the language and customs of their new country. Settlement houses avoided the condescension and moral disapproval of earlier philanthropic efforts. But they generally embraced a belief that middle-class Americans had a responsibility to impart their own values to immigrants and to teach them how to create middle-class lifestyles.
Young college women (mostly unmarried) were important participants in the settlement house movement. Working in a settlement house, which was a protected site that served mostly women, was consistent with the widespread assumption that women needed to be sheltered from difficult environments. The clean and well-tended buildings that settlement houses created were not only a model for immigrant women, but an appropriate site for elite women as well.
The settlement houses helped create another important el-
ement of progressive reform: the profession of social work.
Workers at Hull House, for example, maintained a close
relationship with the University of Chicago’s pioneering work in the field of sociology. A growing number of programs for the professional training of social workers began to appear in the nation’s leading universities, partly in response to the activities of the settlements.
The Allure of Expertise
As the emergence of the social work profession suggests, pro gressives involved in humanitarian efforts placed a high value on knowledge and expertise. Even nonscientific problems, they believed, could be analyzed and solved scientifically-Many reformers came to believe that only enlightened experts and well-designed bureaucracies could create the stability and order America needed.
Some reformers even spoke of the creation of a new civilization, in which the expertise of scientists and engineers could e brought to bear on the problems of the economy and society. The social scientist Thorstein Veblen, for example, proposed a new economic system in which power would reside m the hands of highly trained engineers. Only they, he argued, ou fully understand the "machine process” by which mod
ern society must be governed.
The Professions
The late nineteenth century saw a dramatic expansion in the number of Americans engaged in administrative and professional tasks. Industries needed managers, technicians, and accountants as well as workers. Cities required commercial, medical, legal, and educational services. New technology required scientists and engineers, who, in turn, required institutions and instructors to train them. By the turn of the century, those performing these services had come to constitute a distinct social group-what some historians have called a new middle class.
The new middle class placed a high value on education and individual accomplishment. By the early twentieth century, its millions of members were building organizations and establishing standards to secure their position in society. The idea of professionalism had been a frail one in America even as late as 1880. When every patent-medicine salesman could claim to be a doctor, when every frustrated politician could set up shop as a lawyer, when anyone who could read and write could pose as a teacher, a professional label by itself carried little weight. There were, of course, skilled and responsible doctors, lawyers, teachers, and
others; but they had no way of controlling or distinguishing themselves clearly from the amateurs, charlatans, and incompetents who presumed to practice their trades. As the demand for professional services increased, so did the pressures for reform.
Among the first to respond was the medical profession. In 1901, doctors who considered themselves trained professionals reorganized the American Medical Association into a national professional society. By 1920, nearly two-thirds of all American doctors were members. The AMA quickly called
for strict, scientific standards for admission to the practice of medicine, with doctors themselves serving as protectors of the standards. State governments responded by passing new laws requiring the licensing of all physicians. By 1900, medical education at a few medical schools-notably Johns Hopkins in Baltimore (founded in 1893)-compared favorably with that in the leading institutions of Europe. Doctors such as William H. Welch at Hopkins revolutionized the teaching of medicine by moving students out of the classrooms and into laboratories and clinics.
There was similar movement in other professions. By 1916, lawyers in all forty-eight states had established professional bar associations. The nation’s law schools accordingly expanded greatly. Businessmen supported the creation of schools of business administration and created their own national organizations: the National Association of Manufacturers In 1895 and the United States Chamber of Commerce in 1912. Even farmers, long the symbol of the romantic spirit of individualism, responded to the new order by forming, through the National Farm Bureau
American
Medical
Association
National Association of Manufacturers
THE PROGRESSIVES
555
THE INFANT WELFARE SOCIETY, CHICAGO
The Infant Welfare Society was one of many "helping" organizations in Chicago and other large cities—many of them closely tied to the settlement houses—that strove to help immigrants adapt to American life and create safe and healthy living conditions. Here, a volunteer helps an immigrant mother learn to bathe her baby. (The Library of Congress (LC-DIG-npcc-33267)) Federation, a network of agricultural organizations designed to spread scientific farming methods.
While removing the untrained and incompetent, the admission requirements also protected those already in the professions from excessive competition and lent prestige and status to their trades. Some professionals used their entrance requirements to exclude blacks, women, immigrants, and other "undesirables” from their ranks. Others used them simply to keep the numbers down, to ensure that demand would remain high.
Women and the Professions
Both by custom and by active barriers of law and prejudice, American women found themselves excluded from most of the emerging professions. But a substantial number of middle-class women-particularly those emerging from the new women’s colleges and coeducational state universities-entered professional careers nevertheless.
A few women managed to establish themselves as physicians, lawyers, engineers, scientists, and corporate managers in the early 1900s. Several leading medical schools admitted women, and in 1900 about 5 percent of all American physicians were female (a proportion that remained
unchanged until the 1960s). Most, however, turned by necessity to those "helping” professions that society considered vaguely domestic and thus suitable for women: settlement houses, social work, and most important, teaching. Indeed, in the late nineteenth century, more than two-thirds of all grammar school teachers were women, and perhaps 90 percent of all
Female-
Dominated
Professions
DEBATING THE PAST
Progressivism
T I WT T I
ear^ ^50s, most Historians generally agreed on the central characteristics U IN JL JL JLJ of progressivism. It was just what progressives themselves said it was: a movement by the "people” to curb the power of the "special interests." George Mowry challenged this traditional view in The California Progressives (1951). He described the reform movement in California not as a people's protest, but, rather, as an effort by a small and privileged group of business and professional men to limit the power of large new corporations and labor unions. Richard Hofstadter expanded on this idea in The Age of Reform (1955), describing progressives throughout the country as people suffering from "status anxiety”—old, formerly influential, upper-middle-class families seeking to restore their fading prestige by challenging the powerful new institutions that had begun to displace them.
The Mowry-Hofstadter thesis provoked new challenges and new interpretations of the meaning of progressivism. Gabriel Kolko, in The Triumph of Conservatism (1963), rejected the Mowry-Hofstadter idea that progressivism represented the efforts of a displaced elite. Progressivism, he argued, was an effort to regulate business undertaken, not by the "people" or "displaced elites," but by corporate leaders, who saw in government supervision a way to protect themselves from competition. Martin Sklar's The Corporate Reconstruction of American Capitalism (1988) is a more sophisticated version of a similar argument.
A more moderate challenge to the "psychological" interpretation of progressivism came from historians embracing a new "organizational" view of history. In The Search for Order, 1877-1920 (1967), Robert Wiebe presented progressivism as a response to dislocations in American life brought on by rapid changes in the economy. Economic power had moved to large, national organizations, while social and political life remained centered primarily in local communities. The result was widespread disorder and unrest. Progressivism, Wiebe argued, was the effort of a "new middle class"—a class tied to the emerging national economy—to stabilize and enhance their position in society by creating national institutions suitable for the new national economy.
Some historians continued to argue that progressivism was a movement of the people against the special interests. J. Joseph Huthmacher argued in 1962 that much of the force behind progressivism came from members of the working class, especially immigrants, who pressed for such
reforms as workmen's compensation and wage and hour laws. John Buenker, in Urban Liberalism and Progressive Reform (1973), claimed that political machines and urban "bosses" were important sources of reform energy and helped create twentieth-century liberalism.
Other historians writing in the 1970s and 1980s attempted to link reform to some of the broad processes of political change that had created the public battles of the era. Richard L. McCormick's From Realignment to Reform (1981), a study of political change in New York State, argued that the crucial change in this era was the decline of the political parties and the rise of interest groups working for particular social and economic goals.
Many historians see progressivism as rooted in gender and have focused on the role of women (and the vast network of voluntary associations they created) in shaping and promoting progressive reform, Historians Kathryn Sklar, Linda Gordon, Ruth Rosen, and Elaine Tyler May, among others, argued that some progressive battles were part of an effort by women to protect their interests within the domestic sphere in the face of jarring challenges from the new industrial world. This protective urge drew women reformers to such issues as temperance, divorce, prostitution, and the regulation of female and child labor. Other women worked to expand their own roles
professional women were teachers. For educated black women, in particular, the existence of segregated schools in the South created a substantial market for African American teachers.
Women also dominated other professional activities. Nursing had become primarily a women’s field during and after the Civil War. By the early twentieth century, it was adopting professional standards. And many women entered academia-often receiving advanced degrees at such predominantly male institutions as the University of Chicago, MIT, or Columbia, and finding professional opportunities in the new and expanding women’s colleges.
WOMEN AND REFORM
The prominence of women in reform movements is one of the most striking features of progressivism. In most states in the early twentieth century, women could not vote. They almost
Key Role of
Women in Reform Causes
never field public office. They had footholds in only a few (am usually primarily female) professions and lived in a culture ii which most people, male and female, be lieved that women were not suited fc the public world. What, then, explain the prominent role so many wome:
played in the reform activities of the period?
The "New Woman"
The phenomenon of the "new woman,” widely rem; upon at the time, was a product of social and econ Socioeconomic changes that affected the private woi Origins of the much as the public one, even if New Woman changes affected mostly middle-class pie. By the end of the nineteenth cer almost all income-producing activity had moved out o home and into the factory or the office. At the same
556 •
DM#\n d .’£i	R.
Grand Charge on the Enemy's Works,
Other historians have sought to place progressiv-ism in a broader context. Daniel Rodgers's Atlantic Crossings (1998) is a study of how European reforms influenced American progressives. Both Michael McGerr, in A Fierce Discontent (2003), and Alan Dawley, in Changing the World (2003), have characterized progressivism as a fundamentally moral undertaking. McGerr viewed it as an effort by the middle class to create order and stability, whereas Dawley saw it as an effort by groups on the left to attack social injustice.
Given the range of disagreement over the nature of the progressive movement, it is hardly surprising that some historians have despaired of finding any coherent definition for the term. Peter Filene, for one, suggested in 1970 that the concept of progressivism as a "movement" had outlived its usefulness. But Daniel Rodgers, in an important 1982 article, "In Search of Progressivism," disagreed. The very diversity of progressivism, he argued, accounted both for its enormous impact on its time and for its capacity to reveal to us today the "noise and tumult" of an age of rapid social change. •
UNDERSTAND, ANALYZE,
AND EVALUATE
1.	What is the "psychological" interpretation of how people became progressives?
2.	What is the gendered view of progressive reform advanced by historians?
3.	Was progressivism a "people’s" movement?
(© Private Collection/The Bridgeman Art Library)
in the public world. Progressivism cannot be understood, historians of women contend, without understanding the role of women and the importance of issues involving the family and the private world within it.
children were beginning school at earlier ages and spending more time there. For many wives and mothers who did not work for wages, the home was no longer an all-consuming place. Technological innovations such as running water, electricity, and eventually household appliances made housework less onerous (even if higher standards of cleanliness counterbalanced many of these gains).
Declining family size also changed the lives of many women. Middle-class white women in the late nineteenth century had fewer children than their mothers and grandmothers had borne. They also lived longer. Many women thus now spent fewer years with young children in the home and lived more years after their children were grown.
Some educated women shunned marriage, believing that only by remaining single could they play the roles they envisioned in the public world. Single women were among ^he most prominent female reformers of the time: Jane Addams and Lillian Wald in the settlement house movement,
rances Willard in the temperance movement, Anna ioward Shaw in the suffrage movement, and many others, ome of these women lived alone. Others lived with other women, often in long-term relationships-some of them quietly romantic-that were known at the time as "Boston mar-
agesT The divorce rate also rose rapidly in the late nine-:enth century, from one divorce for every twenty-one tarriages in 1880 to one in nine by 1916; women initiated mii'nrirv nf rhpm.
"Boston
Marriages’1 2 3
The Clubwomen
Among the most visible signs of the increasing public roles of women in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries were the women's clubs, which proliferated rapidly beginning in the 1880s and 1890s and became the vanguard of many important reforms.
*	557
558 ® CHAPTER 20
The women’s clubs began largely as cultural organizations to provide middle- and upper-class women with an outlet for their intellectual energies. In 1892, when women formed the GFWC General Federation of Women’s Clubs to coordinate the activities of local organizations, there were more than 100,000 members in nearly 500
clubs. By 1917, there were over 1 million.
By the early twentieth century, the clubs were becoming less concerned with cultural activities and more concerned with contributing to social betterment. Because many club members were from wealthy families, some organizations had substantial funds at their disposal to make their influence felt. And ironically, because women could not vote, the clubs had a nonpartisan image that made them difficult for politicians to dismiss.
Black women occasionally joined clubs dominated by whites. But most such clubs excluded blacks, and so African Americans formed clubs of their own. Some of them affiliated with the General Federation, but most became part of the independent
National Association of Colored Women. Some black clubs also took positions on issues of particular concern to African Americans, such as lynching and aspects of segregation.
The women’s club movement seldom raised overt challenges to prevailing assumptions about the proper role of women in society. Few clubwomen were willing to accept the arguments .	of such committed feminists as Charlotte
A |-Jt JOT T(2
Space for	Perkins Gilman, who in her 1898 book,
Women	Women and Economics, argued that the tra-
ditional definition of gender roles was exploitive and obsolete. Instead, the club movement allowed women to define a space for themselves in the public world without openly challenging the existing, male-dominated order.
Much of what the clubs did was uncontroversial: planting trees; supporting schools, libraries, and settlement houses; building hospitals and parks. But clubwomen were also an important force in winning passage of state (and ultimately federal) laws that regulated the conditions of woman and child labor, established government inspection



A^AAAA



ul b



THE COLORED WOMEN’S LEAGUE OF WASHINGTON, D.C.
The women’s club movement spread widely thro h A African American women gathered to improve social and political conditions. The Colored Women’s League of Washington DC ™er'Can 16 and Produced a number of organizations through which by Sara Fleetwood, a registered nurse who was the wife of Christian Fleetwood, one of the first African American soldiers to ’ mGm h	3ppear in ^is 1894 Photograph, was founded in 1892
The league she founded was committed to "racial uplift," and it consisted mostly of teachers, who created nurseries for the jV606176 1 6 ^on9ress'onal Medal of Honor for his heroism in the Civil War. League are shown here gathered on the steps of Frederick Douglass’s home on Capitol Hill Sara Fleetwood k in tkQ T	WOmen w^° worked and evening schools for adults. Members of the
second row on the far right. (The Library of Congress)
THE PROGRESSIVES
♦ 559 of workplaces, regulated the food and drug Industries, reformed policies toward the Indian tribes, applied new standards to urban housing, and, perhaps most notably, outlawed the manufacture and sale of alcohol. They were instrumental in pressuring state legislatures in most states to provide "mother’s pensions” to widowed or abandoned mothers with small children-a system that ultimately became absorbed into the Social Security system. In 1912, they pressured Congress into establishing the Children’s Bureau in the Labor Department, an agency directed to develop policies to protect children.
In many of these efforts, the clubwomen formed alliances with other women’s groups, such as the Women’s Trade Union
Women’s League (WTUL), founded in 1903 by fe-Trade Union ma^e union members and upper-class re-League	formers. It was committed to persuading
women to join unions. In addition to working on behalf of protective legislation for women, WTUL members held public meetings on behalf of female workers, raised money to support strikes, marched on picket lines, and bailed
striking women out of jail.
Woman Suffrage
Perhaps the largest single reform movement of the progressive era, indeed one of the largest in American history, was the fight for woman suffrage.
It is sometimes difficult for today’s Americans to understand why the suffrage issue could have become
Radical the source of such enormous controversy. But Challenge of the time, suffrage seemed to many of its
WOMEN S
Suffrage critics a very radical demand, in part because of the rationale some of its early supporters
used to advance it. Throughout the late nineteenth century, many suffrage advocates presented their views in terms of "natural rights,” arguing that women deserved the same rights as men-including, first and foremost, the right to vote. Elizabeth Cady Stanton, for example, wrote in 1892 of woman as The arbiter of her own destiny ... if we are to consider her as a citizen, as a member of a great nation, she must have the same rights as all other members.” This was an argument that boldly challenged the views of the many men and women who believed that society required a distinctive female "sphere” in which women would serve first and foremost as wives and mothers. And so a powerful antisuffrage movement emerged, dominated by men but with the active support of many women. Opponents railed against the threat suffrage posed to the "natural order” of civilization. Antisuffragists, many of them women, associated suffrage with divorce (not without some reason, since many suffrage advocates also supported making it easier for women to obtain a divorce). They linked suffrage with promiscuity, immorality, and neglect of children.
In the first years of the twentieth century, the suffrage movement began to overcome this opposition and win some substantial victories, in part because suffragists were becoming better organized and more politically sophisticated than their opponents. Under the leadership of Anna Howard Shaw, a Boston social worker, and Carrie Chapman Catt, a journalist NAWSA from Iowa, membership in the National
American Woman Suffrage Association (NAWSA) grew from about 13,000 in 1893 to over 2 million in 1917. The movement gained strength because many of its most prominent leaders began to justify suffrage in "safer,” less threatening ways. Suffrage, some supporters began to argue, would not challenge the "separate sphere” in which women resided. It was, they claimed, precisely because women occupied
SHIRTWAIST WORKERS ON STRIKE
The Womens Trade Union League was notable for bringing educated, middle-class women together with workers in efforts to improve factory and labor conditions. These picketing women are workers in the "Ladies Tailors” garment factory in New York. (The Library of Congress (LC-DIG-ggbain-04507)) 560 * CHAPTER 20
SUFFRAGE PAGEANT, 1913
On March 3, 1913—the day before Woodrow Wilson’s inauguration as president—more than 5,000 supporters of woman suffrage staged a parade in Washington, D.C., that overshadowed Wilson’s own arrival there. Crowds estimated at over half a million watched the parade, not all of them admirers of the woman suffrage movement, and some of the onlookers attacked the marchers. The police did nothing to stop the attacks. This photograph depicts a suffragist, Florence Noyes, costumed as Liberty, posing in front of the U.S. Treasury Building, part of a pageant accompanying the parade. Woman suffrage was one of the most important and impassioned reform movements of the progressive era. (The Library of Congress) a distinct sphere-because as mothers and wives and homemakers they had special experiences and special sensitivities to bring to public life-that woman suffrage could make such an important contribution to politics.
In particular, many suffragists argued that enfranchising women would help the temperance movement, by giving its largest group of supporters a political voice. Some suffrage advocates claimed that once women had the vote, war would become a thing of the past, since women would-by their calming, maternal influence-help curb the belligerence of men. That was one reason why World War I gave a final, decisive push to the movement for suffrage.
Suffrage also attracted support for other, less optimistic reasons. Many middle-class people found persuasive the argument that if blacks, immigrants, and other "base” groups had access to the franchise, then it was a matter
not only of justice but of common sense to allow educated, "well-born” women to vote.
The principal triumphs of the suffrage movement began in 1910, when Washington became the first state in four-
Nineteenth teen Vears t0 extenc^ suffrage to women. Amendment California followed a year later, and four other western states in 1912. In 1913,
Illinois became the first state east of the Mississippi to embrace woman suffrage. And in 1917 and 1918, New York and Michigan-two of the most populous states in the Union-gave women the vote. By 1919, thirty-nine states had granted women the right to vote in at least some elections; fifteen had allowed them full participation. In 1920, finally, suffragists won ratification of the Nineteenth Amendment, which guaranteed political rights to women throughout the nation.
To some feminists, however, the victory seemed less than
complete. Alice Paul, head of the militant National Woman’s
Conservative
Arguments for Suffrage
Party (founded in 1916), never accepted the relatively conservative ’'separate sphere” justification for suffrage. She argued that the Nineteenth Amendment alone would not be sufficient to protect women’s rights. Women needed more: a constitutional amendment that would provide clear, legal protection for their rights and would prohibit all discrimination on the basis of sex. But Alice Paul’s argument found limited favor even among many of the most important leaders of the recently triumphant suffrage crusade.
THE ASSAULT ON THE PARTIES
Sooner or later, most progressive goals required the involvement of government. Only government, reformers agreed, could effectively counter the many powerful private interests that threatened the nation. But American government at the dawn of the new century was, progressives believed, poorly
Reforming adapted to perform their ambitious tasks. At
Government every level, political institutions were outmoded, inefficient, and corrupt. Before progressives could reform society effectively, they would have to reform government itself. Many reformers believed the first step must be an assault on the dominant role the political par-
ties played in the life of the state.
Attacks on party dominance had been frequent in the lai nineteenth century. Greenbackism and Populism, for exampl a been efforts to break the hammerlock with which tf
RepubhcanS and Democrats controlled public life. Th n ependent Republicans (or mugwumps) had also attempte to challenge the grip of partisanship.
THE PROGRESSIVES
• 561 These early assaults enjoyed some success. In the 1880s and 1890s, for example, most states adopted the secret ballot. Prior to that, the political parties themselves had printed ballots (or Tickets’), with the names of the party’s candidates, and no others. They distributed the tickets to their supporters, who then simply went to the polls to deposit them in the ballot box. The old system had made it possible for bosses to monitor the voting behavior of their constituents; it had also made it difficult for voters to ’split” their tickets-to vote for candidates of different parties for different offices. The new secret ballot-printed by the government and distributed at the polls to be filled out and deposited in secret-helped chip away at the power of the parties over voters.
Municipal Reform
Many progressives, such as Lincoln Steffens, believed the impact of party rule was most damaging in the cities. Municipal government therefore became one of the first targets of those working for political reform.
The muckrakers struck a responsive chord among a powerful group of urban, middle-class progressives. For several decades after the Civil War, "respectable” citizens of the nation's large cities had avoided participation in municipal government. Viewing politics as a debased and demeaning activity, they shrank from contact with the "vulgar” ele-
Middle-Class ments who were coming to dominate Progressives public life. By the end of the century, however, a new generation of activists-some of them members of old aristocratic families, others a part of the new middle class-were taking a growing interest in government.
These activists faced a formidable array of opponents. In addition to challenging the powerful city bosses and their entrenched political organizations, they were attacking a large group of special interests: saloon owners, brothel keepers, and, perhaps most significantly, those businessmen who had established lucrative relationships with the urban political machines and who viewed reform as a threat to their profits. Finally, there was the great constituency of urban working people, many of them recent immigrants, to whom the machines were a source of needed jobs and services. Gradually, however, the reformers gained in political strength.
were replaced by an elected, nonpartisan commission. In 1907, Des Moines, Iowa, adopted its own version of the commission plan, and other cities followed.
Another approach to municipal reform was the city-manager plan, by which elected officials hired an outside expert-often a professionally trained business manager or engineer-to take
City-Manager charge of the city g°vernment- The citY Plan	manager would presumably remain un-
tainted by the corrupting influence of politics. By the end of the progressive era in the early 1920s, almost 400 cities were operating under commissions, and
another 45 employed city managers.
In most urban areas, the enemies of partnership had to settle for less absolute victories. Some cities made the election of mayors nonpartisan (so that the parties could not choose the candidates) or moved them to years when no presidential or congressional races were in progress (to reduce the influence of the large turnouts that party organizations produced). Reformers tried to make city councilors run at large, to limit the influence of ward leaders and district bosses. They tried to strengthen the power of the mayor at the expense of the city council, on the assumption that reformers were more likely to succeed in getting a sympathetic mayor elected than they were to win control of the entire council.
Some of the most successful reformers emerged from conventional political structures that progressives came to control.
TOM JOHNSON
As sentiment for municipal reform grew in intensity in the late nineteenth century, it became possible for progressive mayors committed to ending "boss rule” to win election over machine candidates in some of America’s largest cities. One of the most prominent was Tom Johnson, the reform mayor of Cleveland. Johnson made a fortune in the steel and streetcar business and then entered politics, partly as a result of reading Henry George’s Poverty and Progress. He became mayor in 1901 and in his four terms waged strenuous battles against party bosses and corporate interests. He won many fights, but he lost what he considered his most important one: the struggle for municipal ownership of public utilities. (© Western Reserve Historical Society) New Forms of Governance
One of the first major successes came in Galveston, Texas, where the old city government proved unable
Commission “ d“‘ "“'i” '"““t ’ J,
Plan	structive tidal wave m 19OU.
Capitalizing on public dismay,
reformers, many of them local businessmen, won ap-
proval of a new city charter. The mayor and council
Social Democracy
AMERICA IN THE WORLD
tq w t i"| it ir TTP ener9Y- enthusiasm, and organization drove the reform ef-U JN U il 1V1 U U w forts in America in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, much of it a result of social crises and political movements in the United States. But the age of reform," as some scholars have called it, was not just an American phenomenon. It was part of a wave of social experimentation that was occurring through much of the industrial world.
Several industrializing nations—the United States, Britain, Germany, and France—adopted the term "progressivism" for their efforts, but the term that most broadly defined the new reform energies was "social democracy." Social democrats in many countries shared a belief in the betterment of society, not through religion or inherited ideology, but through the accumulation of knowledge. They favored improving the social condition of all people through economic reforms and government programs of social protection. And they believed that these changes could come through peaceful political change, rather than through radicalism or revolution. Political parties committed to these goals emerged in several countries: the Labour Party in Britain, Social Democratic parties in various European nations, and the short-lived Progressive Party in the United States. Intellectuals, academics, and government officials across the world shared the knowledge they were accumulating and observed social programs. An important moment in the growth of social democracy were the many Paris expositions of 1889 and 1900. Their symbol was the famous Eiffel Tower, and their meaning for many progressives was the possibilities of progress through industrial innovation. Not only tourists, but progressive experts as well, visited the Paris expositions; and they held meetings while they were there to share their visions of the future.
At the turn of the century, American reformers visited Germany, France, Britain, Belgium, and the Netherlands, observing the reforms in progress there, while European reformers visited the United States. Reformers from both the United States and Europe were also fascinated by the advanced social experiments in Australia and, especially, New Zealand—which the American reformer Henry Demarest Lloyd once called "the political brain of the modern world." New Zealand's dramatic experiments in factory regulation, woman suffrage, old-age pensions, progressive taxation, and labor arbitration gradually found counterparts in many other nations. William Allen White, a progressive journalist from Kansas, said of this time: "We were parts of one another, in the United States and Europe. Something was welding us into one social and economic whole with local political variations ... [all] fighting a common cause."
(© Archives Charmet/The Bridgeman Art Library)
Social democracy—or, as it was sometimes called in the United States and elsewhere, social justice or the Social Gospel—was responsible for many public programs. Germany began a system of social insurance for its citizens in the 1880s while undertaking a massive
Tom Johnson, the celebrated reform mayor of Cleveland, waged
Tom Johnson a long war a§ainst the powerful streetcar interests in his city, fighting to lower streetcar fares to 3 cents, and ultimately to impose municipal ownership on certain basic utilities. After Johnson’s defeat and death, his talented aide Newton D. Baker won election as mayor and helped maintain Cleveland’s reputation as the best-governed city in America. Hazen Pingree of Detroit, Samuel "Golden Rule” Jones of Toledo, and other mayors effectively challenged local party bosses to bring the spirit of reform into city government.
Statehouse Progressivism
The assault on boss rule in the cities did not, however, always produce results. Consequently, many progressives turned to state government as an agent for reform. They looked with particular scorn on state legislatures, whose ill-paid, undistinguished members, they believed, were generally incompetent, often corrupt, and totally controlled by party bosses. Reformers
562 ®
began looking for ways to circumvent the boss-controlled legislatures by increasing the power of the electorate.
Two of the most important changes were innovations first proposed by Populists in the 1890s: the initiative and the Initiative and referendum. The initiative allowed reform-Referendum ers to circumvent state legislatures by submitting new legislation directly to the voters m general elections. The referendum provided a method by which actions of the legislature could be returned to the electorate for approval. By 1918, more than twenty states had
enacted one or both of these reforms.
Similarly, the direct primary and the recall were efforts to limit the power of party and improve the quality of elected
Direct Primary and Recall
officials. The primary election was an attempt to take the selection of candidates away from the bosses and give it to the peo-.	P^e- Qn the South, it was also an effort to
?n?lt	voting~since primary voting, many white southerners
e leved, would be easier to control than general elections.) The

THE PROGRESSIVES
• 563 study of society that produced more than 140 volumes of "social investigation" of almost every aspect of the nation's life. French reformers pressed in the 1890s for factory regulation, assistance to the elderly, and progressive taxation. Britain pioneered the settlement houses in working-class areas of London—a movement that soon spread to the United States as well—and, like the United States, witnessed growing challenges to the power of monopolies at both the local and national level,
In many countries, social democrats felt pressure from the rising worldwide labor movement and from the rise of socialist parties in many industrial countries. Strikes, sometimes violent, were common in France, Germany, Britain, and the United States in the late nineteenth century. The more militant workers became, the more unions grew Social democrats did not always welcome the rise of militant labor movements, but they took them seriously and tried to use them to support their own reform efforts.
The politics of social democracy represented a great shift in the character of public life all over the industrial world. Instead of battles over the privileges of aristocrats or the power of monarchs, reformers now focused on the social problems of ordinary people and attempted to improve their lot. "The politics of the future are social politics," the British reformer Joseph Chamberlain said in the 1880s, referring to efforts to deal with the problems of ordinary citizens. That belief was fueling progressive efforts across the world in the years that Americans have come to call the "progressive era." •
UNDERSTAND, ANALYZE, AND EVALUATE
1.	What is social democracy? How does it differ from socialism?
2.	What progressive era reforms in American social and political life can be seen in other nations as well?
3.	Social democratic political parties continue to exist in many countries throughout the world. Why was the Progressive Party in the United States so short-lived?
Robert La Follette
regulate public utilities. In California, Governor Hiram Johnson limited the political power of the Southern Pacific Railroad. In New Jersey, Woodrow Wilson, the Princeton University president elected governor in 1910, used executive leadership to win reforms designed to end New Jersey’s widely denounced position as the "mother of trusts.”
The most celebrated state-level reformer was Robert M. La Follette of Wisconsin. Elected governor in 1900, he helped turn his state into what reformers across the nation described as a "laboratory of progressivism.” Under his leadership the Wisconsin
progressives won approval of direct primaries, initiatives, and referendums. They regulated railroads and utilities. They passed laws to regulate the workplace and provide compensation for laborers injured on the job. They instituted graduated taxes on inherited fortunes, and they nearly doubled state levies on railroads and other corporate interests. La Follette used his personal magnetism to widen public awareness of progressive goals. Reform was the responsibility not simply of politicians, he argued, but of newspapers, citizens’ groups, educational institutions, and business and professional organizations as well.
Parties and Interest Groups
The reformers did not, of course, eliminate parties from
American political life. But they did contribute to a decline in
~	party influence. Evidence of their impact
Decline of	r	,	,	, ,
Party	came from, among other things, the decline
Influence	in voter turnout. In the late nineteenth
century, up to 81 percent of eligible voters routinely turned out for national elections because of the
recall gave voters the right to remove a public official from office at a special election, which could be called after a sufficient number of citizens had signed a petition. By 1915, every state in the nation had instituted primary elections for at least some offices. The recall encountered more strenuous opposition, but a few states (such as California) adopted it as well.
Other reform measures attempted to clean up the legislatures themselves. Between 1903 and 1908, twelve states passed laws restricting lobbying by business interests in state legislatures. In those same years, twenty-two states banned campaign contributions by corporations, and twenty-four states forbade public officials to accept free passes from railroads. Many states also struggled successfully to create systems of workmen’s compensation for workers injured on the job. And starting in 191b reformers successfully created pensions for widows with dependent children.
Reform efforts proved most effective in states that ele-
vated vigorous and committed politicians to positions of
leadership. In New York, Governor Charles Evans Hughes
exploited progressive sentiment to create a commission to
ROBERT LA FOLLETTE CAMPAIGNING IN WISCONSIN
After three terms as governor of Wisconsin, La Follette began a long career in the U.S. Senate in 1906, during which he worked uncompromisingly for advanced progressive reforms-so uncompromisingly, in fact, that he was often almost completely isolated. He titled a chapter of his autobiography "Alone in the Senate." La Follette had a greater impact on his own state, whose politics he and his sons dominated for nearly forty years and where he was able to win passage of many reforms that the federal government resisted. (The Library of Congress (LC-DIG-ggbain-06406)) 564 * CHAPTER 20
strength of party loyalty. In the early twentieth century, while turnout remained high by today's standards, the figure declined markedly as parties grew weaker. In the presidential election of 1900, 73 percent of the electorate voted. By 1912, that figure had declined to about 59 percent. Never again did voter turnout reach as high as 70 percent.
Why did voter turnout decline in these years? The secret ballot was one reason. Party bosses had less ability to get voters to the polls. Illiterate voters had trouble reading the new ballots. Party bosses lost much of their authority and were unable to mobilize voters as successfully as they had in the past. But perhaps the most important reason for the decline of party rule (and voter turnout) was that other power centers were beginning to replace them. They have become known as "interest groups.” Beginning late in the nineteenth century and accelerating rapidly in the twentieth, new organizations emerged outside the party system: professional organizations, trade associations representing businesses and industries, labor organizations, farm lobbies, and many others. Social workers, the settlement house movement, women’s clubs, and others learned to operate as interest groups to advance their demands.
SOURCES OF PROGRESSIVE REFORM
Middle-class reformers, most of them from the East, dominated the public image and much of the substance of progressivism in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. But they were not alone in seeking to improve social conditions. Working-class Americans, African Americans, westerners, and even party bosses also played crucial roles in advancing some of the important reforms of the era.
Labor, the Machine, and Reform
Although the American Federation of Labor, and its leader Samuel Gompers, remained largely aloof from many of the reform efforts of the time (reflecting Gompers’s firm belief that workers should not rely on government to improve their lot), some unions played important roles in reform battles. Between 1911 and 1913, thanks to political pressure from labor groups such as the newly formed Union Labor Party, California passed a child-labor law, a workmen’s compensation law, and a limitation on working hours for women. Union pressures contributed to the passage of similar laws in many other states as well.
One result of the assault on the parties was a change in the party organizations themselves, which attempted to adapt to the new realities so as to preserve their influence. They sometimes allowed their machines to become vehicles of social reform. One example was New York City’s Tammany Hall, the
Percentage
818 79.4
Triangle
Shirtwaist
Fire
nation’s oldest and most notorious city machine. Its astute leader, Charles Francis Murphy, began in the early years of the century to fuse the techniques of boss rule with some of the concerns of social reformers. Tammany began to use its political power on behalf of legislation to improve working conditions, protect child laborers, and eliminate the worst abuses of the industrial economy.
In 1911, a terrible fire swept through the factory of the Triangle Shirtwaist Company in New York City; 146 workers, most of them women, died. Many of them had been trapped inside the burning building because management had locked the emergency exits to prevent malingering.
For the next three years, a state commission studied not only the background of the fire but also the general condition of the industrial workplace. It was responding to intense public pressure from women’s groups and New York City labor unions-and to quiet pressure from Tammany Hall. By 1914, the commission had issued a series of reports calling for major reforms in the conditions of modern labor. The report itself was a classic progressive document, based on the testimony of experts, filled with statistics and technical data.
Yet, when its recommendations reached the New York legislature, its most effective supporters were not middle-class progressives but two Tammany Democrats from working-class backgrounds: Senator Robert F. Wagner and Assemblyman Alfred E. Smith. With the support of Murphy and the backing
77.5
79.3
79.3
74.7
73.2
65.2 65.4
58.8
61.6
49.2
1876 1880 1884 1888 1892 1896 1900 1904	1908 1912 1916 1920
Year
ye?eLDmentARfTiC|,PtAT!°k PRES,DENT,AL ELECTIONS, 1876-1920 One of the striking art shows he sVead" 7	7'^	** Significant decline P°Pular Participation in P°life ™S
remled hLh bv mod 77 7°f ‘Urn°Ut " P-sidential elections front ,876 to 1920. Turnon, because women had 7" s Lu61”1	** aberrant elec,ion °f 1320, in which turnout dropped sharply
t m an Zraoe ra e 7	7 ha<* n°'	P-‘-ipa,e in elections in large nunthersf
• Whet were some of the reasons for this decline?
THE PROGRESSIVES
♦ 565 of other Tammany legislators, they steered through a series of pioneering labor laws that imposed strict regulations on factory owners and established effective mechanisms for enforcement.
Western Progressives
The American West produced some of the most notable progressive leaders of the time: Hiram Johnson of California, George Norris of Nebraska, William Borah of Idaho, and others-almost all of whom spent at least some of their political careers in the U.S. Senate. For western states, the most important target of reform energies was not state or local governments, which had relatively little power, but the federal government, which exercised a kind of authority in the West that it had never possessed in the East. That was in part because some of the most important issues to the future of the West required action above the state level. Disputes over water, for example, almost always involved rivers and streams that crossed state lines. The
question of which states had the rights to the waters of the Colorado River created a political battle that no state government could resolve; the federal government had to arbitrate.
More significant, perhaps, the federal government exercised enormous power over the lands and resources of the western states and provided substantial subsidies to the region in the form of land grants and support for railroad and water projects. Huge areas of the West remained (and still remain) public lands, controlled by Washington-a far greater proportion than in any states east of the Mississippi. Much of the growth of the West was (and continues to be) a result of federally funded dams and water projects.
African Americans and Reform
One social question that received little attention from white progressives was race. But among African Americans themselves, the progressive era produced some significant challenges to existing racial norms.
,	£ u f. • farfnrv nf thp Trianale Shirtwaist Company are laid out on the sidewalk near the building, as police
TIMS OF THE TR.ANGLE FIRE 1911
In this|egis|a(ors int0 passing laws t0 protecl wome„ workers. (© The Granger Collection, New York! lassersby look up at the scene of the blaze. The tragedy of the lr g 9 W. E. B.
Du Bois
566 * CHAPTER 20
African Americans faced greater obstacles than any other group in challenging their own oppressed status and seeking reform. Thus it was not surprising, perhaps, that so many embraced the message of Booker T. Washington in the late nineteenth century, to "put down your bucket where you are,” to work for immediate self-improvement rather than long-range social change. Not all African Americans, however, were content with this approach. And by the turn of the century a powerful challenge was emerging-a challenge to the philosophy of Washington but, more important, to the entire structure of race relations. The chief spokesman for this new approach was W. E. B. Du Bois.
Du Bois, unlike Washington, had never known slavery. Born in Massachusetts, educated at Fisk University in Nashville and at Harvard, he grew to maturity with a more expansive view than Washington of the goals of his race and the responsibilities of white
society to eliminate prejudice and injustice. In The Souls of Black Folk (1903), he launched an open attack on the philosophy of Washington, accusing him of encouraging white efforts to impose segregation and of limiting the aspirations of his race. "Is it possible and probable,” he asked, "that nine millions of men can make effective progress in economic lines if they are deprived of political rights, made a servile caste, and allowed only the most meager chance for developing their exceptional men? If history and reason give any distinct answer to these questions, it is an emphatic No.”
Rather than content themselves with education at the trade and agricultural schools, Du Bois advocated, talented blacks should accept nothing less than a full university education. They should aspire to the professions. They should, above all, fight for their civil rights, not simply wait for them to be granted as a reward for patient striving. In 1905, Du Bois and a group of his supporters met at Niagara Falls-on the Canadian side of the border because no hotel on the American side of the Falls would NAACP have them and launched what became
Founded known as the Niagara Movement. Four years later, after a race riot in Springfield, Illinois, they joined with white progressives sympathetic to their cause to form the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP). Whites held most of the offices at first, but Du Bois, its director of publicity and research, was the guiding spirit. In the ensuing years, the new organization led the drive for equal rights, using as its principal weapon lawsuits in the federal courts.
Within less than a decade, the NAACP had begun to win some important victories. In Guinn v. United States (1915), the Supreme Court supported its position that the grandfather clause in an Oklahoma law was unconstitutional. (The statute denied the vote to any citizen whose ancestors had not been enfranchised in 1860.) In Buchanan v. Worley (1917), the Court struck down a Louisville, Kentucky, law requiring residential segregation. The NAACP established itself, particularly after Booker T. Washington's death in 1915, as one of the nation’s leading black organizations, a position it would maintain for many years.
Among the many issues that engaged the NAACP and other
African American organizations was the phenomenon of lynch-
ing in the South. Du Bois was an outspoken critic of lynching and
an advocate of a federal law making it illegal (since state courts
THE YOUNG W. E. B. DU BOIS
This formal photograph of W. E. B. Du Bois was taken in 1899, when he was thirty-one years old and a professor at Atlanta University. He had just published The Philadelphia Negro, a classic sociological study of an urban community, which startled many readers with its description of the complex class system among African Americans in the city. (© Hulton Archive./Getty Images) in the South routinely refused to prosecute lynchers). But the most determined opponents of lynching were southern women. They included white women such as Jessie Daniel Ames. The most effective crusader was a black woman, Ida Wells Barnett, who worked both on her own (at great personal risk) and with such organizations as the National Association of Colored Women and the Women’s Convention of the National Baptist Church to try to discredit lynching and challenge segregation.
CRUSADE FOR SOCIAL
ORDER AND REFORM
formers directed many of their energies at the political process. But they also crusaded on behalf of what they consid-ere moral issues. There were campaigns to eliminate alcohol
THE PROGRESSIVES
567
from national life, to curb prostitution, to limit divorce, and to
restrict immigration. Proponents of each of those reforms be-
lieved that success would help regenerate society as a whole.
The Temperance Crusade
Many progressives considered the elimination of alcohol from American life a necessary step in restoring order to society. Scarce wages vanished as workers spent hours in the saloons. Drunkenness spawned violence, and occasionally murder, within urban families. Working-class wives and mothers hoped through temperance to reform male behavior and thus improve women’s lives. Employers, too, regarded alcohol as an impediment to industrial efficiency; workers often missed time on the job because of drunkenness or came to the factory intoxicated. Critics of economic privilege denounced the liquor industry as one of the nation’s most sinister trusts. And political reformers, who (correctly) looked on the saloon as one of the central institutions of the urban machine, saw an attack on drinking as part of an attack on the bosses. Out of such sentiments emerged the temperance movement.
Temperance had been a major reform movement before the Civil War, mobilizing large numbers of people in a cru-WCTU	sa<^e witd stron& evangelical overtones. In
1873, the movement developed new strength. Temperance advocates formed the Women’s Christian
Temperance Union (WCTU), led after 1879 by Frances Willard. By 1911, it had 245,000 members and had become the single largest women’s organization in American history to that point. In 1893, the Anti-Saloon League joined the temperance movement and, along with the WCTU, began to press for a specific legislative solution: the legal abolition of saloons. Gradually, that demand grew to include the complete prohibition of the sale and manufacture of alcoholic beverages.
Despite substantial opposition from immigrant and working-class voters, pressure for prohibition grew steadily through the first decades of the new century. By 1916, nine-
Eighteenth teen states had Passed Prohibition laws.
Amendment but since the consumption of alcohol was actually increasing in many unregulated areas, temperance advocates were beginning to advocate a national prohibition law. America’s entry into World War I, and the moral fervor it unleashed, provided the last push to the advocates of prohibition. In 1917, with the support of rural fundamentalists who opposed alcohol on moral and religious grounds, progressive advocates of prohibition steered through Congress a constitutional amendment embodying their demands. Two years later, after ratification by every state in the nation except Connecticut and Rhode Island (bastions of Catholic immigrants), the Eighteenth Amendment became
law, to take effect in January 1920.
Total immigration during	4.96
five-year periods (in millions)
1901-	1906-	1911-	1916—
1905	1910	1915	1920
TOTAL IMMIGRATION, 1900-1920
Emigration to the United States reached the highest level in the nation's history to that point in the first fifteen years of the twentieth century. In the nineteenth century, there was no five-year period when as many as 3 million immigrants arrived in America. In the first fifteen years of the twentieth century, more than 3 million newcomers arrived in every five-year period—and in one of them, as this chart reveals, the number reached almost 5 million. (The Library of Congress (3a38144u)) Why did the flow of immigrants drop so sharply in the period 1916-1920?
568 < CHAPTER 20
I
I
Immigration Restriction
Virtually all reformers agreed that the growing immigrant population had created social problems, but there was wide disagreement on how best to respond. Some progressives believed that the proper approach was to help the new residents adapt to American society. Others argued that efforts at assimilation had failed and that the only solution was to limit the flow of new arrivals.
In the first decades of the century, pressure grew to close the nation’s gates. New scholarly theories, appealing to the
Eugenics and Pr°gressive respect for expertise, argued Nativism that the introduction of immigrants into American society was polluting the nation’s racial stock. Among the theories created to support this argument was eugenics, the science of altering the reproductive processes of plants and animals to produce new hybrids or breeds. In the early twentieth century, there was an effort, funded by the Carnegie Foundation, to turn eugenics into a method of altering human reproduction as well. But the eugenics movement when applied to humans was not an effort to '"breed” new people, an effort for which no scientific tools existed. It was, rather, an effort to grade races and ethnic groups according to their genetic qualities. Eugenicists advocated the forced sterilization of the mentally retarded, criminals, and others. But they also spread the belief that
SOURCES OF IMMIGRATION, 1900-1920
At least as striking as the increase in immigration in the early twentieth century was the change in its sources. In the nineteenth century, the vast majority of immigrants to the United States had come from northern and western Europe (especially Britain, Ireland, Germany, and Scandinavia). Now, as this chart shows, the major sources were southern and eastern Europe, with over 60 percent coming from Italy, Russia, and the eastern European regions of the Austro-Hungarian Empire. * What impact did these changing sources have on attitudes toward immigration in the United States?
human inequalities were hereditary and that immigration was contributing to the multiplication of the unfit. Skillful publicists such as Madison Grant, whose The Passing of the Great Race (1916) established him as the nation’s most effective nativist, warned of the dangers of racial mongrelization” and of the importance of protecting the purity of Anglo-Saxon and other Nordic stock from pollution by eastern Europeans, Latin Americans, and Asians.
A special federal commission of "experts,” chaired by Senator William P. Dillingham of Vermont, issued a study filled with statistics and scholarly testimony. It argued that the newer immigrant groups-largely southern and eastern Europeans-had proven themselves less assimilable than earlier immigrants. Immigration, the report implied, should be restricted by nationality. Many people who rejected these racial arguments nevertheless supported limiting immigration as a way to solve such urban problems as overcrowding, unemployment, strained social services, and social unrest.
The combination of these concerns gradually won for the nativists the support of some of the nation’s leading progressives, among them former president Theodore Roosevelt. Powerful opponents-employers who saw immigration as a source of cheap labor, immigrants themselves, and their political repre-sentatives-managed to block the restriction movement for a time. But by the beginning of World War I (which effectively blocked immigration temporarily), the nativist tide was gaining strength.
CHALLENGING THE CAPITALIST ORDER
If there was one issue that overshadowed, and helped to shape, all others in the minds of reformers, it was the character of the dramatically growing modern industrial economy. Most of the problems that concerned progressives could be traced back, directly or indirectly, to the growing power and influence—and also, reformers believed, corruption-of corporate America. So it is not surprising that prominent among progressive concerns was reshaping or reforming the behavior of the capitalist world.
The Dream of Socialism
At no time in the history of the United States to that point, and seldom after, did radical critiques of the capitalist system attract more support than in the period 1900-1914. Although Eugene Debs never a force to rival or even seriously threaten the two major parties, the Socialist
Party of America grew during these years into a force of considerable strength. In the election of 1900, it had attracted the support of fewer than 100,000 voters; in 1912, its durable leader and perennial presidential candidate, Eugene V. Debs, received nearly l million ballots. Strongest in urban immigrant
THE PROGRESSIVES
» 569 MAY DAY, 1908
The American Socialist Party staged this vast rally in New York City’s Union Square to celebrate May Day in 1908. The Second Socialist International had designated May Day as the official holiday for radical labor in 1899. (© Corbis) communities, particularly among Germans and Jews, it also attracted the loyalties of a substantial number of Protestant farmers in the South and Midwest. Socialists won election to over 1,000 state and local offices. And they had the support at limes of such intellectuals as Lincoln Steffens, the crusader against municipal corruption, and Walter Lippmann, the brilliant young journalist and social critic. Florence Kelley, Frances Willard, and other women reformers were attracted to socialism, too, in part because of its support for pacifism and labor organizing.
Virtually all socialists agreed on the need for basic structural changes in the economy, but they differed widely on the extent of those changes and the tactics necessary to achieve ihem. Some socialists endorsed the radical goals of European Marxists; others envisioned a moderate reform that would allow small-scale private enterprise to survive but would "Wobbl ” nationalize major industries. Some believed in working for reform through electoral politics; others favored militant direct action. Among the militants was the radical labor union the Industrial Workers of the World (IWW), known to opponents as the "Wobblies"
(a nickname of unknown origin). Under the leadership of William ("Big Bill") Haywood, the IWW advocated a single union for all workers and abolition of the "wage slave" system; it rejected political action in favor of strikes-especially the general strike. The Wobblies were widely believed to have been responsible for the dynamiting of railroad lines and power stations and other acts of terror in the first years of the twentieth century.
The IWW was one of the few labor organizations of the time to champion the cause of unskilled workers and had particular strength in the West-where a large group of migratory laborers (miners, timbermen, and others) found it very difficult to organize or sustain conventional unions. In 1917, a strike by IWW timber workers in Washington and Idaho shut down production in the industry. That brought down upon the union the wrath of the federal government, which had just begun mobilizing for war and needed timber for war production. Federal authorities imprisoned the leaders of the i and state governments between 1917 and 1919 passed a of laws that outlawed the IWW. The organization surviv a time but never fully recovered.
570 * CHAPTER 20
LOUIS BRANDEIS
Brandeis graduated from Harvard Law School in 1877 with the best academic record of any student in the school’s previous or subsequent history. His success in his Boston law practice was such that by the early twentieth century he was able to spend much of his time in unpaid work for public causes. His investigations of monopoly power soon made him a major figure in the emerging progressive movement. Woodrow Wilson nominated him for the U.S. Supreme Court in January 1916. He was one of the few nominees in the Court's history never to have held prior public office, and he was the first Jew ever to have been nominated. The appointment aroused five months of bitter controversy in the Senate before Brandeis was finally confirmed. For the next twenty years, he was one of the Court’s most powerful members—all the while lobbying behind the scenes on behalf of the many political causes (preeminent among them Zionism, the founding of a Jewish state) to which he remained committed. (© Bettmann/Corbis) Moderate socialists who advocated peaceful change through
political struggle dominated the Socialist Party. They empha-
sized a gradual education of the public to Socialism s ,	, r ,	,	. rr
Demise	neec* *or change and patient efforts
within the system to enact it. But World
War I dramatically weakened the socialists. They had refused to support the war effort, and a growing wave of antiradicalism subjected them to enormous harassment and persecution.
Decentralization and Regulation
Most progressives retained a faith in the possibilities of reform within a capitalist system. Rather than nationalize basic industries, many reformers hoped to restore the economy to a "more human” scale. Few envisioned a return to a society of small, local enterprises; some consolidation, they recognized, was inevitable. They did, however, argue that the federal government
should work to break up the largest combinations and enforce a balance between the need for bigness and the need for competition.
This viewpoint came to be identified particularly closely with Louis D. Brandeis, a brilliant lawyer and later justice of the Supreme Court, who wrote widely (most notably in his 1913 book, Other People’s Money) about the "curse of big-
The Problem of Corporate Centralization
"Good Trusts” and "Bad Trusts”
ness.
Brandeis and his supporters opposed bigness in part because they considered it inefficient. But their opposition had a moral basis as well. Bigness was a threat not just to efficiency but to freedom as well. It limited the ability of individuals to control their own destinies. It encour-
aged abuses of power. Government must, Brandeis insisted, regulate competition in such a way as to ensure that large combinations did not emerge.
Other progressives were less enthusiastic about the virtues of competition. More important to them was efficiency, which they believed economic concentration encouraged. What government should do, they argued, was not to fight "bigness,” but to guard against abuses of power by large institutions. It should distinguish between "good trusts” and "bad trusts,” encouraging the good while disciplining the
bad. Since economic consolidation was destined to remain a permanent feature of American society, continuing oversight by a strong, modernized government was essential. One of the most influential spokesmen for this emerging "nationalist” position was Herbert Croly, whose 1909 book, The Promise of American Life, became an influential progressive document.
Increasingly, the attention of nationalists such as Croly focused on some form of coordination of the industrial economy. Society must act, Walter Lippmann wrote in a notable 1914 book, Drift and Mastery, "to introduce plan where there has been clash, and purpose into the jungles of disordered growth.” To some nationalists, that meant businesses themselves learning new ways of cooperation and self-regulation. To others, the solution was for government to play a more active role in regulating and planning economic life. One of those who came to endorse that position (although not fully until after 1910) was Theodore Roosevelt, who once said: "We should enter upon a course of supervision, control, and regulation of those great corporations.” Roosevelt became for a time the most powerful symbol of the reform impulse at the national level.
THEODORE ROOSEVELT AND THE MODERN PRESIDENCY
Presidents in general are not lovable,” the famous writer and columnist Walter Lippmann, who had known many, said near t e end of his life. They’ve had to do too much to get where they are. But there was one President who was lovable-Teddy Roosevelt-and I loved him.”
THE PROGRESSIVES
• 571
Lippmann was not alone. To a generation of progressive reformers, Theodore Roosevelt was more than an admired public figure; he was an idol. No president before, and few since, had attracted such attention and devotion. Yet, for all his popularity among reformers, Roosevelt was in many respects decidedly conservative. He earned his extraordinary popularity less because of the extent of the reforms he championed than because he brought to his office a broad conception of its powers and invested the presidency with something of its modern status as the center of national political life.
The Accidental President
When President William McKinley suddenly died in September 1901, the victim of an assassination, Roosevelt (who had been elected vice president less than a year before) was only forty-two years old, the youngest man ever to assume the presidency. "I told William McKinley that it was a mistake to nominate that wild man at Philadelphia,” party boss Mark Hanna was reported to have exclaimed. "Now look, that damned cowboy is President of the United States!”
Roosevelt’s reputation as a wild man was a result less of the substance of his early political career than of its style. As a Roosevelt’s	Young member of the New York legisla-
Background	ture’ hnd displayed an energy seldom
seen in that lethargic body. As a rancher in the Dakota Badlands (where he retired briefly after the sudden death of his first wife), he had helped capture outlaws. As New York City police commissioner, he had been a flamboyant battler against crime and vice. As assistant secretary of the navy, he had been a bold proponent of American expansion. As commander of the Rough Riders, he had led a heroic, if militarily useless, charge in the battle of San Juan Hill in Cuba during the
Spanish-American War.
But Roosevelt as president rarely rebelled against the leaders of his party. He became, rather, a champion of cautious, moderate change. Reform, he believed, was a vehicle less for remaking American society than for protecting it against radical challenges.
OVERNMENT, CAPITAL, AND LABOR
Roosevelt’s Vision of deral Power
>sevelt allied himself with those progressives who urged Jlation (but not destruction) of the trusts. At the heart of Roosevelt’s policy was his desire to win for government the power to investigate the activities of corporations and publicize the results. The new Department of
imerce and Labor, established in 1903 (later to be divided two separate departments), was to assist in this task ugh its investigatory arm, the Bureau of Corporations, ^though Roosevelt was not a trustbuster at heart, he made m highly publicized efforts to break up combinations. In 2, he ordered the Justice Department to invoke the man Antitrust Act against a great new railroad monopoly m Northwest, the Northern Securities Company, a $400
PRESIDENT THEODORE ROOSEVELT
To a generation of progressive reformers, Theodore Roosevelt was an idol. No president before, and few since, had attracted such attention and devotion from the American people. (The Library of Congress (LC-DIG_ppmsca-37602)) Northern
Securities
Company
million enterprise pieced together by J. P. Morgan and others.
To Morgan, accustomed to a warm, supportive relationship with Republican administrations, the action was baffling. He told the president, "If we have done any-
thing wrong, send your man to my man and they can fix it up.”
Roosevelt proceeded with the case nonetheless, and in 1904 the Supreme Court ruled that the Northern Securities Company must be dissolved. Although he filed more than forty additional antitrust suits during the remainder of his presidency, Roosevelt had no serious commitment to reverse the prevailing trend toward economic concentration.
A similar commitment to establishing the government as an impartial regulatory mechanism shaped Roosevelt’s policy toward labor. In the past, federal intervention in industrial disputes had almost always meant action on behalf of employers. Roosevelt was willing to consider labor’s position as well. When a bitter 1902 strike by the United Mine Workers endangered coal supplies for the coming winter, Roosevelt asked both the operators and the miners to accept impartial federal arbitration. When the mine owners balked, Roosevelt threatened to send federal troops to seize the mines. The operators finally relented. Arbitrators awarded the strikers a 10 percent wage increase and a nine-hour day, although no recognition of their union-less than they had wanted but more than they would likely have
A LEADER IN AMERICA’S CONSERVATION
DEDICATED TO CONSERVING AMERICA MOVEMENT,
naturalist John Muir (1838-1914) was born in Scotland and grew up in Wisconsin. He went to California in 1868 and spent several years in the American West exploring the land and studying the trees, forests, and glaciers of the area before settling permanently in California in 1880. He campaigned for the establishment of Yosemite National Park, a goal achieved in 1890. Through his friendship with President Theodore Roosevelt, he persuaded the president to greatly increase the amount of protected public land. As a dedicated conservationist, Muir wrote articles attempting to rouse the public to the need to protect public lands. In addition to the public lands he helped protect and preserve, Muir created another lasting legacy—the Sierra Club, an organization that he co-founded and that is still thriving today. The two source documents below are thus both connected to John Muir. The first is an excerpt from his book Our National Parks. The second is a reprinting of the Sierra Club's current stated purposes and goals.
OUR NATIONAL PARKS-1901
From Chapter 1, "The Wild Parks and Forest Reservations
of the West,” by John Muir
The tendency nowadays to wander in wildernesses is delightful to see. Thousands of tired, nerve-shaken, over-civilized people are beginning to find out that going to the mountains is going home; that wildness is a necessity; and that mountain parks and reservations are useful not only as fountains of timber and irrigating rivers, but as fountains of life. Awakening from the stupefying effects of the vice of over-industry and the deadly apathy of luxury, they are trying as best they can to mix and enrich their own little ongoings with those of Nature, and to get rid of rust and disease. Briskly venturing and roaming, some are washing off sins and cobweb cares of the devil’s spinning in all-day storms on mountains; sauntering in rosiny pine-woods or in gentian meadows, brushing through chaparral, bending down and parting sweet, flowery sprays; tracing rivers to their sources, getting in touch with the nerves of Mother Earth; jumping from rock to rock, feeling the life of them, learning the songs of them, panting in whole-souled exercise, and rejoicing in deep, long-drawn breaths of pure wildness. This is fine and natural and full of promise. So also is the growing interest in the care and preservation of forests and wild places in general, and in the half wild parks and gardens of towns....
When, like a merchant taking a list of his goods, we take stock of our wildness, we are glad to see how much of even the most destructible kind is still unspoiled. Looking at our continent as scenery when it was all wild, lying between beautiful seas, the starry sky above it, the starry rocks beneath it, to compare its sides, the East and the West, would be like comparing the sides of a rainbow. But it is no longer equally beautiful. . . . [T]he continent’s outer beauty is fast passing away, especially the plant part of it, the most destructible and most universally charming of all.
Only thirty years ago, the great Central Valley of California, five hundred miles long and fifty miles wide, was one bed of golden and purple flowers. Now it is ploughed and pastured out of existence, gone forever-scarce a memory of it left in fence corners and along the bluffs of the streams.... The same fate, sooner or later, is awaiting them all, unless awaken-ing public opinion conies forward to stop it. . . .
The Grand Canon Reserve of Arizona, of nearly two million acres, or the most interesting part of it as well as the Rainier region, should be made into a national park, on account of their supreme grandeur and beauty No matter how far you have wandered hitherto, or how many famous gorges and valleys you have seen, this one the Grand Canon of the Colorado, will seem as novel to you, as unearthly in the color and grandeur and quantity of its architecture as if you had found it after death, on some other star; so incomparably lovely and grand and supreme is it above all the other canons in our fire-moulded, earthquake-shaken, rain-washed, wave-washed, river and glacier sculptured world
Source: Library of Congress, Materials from the General Collection and Rare Book and Cwni	r^.
a 5pecial Collections Division of the Library of Congress.
572
UNDERSTAND, ANALYZE, AND EVALUATE
1.	What benefits does Muir describe as a result of spending time in the "wilderness"? What maladies does Muir believe the wilderness will correct? How do his arguments reflect the economic and social history of his time?
2.	What is Muirs purpose? Is he attempting primarily to instruct or to persuade? How does that purpose affect the tone of the writing?
SIERRA CLUB-2006
Sierra Club Purposes and Goals
The purposes of the Sierra Club are to explore, enjoy, and protect the wild places of the earth; to practice and promote the responsible use of the earth’s ecosystems and resources; to educate and enlist humanity to protect and restore the quality of the natural and human environment; and to use all lawful means to carry out these objectives.
Ideal Goals-for Environment and Society
•	To sustain natural life-support systems, avoid impairing them, and avoid irreversible damage to them.
•	To facilitate species survival; to maintain genetic diversity; to avoid hastened extinction of species; to protect prime natural habitat.
•	To establish and protect natural reserves, including representative natural areas, wilderness areas in each biome, displays of natural phenomena, and habitats for rare and endangered species.
•	To control human population growth and impacts; to limit human population numbers and habitat needs within
Earth’s carrying capacity; to avoid needless human consumption of resources; to plan and control land use, with envi- • ronmental impact assessment and safeguards, and rehabilitation of damaged sites.	<
•	To learn more about the facts, interrelationships, and principles of the Earth’s ecosystems, and the place and impact of humans in them; to understand the consequences of human activities within the biosphere.
•	To develop responsible and appropriate technology matched to end-uses; to introduce sophisticated technology gradually after careful assessment and with precautionary monitoring.
•	To control pollution of the biosphere; to minimize waste residuals with special care of hazardous materials; to use the best available control technology at sources; and to recycle wastes.
•	To manage resources soundly; to avoid waste with long-term plans; to sustain the yield of living resources and maintain their productivity and breeding stocks; to prolong availability of nonliving resources such as fossil fuels, minerals, and water.
•	To impart a sense of social responsibility among consumers, developers, and public authorities concerning environmental protection; to regulate threats to public health; to avoid private degradation of public resources; to minimize im-	;
pacts on innocent parties and future generations.
As the Sierra Club prepares for its second century, we offer to America and the world our vision of humanity living in	'
harmony with nature. We dedicate ourselves to achieving this vision as we reaffirm our passionate commitment to ex-	;
plore, enjoy, and protect the Earth.
(From the Current Articles of Incorporation & Bylaws, June 20, 1981, updated July 13, 2006. Excerpted from Sierra Club Goals Pamphlet,
1985 1989. Reproduced from sierraclub.org with permission of the Sierra Club. ©2006 Sierra Club. All Rights Reserved.)	?
MAKE CONNECTIONS
1 The Sierra Club's goals for environment and society are characterized as "ideal" goals. Why do you think ' the Sierra Club identifies them in that way? Does that mean the goals are unrealistic or unachievable?
2. How do the purposes and goals of the Sierra Club echo the sentiments Muir expressed in Our National
3 How has the Sierra Club, according to its statement of purposes and goals, extended Muir's message and his advocacy of conservation?
574 * CHAPTER 20
BOYS IN THE MINES
These young boys, covered in grime and no more than twelve years old, pose for the noted photographer Lewis Hine outside the coal mine in Pennsylvania where they separated coal from slate in coal breakers. The rugged conditions endured by mine workers were one cause of the great strike of 1902, in which Theodore Roosevelt intervened. (The Library of Congress) won without Roosevelts intervention. Roosevelt viewed himself as no more the champion of labor than as a champion of management. On several occasions, he ordered federal troops to intervene in strikes on behalf of employers.
The "Square Deal”
During Roosevelt’s first years as president, he was principally concerned with winning reelection, which required that he not antagonize the conservative Republican Old Guard. By skillfully dispensing patronage to conservatives and progressives alike, and by winning the support of northern businessmen while making adroit gestures to reformers, Roosevelt had neutralized his opposition within the party by early 1904. He won its presidential nomination with ease. And in the general election, where he faced a dull conservative Democrat, Alton B. Parker, he captured over 57 percent of the popular vote and lost no states outside the South.
During the 1904 campaign, Roosevelt boasted that he had worked in the anthracite coal strike to provide everyone with a "square deal.” One of his first targets after the election Hepburn Act was r^e Powerful railroad industry. The Interstate Commerce Act of 1887, establishing the Interstate Commerce Commission (ICC), had been an early effort to regulate the industry; but over the years, the courts had sharply limited its influence. Roosevelt asked Congress for legislation to increase the government’s power to oversee railroad rates. The Hepburn Railroad Regulation Act of 1906 sought to restore some regulatory authority to the government, although the bill was so cautious that it
satisfied few progressives.
Roosevelt also pressured Congress to enact the Pure Food and
Drug Act, which restricted the sale of dangerous or ineffective
medicines. When Upton Sinclair’s powerful novel The Jungle appeared in 1906, featuring appalling descrip-
AND^EMtuo^CT tions of conditions in the meatpacking industry, Roosevelt pushed for passage of the Meat Inspection Act, which helped eliminate many diseases once transmitted in impure meat. Starting in 1907, he proposed, but mostly failed to achieve, even more stringent reforms: an eight-hour workday, broader compensation for victims of industrial accidents, inheritance and income taxes, regulation of the stock market, and others. He also started openly to criticize conservatives in Congress and the judiciary who were obstructing these programs. The result was a widening gulf between the
president and the conservative wing of his party.
Roosevelt and Conservation
Roosevelt’s aggressive policies on behalf of conservation contributed to that gulf. Using executive powers, he restricted private development on millions of acres of undeveloped government land-most of it in the West-by adding them to the previously modest national forest system. When conservatives in Congress restricted his authority over public lands in 1907, Roosevelt and his chief forester, Gifford Pinchot, seized all the forests and many of the water power sites still in the public domain before the bill became law.
Roosevelt was the first president to take an active interest in the new and struggling American conservation movement. In the early twentieth century, the idea of preserving the natural world for ecological reasons was not well established. Instead, many people who considered themselves "conservationists —such as Pinchot, the first director of the National Forest Service (which he helped to create)—promoted policies to protect land for carefully managed development.
THE PROGRESSIVES 575
The Old Guard eagerly supported another important aspect of
Roosevelt’s natural resource policy: public reclamation and irriga-
Federal Aid tion Pro)ects- In 1902» the president backed to the West	National Reclamation Act, better known
as the Newlands Act (named for its sponsor,
Nevada senator Francis Newlands). The Newlands Act provided federal funds for the construction of dams, reservoirs, and canals in the West- projects that would open new lands for cultivation and (years later) provide cheap electric power.
Roosevelt and Preservation
Despite his sympathy with Pine hots vision of conservation, Roosevelt also shared some of the concerns of the naturalists-those within the conservation movement committed to protecting the natural beauty of the land and the health of its wildlife from human intrusion. Early in his presidency, Roosevelt even spent four days camping in the Sierras with
John Muir, the nation’s leading preservationist and the founder of the Sierra Club.
Roosevelt added significantly to the still-young National Park System, whose purpose was to protect public land from any exploitation or development. Congress had created the first national park-Yellowstone, in Wyoming, in 1872-and had authorized others in the 1890s: Yosemite and Sequoia in California, and Mount Rainier in Washington State. Roosevelt added land to several existing parks and also created new ones: Crater Lake in Oregon, Mesa Verde in Utah, Platt in Oklahoma, and Wind Cave in South Dakota.
The Hetch Hetchy Controversy
The contending views of the early conservation movement came to a head beginning in 1906 in a sensational controversy over the Hetch Hetchy Valley in Yosemite National Park. Hetch Hetchy (a name derived from a local Indian term
Olympic (1938) "
- North Cascades (1968)
Isle Royale (1931)
Redwood
(1968)
Mount
"Rainier
(1899)
\ Glacier (1910)
Voyageurs
(1971)
National Parks (date established) National Forests
—Crater Lake : (1902)	'
Yellowstone
z(1872)
Grand Teton (1929)
(North Unit) i Theodore Roosevelt ^(1947)
, (South Unit)
Acadia
(1919)
Wind Cave "(1903)
Lassen
Volcanic
(1916) .•
Yosemite^"
(1890)
Sequoia^^ (1890)
Arches
(1971)
Zion
(1919)
. Bryce I pa924)n CaPit0TReef
Rocky
Mountain
(1915)
\
Kings .
Canyon
(1940)
■ Grand / Canyon \(1919)
? Petrified Forest / (1962)
(1971)
-i. Canyonlands ' (1964)
■ \- ..
\ Mesa Verde
/ (1906)
Platt
<(1906)
; Mammoth Cave (1921) T
Haleakala (1960)
Kobuk . Valley
Denali
Mt. McKinley (1917) Lake Clark (1981)	/
Katmai (1981)
"Gatesof
the Arctic __ /
(1981)
Wrangel-St. Elias (191>7)
■Kenai
Fjords
(1918)
hen;
(19
(1926)
Great Smoky ___ Mountains
.... (1926)
,, \
Carlsbad Caverns	.
/(1923)
\ Guadalupe s Mountains
>(1966)	Big Bend
\	(1935)
xy
Glacier Bay1;' 1
(1925)
'Hot , Springs ' (1921) ,
Everglades
—(1934)






A

r^nccrc Thia man illustrates the steady qrowth throughout the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries of the systems of national KUSHMENT OF NATIONAL PARKS AND FO	T p	remembered as a great champion of national parks and forests, the greatest expansions of these
and national forests in the United States. Although Theodore Roose	y
ns occurred after his presidency. Note, for example, how many new areas were a erne______________________
is the difference between national parks and national forests.
576 ♦ CHAPTER 20
meaning "grassy meadows”) was a spectacular, high-walled valley popular with naturalists. But many residents of San Francisco, worried about finding enough water to serve their growing population, saw Hetch Hetchy as an ideal place for a dam, which would create a large reservoir for the city-a plan that Muir and other naturalists furiously opposed.
In 1906, San Francisco suffered a devastating earthquake and fire. Widespread sympathy for the city strengthened the case for the dam; and Theodore Roosevelt-who had initially expressed some sympathy for Muir’s position-turned the decision over to Gifford Pinchot. Pinchot had no interest in Muir’s aesthetic and spiritual arguments. He approved construction of the dam.
For over a decade, a battle raged between naturalists and the advocates of the dam, a battle that consumed the ener-
Cqmfeting 8ies J°hn Mtm for the rest of his life Conservationist aRd that eventually, many people be-Visions	lieved, led to his death. "Dam Hetch
Hetchy!” Muir once said. "As well dam for water-tanks the people’s cathedrals and churches, for no holier temple has ever been consecrated by the heart of man.” To Pinchot, there was no question that the needs of the city were more important than the claims of preservation. Muir helped place a referendum question on the ballot in 1908, certain that the residents of the city would oppose the project "as soon as light is cast upon it.” Instead, San Franciscans approved the dam by a huge margin. Although there were many more delays in succeeding years, construction of the dam finally began after World War I.
This setback for the naturalists was not, however, a total defeat. The fight against Hetch Hetchy helped mobilize a new coalition of people committed to preservation, not "rational use,” of wilderness.
The Panic of 1907
Despite the flurry of reforms Roosevelt was able to enact, the government still had relatively little control over the industrial economy. That became clear in 1907, when a serious panic and recession began.
Conservatives blamed Roosevelt’s "mad” economic policies for the disaster. And while the president naturally (and correctly) disagreed, he nevertheless acted
Coa^and^ron quickly to reassure business leaders that he
Company would not interfere with their recovery ef-“	forts. J. P. Morgan, in a spectacular display
of his financial power, helped construct a pool of the assets of several important New York banks to prop up shaky financial institutions. The key to the arrangement, Morgan told the president, was the purchase by U.S. Steel of the shares of the Tennessee Coal and Iron Company, currently held by a threatened New York bank. He would, he insisted, need assurances that the purchase would not prompt antitrust action. Roosevelt tacitly agreed, and the Morgan plan proceeded. Whether or
not as a result, the panic soon subsided.
Roosevelt loved being president. As his years in office produced increasing political successes, as his public popularity continued to rise, more and more observers began to assume
ROOSEVELT AND MUIR IN YOSEMITE
John Muir, founder and leader of the Sierra Club, considered Theodore Roosevelt a friend and ally—a relationship cemented by a four-day camping trip the two men took together in Yosemite National Park in 1903. Roosevelt was indeed a friend to the national park and national forest systems and added considerable acreage to both. Among other things, he expanded Yosemite (at Muir’s request). But unlike Muir, Roosevelt was also committed to economic development. As a result, he was not always a reliable ally of the most committed preservationists. (© Bettmann/ Corbis) THE PROGRESSIVES
• 577 that he would run for reelection in 1908, despite the long-standing tradition of presidents serving no more than two terms. But the Panic of 1907, combined with Roosevelt’s growing "radicalism” during his second term, so alienated conservatives in his own party that he might have had difficulty winning the Republican nomination. In 1904, moreover, he had made a public promise to step down four years later. And so in 1909, Roosevelt, fifty years old, retired from public life-briefly.
THE TROUBLED SUCCESSION
William Howard Taft, who assumed the presidency in 1909, had been Theodore Roosevelt's most trusted lieutenant and his handpicked successor; progressive reformers believed him to be one of their own. But Taft had also been a restrained and
William moderate jurist, a man with a punctilious
Howard Taft regard for legal process; conservatives expected him to abandon Roosevelt's aggressive use of presidential powers. By seeming acceptable to almost everyone, Taft easily won election to the White House in 1908. He received his party’s nomination virtually uncontested. His victory in the general election in November-over William Jennings Bryan, running for the Democrats for the
third time-was a foregone conclusion.
Four years later, however, Taft would leave office the most
decisively defeated president of the twentieth century, his party deeply divided and the government in the hands of a Democratic administration for the first time in twenty years.
Taft and the Progressives
Taft’s first problem arose in the opening months of the new administration, when he called Congress into special session to
Payne-Aldrich lower Protective tariff rates> an old Pr°gres’ Tariff	sive demand- But the president made no
effort to overcome the opposition of the congressional Old Guard, arguing that to do so would violate the constitutional doctrine of separation of powers. The result was the feeble Payne-Aldrich Tariff, which reduced tariff rates scarcely at all and in some areas raised them. Progressives re-
sented the president’s passivity.
Taft may not have been a champion of reform, but neither was he a consistent opponent of change. In 1912, he supported and signed legislation to create a federal Childrens Bureau to investigate "all matters pertaining to the welfare of children and child life.” Julia Lathrop, the first chief of the bureau, was a veteran of Hull House and a close associate of Jane Addams. She helped make the Children’s Bureau a force for progressive change not just in federal policy, but also in state and local governments.
But a sensational controversy broke out late in 1909 that
helped put an end to Taft’s popularity with reformers. Many
Progressives had been unhappy when Taft replaced Roosevelt’s
secretary of the interior, James R. Garfield, an aggressive
WILLIAM HOWARD TAFT
Taft could be a jovial companion in small groups, but his public image was of a dull, stolid man who stood in sharp and unfortunate contrast to his dynamic predecessor, Theodore Roosevelt. Taft also suffered public ridicule for his enormous size. He weighed as much as 350 pounds at times, and wide publicity accompanied his installation of an oversized bathtub in the White House. (© Bettmann/Corbis) conservationist, with Richard A. Ballinger, a conservative corporate lawyer. Suspicion of Ballinger grew when he attempted to invalidate Roosevelt’s removal of nearly 1 million acres of forests and mineral reserves from private development.
In the midst of this mounting concern, Louis Glavis, an Interior Department investigator, charged Ballinger with having once connived to turn over valuable public coal lands in Alaska to a private syndicate for personal profit. Glavis took the evidence to Gifford Pinchot, still head of the Forest
Service and a critic of Ballinger’s policies. Pinchot took the charges to the president. Taft investigated them and decided they were groundless. But Pinchot was not satisfied, particularly after Taft fired Glavis for his part in the episode. He leaked the story to the press and asked Congress to investigate the scandal. The president discharged him for insubordination. The congressional committee appointed to study the controversy, dominated by Old Guard Republicans, exonerated Ballinger. But
Ballinger-
PlNCHOT
Dispute
578 ® CHAPTER 20
progressives throughout the country supported Pinchot. The controversy aroused as much public passion as any dispute of its time; and when it was over, Taft had alienated the supporters of Roosevelt completely and, it seemed, irrevocably.
The Return of Roosevelt
During most of these controversies, Theodore Roosevelt was far away: on a long hunting safari in Africa and an extended tour of Europe. To the American public, however, Roosevelt remained a formidable presence thanks to intensive newspaper coverage of his every move abroad. His return to New York in the spring of 1910 was a major public event. Roosevelt insisted that he had no plans to reenter politics, but within a month he announced that he would embark on a national speaking tour before the end of the summer. Furious with Taft, he was becoming convinced that he alone was capable of reuniting the Republican Party.
The real signal of Roosevelt’s decision to assume leadership of
Republican reformers came in a speech he gave on September 1, «NEw	1910, in Osawatomie, Kansas. In it he out-
Nationalism” lined a set of principles, which he labeled the "New Nationalism,” that made clear he had moved a considerable way from the cautious conservatism of the first years of his presidency. He argued that social justice was possible only through the vigorous efforts of a strong federal government whose executive acted as the "steward of the public welfare.” Those who thought primarily of property rights and personal profit "must now give way to the advocate of human welfare.” He supported graduated income and inheritance taxes, workers’ compensation for industrial accidents, regulation of the labor of women and children, tariff revision, and firmer regula-
tion of corporations.
Spreading Insurgency
The congressional elections of 1910 provided further evidence of how far the progressive revolt had spread. In primary elections, conservative Republicans suffered defeat after defeat while almost all the progressive incumbents were reelected. In the general election, the Democrats, who were now offering progressive candidates of their own, won control of the House of Representatives for the first time in sixteen years and gained strength in the Senate. But Roosevelt still denied any presidential ambitions and claimed that his real purpose was to pressure Taft to return to progressive policies. Two events, however, changed his mind. The first, on October 27, 1911, was the announcement by the administration of a suit against U.S. Steel, which charged, among other things, that the 1907 acquisition of the Tennessee Coal and Iron Company had been illegal. Roosevelt had approved that acquisition in the midst of the 1907 panic, and he was enraged by the implication that he had acted improperly.
Roosevelt was still reluctant to become a candidate for president because Senator Robert La Follette, the great Wisconsin progressive, had been working since 1911 to secure the presidential nomination for himself. But La Follette’s candidacy stumbled in February 1912 when, exhausted, and distraught over the illness of a daughter, he appeared to suffer a nervous breakdown during a speech in Philadelphia. Roosevelt announced his candidacy on February 22.
Roosevelt versus Taft
La Follette retained some diehard support. But for all practical purposes, the campaign for the Republican nomination had now become a battle between Roosevelt and Taft. Roosevelt scored overwhelming victories in all thirteen presidential
ROOSEVELT AT OSAWATOMIE
Roosevelt's famous speech at Osawatomie, Kansas, in 1910 was the most radical of his career and openly marked his break with the Taft administration and the Republican leadership. "The essence of any struggle for liberty,” he told his largely conservative audience, "has always been, and must always be to take from some one man or class of men the right to enjoy power, or wealth, or position or immunity, which has not been earned by service to his or their fellows.” (© The Granger Collection, New York) THE PROGRESSIVES * 579
primaries. Taft, however, remained the choice of most party leaders, who controlled the nominating process.
The battle for the nomination at the Chicago convention revolved around an unusually large number of contested delegates: 254 in all. Roosevelt needed fewer than half the disputed seats to clinch the nomination. But the Republican National Committee, controlled by the Old Guard, awarded all but 19 of them to Taft. At a rally the night before the convention opened, Roosevelt addressed 5,000 cheering supporters. "We stand at Armageddon,” he told the roaring crowd, "and we battle for the Lord.” The next day, he led his supporters out of the convention, and out of the party. The convention then quietly nominated Taft on the first ballot.
Roosevelt summoned his supporters back to Chicago in August for another convention, this one to launch the new The	Progressive Party and nominate himself as
Progressive its presidential candidate. Roosevelt Party	approached the battle feeling, as he put it,
"fit as a bull moose” (thus giving his new
party an enduring nickname).
The "Bull Moose” party was notable for its strong commitment to a wide range of progressive causes that had grown in popularity over the previous two decades. The party advocated additional regulation of industry and trusts, sweeping reforms of many areas of government, compensation by the government for workers injured on the job, pensions for the elderly and for widows with children, and (alone among the major parties) woman suffrage. The delegates left the party’s convention filled with hope and excitement.
Roosevelt himself, however, entered the fall campaign aware that his cause was almost hopeless, partly because many of the insurgents who had supported him during the primaries refused to follow him out of the Republican Party. His pessimism was also a result of the man the Democrats had nominated for president.
WOODROW WILSON AND
THE NEW FREEDOM
The 1912 presidential contest was not simply one between conservatives and reformers. It was also one between two brands of progressivism. And it matched the two most important national leaders of the early twentieth century in unequal contest.
Woodrow Wilson
Reform sentiment had been gaining strength within the Democratic as well as the Republican Party in the first years of the century. At the 1912 Democratic National Convention in Baltimore in June, Champ Clark, the conservative Speaker of the House, was unable to assemble the two-thirds majority necessary for nomination because of progressive opposition, finally, on the forty-sixth ballot, Woodrow Wilson, the governor
of New Jersey and the only genuinely progressive candidate in the race, emerged as the party’s nominee.
Wilson had risen to political prominence by an unusual
path. He had been a professor of political science at Princeton
until 1902, when he was named president Wilson’s "New c ,	.	.	,	rxT
Freedom” °*the university. Elected governor of New Jersey in 1910, he demonstrated a commitment to reform. During his two years in the statehouse, he earned a national reputation for winning passage of progressive legislation. As a presidential candidate in 1912, Wilson presented a progressive program that came to be called the "New Freedom.” Roosevelt’s New Nationalism advocated accepting economic concentration and using government to regulate and control it. But Wilson seemed to side with those who (like Louis Brandeis) believed that bigness was both unjust and inefficient, that the proper response to monopoly was
not to regulate it but to destroy it.
The 1912 presidential campaign was an anticlimax. William Howard Taft, resigned to defeat, barely campaigned. Roosevelt campaigned energetically (until a gunshot wound from a would-be assassin forced him to the sidelines during the last weeks before the election), but he failed to draw any significant numbers of Democratic progressives away from Wilson. In November, Roosevelt and Taft split the Republican vote; Wilson held on to most Democrats and won. He polled only 42 percent of the vote, compared with 27 percent for Roosevelt, 23 percent for Taft, and 6 percent for the socialist Eugene V. Debs. But in the electoral college, Wilson won 435 of the 531 votes. Roosevelt had carried only six states, Taft two, Debs none.
Lowering the Tariff
The Scholar as President
Wilson was a bold and forceful president. He exerted firm control over his cabinet, and he delegated real authority only to those whose loyalty to him was beyond question. His most powerful adviser, Colonel Edward M. House, was an intelligent and ambitious Texan who held no office and whose only claim to authority was his personal intimacy with the president.
In legislative matters, Wilson skillfully welded together a coalition that would support his program. Democratic majorities in both houses of Congress made his task easier. Wilson’s first triumph as president was the fulfillment of an old
Democratic (and progressive) goal: a substantial lowering of the protective tariff. The Underwood-Simmons Tariff provided cuts substantial enough, progressives believed, to introduce real competition into American markets and thus to help break the power of trusts. To make up for the loss of revenue under the new tariff, Congress approved a graduated income tax, which the recently adopted Sixteenth Amendment to the Constitution now permitted. This first modern income tax imposed a 1 percent tax on individuals and corporations earning more than $4,000 a year, with rates ranging up to 6 percent on annual incomes over $500,000.
Wilson held Congress in session through the summer to work on a major reform of the American banking system:
580 . CHAPTER 20
WOODROW WILSON
Woodrow Wilson, the 28th president of the United States, was a Virginian (the first southerner to be elected president since before the Civil War), a professor of political science and later president of Princeton University, governor of New Jersey, and known as a brilliant progressive. His election to the presidency brought the first Democrat to the White House since 1896. (The Library of Congress (3a21763v)) the Federal Reserve Act, which Congress passed and the president signed on December 23, 1913. It created twelve regional banks, each to be owned and controlled by
Ffufrai
Reserve Act	inc^ivi(^ual banks of its district. The re-
gional Federal Reserve banks would hold a certain percentage of the assets of their member banks in reserve; they would use those reserves to support loans to private banks at an interest (or "discount”) rate that the Federal Reserve system would set; they would issue a new type of paper currency-Federal Reserve notes-that would become the nation’s basic medium of trade and would be backed by the government. Most important, they would be able to shift funds quickly to troubled areas-to meet increased demands for credit or to protect imperiled banks. Supervising and regulating the entire system was a national Federal Reserve Board, whose members were appointed by the president. Nearly half the nation’s banking resources were represented in the system
within a year, and 80 percent by the late 1920s.
In 1914, turning to the central issue of his 1912 campaign,
Wilson proposed two measures to deal with the problem of monopoly. In the process he revealed how his own approach to the issue was beginning to change. There was a proposal to create a federal agency through which the government would help business police itself-a regulatory commission of the type Roosevelt had advocated in 1912. There were also proposals to strengthen
Candidate (Party)
Electoral Vote
Popular Vote (%)
Woodrow Wilson (Democratic)
Theodore Roosevelt (Progressive/Bull Moose)
■Mg Wi 11 iam H. Taft ■HHB (Republican)
Eugene V. Debs (Socialist)
6,293,454
(41.9)
4,119,538
(27.4)
3,484,980
(23.2)
900,672
(6.0)
Other parties	___ noc nic
(Prohibition; Socialist Labor)
58.8% of electorate voting
ELECTION OF 1912
The election of 1912 was one of the most unusual in American history because of the dramatic schism within the Republican Party. Two Republican presidents—William Howard Taft, the incumbent, and Theodore Roosevelt, his predecessor-ran against each other in 1912, opening the way for a victory by the Democratic candidate, Woodrow Wilson, who won with only about 42 percent of the popular vote. A fourth candidate, the socialist Eugene V. Debs, received a significant 6 percent of the vote. * What events caused the schism between Taft and Roosevelt?
the government’s ability to break up trusts-a decentralizing approach characteristic of Wilson’s 1912 campaign. The two measures took shape as the Federal Trade Commission Act and the Clayton Antitrust Act. The Federal Trade Commission Act created a regulatory agency that would help businesses determine in advance whether their actions would be acceptable to the government. The agency would also have authority to launch prosecutions against unfair trade practices,” and it would have wide power to investigate corporate behavior. Wilson signed the Federal Trade Commission Bill happily. But he seemed to lose interest in the Clayton Antitrust Bill and did little to protect it from conservative assaults, which greatly weakened it. The future, he had apparently decided, lay with government supervision.
Retreat and Advance
By the fall of 1914, Wilson believed that the program of the New Freedom was essentially complete and that agitation for reform would now subside. He refused to support the movement for national woman suffrage. Deferring to southern Democrats, and reflecting his own southern background, he condoned the
reimposition of segregation in the agencies of the federal government (in contrast to Roosevelt, who had ordered the elimination of many such barriers). When congressional progressives attempted to enlist his support for new reform legislation, Wilson dismissed their proposals as unconstitutional or unnecessary.
The congressional elections of 1914, however, shattered the president’s complacency. Democrats suffered major losses in Congress, and voters who in 1912 had supported the Progressive Party began returning to the Republicans. Wilson would not be able to rely on a divided opposition when he ran for reelection in 1916. By the end of 1915, therefore, Wilson had begun to support a second flurry of reforms. In January 1916, he appointed Louis Brandeis to the Supreme Court, making him not only the first Jew but also the most progressive justice to serve there. Later, he supported a measure to make it easier for farmers to receive credit and one creating a system of workers’ compensation for federal employees.
Wilson was sponsoring measures that expanded the powers of the national government in important ways. In 1916,
THE PROGRESSIVES * 581
for example, he supported the Keating-Owen Act, the first _	_	federal law regulating child labor. The
LaWS	measure prohibited the shipment of goods
produced by underage children across state lines, thus giving an expanded importance to the constitutional clause assigning Congress the task of regulating interstate commerce. The president similarly supported measures that used federal taxing authority as a vehicle for legislating social change. After the Court struck down
Keating-Owen, a new law attempted to achieve the same goal by imposing a heavy tax on the products of child labor. (The Court later struck it down too.) And the Smith-Lever Act of 1914 demonstrated another way in which the federal government could influence local behavior; it offered matching federal grants to support agricultural extension education. Over time, these innovative uses of government overcame most of the constitutional objections and became the foundation of a long-term growth in federal power over the economy.
LOOKING BACK
The powerful surge of reform efforts in the last years of the nineteenth century and the first years of the twentieth-reforms intended to help the United States deal with the extraordinary changes and the vexing problem of the modern industrial era-caused many Americans to come to identify themselves as ’’progressives.” That label meant many different things to many different people, but at its core was a belief that human effort and government action could improve society. The reform crusades gained strength steadily, driven by both men and women, and by people of many races and ethnicities. By the early twentieth century, progressivism had become a powerful, transformative force in American life.
This great surge of reform eventually reached the federal government and national politics, as progressives began to understand the limits of state and local reform. Success, they came to believe, required the engagement of the federal government. Two national leaders-Theodore Roosevelt and Woodrow Wilson-contributed to a period of national reform that made the government in Washington a great center of power for the first time since the Civil War-a position it has never relinquished. Progressivism did not solve the nation’s problems, but it gave movements, organizations, and governments new tools to deal with them.
Key T erms/ People/ Places/ Events
Jane Addams 553 Louis Brandeis 570 MUCKRAKERS 553 NAACP 566 New Freedom 579 New Nationalism 578 Prohibition 567
Alice Paul 560 "Bull Moose” party 579 Eugenics 568 Gifford Pinchot 574 Hetch Hetchy 575 Hull House 553 IWW ("Wobblies”) 569
RECALL and reflect
1- What ’’moral” crusades did progressives undertake m their efforts to reform the social order?
2. How did W. E. B. Du Bois’s philosophy on race relations
differ from that of Booker T. Washington?
What were some of the approaches progressives used to
challenge the power and influence of capitalist corporate
America?
Robert La Follette 563 Social Gospel 553 Triangle Shirtwaist Company
fire 564
W. E. B.
Du Bois 566 4.	What was Theodore Roosevelt’s ’’New Nationalism”?
5.	What was Woodrow Wilson’s ’’New Freedom”?
582 ® CHAPTER 20
SIGNIFICANT EVENTS
^1873	_____
Women's Christian Temperance Union (WCTU) founded
Pinchot-Ballinger dispute begi NAACP formed
1893
Anti-Saloon League founded
1901
McKinley assassinated; Roosevelt becomes president
1903
Women's Trade Union League founded
Department of Commerce and Labor created
1889
Jane Addams opens Hull House in Chicago
1911
Fire kills 146 workers at Triangle Shirtwaist Company in New York City
1900
Galveston, Texas, establishes commission government
1902
Roosevelt intervenes in anthracite coal strike
Oregon adopts initiative and referendum
Mississippi adopts direct primary
Northern Securities antitrust case filed
1913
Seventeenth Amendment, establishing direct popular election of
U.S. senators, ratified
Federal Reserve Act passed
1920
Nineteenth Amendment (woman suffrage) ratified
1905
Roosevelt elected president
1906
Hepburn Railroad Regulation Act passed
Meat Inspection Act passed	1907
Financial panic and recession
1908
William Howard Taft elected president
1912
Roosevelt forms Progressive Party
Woodrow Wilson elected president
1919
Eighteenth Amendment (prohibition) ratified
AMERICA AND THE GREAT WAR
I
looking ahead
What were the most important events that led up to the United States declaring war on Germany?
2-	How did US. participation in the Great War affect the nation s economy and society both during the war and after the conflict ended?
3-	Why did the Great War fail to become the war to end all wars ?
THE WAR TO END ALL WARS
The horror of World War I was unprecedented in human history. More than 9 million people died between July 28, 1914, when the war started and November 11, 1918, when it came to an end. The astronomical number of casualties was due to advanced technologies of combat. Here, an American soldier is succumbing to poison gas, one of the most feared weapons of the war. (Private Collection/© Peter Newark Pictures/Bridgeman Images) ______dL.
SETTING THE STAGE
THE GREAT WAR, AS IT WAS KNOWN
to a generation unaware that another, greater war would soon follow, began relatively inconspicuously in August 1914 when forces of the Austro-Hungarian Empire invaded the tiny Balkan nation of Serbia. Within weeks, however, it had grown into a conflagration that engaged the armies of almost all the major nations of Europe. Most Americans looked on with horror as the war became the most savage in history and dragged on, murderously and inconclusively, for two and a half years. Many Americans believed that the conflict had little to do with them, but they were wrong. The United States in 1914 had been deeply involved in world affairs since at least the Spanish-American War and, in the early years of the twentieth century, had taken on many more international commitments and obligations. So it should not have been surprising that the United States finally entered the war in 1917.
For America, the war as a military struggle was brief, decisive, and—in relative terms without great cost. Only 112,000 American soldiers died in the conflict, half of them from influenza and other diseases rather than in combat. Economically, the war was the source of a great industrial boom, which helped spark the years of prosperity that would follow. And the war propelled the United States into a position of international preeminence. Yet once the conflict ended, the United States encountered frustration and disillusionment. The war to end all wars, the war to make the world safe for democracy," became neither. Instead, it led directly to twenty years of international instability that would ultimately generate another great conflict.
THE “BIG STICK”: AMERICA AND THE WORLD, 1901-1917
To the general public, foreign affairs remained largely remote. Walter Lippmann once wrote: "I cannot remember taking any interest whatsoever in foreign affairs until after the outbreak of the First World War/' But to Theodore Roosevelt and later presidents, that made foreign affairs even more appealing. There the president could act with less regard for the Congress or the courts. There he could free himself from concerns about public opinion. Overseas, the president could exercise power unfettered and alone.
Roosevelt and "Civilization"
Theodore Roosevelt believed in the value and importance of using American power in the world (a conviction he once described by citing the proverb ’Speak softly, but carry a big stick”). But he had two different standards for using that power.
Roosevelt believed that an important distinction existed between the ’civilized” and "uncivilized” nations of the world. "Civilized” nations, as he defined them, were predominantly white and Anglo-Saxon or Teutonic; "uncivilized” nations were generally nonwhite, Latin, or Slavic. But racism was only partly the basis of the distinction. Equally important was economic development. He believed, therefore, that Japan, a rapidly industrializing society, had earned admission to the ranks of the civilized. A civilized society, he argued, had the right and duty to intervene in the affairs of a "backward” nation to preserve order and stability. That belief was one important reason
for Roosevelt’s early support of the development of American sea power. By 1906 the American navy had attained a size and strength surpassed only by that of Great Britain (although Germany was fast gaining ground).
Racial and Economic Basis of Roosevelt’s
Diplomacy
Protecting the "Open Door" in Asia
In 1904. the Japanese staged a surprise attack on the Russian fleet at Pott Atthu, m southern
Manchuria, a province of China that both Russia and Japan hoped to control. Roosevelt, hoping to
584 .
AMERICA AND THE GREAT WAR
• 585 THE WORLDS CONSTABLE.
NEW DIPLOMACY”
This 1904 drawing by the famous Puck cartoonist Louis Dalrymple conveys the new image of America as a great power that Theodore Roosevelt was attempting to project to the world. Roosevelt the world policeman deals effectively with "less civilized" peoples (Asians and Latin Americans, seen clamoring at left) by using the "big stick" and deals equally effectively with the "civilized" nations (at right) by offering arbitration. (© The Granger Collection, New York) prevent either nation from becoming dominant there, agreed to a Japanese request to mediate an end to the conflict. Russia, faring badly in the war, had no choice but to agree. At a peace conference in Portsmouth, New Hampshire, in 1905, Roosevelt extracted from the embattled Russians a recognition of Japan s territorial gains and from the Japanese an agreement to cease the fighting and expand no further. At the same time, he nego tiated a secret agreement with the Japanese to ensure that the United States could continue to trade freely in the region.
Roosevelt won the Nobel Peace Prize in 1906 for his work in ending the Russo-Japanese War. But in the years that fol lowed, relations between the United States and Japan steadily deteriorated. Japan now emerged as the preeminent naval
power in the Pacific and soon began to ex-Great White	dude American trade from many of the
T	territories it controlled. To be sure the
Japanese government recognized the power of the United
States, he sent sixteen battleships of the new American navy
(known as the "Great White Fleet” because the ships were
temporarily painted white for the voyage) on an unprece-
dented journey around the world that included a call on Japan.
The Iron-Fisted Neighbor
Roosevelt took a particular interest in events in what he (and most other Americans) considered the nation’s special sphere of interest: Latin America. He established a pattern of U.S. intervention in the region that would long survive his presidency.
Early in 1902, the financially troubled government of Venezuela began to renege on debts to European bankers. Naval forces of Britain, Italy, and Germany blockaded the Venezuelan coast in response. Then German ships began to bombard a Venezuelan port amid rumors that Germany planned to establish a permanent base in the region. Roosevelt used the threat of American naval power to pressure the German navy to withdraw.
The incident helped persuade Roosevelt that European intrusions into Latin America could result not only from aggression but also from instability or irre-
"Roosevelt sponsibility (such as defaulting on debts) Corollary within the Latin American nations themselves. As a result, in 1904 he announced what came to be known as the "Roosevelt Corollary” to the Monroe Doctrine.
i
i


586
