often were not large enough to satisfy the demand) and more on hired male workers. These farmhands performed many of the tasks that on smaller farms had once been the jobs of the women and children of the family. As a result, farm women tended to work increasingly at domestic tasks-cooking, sewing, gardening, and dairying-a development that spared them from some heavy labor but that also removed them from the principal income-producing activities of the farm. (See Chapter 11 for a discussion of family relations
in the agrarian South.)
In the industrial economy of the rapidly growing cities, there was an even more significant decline in the traditional economic function of the family. The urban household became less important as a center of production. Instead, most income earners left home each day to work elsewhere. A sharp distinction began to emerge between the public world of the work-place-the world of commerce and industry and the private world of the family. The world of the family was now more often dominated not by production, but by housekeeping, child rearing, and other primarily domestic concerns. It was also a world dominated by women.
Accompanying (and perhaps in part caused by) the chang-
ing economic function of the family was Falling Birth ,	,
Rates	a decline in the birth rate. In 1800, the
average American woman could be expected to give birth to approximately seven children during her childbearing years. By 1860, the average woman bore five children. The birth rate fell most quickly in urban areas and among middle-class women. Mid-nineteenth-century Americans had access to some birth-control devices, which undoubtedly contributed in part to the change. There was also a significant rise in abortions, which remained legal in some states until after the Civil War and which, according to some estimates, may have terminated as many as 20 percent of all pregnancies in the 1850s. But the most important cause of the declining birth rate was changes in sexual behavior including
increased abstinence.
Women and the
"Cult of Domesticity”
The emerging distinction between the public and private worlds, between the workplace and the home, led to increasingly sharp distinctions between the social roles of men and women. Those distinctions affected not only factory workers and farmers, but members of the growing middle class as well-There had, of course, always been important differences between
PASTORAL AMERICA, 1848
This painting by the American artist Edward Hicks suggests the degree to which Americans continued to admire the "Peaceable Kingdom” (the name of another, more famous Hicks work) of the agrarian world. Hicks titled this work An Indian Summer View of the Farm w. Stock of James C. Cornell of Northampton Bucks County Pennsylvania. That Took the Premium in the Agricultural Society, October the 12, 1848. It portrays the diversified farming of a prosperous Pennsylvania family, shown here in the foreground with their cattle, sheep, and workhorses. In the background stretches a field ready for plowing and another ready for harvesting. (Courtesy National Gallery of Art, Washington) the male and female spheres in American society. Women had long been denied many legal and political rights enjoyed by men; within the family, the husband and father had traditionally ruled, and the wife and mother had generally bowed to his demands and desires. It had long been practically impossible for most women to obtain divorces, although divorces initiated by men were often easier to arrange. (Men were also far more likely than women to win custody of children in case of a divorce.) In most states, husbands retained almost absolute authority over both the property and persons of their wives. Wife beating was illegal in only a few areas, and the law did not acknowledge that rape could occur within marriage. Women traditionally had very little access to the worlds of business or politics. Indeed, in most communities custom dictated that women never speak in public before audiences that included men.
Most women also had much less access to education than men, a situation that survived into the mid-nineteenth cen-Female	turV- Although they were encouraged to
Education attend school at the elementary level, they were strongly discouraged-and in most cases effectively barred-from pursuing higher education.
Oberlin in Ohio became the first college in America to accept female students; it permitted four to enroll in 1837, despite criticism that coeducation was a rash experiment approximating free love. Oberlin authorities were confident that "the mutual influence of the sexes upon each other is decidedly happy in the cultivation of both mind & manners/’ But few other institutions shared their views. Coeducation remained extraordinarily rare until long after the Civil War; and only a very few women’s colleges-such as Mount Holyoke, founded in Massachusetts by Mary Lyon in 1837-emerged.
No longer income producers, middle-class women became guardians of the "domestic virtues.” Their role as mothers, entrusted with the nurturing of the young,
New Roles for seemed more central to the family than it had in the past. And their role as wives-as companions and helpers to their husbands-grew more important as well. Middle-class women also became more important as consumers. They learned to place a high value on keeping a clean, comfortable, and well-appointed home, on entertaining,
and on dressing elegantly and stylishly.
FAMILY TIME
CONSIDER THE SOURCE A
-	——
HOW A FAMILY SPENDS TIME TOGETHER
has been a favorite subject of artists for centuries. Studying where families gather, how they celebrate, and how they interact and communicate when relaxing or playing is a powerful way to gather information about conventional roles of mothers, fathers, extended family members, children, and sometimes servants. The two images following are separated by 172 years yet strive to tell a similar story about family life. The first image, of a parlor in antebellum Philadelphia, appeared in Godey's Lady's Book in May 1842. Focused on the lives of better-off white women, Godey’s Lady's Book featured advice columns on fashion, manners, home decoration, and child rearing. The second, by photographer Eric Audras, is set in present-day America. Audras, who chronicles the joys and struggles of modern families, has a keen eye for catching what fascinates parents and children today.
Much is communicated in the small details of each composition: the style of dress, the type of activities being pursued, and the spatial organization of family members. When such details are collectively analyzed, they tell us about the evolution of family life in America.
FAMILY TIME-1842
FAMILY DEVOTION-MORNING
(© Archive Photos/Getty Images) UNDERSTAND, ANALYZE, AND EVALUATE
1.	What does this picture tell us about the organization of family life? What does it suggest about the social roles of different family members?
2.	How does the artist communicate the high importance given to reading by families of this era?
FAMILY TIME-2013
MAKE CONNECTIONS
1.	How would you describe the organization of family life in this image? How does it compare with the first image?
2.	Study the different activities family members are pursuing in this photograph. How are they different from those in the 1842 image?
3.	What connections can you draw between how families spend time together today and the ways they did in the antebellum era?
(© ONOKY/Getty Images (RF))
1
285
286 • CHAPTER 10
NATHAN HAWLEY AND FAMILY
Nathan Hawley, seated at center in this 1801 painting, was typical of many early-nineteenth-century fathers in having a very large family. Nine members are visible here. Hawley at the time was the warden of the Albany County jail in New York, and the painting was by William Wilkie, one of the inmates there. The painting suggests that Hawley was a man of modest but not great means. His family is fashionably dressed, and there are paintings on the walls—signs of style and affluence. But the house is very simply furnished, without drapes for the windows, with a simple painted floor cloth in the front room, and a bare floor in the back. {Nathan Hawley and Family, William Wilkie ca.1801. Albany, New York. Watercolor on paper; 15 3/4 X 20 Signed lower right; William Wilkie fecit, inscribed in lower margin: NATHAN HAWLEY and FAMILY, Novr. 3?. 1801. © Albany Institute of History and Art Purchase 1951.58) Women’s
Separate
Sphere
Occupying their own "separate sphere/' some women began to develop a distinctive female culture. Friendships among women became increasingly intense; women began to form their own social networks (and, ultimately, to form female clubs and associations that were of great importance to the advancement of various reforms). A dis-
tinctive feminine literature began to emerge to meet the demands of middle-class women. There were women’s magazines, of which the most prominent was Godey’s Lady's Book, edited after 1837 by Sarah Hale. The magazine scrupulously avoided dealing with public controversies or political issues and focused instead on fashions, shopping and homemaking advice, and other purely domestic concerns. Politics and religion were inappropriate for the magazine, Hale explained in 1841, because ’’other subjects are more important for our sex and more proper for our sphere.”
By the standards of a later era, the increasing isolation of women from the public world seems to be a form of oppression and discrimination. And it is true that few men considered women fit for business, politics, or the professions. On the other hand, most middle-class men—and many middle-class omen as well-considered the new female sphere a vehicle
Benefits and Costs
for expressing special qualities that made women in some ways superior to men. Women were to be the custodians of morality and benevolence, just as the home-shaped by the influence of women-was to be a refuge from the harsh, compet-
itive world of the marketplace. It was women’s responsibility to provide religious and moral instruction to their children and to counterbalance the acquisitive, secular impulses of their husbands. Thus the ’’cult of domesticity,” as some scholars have called it, brought both benefits and costs to middle-class women. It allowed them to live lives of greater material comfort than in the past, and it placed a higher value on their ’’female virtues” and on their roles as wife and mother. At the same time, it left women increasingly detached from the public world, with few outlets for their other interests and energies.
The costs of that detachment were particularly clear among unmarried women of the middle class. By the 1840s, the ideology of domesticity had grown so powerful that few genteel women would any longer consider working (as many had in the past) in shops or mills, and few employers would consider hiring them. But unmarried women nevertheless required some income-producing activity. They had few
AMERICA’S ECONOMIC REVOLUTION
• 287 choices. Some could become teachers or nurses, professions that seemed to call for the same female qualities that made women important within the home; and both of those professions began in the 1840s and 1850s to attract significant numbers of women, although not until the Civil War did females begin to dominate them. Otherwise, unmarried females were largely dependent on the generosity of relatives or hired as governesses for children or companions for widows and other women.
Middle-class people gradually came to consider work by women outside the household to be unseemly, something
Working- characteristic of the lower classes-as Class Women indeed it was. But working-class women could not afford to stay home and cultivate the "domestic virtues.” They had to produce income for their families. They continued to work in factories and mills, but under conditions far worse than those that the original, more "respectable” women workers had once enjoyed. They also frequently found employment in middle-class homes. Domestic service became one of the most frequent sources of female employment. In other words, now that production had moved outside the household, women who needed to earn money had to move outside
their own households to do so.
Leisure Activities
Leisure time was scarce for all but the wealthiest Americans in the mid-nineteenth century. Most people worked long hours. Saturday was a normal working day. Vacations-paid or unpaid-were rare. For most people, Sunday was the only respite from work and was generally reserved for religion and rest. Almost no commercial establishments did any business on Sunday, and even within the home many families frowned upon playing games or engaging in other kinds of entertainment on the Sabbath. For working-class and middle-class people, therefore, holidays took on a special importance. That was one reason for the strikingly elaborate Fourth of July celebrations throughout the country. The celebrations were not just expressions of patriotism. They were also a way of enjoying one of the few holidays from work available to virtually all Americans.
In rural America, where most people still lived, the erratic pattern of farmwork gave many people some relief from the relentless work schedules of city residents. For urban people, however, leisure was something to be seized in what few free moments they had. Men gravitated to taverns for drinking, talking, and game-playing. Women gathered in one another s homes for conversation or card games or to share work on such household tasks as sewing. For educated people, whose numbers were rapidly expanding, reading became one of the prin cipal leisure activities. Newspapers and magazines proliferated rapidly, and books-novels, histories, autobiographies, biogra phies, travelogues, and others-became staples of affluent homes. Women were particularly avid readers, and women writers created a new genre of fiction specifically for females-
the "sentimental novel,” which often offered idealized visions of women’s lives and romances (see p. 336).
There was also a vigorous culture of public leisure, even if many families had to struggle to find time or means to participate in it. In larger cities, theaters were becoming increasingly popular; and while some of them catered to particular
Minstrel social groups, others attracted audiences Shows	crossed class lines. Wealthy people,
middle-class people, workers and their families: all could sometimes be found watching a performance of Shakespeare or a melodrama based on a popular novel or an American myth. Minstrel shows-in which white actors mimicked (and ridiculed) African American culture-became increasingly popular (see p. 420). Public sporting events-boxing, horse racing, cockfighting (already becoming controversial), and others-often attracted considerable crowds. Baseball-not yet organized into professional leagues-was beginning to attract large crowds when played in city parks or fields on the edges of towns (see p. 384). A particularly exciting event in many communities was the arrival of the circus-a traveling entertainment with roots in the Middle Ages that continued to entertain, delight, and bamboozle chil-
dren and adults alike.
Popular tastes in public spectacle tended toward the bizarre and the fantastic. Most men and women lived in a constricted world of familiar things. Relatively few people traveled; and in the absence of film, radio, television, or even much photography, they hungered for visions of unusual phenomena that contrasted with their normal experiences. People going to the theater or the circus or the museum wanted to see things that amazed and even frightened them. Perhaps the most celebrated provider of such experiences P T Barnum was t^ie famous aRd unscrupulous showman P. T. Barnum, who opened the American
Museum in New York City in 1842-not a showcase for art or nature, but a great freak show populated by midgets (the most famous named Tom Thumb), Siamese twins, magicians, and ventriloquists. Barnum was a genius in publicizing his ventures with garish posters and elaborate newspaper announcements. Only later, in the 1870s, did he launch the famous circus for which he is still best remembered. But he was always a pioneer in exploiting public tastes for the wild and exotic.
One of the ways Barnum tried to draw visitors to his museum was by engaging lecturers. He did so because he understood that the lecture was one of the most popular forms of entertainment in nineteenth-century America. Men and women flocked in enormous numbers to lyceums, churches, schools, and auditoriums to hear lecturers explain the latest advances in science, to describe their visits to exotic places, to provide vivid historical narratives, or to rail against the evils of alcohol or slavery. Messages of social uplift and reform attracted rapt audiences, particularly among women eager for guidance as they adjusted to the often jarring changes in the character of family life in the industrializing world.
288 * CHAPTER 10
P. T. BARNUM AND TOM THUMB P. T.
Barnum, circus producer, next to a table on which stands Charles Stratton, a little person who came to be known as General Tom Thumb. Hoping to capitalize on the popular fascination with the bizarre and the fantastic, Barnum hired Stratton at the age of five to tour the country with his circus. Stratton sang, danced, and impersonated famous people such as Napoleon Bonaparte. (© Corbis) THE AGRICULTURAL NORTH
Even in the rapidly urbanizing and industrializing Northeast, and more so in what nineteenth-century Americans called the Northwest (and what Americans today call the Midwest), most people remained tied to the agricultural world. But agriculture,
Rise of	in^ustrY an^ commerce, was becoming
Commercial	increasingly a part of the new capitalist
Agriculture	economy, linked to the national and inter-
national market. Where agriculture could not compete in this new commercial world, it declined. Where
k could compete, it simultaneously flourished and changed.
Truck Farming in THE Northeast
Northeastern Agriculture
The story of agriculture in the Northeast after 1840 is one of decline and transformation. The reason for the decline was simple: the farmers of the section could no longer compete with the new and richer soil of the Northwest. Centers of production were gradually shifting westward for many of the farm goods that had in the past been most important to northeastern agriculture: wheat, corn, grapes, cattle, sheep, and hogs.
Some eastern farmers responded to these changes by moving west themselves and establishing new farms. Still others moved to mill towns and became laborers. Some farmers, however, remained on the land and managed to hold their own. As the eastern urban centers increased in population, many farmers turned to the task of supplying food to
nearby cities; they raised vegetables (truck farming) or fruit and sold it in local towns. New York, for example, led all other states in apple production.
The rise of cities also stimulated the rise of profitable dairy farming. Approximately half the dairy products of the country were produced in the East; most of the rest came from the West, where Ohio was the leading dairy state. Partly because of the expansion of the dairy industry, the Northeast led other sections in the production of hay. New York was the leading hay state in the nation; Pennsylvania and New England grew large crops as well. The Northeast also exceeded other areas in producing potatoes.
But while agriculture in the region remained an important part of the economy, it was steadily becoming less important than the industrial growth of the Northeast itself. As a result, the rural population in many parts of the Northeast continued to decline.
The Old Northwest
There was some industry in the states of the Northwest, more than in the South; and in the two decades before the Civil War, the region experienced steady industrial growth. By 1860, it had 36,785 manufacturing establishments employing 209,909 workers. There was a flourishing industrial and commercial area along the shore of Lake Erie, with Cleveland at its center. Another manufacturing region was in the Ohio River valley; the meatpacking city of Cincinnati was its nucleus. Farther west, the rising city of Chicago, destined to become the great metropolis
of the region, was emerging as the national center of the agricultural machinery and meatpacking industries.
Most of the major industrial activities of the West either served agriculture (as in the case of farm machinery) or relied on agricultural products (as in flour milling, meatpacking, whiskey distilling, and the making of leather goods). As this su88ests> industry was much less important in the Northwest than farming.
Industrialization in the Old Northwest
AMERICA’S ECONOMIC REVOLUTION
• 289 Some areas of the Northwest were not yet dominated by whites. Indians remained the most numerous inhabitants of much of the upper third of the Great Lakes states until after the Civil War. In those areas, hunting and fishing, along with some sedentary agriculture, remained the principal economic activities of both whites and Native Americans. But the tribes did not become integrated into the new commercialized econ-omy that was emerging elsewhere in the Northwest.
For the white (and occasionally black) settlers who populated the lands farther south, the Northwest was primarily an agricultural region. Its rich and plentiful lands made farming a lucrative and expanding activity there, in contrast to the declining agrarian Northeast. Thus the typical citizen of the Northwest was not an industrial worker or poor, marginal farmer, but the owner of a reasonably prosperous family farm. The average size of western farms was 200 acres, the majority owned by the people who worked them.
Rising farm prices around the world provided a strong incentive for these western farmers to engage in commercial agriculture. That usually meant concentrating on a single crop for market (corn, wheat, cattle, sheep, hogs, and others). In the early years of white settlement in the Northwest, farm prices rose because of the debilitation of European agriculture in the .	aftermath of the Napoleonic Wars and the
Specialization growing urban population (and hence the growing demand for food) of industrializing areas of Europe. The Northwest, with good water routes on the Mississippi for getting its crops to oceangoing vessels, prof-
ited from this international trade.
But industrialization, in both the United States and Europe, provided the greatest boost to agriculture. With the growth of factories and cities in the Northeast, the domestic market for farm goods increased dramatically. The growing national and worldwide demand for farm products resulted in steadily rising farm prices. For most farmers, the 1840s and early 1850s were years of increasing prosperity.
To meet the increasing demand for its farm products, residents of the Northwest worked strenuously, and often frantically, to increase their productive capacities. Many tried to take advantage of the large areas of still-uncultivated land and to enlarge the area of white settlement during the 1840s. By 1850, the growing western population was moving into the prairie regions both east and west of the Mississippi: into areas of Indiana, Michigan, Illinois, Missouri, Iowa, and Minnesota. Residents cleared forest lands or made use of fields the Indians had cleared many years earlier. And they began to develop a timber industry to make use of the forests that remained. Wheat was the staple crop of the region, but other crops corn, potatoes, and oats and livestock were also important.
The Northwest increased production not only by expanding the area of settlement, but also by adopting new agricultural technologies that greatly reduced the labor necessary for pro
ducing a crop and slowed the exhaustion of New	the region’s rich soil. Farmers began to cul-
Agricultural tivate new varieties of seed, notably Technologies Mediterranean wheat, which was hardier

CYRUS MCCORMICK’S AUTOMATIC REAPER
Cyrus McCormick invented an automatic reaper in 1831 and had it patented in 1834. The machine, drawn by a horse, cut wheat, corn, or other crops and left it lying in swaths in the field where farmworkers would gather it up and store it in stacks. The reaper allowed one worker to harvest as much wheat in a day as five could harvest using earlier methods. (© Hulton Archive/Getty Images) McCormick
Reaper
than the native type; and they imported better breeds of animals, such as hogs and sheep from England and Spain, to take the place of native stock. Most important were improved tools and farm machines, which American inventors and manufacturers produced in rapidly increasing numbers. During the 1840s, more-efficient grain drills, harrows, mowers, and hay rakes came into wide use. The cast-iron plow, an earlier innovation, remained popular because its parts could be replaced when broken. An even better tool appeared in 1847, when John Deere established at Moline, Illinois, a factory to manufacture steel plows, which were more durable than those made of iron.
Two new machines heralded a coming revolution in grain production. The most important was the automatic reaper, the invention of Cyrus H. McCormick of Virginia. The reaper enabled one worker to harvest as much wheat (or any other small
grain) in a day as five could harvest using older methods. McCormick, who had patented his device in 1834, established a factory at Chicago, in the heart of the grain belt, in 1847. By 1860, more than 100,000 reapers were in use on western farms. Almost as important to the grain grower was the thresher-a machine that separated the grain from the wheat stalks. Threshers appeared in large numbers after 1840. Before that, farmers generally flailed grain by hand (seven bushels a day was a good average for a farm) or used farm animals to tread it (twenty bushels a day on the average). A threshing machine, such as those manufactured by the Jerome
I.
Case factory in Racine, Wisconsin, could thresh twenty-five bushels or more in an hour. The Northwest considered itself the most democratic section of the country. But its democracy was based on a defense of economic freedom and the rights of property-a white, middle-class vision of democracy that was becoming common
290 « CHAPTER 10
in many other parts of the country as well. Abraham Lincoln, an Illinois Whig, voiced the economic opinions of many of the people of his section. "I take it that it is best for all to leave each man free to acquire property as fast as he can/’ said Lincoln. "Some will get wealthy. I don’t believe in a law to prevent a man from getting rich; it would do more harm than good. . . . When one starts poor, as most do in the race of life, free society is such that he knows he can better his condition; he knows that there is no fixed condition of labor for his whole life.”
Rural Life
Life for farming people was very different from life in towns and cities. It also varied greatly from one farming region to another. In the more densely populated farm areas east of the Appalachians and in the easternmost areas of the Northwest, farmers were usually part of vibrant communities and made extensive use of the institutions of those communities-the churches, schools, stores, and taverns. As white settlement moved farther west, farmers became isolated and had to struggle to find any occasions for contact with people outside their own families.
Religion drew farm communities together perhaps more than any other force, particularly since so many farm areas were populated by people of common ethnic (and therefore religious) backgrounds. Town or village churches were popular meeting places, for both services and social events-most of them dominated by women. Even in areas with no organized churches, farm families-and,
Importance of Religion in Rural Communities
again, women in particular-gathered in one another’s homes for prayer meetings, Bible readings, and other religious activities. Weddings, baptisms, and funerals also brought communities together in celebration or mourning.
But religion was only one of many reasons for interaction. Farm people joined together frequently to share tasks that a single family would have difficulty performing on its own; festive barn raisings were among the most frequent. Women prepared large suppers while the men worked on the barn and the children played. Large numbers of families also gathered together at harvest time to help bring in crops, husk corn, or thresh wheat. Women came together to share domestic tasks as well, holding "bees” in which groups of women joined together to make quilts, baked goods, preserves, and other products.
But despite the many social gatherings farm families managed to create, they lived in a world with much less contact with popular culture and public social life than people who lived in towns and cities. Rural people, often even more than urban ones, treasured their links to the outside world letters from relatives and friends in distant places, newspapers and magazines from cities they had never seen, catalogs advertising merchandise that their local stores never had. Yet many also valued their separation from urban culture and cherished the relative autonomy that farm life gave them. One reason many rural Americans looked back nostalgically on country life once they moved to the city was that they sensed that in the urban world they did not have as much control over the patterns of their daily lives as they had once known.
LOOKING BACK
Between the 1820s and the 1850s, the American economy experienced the beginnings of an industrial revolution-a change so profound that in the United States, as in Europe, it transformed almost every area of life in fundamental ways.
The American industrial revolution was a result of many things: population growth (through both natural increase and immigration), advances in transportation and communication, new technologies that spurred the development of factories capable of mass producing goods, the recruiting of a large industrial labor force, and the creation of corporate bodies capable of managing large enterprises. The new economy created great wealth, expanding the ranks of the wealthy and helping
to create a large new middle class. It also created high levels of inequality, which were particularly visible in the growth of a large industrial working class.
Culture in the industrializing areas of the North changed too, and there were important changes in the structure and behavior of the family, in the role of women, and in the way people used their leisure time and encountered popular culture. The changes were often alluring, often disorienting, and often both. They helped widen the gap in experience and understanding between the generation of the Revolution and the generation of the mid-nineteenth century. They also helped widen the gap between North and South.
Key Terms/People/Places/Events
Commonwealth v. Hunt 278 ’’Cult of domesticity” 282 Cyrus H. McCormick 289 De Witt Clinton 264 Erie Canal 264
Factory system 269 Godey’s Lady’s Book 286 Know-Nothings 262 Lowell System 271 Machine tools 270
Nativism 259 P. T. Barnum 287 Samuel F. B. Morse 266 Sarah Bagley 276 Trunk lines 266
recall and reflect
1.	What were the political responses to immigration in mid-nineteenth century America? Do you see any parallels to responses to immigration today?
2.	Why did the rail system supplant the canal system as the nation’s major transportation network?
3.	How did the industrial workforce change between the 1820s and the 1840s? What were the effects on American society of changes in the workforce?
4.	How did America’s industrial revolution and the factory system change family life and women’s social and economic roles?
5.	How did agriculture in the North change as a result of growing industrialization and urbanization?
AMERICA’S ECONOMIC REVOLUTION 291
SIGNIFICANT EVENTS
1813	*
Lowell establishes textile mill at Waltham, Massachusetts
1817-1825
Erie Canal constructed
_ 1830
Baltimore and Ohio becomes first American railroad to begin operations
1830s
Major immigration from southern (Catholic) Ireland begins
First national craft unions founded
1832
Cholera plague
1834
Cyrus McCormick patents mechanical reaper
Women workers at Lowell mills stage strike
1837
Native American Association begins efforts to restrict immigration
Oberlin becomes first American coeducational college
Mt. Holyoke College for women opens
1842
Massachusetts Supreme Court, in Commonwealth v. Hunt, declares unions and strikes legal
292 ® CHAPTER 10
SIGNIFICANT EVENTS
I8**................*
Samuel F. B. Morse sends first telegraph message
1845
Irish potato famine begins, spurring major emigration to America
Native American Party formed to combat immigration Female Labor Reform
Association established at Lowell
1846
Rotary press invented, making possible rapid printing of newspapers
........... 184? . ..__
John Deere begins manufacturing steel plows
1848
Failed revolution in Germany spurs emigration to America
1852
American Party (Know-Nothings) formed
1850
Nativists form Supreme Order of the Star-Spangled Banner to oppose immigration
n COTTON,
SLAVERY, AND THE OLD SOUTH
THE OLD PLANTATION
This painting, by an unidentified folk artist of the early nineteenth century, suggests the importance of music in the lives of plantation slaves in America. The banjo, which the black musician at right is playing, was originally an African instrument. (© The Granger Colletion, New York) LOOKING AHEAD
1.	How did slavery shape the southern economy and society, and how did it make the South different from the North?
2.	What was the myth and what was the reality of white society in the South? Why was the myth so pervasive and widely believed?
3.	How did slaves resist their enslavement? How successful were their efforts? What was the response of whites?
SETTING THE STAGE
THE SOUTH, LIKE THE NORTH, EXPERIENCED DRAMATIC
growth in the middle years of the nineteenth century. Southerners fanned out into the territories of the Southwest and established new communities, new states, and new markets. The southern agricultural economy grew increasingly productive and prosperous. Trade in such staples as sugar, rice, tobacco, and above all cotton made the South a major force in international commerce and created substantial wealth within the region. It also tied the South securely emerging capitalist world of the United States and its European trading partners. Yet despite its expansion and growth, the South experienced a much less fundamental transformation in these years than did the North. The South had begun the nineteenth century a primarily agricultural region; it remained overwhelmingly agrarian in 1860. It had begun the century with few important cities and little industry; so it remained sixty years later. In 1800, a plantation system dependent on slave labor had dominated the southern economy; by 1860, that system had only strengthened its grip on the region. As the South grew and expanded, it became increasingly unlike the North and increasingly sensitive to what it considered threats to its distinctive way of life. One historian has written, The South grew, but it did not develop.
THE COTTON ECONOMY
The most important economic development in the mid-nineteenth-century South was the shift of economic power from the "upper South” (the original southern states along the Atlantic coast) to the "lower South” (the expanding agricultural regions in the new states of the Southwest). That shift reflected above all the growing dominance of cotton in the southern economy.
The Rise of King Cotton
Decline of the Tobacco Economy
Much of the upper South continued in the nineteenth century to rely, as it always had, on the cultivation of tobacco. But the market for that crop was notoriously unstable. Tobacco prices were subject to frequent depressions, including a prolonged one that began in the 1820s and extended into the 1850s. Tobacco also rapidly exhausted the land on which it grew; it was difficult for most growers to remain in business in the same place for very long. By the 1830s, therefore, many farmers in the old tobacco-
growing regions of Virginia, Maryland, and North Carolina were shifting to other crops notably wheat-while the center of tobacco cultivation was moving westward, into the Piedmont area.
The southern regions of the coastal South-South Carolina, Georgia, and parts of Florida continued to rely on the cultivation of rice, a more stable and lucrative crop than tobacco. Rice, however, demanded substantial irrigation and needed an exceptionally long growing season (nine months), so cultivation of that staple remained restricted to a relatively small area. Sugar growers along the Gulf Coast, similarly, enjoyed a reasonably profitable market for their crop. But sugar cultivation required intensive (and debilitating) labor and a long growing time. Only relatively wealthy planters could afford to engage in it, and they faced major competition from the great sugar plantations of the Caribbean. Sugar cultivation, therefore, did not spread much beyond a small area in southern Louisiana and eastern Texas. Long-staple (Sea Island) cotton was another lucrative crop, but like rice and sugar, it could grow only in a limited area-the coastal regions of the Southeast.
The decline of the tobacco economy in the upper South, and the limits of the sugar rice and long-staple cotton economies farther south, might have forced the region to shift its attention in Short-Staple	the nineteenth century to other nonagricultural pursuits, had it not been for
Cotton	the £rowing importance of a new product that soon overshadowed all else:
short-staple cotton. This was a hardier and coarser strain of cotton that could grow successfully in a variety of climates and in a variety of soils. It was harder to process than the long-staple variety; its seeds were more difficult to remove from the fiber. But the 1793 invention of the cotton gin (see p. 189) had largely solved that problem.
COTTON, SLAVERY, AND THE OLD SOUTH - 295
THE NEW ORLEANS COTTON
EXCHANGE
Edgar Degas, the French impressionist, painted this scene of cotton traders examining samples in the New Orleans cotton exchange in 1873. By this time the cotton trade was producing less impressive profits than those that had made it the driving force of the booming southern economy of the 1850s. Degas's mother came from a Creole family of cotton brokers in New Orleans, and two of the artist's brothers (depicted here reading a newspaper and leaning against a window) joined the business in America. (Musee des Beaux-Arts, Pau, France/© Giraudon/ The Bridgeman Art Library) Demand for cotton was growing rapidly. The growth of the textile industry in Britain in the 1820s and 1830s, and in New England in the 1840s and 1850s, created an enormous new demand for the crop. As a result, ambitious men and women rapidly moved into previously uncultivated lands-many of them newly open to planter settlement after the relocation of the tribes in the 1820s and 1830s-to establish new cottongrowing regions.
Beginning in the 1820s, therefore, cotton production spread rapidly. From the western areas of South Carolina and Georgia, production moved steadily westward-first into Alabama and Mississippi, then into northern Louisiana, Texas, and Arkansas. By the 1850s, cotton had become the linchpin of the southern economy. In 1820, the South had produced about 500,000 bales of cotton. By 1850 it was producing nearly 3 million bales a year, and by 1860 nearly 5 million. There were periodic fluctuations in cotton prices, resulting generally from overproduction; periods of boom frequently gave way to abrupt busts.
But the cotton economy continued to grow, even if in fits and starts. By the time of the Civil War, cotton constituted nearly two-thirds of the total export trade of the
United States and was bringing in nearly $200 million a year. The annual value of the rice crop, in contrast, was $2 million. It was little wonder that southern politicians now proclaimed: "Cotton is king!”
Cotton production dominated the more recently settled areas of what came to be known as the "lower South” (or, in a later era,
Spread of Cotton Production
the "Deep South”). Many people began to call this region the Cotton Kingdom.” Settlement of the area resembled in some ways the rush of gold seekers to a new strike. The prospect of tremendous profits from growing cotton drew white settlers to
the lower South by the thousands. Some were wealthy planters from the older states who transferred their assets and slaves to a cotton plantation. Most were small slaveholders or slaveless farmers who hoped to move into the planter class.
A similar shift, if an involuntary one, occurred in the slave population. Between 1820 and 1860, the number of slaves in Expansion of Alabama leaped from 41,000 to 435,000, Slavery and in Mississippi from 32,000 to 436,000.
In the same period, the increase in Virginia was only from 425,000 to 490,000. Between 1840 and 1860, according to some estimates, 410,000 slaves moved from the upper South to the cotton states-either accompanying masters who were themselves migrating to the Southwest or (more often) sold to planters already there. Indeed, the sale of slaves to the Southwest became an important economic activity in the upper South and helped the troubled planters of that region compensate for the declining value of their crops.
Weak
Manufacturing
Sector
Southern Trade and Industry
In the face of this booming agricultural expansion, other forms of economic activity developed slowly in the South. The business classes of the region-the manufacturers and merchants-were not unimportant. There was growing activity in flour milling and in textile and iron manufacturing,
particularly in the upper South. The Tredegar Iron Works in Richmond, for example, compared favorably with the best iron mills in the Northeast. But industry remained an insignificant force in comparison with the agricultural economy. The total value of southern textile manufactures in 1860 was $4.5 million-a threefold increase over the value of those goods twenty years
296 * CHAPTER 11
before, but only about 2 percent of the value of the raw cotton exported that year.
To the degree that the South developed a nonfarm commercial sector, it was largely to serve the needs of the plantation economy. Particularly important were the brokers, or "factors,” who marketed the planters’ crops. These merchants tended to live in such towns as New Orleans, Charleston, Mobile, and Savannah, where they worked to find buyers for cotton and
other crops and where they purchased goods for the planters they served. The South had only a very rudimentary financial system, and the factors often also served the planters as bankers, providing them with credit. Planters frequently accumulated substantial debts, particularly during periods when cotton prices were in decline; and the southern merchant-bankers thus became figures of considerable influence and importance in the region. There were also substantial groups of professional
1820
Areas of cotton production >
Slave distribution
(One dot approximates 200 slaves)
SLAVERY AND COTTON IN THE SOUTH, 1820 AND 1860
These two maps show the remarkable spread of cotton cultivation in the South in the decades before the Civil War. Both maps show the areas of cotton cultivation (the green-colored areas) as well as areas with large slave populations (the brown-dotted areas). Note how in the top map, which represents 1820, cotton production is concentrated largely in the East, with a few areas scattered among Alabama, Mississippi, Louisiana, and Tennessee. Slavery is most concentrated along the Georgia and South Carolina coast, areas in which long-staple cotton was grown, with only a few other areas of highly dense slave populations. By 1860, the South had changed dramatically. Cotton production had spread throughout the lower South, from Texas to northern Florida, and slavery had moved with it. Slavery was also much denser in the tobacco-growing regions of Virginia and North Carolina, which had also grown. * How did this economic shift affect the white South's commitment to slavery?
Areas of cotton production
Slave distribution (One dot approximates 200 slaves)
0
COTTON, SLAVERY, AND THE OLD SOUTH * 297
people in the South-lawyers, editors, doctors, and others. In most parts of the region, however, they too were closely tied to and dependent on the plantation economy. However important manufacturers, merchants, and professionals might have been to southern society, they were relatively unimportant in comparison with the manufacturers, merchants, and professionals of the North, on whom southerners were coming more and more (and increasingly unhappily) to depend.
The primitive character of the region’s banking system matched a lack of development in other basic services and structures necessary for industrial development. Perhaps most notable was the South’s inadequate transportation system. In the North in the antebellum period, enormous sums were invested in roads, canals,
and above all railroads to knit the region together into an integrated market. In the South there were no such investments. Canals were almost nonexistent; most roads were crude and unsuitable for heavy transport; and railroads, although they expanded substantially in the 1840s and 1850s,
Inadequate
Regional
Transportation
System
failed to tie the region together effectively. Such towns as Charleston, Atlanta, Savannah, and Norfolk had direct connections with Memphis, and thus with the Northwest; and Richmond was connected, via the Virginia Central, with the Memphis and Charleston Railroad. In addition, several independent lines furnished a continuous connection between the Ohio River and New Orleans. Most of the South, however, remained unconnected to the national railroad system. Most lines in the region were short and local. The principal means of transportation was water. Planters generally shipped their crops to market along rivers or by sea; most manufacturing was in or near port towns.
Perceptive southerners recognized the economic subordination of their region to the North. "From the rattle with which the nurse tickles the ear of the child born in the South to the shroud that covers the cold form of the dead, everything comes to us from the North.” the Arkansas journalist Albert Pike lamented. Perhaps the most prominent advocate of southern economic independence was James B. D. De Bow, a resident of New Orleans. He published a magazine advocating
■j t IpH view of plantation lands along a stretch of the Mississippi River between New Orleans and Baton Rouge, Louisiana. Note PLANTATIONS IN LOUISIANA, 1858 This map provides a e a^	designed to give as many planters as possible frontage on the river, which they needed to transport their crops to
the long, narrow shapes of these landholdings—known as long lots. is sys em	which cu|tivation of crops easier Note how towns, stores, and churches all are near the
market and to receive goods in return. The river also deposited rich soi on t e
riverbank, so planters and others living on plantations nearby could reach them yy__________—------- ----------------—---------------------- ---------------------------------
• How is this landscape different from that of the newly opened federal lands in the West.
298 * CHAPTER 11
De Bow’s Review
southern commercial and agricultural expansion, De Bow’s Review, which survived from its founding in 1846 until 1880.
De Bow made his journal into a tireless advocate of southern economic independence from the North, warning constantly
of the dangers of the "colonial” relationship between the sections. One writer noted in the pages of his magazine: "I think it would be safe to estimate the amount which is lost to us annually by our vassalage to the North at $100,000,000. Great God!” Yet De Bow’s Review was itself evidence of the dependency of the South on the North. It was printed in New York, because no New Orleans printer had facilities adequate for the task; it was filled with advertisements from northern manufacturing firms; and its circulation was always modest in comparison with those of northern publications. In Charleston, for example, it sold an average of 173 copies per issue; Harper’s Magazine of New York, in contrast, regularly sold 1,500 copies to South Carolinians.
Reasons for Colonial Dependency
Sources of Southern Difference
Despite this growing concern about the region's "colonial dependency,” the South made few serious efforts to build an economy that might challenge its dependency. An important question about antebellum southern history, therefore, is why the region did so little to develop a larger industrial and commercial economy of its own. Why did it remain so different from the North?
Part of the reason was the great profitability of the South's agricultural system, particularly of cotton production. In the Northeast, many people had turned to manufacturing as the agricultural economy of the region declined. In the South, the agricultural economy was booming, and ambitious people eager to profit from the emerging capitalist economy had little incentive to look beyond it. Another
reason was that wealthy southerners had so much capital invested in their land and, particularly, their slaves, they had little left for other investments. Some historians have suggested that the southern climate-with its long, hot, steamy summers-was less suitable for industrial development than the climate of the North. Still others have claimed that southern work habits (perhaps a reflection of the debilitating effects of the climate) impeded industrialization; some white southerners appeared-at least to many northern observers-not to work very hard, to lack the strong work ethic that fueled northern economic development.
But the southern failure to create a flourishing commercial or industrial economy was also in part the result of a set of values distinctive to the South that discouraged the growth of cities and industry. Many white southerners liked to think of them-
The Cavalier selves as rePresentatives of a special way of Image	based on traditional values of chivalry,
leisure, and elegance. White southerners were, they argued, "cavaliers'-people happily free from the base, acquisitive instincts of the ^yankees” to their north. Southern
white people were, they believed, more concerned with a refined and gracious way of life than with rapid growth and development. Appealing as the "cavalier” image was to southern whites, however, it conformed to the reality of southern society in very limited ways.
WHITE SOCIETY
IN THE SOUTH
Only a small minority of southern whites owned slaves. In 1850, when the total white population of the South was over 6 million, the number of slaveholders was only 347,525. In 1860, when the white population was just above 8 million, the number of slaveholders had risen to only 383,637. These figures are somewhat misleading, since each slaveholder was normally the head of a family averaging five members. But even with all members of slaveowning families included in the figures, those owning slaves still amounted to perhaps no more than one-quarter of the white population. And of the minority of whites holding slaves, only a small proportion owned them in substantial numbers.
The Planter Class
Planter
Aristocracy
How, then, did the South come to be seen-both by the outside world and by many southerners themselves-as a society dominated by great plantations and wealthy landowning planters? In large part, it was because the planter aristocracy-the cotton
magnates, the sugar, rice, and tobacco nabobs, the whites who owned at least forty or fifty slaves and 800 or more acres-exercised power and influence far in excess of their numbers. They stood at the apex of society, determining the political, economic, and even social life of their region. Enriched by vast annual incomes, dwelling in palatial homes, surrounded by broad acres and many black servants, they became a class to which all other southerners deferred. The wealthiest planters also maintained homes in towns or cities and spent several months of the year there, engaged in a glittering social life. Others traveled widely, especially to Europe, as an antidote to the isolation of plantation life. And many used their plantations to host opulent social events.
White southerners liked to compare their planter class to the old upper classes of England and Europe: true aristocracies, long entrenched. In fact, however, the southern upper class was in most cases not at all similar to the landed aristocracies of the Old World. In some areas of the upper South-the Tidewater region of Virginia, for example-some of the great aristocrats were indeed people whose families had occupied positions of wealth and power for generations. In most of the South, however, a long-standing landed aristocracy, although central to the "cavalier” image, was largely a myth. Even the most important planters in the cotton-growing areas of the South were, typically, new to their wealth and power. As late as
COTTON, SLAVERY, AND THE OLD SOUTH
• 299 the 1850s, many of the great landowners in the lower South were still first-generation settlers, who had arrived with only modest resources, struggled for years to clear land and develop a plantation in what was at first a rugged wilderness, and only recently had started to live in the comfort and luxury for which they became famous. Large areas of the "Old South” (as Americans later called the South of the pre-Civil War era) had been settled and cultivated for less than two decades at the time of the Civil War.
Nor was the world of the planter nearly as leisured and genteel as the "cavalier” myth would suggest. Growing staple crops was a business that was in its own way just as competitive and just as risky as the industrial enterprises of the North.
Plantation Planters had to supervise their operations
Management carefully if they hoped to make a profit.
They were, in many respects, just as much competitive capitalists as the industrialists of the North whose lifestyles they claimed to hold in contempt. Even many affluent planters lived modestly, their wealth so heavily invested in
land and slaves that there was little left for personal comfort. And white planters, even some substantial ones, tended to move frequently as new and presumably more-productive areas opened up to cultivation.
Indeed, it may have been the very newness and precariousness of the plantation way of life, and the differences between the reality of that life and the image of it, that made many southern planters determined to portray themselves as genteel aristocrats. Having struggled so hard to reach and maintain their positions, they were all the more determined to defend them. Perhaps that was why the defense of slavery and of the South's 'Tights” was stronger in the new, booming regions of the lower South and weaker in the more established and less flourishing areas of the Tidewater.
Wealthy southern whites sustained their image of themselves as aristocrats in many ways. They avoided such "coarse” occupations as trade and commerce; those who did not become planters often gravitated toward the military, a "suitable” career
Aristocratic
Values
Woods
Pasture
CROPS
Cotton
Rice
Corn
Cane
H
Potatoes ■	Peas
■	Other crops
Idle
Woods
■ Ponrnin chnws both how much plantations were connected to the national and world markets, and how much they tried to be A GEORGIA PLANTATION This map of the Hopeton anta ion in uaarcane all of them crops for the market. Note also the many crops grown for the local market or for consumption self-sufficient. Note the large areas of land devoted to growing cotton, rice, an	djstributjon of |jvjng quarters, with slaves' quarters grouped together very near the
by residents of the plantation—potatoes, vegetables, corn, and others. I e op e
owners residence.
Why would a plantation in this part of the South be Why would planters want their slaves living
diversified in the market crops it raised than the cotton plantations in the Mississippi Delta? ^n^arby^Whym^bi slaves be unha^ °b°Ut S°
300
CHAPTER 11
for men raised in a culture in which medieval knights (as portrayed in the novels of Walter Scott) were a powerful and popular image. The aristocratic ideal also found reflection in the definition of a special role for southern white women.
"Honor"
Above all, perhaps, white males adopted an elaborate code of chivalry, which obligated them to defend their "honor,” often through dueling-which survived in the South long after it had largely vanished in the North. Southern white males placed enormous stock in conventional forms of courtesy and respect in their dealings with one another-perhaps to distance themselves from the cruelty and disrespect that were so fundamental to the slave system they controlled. Violations of such forms often brought what seemed to outsiders a disproportionately heated and even violent response.
The idea of honor in the South was only partly connected to the idea of ethical behavior and bravery. It was also tied to the importance among white males of the public appearance of dignity and authority-of saving face in the presence of others. Anything that seemed to challenge the dignity, social station, or "manhood” of a white southern male might be the occasion
for a challenge to duel, or at least for a stern public rebuke When the South Carolina congressman Preston Brooks strode into the chamber of the United States Senate and savagely beat Senator Charles Sumner of Massachusetts with a cane to retaliate for what he considered an insult to a relative, he was acting wholly in accord with the idea of southern honor. In the North, he was reviled as a savage. In the South, he became a popular hero. But Brooks was only the most public example of a code of behavior that many white southern men fol-
Cult of
Honor lowed. Avenging insults was a social necessity in many parts of southern society, and avenging insults to white southern women was perhaps the most
important obligation of a white southern "gentleman.”
The "Southern Lady"
In some respects, affluent white women in the South occupied roles very similar to those of middle-class white women in the North. Their lives generally centered in the home, where they served as companions to and hostesses for their husbands and as nurturing mothers for their children. Even less frequently than in the North did "genteel” southern white women engage in public activities or find income-producing employment.
THE OLIVIER PLANTATION
In this watercolor on paper, Adrien Persac (1823—1873) nlarpc th l, f . east bank of the Bayou Teche, an important waterway in Louisiana. Also on the right, he depicts the suoa'r hnn<u.°U d" V r SU93r plantat'°n °n the left wi,h add"'°nal dwellings towards the right, on the the planter and his family. (© Louisiana State Museum, USA/Bridgeman Images) '	y	an a oating pontoon bridge. The artist represents the self-consciously elegant life of
COTTON, SLAVERY, AND THE OLD SOUTH * 301
But the life of the "southern lady” was also in many ways very different from that of her northern counterpart. For one thing, the cult of honor in the region meant in theory that southern white men gave particular importance to the "defense”
Subordinate °‘ W0l™n-In Police, this generally meant
Status of	w“lte men were even more dominant
Women an<^ white women even more subordinate in southern culture than they were in the
North. George Fitzhugh, one of the South’s most important social theorists, wrote in the 1850s: 'Women, like children, have but one right, and that is the right to protection. The right to protection involves the obligation to obey.”
More important in determining the role of southern white women, however, were the social and economic realities in which they lived. The vast majority of females in the region lived on farms, isolated from people outside their own families, with virtually no access to the "public world” and thus few opportunities to look beyond their roles as wives and mothers. Because the family was the principal economic unit on most farms, the dominance of husbands and fathers over wives and children was even greater than in those northern families in which income-producing activities had moved out of the home and into the factory or office. For many white women, living on farms of modest size meant a fuller engagement in the economic life of the family than was becoming typical for middle-class women in the North. These women engaged in spinning, weaving, and other production; they participated in agricultural tasks; they helped supervise the slave workforce. On some of the larger plantations, however, even these limited roles were sometimes considered unsuitable for white women; and the "plantation mistress” became, in some cases, more an ornament for her husband than an active part of the economy or the society.
CLEAR STARCHING IN LOUISIANA
This 1837 etching by Auguste Hervieu offers a strikingly unromanticized view of plantation women in the South. The white plantation mis soberly dressed, speaks harshly to two black household servants, presumably criticizing the way they are doing the laundry. The slaves cower, carefully hiding whatever resentment t ey might feel behind a submissive pose. Nothing in this picture suggests anything like the k’ ease and luxury often associated with plantation life in popular mythology at the time since, [The Life and Adventures of Jonathan Jefferson Whitlaw, by Frances Trollope, 1836} Southern white women also had less access to education than their northern counterparts. Nearly a quarter of all white women over twenty were completely illiterate; relatively few women had more than a rudimentary exposure to schooling. Even wealthy planters were not interested in extensive schooling for their daughters. The few female "academies” in the South trained women primarily to be suitable wives.
Southern white women had other special burdens as well. The southern white birth rate remained nearly 20 percent ~	higher than that of the nation as a whole, and
Burdens infant mortality in the region remained higher than elsewhere; nearly half the children born in the South in 1860 died before they reached five years of age. The slave-labor system had a mixed impact on white women. It helped spare many of them from certain kinds of arduous labor, but it also threatened their relationships with their husbands. Male slaveowners had frequent sexual relationships with the female slaves on their plantations; the children of those unions became part of the plantation labor force and served as a constant reminder to white women of their husbands’ infidelity. Black women (and men) were obviously the most important
victims of such practices. But white women suffered too.
A few southern white women rebelled against their roles and against the prevailing assumptions of their region. Some became outspoken abolitionists and joined northerners in the crusade to abolish slavery. Some agitated for other reforms within the South itself. Most white women, however, found few outlets for whatever discontent they may have felt with their lives. Instead, they generally convinced themselves of the benefits of their position and-even more fervently than southern white men-defended the special virtues of the southern way of life. Upper-class white women in the South were particularly energetic in defending the class lines that separated them from poorer whites.
The Plain Folk
The typical white southerner was not a great planter and slaveholder, but a modest yeoman farmer. Some of these "plain folk,” as they have become known, owned a few slaves, with whom they worked and lived far more closely than did the larger planters. Most (in fact, three-quarters of all white families) owned no slaves. Some plain folk, most of whom owned their own land, devoted themselves largely to subsistence farming; others grew cotton or other crops for the market, but usually could not produce enough to allow them to expand their operations or even get out of debt. During the 1850s, the number of nonslaveholding landowners increased much faster than the number of slaveholding landowners. While there were occasional examples of poor farmers moving into the ranks of the planter class, such cases were rare. Most yeomen knew that they had little prospect of substantially bettering their lot.
One reason was the southern educational system, which provided poor whites with few opportunities to learn and thus limited their chances of advancement. For the sons of wealthy planters, the region provided ample opportunities to gain an
302 » CHAPTER 11
education. In 1860 there were 260 southern colleges and universities, public and private, with 25,000 students enrolled in them, or more than half the total number of
Educational students in the United States. But universi-
Opportunities ties were within the reach of only the upper class. The elementary and secondary schools of the South were not only fewer but also inferior to those of the Northeast (although not much worse than the crude schools of the Northwest), and a higher proportion of whites
were illiterate than in other parts of the country.
That a majority of the South’s white population consisted of
modest farmers largely excluded from the dominant plantation society raises another important question about the antebellum South. Why did the plain folk have so little power in the public world of the Old South? Why did they not oppose the aristocratic social system in which they shared so little? Why did they not resent the system of slavery, from which they generally did not benefit?
Some nonslaveowning whites did oppose the planter elite, but for the most part in limited ways and in a relatively few, isolated areas. These were southern highlanders, the "hill
Hill People PeoP^e^ w^° lived in the Appalachian ranges east of the Mississippi, in the Ozarks to the west of the river, and in other "hill country” or "backcountry” areas cut off from the commercial world of the plantation system. Of all southern whites, they were the most isolated from the mainstream of the region’s life. They practiced a simple form of subsistence agriculture, owned practically no slaves, and had a proud sense of seclusion. They were, in most respects, unconnected to the new commercial economy that dominated the great cotton-planting region of the South. They produced almost no surplus for the market, had little access to money, and
often bartered for the goods they could not grow themselves.
To such men and women, slavery was unattractive for many of the same reasons it was unappealing to workers and small farmers in the North: because it threatened their sense of their own independence. Hill country farmers lived in a society defined by individual personal freedom and unusual isolation from modern notions of property. They also held to older political ideals, which for many included the ideal of fervent loyalty to the nation.
Such whites frequently expressed animosity toward the planter aristocracy of the other regions of the South. The mountain region was the only part of the South to defy the trend toward sectional conformity, and the only part to resist the movement toward secession when it finally developed. Even during the Civil War, many hill country southerners refused to support the Confederacy; some even fought for the Union.
Far greater in number, however, were the nonslaveowning whites who lived in the midst of the plantation system. Many, perhaps most of them, accepted that system because they were tied to it in important ways. Small farmers depended on the local plantation aristocracy for many things: access to cotton gins, markets for
their modest crops and their livestock, credit or other financial assistance. In many areas, there were also extensive kinship
Close Relations with THE Plantation Aristocracy
networks linking lower- and upper-class whites. The poorest resident of a county might be a cousin of the richest aristocrat. Together, these mutual ties helped mute what might otherwise have been pronounced class tensions.
Small farmers felt tied to the plantation society in other ways as well. For white men, at least, the South was an unusually democratic society, in that participation in politics—both through voting and through attending campaign meetings and barbecues-was even more widespread than in the North, where participation was also high. Just as political participation gave workers in the North a sense of connection to the social order, so it did for farmers in the South-although officeholders in the South, even more than in the North, were almost always members of the region’s elites. In the 1850s, moreover, the boom in the cotton economy allowed many small farmers to improve their economic fortunes. Some bought more land, became slaveowners, and moved into at least the fringes of plantation society. Others simply felt more secure in their positions as independent yeomen and hence more likely to embrace the fierce regional loyalty that was spreading throughout the white South in these years.
Small farmers, even more than great planters, were also committed to a traditional, male-dominated family structure. Their household-centered economies required the participation of all family members and, they believed, a stable system
Commitment of gender relarions to ensure order and sta' TO	bility. Men were the unquestioned masters
Paternalism of their homes; women and children, who were both family and workforce, were firmly under the master’s control. As the northern attack on slavery increased in the 1840s and 1850s, it was easy for such farmers to believe-and easy for ministers, politicians, and other propagandists for slavery to persuade them-that an assault on one hierarchical system (slavery) would open the way to an
assault on another such system (patriarchy).
There were other white southerners, however, who did not
share in the plantation economy in even limited ways and yet continued to accept its premises. These were the members of a particularly degraded class-numbering perhaps a half million in 1850-known to other classes variously and demeaningly as "crackers,” "sand hillers,” or "poor white trash” (a phrase used as a chapter title in Harriet Beecher Stowe’s Uncle Tom's Cabin). Occupying the infertile lands of the pine barrens, the red hills, and the swamps, they lived in miserable cabins amid genuine destitution. Many owned no land (or owned land on which nothing could be grown) and supported themselves by foraging or hunting. Others worked as common laborers for their neighbors, although the slave system limited their opportunities. Their degradation resulted partly from dietary deficiencies and disease. Some resorted at times to eating clay (hence the tendency of affluent whites to refer to them disparagingly as clay eaters ); and they suffered from pellagra, hookworm, and malaria. Planters and small farmers alike held them in contempt They formed a true underclass. In some material respects, their plight was worse than that of the African American slaves (who themselves often looked down on the poor whites).
COTTON, SLAVERY, AND THE OLD SOUTH - 303
Yet, even among these southerners-the true outcasts of white society in the region—there was no real opposition to Limited Class	Plantati°n system or slavery. In part,
Conflict undoubtedly, this was because these men and women were so benumbed by poverty that they had little strength to protest. But their relative passivity resulted also from perhaps the single greatest unifying factor among the southern white population, the one force that was most responsible for reducing tensions among the various classes: their perception of race. However poor and miserable these white southerners were, they could still consider themselves members of a ruling race; they could still look down on the black population of the region and feel a bond with their fellow whites born of a determination to maintain their racial supremacy. As Frederick Law Olmsted, a northerner who visited the South and chronicled southern society in the 1850s, wrote: "From childhood, the one thing in their condition which has made life valuable to the mass of whites
has been that the niggers are yet their inferiors/'
SLAVERY: THE “PECULIAR
INSTITUTION”
White southerners often referred to slavery as the "peculiar institution.” By that they meant not that the institution was odd, but that it was distinctive, special. The description was apt, for American slavery was indeed distinctive. The South in the mid-nineteenth century was the only area in the Western world-except for Brazil, Cuba, and Puerto Rico-where slavery still existed. Slavery, more than any other single factor, isolated the South from the rest of American society. And as that isolation increased, so did the commitment of southerners to defend the institution.
Within the South itself, the institution of slavery had paradoxical results. On the one hand, it isolated blacks from whites, drawing a sharp and inviolable racial line dividing one group of southerners from another. As a result, African Americans under slavery began to develop a society and culture of their own, one unrelated to the white civilization around them. On the other hand, slavery created a unique bond between blacks and whites-masters and slaves-in the South. The two groups may have maintained separate spheres, but each sphere was deeply influenced by, indeed dependent on, the other.
Varieties of Slavery
Slavery was an institution established and regulated in detail by law. The slave codes of the southern states forbade slaves to hold property, to leave their masters’ premises without permission, to be out after dark, to congregate with other slaves except at church, to carry firearms, or to strike a white person, even in self-defense. The codes of some states prohib ited whites from teaching slaves to read
Legal Basis of or write and denied slaves the right to Slavery	testify in cQurc against white people. The
laws contained no provisions to legalize slave marriages or divorces. If an owner killed a slave while punishing him, the act was generally not considered a crime. Slaves, however, faced the death penalty for killing or even resisting a white person and for inciting revolt. The codes also contained extraordinarily rigid provisions for defining a person’s race. Anyone with even a trace of African ancestry was defined as black. And anyone even rumored to possess any such trace was presumed to be black unless he or she could prove otherwise-which was, of course, almost impossible to do.
These and dozens of other restrictions might seem to suggest that slaves lived under a uniformly harsh and dismal regime. Had the laws been rigidly enforced, that might have been the case. In fact, however, enforcement was spotty and uneven. Some slaves did acquire property, did learn to read and write, and did assemble with other slaves, in spite of laws to the contrary. Although the major slave offenses generally fell under the jurisdiction of the courts (and thus of the slave codes), white owners handled most transgressions and in-
flicted widely varying punishments. In
Reality of	,	,	,	,	. .,
Slavery	other words, despite the rigid provisions
of law, there was in reality considerable variety within the slave system. Some blacks lived in almost prisonlike conditions, rigidly and harshly controlled by their masters. Many (probably most) others enjoyed some flexibility and (at least in comparison to the regimen prescribed by law) a significant degree of autonomy.
Most masters possessed very few slaves, and their experience with (and image of) slavery was a reflection of the special nature of slavery on the small farm. White farmers with few slaves generally supervised their workers directly and often worked closely alongside them. On such farms, blacks and whites developed a form of intimacy unknown on larger plantations. The paternal relationship between such masters and their slaves could, like relationships between fathers and children, be warm and affectionate. It could also be tyrannical and cruel. In either case, it was a relationship based on the relative powerlessness of the slaves.
Although the majority of slaveowners were small farmers, the majority of slaves lived on plantations of medium or large size, with sizable slave workforces. Substantial planters often hired overseers and even assistant overseers to represent them. "Head drivers,” trusted and responsible slaves often assisted by several subdrivers, acted under the overseer as foremen.
Larger planters generally used one of two methods of assigning slave labor. One was the task system (most common in
_	rice culture), under which slaves were as-
Task and .	.	.	.	. .	.	r
Gang Systems signed a particular task in the morning, for
example, hoeing one acre; after completing the job, they were free for the rest of the day. The other, far more common, was the gang system (employed on the cotton, sugar, and tobacco plantations), under which slaves were simply divided into groups, each of them directed by a driver, and compelled to work for as many hours as the overseer considered a reasonable workday.
304 . CHAPTER 11
WAVING FROM THE SHORE
This image, from the mid-1800s, depicts slaves picking cotton along a riverbank. They are waving to men sitting on bales as they ride the barge on route to the market. (© Archive Photos/Getty images) Life under Slavery
Slaves generally received at least enough necessities to enable them to live and work. Their masters usually furnished them with an adequate, if mostly coarse, diet, consisting mainly of cornmeal, salt pork, molasses, and on special occasions fresh meat or poultry. Many slaves cultivated gardens for their own use. They received cheap clothing and shoes. They lived in crude cabins, called slave quarters, usually clustered in a complex near the master’s house. The plantation mistress or a doctor retained by the owner provided some medical care; but slave women themselves—as "healers” and midwives, or simply as mothers-were the more important source.
Slaves worked hard, beginning with light tasks as children. Their workdays were longest at harvest time. Slave women worked particularly hard. They generally labored in the fields with the men, and they assumed as well the crucial chores traditionally reserved for women-cooking,
Special Position of Women
cleaning, and child rearing. Because slave families were often divided, with husbands and fathers frequently living on neighboring plantations (or, at times, sold to plantation owners far away), black women often found themselves acting in effect as single parents. Within the slave family, therefore, women had special burdens but also a special authority.
Slaves were, as a group, much less healthy than southern whites. After 1808, when the international slave trade became High Slave iHegal in America, the proportion of blacks Mortality t0 whites steadily declined. In 1820, there Rates	was one African American to every four
whites; in 1840, one to every five. The slower increase of the black population was a result of its comparatively high death rate. Slave mothers had large families, but the enforced poverty in which virtually all African Americans lived ensured that fewer of their children would survive to adulthood than the children of white parents. Even those who did survive typically died at a younger age than the
average white person.
COTTON, SLAVERY, AND THE OLD SOUTH
• 305 Even so, according to some scholars, the actual material conditions of slavery may have been better than those of some northern factory workers and better than those of both peasants and industrial workers in much of nineteenth-century Europe. The conditions of American slaves were certainly less severe than those of slaves in the Caribbean and South America crops, which required more arduous labor. Sugar production in the Caribbean islands, in particular, involved extraordinarily backbreaking work and a high risk of fatal tropical diseases. Caribbean and South American planters continued to use the African slave trade well into the nineteenth century to replenish their labor supply, so they had less incentive than American planters (who no longer had access to that trade) to protect their existing laborers. Growing cotton, the principal activity for most slaves in the United States, was much less debilitating than growing sugar; and planters had strong economic incentives to maintain a healthy slave population. One result of this was that America became the only country where a slave population actually increased through natural reproduction (although it grew much more slowly than the white population).
Most masters did make some effort to preserve the health-and thus the usefulness-of their slaves. One example was the frequent practice of protecting slave children from hard work until early adolescence. Masters believed that doing so would
NURSING THE MASTER’S CHILD
This photograph shows a black slave woman caring for a white child. The image was taken in Arkansas in 1855. Black women typ y cared for white children on plantations, sometimes with great affection and sometimes this photograph may suggest—dutifully and without enthusiasm. (The Library of Co g (LC-USZC4-5251))
make young slaves more loyal and would also ensure better health as adults. Another example was the use of hired labor, when available, for the most unhealthy or dangerous tasks. A traveler in Louisiana noted, for example, that Irishmen were employed to clear malarial swamps and to handle cotton bales at the bottom of chutes extending from the river bluff down to a boat landing. If an Irish worker died of disease or in an accident, a master could hire another for a dollar a day or less. But a master would lose an investment of perhaps $1,000 or more if a prime field hand died. Still, cruel masters might forget their pocketbooks in the heat of anger. Slaves were often left to the discipline of overseers, who had less of an economic stake in their well-being; overseers were paid in proportion to the amount of work they could get out of the slaves they supervised.
Household servants had a somewhat easier life-physically at least-than did field hands. On a small plantation, the same slaves might do both field work and housework. But on a
House Slaves large estate-there would generallY be a seP' arate domestic staff: nursemaids, housemaids, cooks, butlers, coachmen. These people lived close to the master and his family, eating the leftovers from the family table and in some cases even sleeping in the "big house/'
Between the blacks and whites of such households affectionate, almost familial relationships might sometimes develop. More often, however, house servants resented their isolation from their fellow slaves and the lack of privacy that came with living in such close proximity to the master’s family. Among other things, that proximity meant that their transgressions were more visible than those of field hands, and so they received punishments more often than did other slaves. When emancipation came after the Civil War, it was often the house servants who were the first to leave the plantations of their former owners.
Female household servants were especially vulnerable to sexual abuse by their masters and white overseers, who sometimes pressured them into supposedly consensual sexual relationships and
sometimes raped them. In addition to unwanted sexual attention from white men, female slaves often received vindictive treatment from white women. Plantation mistresses naturally resented the sexual liaisons between their husbands and female slaves. Punishing their husbands was not usually possible, so they often punished the slaves instead-with arbitrary beatings, increased workloads, and various forms of psychological torment.
Sexual Abuse
Slavery in the Cities
The conditions of slavery in the cities differed significantly from those in the countryside. On relatively isolated plantations, slaves had little contact with free blacks and lower-class whites, and masters maintained direct and effective control; a deep and seemingly unbridgeable chasm yawned between slavery and freedom. In the city, however, a master often could not supervise his slaves closely and at the same time use them
DEBATING THE PAST
io
The Character of Slavery
KT A
'ssue 'n American history has produced a richer literature or a more spirited debate than JAI U the nature of American slavery. The debate began even before the Civil War, when abolitionists strove to expose slavery to the world as a brutal, dehumanizing institution, while southern defenders of slavery tried to depict it as a benevolent, paternalistic system. But by the late nineteenth century, as historian David Blight noted in Race and Reunion (2002), with white Americans eager for sectional conciliation, both northern and southern chroniclers of slavery began to accept a romanticized and unthreatening picture of the Old South and its "peculiar institution." The first major scholarly examination of slavery was Ulrich B. Phillips's American Negro Slavery (1918), which portrayed slavery as an essentially benign institution in which kindly masters looked after submissive, childlike, and generally contented African Americans. Phillips's apologia for slavery remained the authoritative work on the subject for nearly thirty years.
Challenges to Phillips began to emerge in the 1940s, as concern about racial injustice increasingly engaged the attention of white Americans. In 1941, Melville J. Herskovits challenged Phillips's contention that black Americans retained little of their African cultural inheritance, In 1943, Herbert Aptheker published a chronicle of slave revolts as a way of refuting Phillips's claim that blacks were submissive and content.
A somewhat different challenge to Phillips emerged in the 1950s from historians who emphasized the brutality of the institution. Kenneth Stampp's The Peculiar Institution (1956) and Stanley Elkins’s Slavery (1959) described a labor system that did serious physical and psychological damage to its victims. Stampp, and especially Elkins, portrayed slavery as something like a prison, in which men and
women had no space in which to develop their own social and cultural lives.
In the 1970s, new scholarship on slavery focused on slaves' striking success in building a culture of their own despite their enslavement. John Blassingame in 1973 argued that "the most remarkable aspect of the whole process of enslavement is the extent to which the American-born slaves were able to retain their ancestors' culture." Herbert Gutman, in The Black Family in Slavery and Freedom (1976), challenged the prevailing belief that slavery had weakened and even destroyed the African American family. On the contrary, he argued, the black family survived slavery with impressive strength, Eugene Genovese's Roll, Jordan, fto//(1974) and other works revealed how African Americans manipulated the paternalist assumptions at the heart of slavery to build a large cultural space of their own within the system where they could develop their own family life, social traditions, and religious patterns. That same year, Robert Fogel and Stanley Engerman published their
profitably. Even if they slept at night in carefully watched backyard barracks, slaves moved about during the day alone, performing errands of various kinds. Thus urban slaves gained numerous opportunities to mingle with free blacks and with whites. In the cities, the line between slavery and freedom became increasingly indistinct.
There was a considerable market in the South for common laborers, particularly since, unlike in the North, there were few
Autonomy of EuroPean immigrants to perform menial
Urban Slaves chores. Even the poorest whites tended to prefer working on farms to doing ordinary labor, and so masters often hired out slaves for such tasks. Slaves on contract worked in mining and lumbering (often far from cities); but others worked on the docks and on construction sites, drove wagons, and performed other unskilled jobs in cities and towns. Slave women and children worked in the region’s few textile mills. Particularly skilled workers such as
blacksmiths or carpenters were also often hired out.
Many white southerners considered slavery to be incom-
patible with city life, and as southern cities grew the number of slaves in them declined, relatively if not absolutely. Fearing conspiracies and insurrections, many urban slaveowners sold off much of their male property to the countryside. The remaining black women outnumbered black men. The same
cities also had more white men than women a situation that helped account for the birth of many mulattoes. Even while slavery in the cities was declining, the forced segregation of urban blacks, both free and slave, from white society increased. Segregation was a means of social control intended to make up for the loosening of the discipline of slavery in urban areas.
Free African Americans
There were about 250,000 free African Americans in the slaveholding states by the start of the Civil War, more than half of them in Virginia and Maryland. In some cases, they were slaves who had somehow earned money with which they managed to buy their own and their families’ freedom, usually by developing a skill they could market independently of their masters. It was usually urban blacks, with their greater freedom of movement and activity, who could take that route. One example was Elizabeth Keckley, a slave woman who bought freedom for herself and her son with proceeds from sewing. She later became a seamstress, personal servant, and companion to Mary Todd Lincoln in the White House. But few masters had any incentive, or inclination, to give up their slaves, so this route was open to relatively few people.
306
(© The Granger Collection, New York)
defined by their dual roles as members of the plantation workforce and anchors of the black family.
Recent works by Walter Johnson and Ira Berlin mark at least a partial return to the "damage" thesis. In Soul by Soul (2000), a study of the New Orleans slave market, Johnson contends that for whites, purchasing slaves was a way of fulfilling the middle-class fantasy of success and independence, but for the slaves themselves the trade was destructive and dehumanizing. Ira Berlin’s Many Thousands Gone (2000), Generation of Captivity (2003), and The Making of African America (2010) similarly emphasize the dehumanizing character of the slave market and argue that slavery was less a social system than a commodification of human beings. •
UNDERSTAND, ANALYZE, AND EVALUATE
controversial Time on the Cross, a highly quantitative study that supported some of the claims of Gutman and Genovese about black achievement, but that went much further in portraying slavery as a successful and reasonably humane (if ultimately immoral) system. Slave workers, they argued, were better treated and lived in greater comfort than most northern industrial workers of the same era.
Other scholarship on slavery has focused on the role of women within it. Elizabeth Fox-Genovese's Within the Plantation Household (1988) examined the lives of both white and black women on the plantation. Rejecting the claims of some feminist historians that black and white women shared a common female identity born of their shared subordination to men, she portrayed slave women as
1.	Why have scholarly studies of slavery interpreted the system so differently? Do the differing interpretations reflect general social attitudes of the period in which the studies were written?
2.	Why might the conclusions drawn by Robert Fogel and Stanley Engerman in Time on the Cross have provoked vehement criticism?
3.	What might be some reasons for the resurgence of focus on the "damage" thesis of slavery, as in the works by Walter Johnson and Ira Berlin?
Tightened
Restrictions on Free Blacks
Some slaves were sometimes set free by a master who had moral qualms about slavery, or by a master's will after his death-for example, the more than 400 slaves belonging to John Randolph of Roanoke, freed in 1833. From the 1830s on, however, state laws governing slavery became more rigid. That was in part a response to the fears Nat Turner’s revolt (see p. 310) created among white southerners: free blacks, removed from close supervision by whites, might generate more violence and rebellion than slaves. It was also in part
because the community of free blacks in southern cities was becoming larger and, to whites, more threatening—a dangerous example to blacks still in slavery. The rise of abolitionist agitation in the North-and the fear that it would inspire slaves to rebel-also persuaded southern whites to tighten their system. The new laws made it more and more difficult, and in some cases practically impossible, for owners to set free (or manumit”) their slaves; all southern states forbade free African Americans from entering. Arkansas even forced the freed slaves living there to leave.
A few free blacks (generally those on the northern fringes of the slaveholding regions) attained wealth and promi nence. Some owned slaves themselves, usually relatives whom they had bought in order to ensure their ultimate
emancipation. In a few cities-New Orleans, Natchez, Charleston-free black communities managed to flourish relatively unmolested by whites and with some economic stability. Most free blacks, however, lived in abject poverty, under conditions worse than those of African Americans in the North. Law or custom closed many occupations to them, forbade them to assemble without white supervision, and placed numerous other restraints on them. They were only quasi-free, but they had all the burdens of freedom: the necessity to support themselves, to find housing, to pay taxes. Yet, great as were the hardships of freedom, these blacks preferred them to slavery.
The Slave Trade
The transfer of enslaved people from one part of the South to another was one of the most important and terrible consequences of slavery. Sometimes slaves moved to the new cotton
Slave	lands in the company of their original own-
Markets ers’ wh° were mi8ratin8 themselves. But more often, the transfer occurred through the efforts of professional slave traders. For shorter journeys slaves traveled on foot, trudging in coffles of hundreds along dusty highways. For transfers over longer distances, the traders
307
308 • CHAPTER 11
i
j
THE BUSINESS OF SLAVERY
The offices of slave dealers were familiar sights on the streets of pre-Civil War southern cities and towns. They provide testimony to the way in which slavery was not just a social system, but a business, deeply woven into the fabric of southern economic life. (The Library of Congress) conveyed slaves via river or ocean steamers. Central slave markets included Natchez, New Orleans, Charleston, and Mobile. In the 1840s and 1850s, healthy young field hands could fetch
between $500 and $1,700, depending on the fluctuations in the market.
The domestic slave trade, essential to the growth and prosperity of the system, was one of its most horrible aspects. The trade dehumanized all who were involved in it. It separated children from their parents and parents from each other. Even families who had long been together might be broken up by new owners in the division of the estate after an old master's death. Planters might deplore the trade, but they eased their consciences by holding traders in contempt.
The foreign slave trade was usually badly conducted, resulting in many people dying along the way. Although federal law had prohibited the importation of slaves from 1808 on, some continued to be smuggled into the United States as late
as the 1850s when the supply of slaves had become inadequate. At the annual southern commercial conventions, planters began to discuss the legal reopening of the trade. "If it is right to buy slaves in Virginia and carry them to New Orleans," William L. Yancey of Alabama asked his fellow delegates in 1858, "why is it not right to buy them in Cuba, Brazil, or Africa?" The convention that year voted to repeal all the laws against slave imports, but the government never acted on its proposal.
The continued smuggling was not without resistance from the slaves themselves. In 1839, a group of fifty-three slaves in Cuba took charge of the ship Amistad that was transporting
The Foreign Slave Trade
better to die than to be a white man's slave." {© Chicago History Museum, USA/The Bridgeman Art Library)	nVen ’	‘ ” PreC'°US h6"1396 reCeiVed fr°m °Ur fatherS'''''	reS*ed ‘ “
them to another part of Cuba. Their goal was to sail back to their homeland in Africa. The slaves had no experience with sailing, and they tried to compel the crew to steer them across the Atlantic. Instead, the ship sailed up the Atlantic coast until it was captured by a ship of the United States Revenue Service. Many Americans, including President Van Buren, thought the slaves should be returned to Cuba. But at the request of a group of abolitionists, former president John Quincy Adams went before the Supreme Court to argue that they should be freed. Adams argued that the foreign slave trade was illegal and thus the Amistad rebels could not be returned to slavery. The Court accepted his argument in 1841, and most of the former slaves were returned to Africa, with funding from American abolitionists.
Two years later, in 1841, another group of slaves revolted on board a ship and took control of it-this time an American vessel bound from Norfolk, Virginia, to New Orleans-and steered it (and its 135 slaves) to the British Bahamas, where slavery was illegal and the slaves were given sanctuary. Such shipboard revolts were rare, but they were symbols of the continued efforts by Africans to resist slavery.
COTTON, SLAVERY, AND THE OLD SOUTH
• 309 Slave Resistance
Few issues have sparked as much debate among historians as the effects of slavery on the blacks themselves. (See "Debating the Past/ pp. 306-307.) Slaveowners, and many white Americans after emancipation, liked to argue that the slaves were generally content, "happy with their lot.” That may have been true in some cases. But it is clear that the vast majority of southern blacks were not content with being slaves, that they yearned for freedom even though most realized there was little they could do to secure it. Evidence for that conclusion can be found, if nowhere else, from the reaction of slaves when emancipation finally came. Virtually all reacted to freedom with joy and celebration; few chose to remain in the service of the whites who had owned them before the Civil War (although most African Americans remained for many years subservient to whites in one way or another).
Rather than contented acceptance, the dominant response of blacks to slavery was a complex one: a combination of adaptation and resistance. At the extremes, slavery could produce two very different reactions, each serving as the basis for a powerful stereotype in white society. One extreme was
. -r l	i iaon	was born into slavery in Maryland. In 1849, when her master died, she escaped to Philadelphia to avoid being
TUBMAN W.TH ESCAPED SLAVES
Harriet Tubman (.1820-913) was b, other slaves Y old out of state. Over the next ten years, she assisted first members	n Y^	(o	pho,os/Getty |mages)
Iternately as a nurse and as a spy for Union forces in South Carolina, on
The Slaves' Music
O
African Americans living as slaves on southern plantations, there was little leisure t J I time—and little opportunity for the kinds of cultural activities that were beginning to appeal to other groups of Americans, But slaves managed nevertheless to create a culture of their own. And among its most distinctive and pervasive features was music, Indeed, to white observers at least, nothing was more striking about slave life than the role music played within it. African Americans sang frequently, sometimes alone, more often in groups. They sang while they worked together in the fields, as they shucked corn, slaughtered hogs, or repaired fences. They sang whenever they had social gatherings—on Sundays or on the rare other holidays from work. They sang when they gathered for chores in the evenings. They sang during their religious services. And they sang with a passion, at times even an ecstasy, that was completely unfamiliar to whites—and sometimes troubling to them.
Their songs were rarely written down and often seemed entirely spontaneous; but much slave music was really derived from African and Caribbean traditions passed on through generations and from snatches of other songs the performers had heard before and from which they improvised variations. In its emotionalism, its pulsing rhythms, and its lack of conventional formal structure, it resembled nothing its white listeners had ever heard before.
Slaves sang whether or not there were any musical instruments to accompany them, but they often created instruments for themselves out of whatever materials were at hand. "Us take pieces of sheep's rib or cow's jaw or a piece of iron, with an old kettle or a hollow gourd and some horsehair to make the drum," one former slave recalled years later. "They'd take the buffalo horn and scrape it out to make the flute." When they could, they would build banjos, an instrument that had originated in Africa. Their masters sometimes gave them violins and guitars, When the setting permitted it, African Americans danced to their music—dances very different from and much more spontaneous than the formal steps that nineteenth-century whites generally learned. They also used music to accompany
one of their other important cultural traditions: storytelling. Black music on the plantations took a number of forms. The most common was religious songs, the precursors of modern gospel music, which expressed—in terms that their white masters, who usually did not listen to the words very carefully, found acceptable-a faith in their eventual freedom and salvation and often spoke of Africans as a chosen people waiting for redemption. At other times, the songs would express a bitterness toward white slaveholders. The great black abolitionist Frederick Douglass remembered one:
We raise de wheat, Dey gib us de corn; We bake de bread, Dey gib us de crust; We sif the meal,
Dey gib us de huss; We peel de meat, Dey gib us de skin; And dat’s de way Dey take us in;
We skim de pot,
Dey gib us de liquor,
what became known as the "Sambo”the shuffling, grinning, head-scratching, deferential slave who acted out the role that he recognized the white world expected of him. More often than not, the "Sambo” pattern of behavior was a charade, a facade assumed in the presence of whites. The other extreme was the slave rebel-the African American who could not bring himself or herself to either acceptance or accommodation but remained forever rebellious. Actual slave revolts were extremely rare, but the knowledge that they were possible struck terror into the hearts of white southerners everywhere. In 1800, Gabriel Prosser gathered 1,000 rebellious slaves outside Richmond; but two Africans gave the plot away, and the Virginia militia stymied the uprising before it could begin. Prosser and thirty-five others were executed. In 1822, the Charleston free black Denmark Vesey and his followers-ru-mored to total 9,000-made preparations for revolt; but again word leaked out, and suppression and retribution followed. In 1831, Nat Turner, a slave preacher, led a band of African Americans who armed themselves with
guns and axes and, on a summer night, went from house to house in Southampton County, Virginia. They killed sixty white men, women, and children before being overpowered
Prosser and Turner Rebellions
by state and federal troops. More than a hundred blacks were executed in the aftermath. Nat Turner’s was the only large-scale slave insurrection in the nineteenth-century South, but fear of slave conspiracies and renewed violence pervaded the section as long as slavery lasted.
For the most part, however, resistance to slavery took less drastic forms such as running away. A small number of slaves managed to escape to the North or to Canada, especially after sympathetic whites began organizing the so-called underground railroad to assist them in flight. But the odds against a successful escape, particularly from the Deep South, were almost impossibly high. The hazards of distance and the slaves’ ignorance of geography were serious obstacles. So were the white "slave patrols,” which stopped wandering blacks on sight throughout the South demanding to see travel permits. Without such a permit, slaves were presumed to be runaways and were taken captive. Slave patrols often employed bloodhounds to track African Americans who attempted to escape through the woods. Despite all the obstacles to success, however, blacks continued to run away from their masters in large numbers. Some did so repeatedly, undeterred by the whippings and other penalties inflicted on them when captured.
310
SLAVE MUSIC
This folk painting illustrates the importance of music to slaves (and at times also to their masters). The banjo in the hands of the man in the center was an instrument that originated in Africa. (Private Collection/© Peter Newark American Pictures/Bridgeman Art Library International) to it and because the more intelligent understood that without this means of emotional and spiritual release, active resistance to slavery might be more frequent.
The powerful music that emerged from slavery helped shape the lives of African Americans on the plantations. It also helped lay the foundations for music that almost all Americans later embraced: gospel, blues, jazz, rhythm and blues, rock, and rap. •
ANAtVZe AND EVALUATE
And say dat’s good enough for nigger.
Your butter and the fat;
Poor nigger, you can't ever get that.
To African Americans, music was a treasured avenue of escape from the hardships of slavery. It was also a vehicle through which they could express anger, resentment, and hope. Their masters generally tolerated their slaves' music—and even valued it, both because they often enjoyed listening
1.	Does the prominent place of music in slave culture support the thesis that slavery was essentially a benign institution?
2.	The English dramatist William Congreve in The Mourning Bride wrote:
Music hath charms to soothe the savage breast,
To soften rocks, or bend a knotted oak.
How might this quote apply to the place of music in African American slave culture?
3.	What more recent musical forms continue the tradition of the slaves' religious songs or spirituals? In what way do these more recent forms serve purposes similar to the purpose of the slaves' religious songs? Does music continue to shape a distinct African American culture?
But perhaps the most important method of resistance was simply a pattern of everyday behavior by which blacks defied their masters. That whites so often considered blacks to be lazy and shiftless suggests one means of resistance: refusal to work hard.
Some slaves stole from their masters or from neighboring whites. Some performed isolated acts of sabotage: losing or Slave	breaking tools (southern planters gradually
Resistance began to buy unusually heavy hoes because so many of the lighter ones got broken) or performing tasks improperly. Many African Americans resisted by building into their normal patterns of behavior
subtle methods of rebellion.
THE CULTURE OF SLAVERY
Resistance was only part of the slave response to slavery. Another was an elaborate process of adaptation. The process did not imply contentment with bondage. It represented a recognition that there was no realistic alternative. One of the ways blacks adapted was by developing their own, separate culture, one that enabled them to sustain a sense of racial pride and unity.
Language and Music
In many areas, slaves retained a language of their own, sometimes incorporating African speech patterns into English. Having arrived in America speaking many different African languages, the first generations of slaves had as much difficulty communicating with one another as they did with white people. To overcome these barriers, they learned a simple, com-Pidgin	mon lan£ua£e (known to linguists as
"pidgin”). It retained some African words, but it drew primarily, if selectively, from English. And while slave language grew more sophisticated as blacks spent more time in America-and as new generations grew up never having known African tongues-some features of this early pidgin survived in black speech for many generations.
Music was especially important in slave society. In some ways, it was as important to African Americans as language.
Most important were voices and song. Field workers often used songs to pass the time in the fields; since they sang them in the presence of whites, they usually attached
relatively innocuous words to them. But African Americans also created emotionally rich and politically challenging music
Importance of Slave Spirituals
311
312 ® CHAPTER 11
in the relative privacy of their religious services. It was there that the tradition of the spiritual emerged in the early nineteenth century.
African American Religion
A separate slave religion was not supposed to exist. Almost all African Americans were Christians by the early nineteenth century. Some had converted voluntarily, and some were coerced by their masters and by the Protestant missionaries who evangelized among them. Masters expected their slaves to worship under the supervision of white ministers. Indeed, autonomous black churches were banned by law; and many slaves became members of the same denominations as their owners-usually Baptist or Methodist. In the 1840s and 1850s, as slavery expanded in the South, missionary efforts increased. Vast numbers of African Americans became members of Protestant churches in those years.
Nevertheless, blacks throughout the South developed their own version of Christianity, at times incorporating into it such practices as voodoo or other polytheistic religious traditions of Africa. Or they simply bent religion to the special circumstances of bondage. Natural leaders emerging within the slave community rose to the rank of preacher.
African American religion was often more emotional than that of its white counterparts and reflected the influence of African customs and practices. Slave prayer meetings routinely involved fervent chanting, spontaneous exclamations from the congregation, and ecstatic conversion experiences. Black religion was also more joyful and affirming than that of many white denominations. And above all, African American religion emphasized the dream of freedom and deliverance. In their prayers and songs and sermons, black Christians talked and sang of the day when the Lord would "call us home,” "deliver us to freedom,” "take us to the Promised Land.” And while their white masters generally chose to interpret such language merely as the expression of hopes for life after death, many
_	African Americans themselves used the im-
Slave
Religion a8es °* Christian salvation to express their own dream of freedom in the present world.
Christian images, and biblical injunctions, were central to Gabriel Prosser, Denmark Vesey, Nat Turner, and others who planned or engaged in open resistance to slavery.
In cities and towns in the South, some African Americans had their own churches, where free blacks occasionally worshiped alongside slaves. In the countryside, however, slaves usually attended the same churches as their masters-sometimes a chapel on the plantation itself, sometimes a church serving a larger farm community. Seating in such churches was usually segregated. Slaves sat in the rear or in balconies. They held their own services later, often in secret, usually at night.
The Slave Family
The slave family was the other crucial institution of black culture in the South. Like religion, it suffered from certain legal
restrictions-most notably the lack of legal marriage. Nevertheless, what we now call the "nuclear family consistently emerged as the dominant kinship model among African Americans.
Such families did not always operate according to white customs. Black women generally began bearing children et younger ages than most white women, often as early as age fourteen or fifteen. Slave communities did not condemn pre-
marital pregnancy in the way white society did, and African American couples would often begin liv-
Marriages ing t0Sether before marrying. It was cus-tomary, however, for couples to marry-in a ceremony involving formal vows—soon after conceiving a child. Often, marriages occurred between slaves living on neighboring plantations. Husbands and wives sometimes visited each other with the permission of their masters, but often such visits had to be in secret, at night. Family ties were no less strong than those of whites, and many slave marriages
lasted throughout the course of long lifetimes.
When marriages did not survive, it was often because of circumstances over which blacks had no control. Up to a third of all black families were broken apart by the slave trade; an average slave might expect during a lifetime to see ten or more relatives sold. And that accounted for some of the other distinctive characteristics of the black family, which adapted itself to the cruel realities of its own uncertain future. Extended kinship networks- which grew to in-Importance	elude not only spouses and their children,
of Kinship	but a^so aunts, uncles, grandparents, even
Networks distant cousins-were strong and important and often helped compensate for the breakup of nuclear families. A slave forced suddenly to move to a new area, far from his or her family, might create fictional kinship ties and become "adopted” by a family in the new community. Even so, the impulse to maintain contact with a spouse and children remained strong long after the breakup of a family. One of the most frequent causes of flight from the plantation was a slave's desire to find a husband, wife, or
child who had been sent elsewhere.
It was not only by breaking up families through sale that whites intruded on black family life. Black women, usually powerless to resist the sexual advances of their masters, often bore the children of whites-children whom the whites almost never recognized as their own and who were consigned to slavery from birth.
In addition to establishing social and cultural institutions of their own, slaves adapted themselves to slavery by forming complex relationships with their masters. However much blacks resented their lack of freedom, they often found it difficult to maintain an entirely hostile attitude toward their owners. Not only were they dependent on whites for the ma-
Paternal serial means of existence food, clothing,
Nature of and shelter; they also often derived from
Slavery their masters a sense of security and protection. There was, in short, a paternal relationship between slave and master- sometimes harsh, sometimes kindly, but almost invariably important. Paternalism,
COTTON, SLAVERY, AND THE OLD SOUTH - 313
in fact, became (even if not always consciously) a vital instrument of white control. By creating a sense of mutual dependence, whites helped reduce resistance to an institution that, in essence, served only the interests of the ruling race.
SIGNIFICANT EVENTS
LOOKING BACK
While the North was creating a complex and rapidly developing commercial-industrial economy, the South was expanding its agrarian economy without making many fundamental changes in its character. Great migrations took many southern whites, and even more African American slaves, into new agricultural areas in the Deep South, where they created a booming "cotton kingdom” that raised crops for export around the world. The cotton economy created many great fortunes and some modest ones. It also entrenched the planter class as the dominant force within southern society-both as owners of vast numbers of slaves, and as patrons, creditors, landlords, and marketers for the large number of poor whites who lived on the edge of the planter world.
The differences between the North and the South were a result of differences in natural resources, social structure, climate, and culture. Above all, they were the result of the existence within the South of an unfree labor system that prevented the kind of social fluidity that an industrializing society usually requires and that kept a large proportion of the southern population in debilitating bondage.
1800
Gabriel Prosser organizes unsuccessful slave revolt in Virginia
1820s
Prolonged depression in tobacco prices begins
English market for cotton textiles boosts prices and causes explosion in cotton production in the Southwest
1831
Nat Turner slave rebellion breaks out in Virginia
Key T erms/ People/ Places/ Events
1837
Cotton prices plummet
1808
Importation of slaves to United States banned
1822
Denmark Vesey thwarted in plans for slave rebellion in Charleston
1833
John Randolph of Roanoke frees 400 slaves
Cult of honor 300 De Bow's Review 298 Denmark Vesey 310 Gabriel Prosser 310 Gang system 303
Nat Turner 310 Pidgin 311 "Sambo” 309 Slave codes 303 Task system 303
1846
De Bow’s Review founded in New Orleans
RECALL AND REFLECT
1.	Why did cotton become the leading crop of the South?
2.	Why did industry fail to develop in the South to the extent that it did in the North?
3.	How did slavery function economically and socially?
4.	What was the effect of slavery on white slaveowners? on slaves? on nonslaveowning whites? on free blacks?
5.	Through what means did slaves maintain a distinct African American culture?
1849
Rise in cotton prices spurs production boom
ANTEBELLUM CULTURE AND REFORM
LOOKING AHEAD
1.	How did an American national culture of art, literature, philosophy, and communal living develop in the nineteenth century?
2.	What were the issues on which social and moral reformers tried to remake the nation"? How successful were their efforts?
3.	Why did the crusade against slavery become the preeminent issue of the reform movement?
GIRLS’ EVENING SCHOOL (C. 1840), ANONYMOUS
Schooling for women, which expanded significantly in the mid-nineteenth century, included training in domestic arts (as indicated by the sewing table at right), as well as in reading, writing, and other basic skills. (fe The Granger Collection, New York) SETTING THE STAGE
THE UNITED STATES IN THE MID-NINETEENTH CENTURY
was a rapidly changing y growing in size, population, and economic complexity. Many Americans were excited by the new possibilities these changes produced. Others, however, were painfully aware of the challenges to traditional values and institutions, the social instability, the increasing inequality, and the uncertainty about the future that accompanied change.
One result of these conflicting attitudes was the emergence of a broad array of movements intended to reform the nation. These reform efforts generally reflected one of two basic impulses. The first was an optimistic faith in human nature, a belief that within every individual resided a spirit that was basically good and that society should attempt to unleash. A second impulse was a desire for order and control. With their traditional values and institutions under assault and often eroding, many Americans yearned above all for a restoration of stability and discipline to their nation. Often, this impulse embodied a conservative nostalgia for better, simpler times. But it also inspired forward-looking efforts to create new institutions of social control, suited to the realities of the new age.
The reforms that flowed from these two impulses came in many guises and mobilized many different groups. In the course of the 1840s, however, one issue—slavery—came to overshadow all others. And one group of reformers the abolitionists—became the most visible of all, At that point, the reform impulse, which at first had been a force that tended to unify the sections, became another wedge between the North and the South.
THE ROMANTIC IMPULSE
National
Cultural
Aspirations
"In the four quarters of the globe/’ wrote the English wit Sydney Smith in 1820, "who reads an American book? or goes to an American play? or looks at an American picture or statue?” The answer, he assumed, was obvious: no one. American intellectuals were fully aware of the low regard in which Europeans held their artistic and intellectual life. In the middle decades of the nineteenth century, they continued to work for both an elevation and a liberation of their nation’s culture-for the
creation of an American artistic world independent of Europe, one that would express their nation’s special virtues.
At the same time, however, some of the nation’s cultural leaders were beginning to strive for another kind of liberation, one that would eventually overshadow their self-conscious nationalism. That impulse-which was, ironically, largely an import from Europe-was the spirit of romanticism. In literature, philosophy, art, even in politics and economics, American intellectuals were committing themselves to the liberation of the human spirit.
Nationalism and Romanticism in American Painting
When Sydney Smith asked in 1820 who looked at an American painting, he was expressing the belief among European artists that they-and they alone-stood at the center of the world of art. But in the United States, many people were looking at American paintings in the antebellum era-and they were doing so not because the paintings introduced them to the great traditions of Europe, but because they believed Americans were creating important new artistic traditions.
The most important and popular American paintings of the first half of the nineteenth century set out to evoke the wonder of the nation’s landscape. Unlike their European counterparts, American painters did not favor gentle scenes of carefully cultivated countrysides. They sought instead to capture the undiluted power of nature by portraying some of the nation’s wildest and most spectacular areas-to evoke what many nineteenth-century people called the 'sublime,” the feeling of awe and wonderment and even fear of the grandeur of nature The first great school of American painters emerged in New York. Frederic ChurcK Thomas Cole, Thomas Doughty, and Asher Durand-known, along with others, as the Hudson Rtver School-pamted the spectacular
315
