CHAPTER 18
Settled areas (more than 2 persons per square mile)
Francisco 1
lusta tsmouth Boston
River
iw Haven "New York Philadelphia more
fington, D.C.
THE UNITED STATES IN 1900
This map helps illustrate the enormous increase in the nation's urban population in the nineteenth century. The map of America in 1800, on p. 194 in Chapter 7, reveals a nation with very few significant cities and with a population clustered largely along the eastern seaboard. By 1900, a much larger area of the United States had consistent areas of settlement, and many more of those areas consisted of towns and cities—including three cities (Chicago, New York, and Philadelphia) with populations of over a million and a considerable number of other cities with 100,000 or more people. Also striking, however, is the amount of land in the West with very light settlement or no settlement. • Do climate and geography help explain the variable patterns of settlement?
of the American countryside to nearby cities. The development of large, steam-powered ocean liners created a highly competitive shipping industry, allowing Europeans and Asians to cross the oceans to America much more cheaply and quickly than they had in the past.
Migrations
As a result of urbanization, the late nineteenth century became an age of unprecedented geographic mobility, as Americans left the declining agricultural regions of the East at a dramatic rate. Some who left were moving to the newly developing
farmlands of the West. But many were moving to the cities of
the East and the Midwest.
Geographic
Mobility
Among those leaving rural America for industrial cities in the late nineteenth century were young rural women, for whom opportunities in the farm economy were limited. As farms grew larger, more commercial, and more mechanized, they became increasingly male preserves; and since much of the workforce on many farms consisted of unskilled and often transient workers, there were fewer family units than before. Farm women had once been essential for making clothes and other household goods, but those goods were now available in stores or through catalogs. Hundreds of thousands of women moved to the cities, therefore, in search of work and community.
Southern blacks were also beginning what would be a nearly century-long exodus from the countryside into the cities. Their withdrawal was a testament to the poverty, debt,
THE AGE OF THE CITY . 489
Population (millions) 76.0
69.5
63.0
56.6
50.2
45.0
39.9	9	ill	Sil	1 Ji	11!
O
IJjj 111 ill 31-5	I™	ill	ill	O	ill	ll!	111	111
1860 1865 1870 1 875 1 880 1 885 1 890 1 895 1 900 Year
POPULATION GROWTH, 1860-1900
This chart illustrates the rapid increase in the nation's population in the last forty years of the nineteenth century. As you can see, the American population more than doubled in those years. • What were the principal factors behind this substantial population growth?
violence, and oppression African Americans encountered in the late-nineteenth-century rural South. The opportunities they found in cities were limited. Factory jobs for blacks were rare, and professional opportunities almost nonexistent. Urban blacks tended to work as cooks, janitors, domestic servants, and in other low-paying service occupations. Because many such jobs were considered women’s work, black women often outnumbered black men in the cities.
By the end of the nineteenth century, there were substantial African American communities (10,000 people or more) in over thirty cities-many of them in the
American South, but some (New York City, Chicago, Communities Washington, D.C., Baltimore) in the North
............... . or in border states. Much more substantial
African American migration would come during World War I and after; but the black communities established in the late nineteenth century paved the way for the great population
movements of the future.
The most important source of urban population growth in the late nineteenth century, however, was the arrival of great numbers of new immigrants from abroad: 10 million between 1860 and 1890, 18 million more in the three decades after that. Some came from Canada, Mexico, Latin America, and-particularly on the West Coast-China and Japan. But by far the greatest number came from Europe. After 1880, the flow of new arrivals began for the first time to include large numbers of people from southern and eastern Europe: Italians, Greeks, Slavs, Slovaks, Russian Jews, Armenians, and others. By the 1890s, more than half of all immigrants came from these new regions, as opposed to less than 2 percent in the 1860s.
J J
Population increase	Thousands of persons
8.56
Total immigration	8.14
IMMIGRATION’S CONTRIBUTION TO POPULATION GROWTH, 1860-1920
Immigration, mostly from Europe, was responsible for about 20 percent of the nation's population growth in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. • What factors drew so many immigrants to the United States in these years?
1861- 1866- 1871- 1876- 1881- 1886- 1891- 1896- 1901- 1906- 1911- 1916
1865 1870 1875 1880 1885 1890 1895 1900 1905 1910 1915 1920
Year
m tj large waves of immigration that transformed American society in the late nineteenth JL JlT Jlji and early twentieth centuries were not unique to the United States. They were part of a worldwide movement of peoples that affected every continent. These epic migrations were the product of two related forces: population growth and industrialization.
The population of Europe grew faster in the second half of the nineteenth century than it had ever grown before—almost doubling between 1850 and the beginning of World War I. The population growth was a result of growing economies able to support more people and productive agriculture that helped end debilitating famines. But the rapid growth nevertheless strained the resources of many parts of Europe and affected, in particular, rural people, who were now too numerous to live off the available land. Many decided to move to other parts of the world, where land was more plentiful or jobs were more available.
At the same time, industrialization drew millions of people from rural areas into cities—sometimes cities in their own countries, but often industrial cities in other, more economically advanced nations. From 1800 to the start of World War I, 50 million Europeans migrated to new lands overseas-people from almost all areas of Europe, but, in the later years of the century (when migration reached its peak), mostly from poor rural areas in southern and eastern Europe. Italy, Russia, and Poland were among the biggest sources of late-nineteenth-century migrants. Almost two-thirds of these immigrants came to the United States. But nearly 20 million Europeans migrated to other lands, to Canada, Australia, New Zealand, South Africa, Argentina, and other parts of South America. Many of these migrants moved to vast areas of open land in these countries and established themselves as farmers. Many others settled in the industrial cities that were growing up in all these regions.
It was not only Europeans who were transplanting themselves in these years. Vast numbers of migrants—usually poor, desperate people—left Asia, Africa, and the Pacific islands in search of better lives. Most of them could not afford the journey abroad on their own. They moved instead as indentured servants, agreeing to a term of servitude in their new land in exchange for food, shelter, and
(Private Collection/© Peter Newark American Pictures/Bridgeman Images!
In earlier stages of immigration, most new immigrants from Europe (with the exception of the Irish) were at least modestly prosperous and educated. Germans and Scandinavians in particular had headed west on their arrival, either to farm or to work as businessmen, merchants, professionals, or skilled laborers in midwestern cities such as St. Louis, Cincinnati, and Milwaukee. Most of the new immigrants of the late nineteenth century, however, lacked the capital to buy farmland and lacked the education to establish themselves in professions. So, like the poor Irish immigrants before the Civil War, they settled overwhelmingly in industrial cities, where most of them took unskilled jobs.
The Ethnic City
By 1890, the population of some major urban areas consisted of a majority of foreign-born immigrants and their children: 87 percent of the population of Chicago, 80 percent in New York City, 84 percent in Milwaukee and Detroit. (London, the largest industrial city in Europe, by contrast, had a population that was 94 percent native.) Jew York had more Irish than Dublin and more Germans
The Diverse American City
than Hamburg. Chicago eventually had more Poles than Warsaw.
Equally striking was the diversity of the new immigrant populations. In other countries experiencing heavy immigration in this period, most of the new arrivals were coming from one or two sources: Argentina, for example, was experiencing great migrations too, but almost everyone was coming
from Italy and Spain. In the United States, however, no single national group dominated. In the last four decades of the nineteenth century, substantial groups arrived from Italy, Germany, Scandinavia, Austria, Hungary, Russia, Great Britain, Ireland, Poland, Greece, Canada, Japan, China, Holland, Mexico, and many other nations. In some towns, a dozen different ethnic groups found themselves living in close proximity.
Most of the new immigrants were rural people, and their adjustment to city life was often painful. To help ease the transition, many national groups formed close-knit ethnic communities within the cities: Italian, Polish, Jewish, Slavic, Chinese, French-Canadian, Mexican, and other neighborhoods (often called immigrant ghettos'’) that attempted to re-create in the New World many of the features of the Old.
J
THE AGE OF THE CITY
« 491 Other Northwestern
transportation. Recruiters of indentured servants fanned out across China, Japan, areas of Africa and the Pacific islands, and, above all, India. French and British recruiters brought hundreds of thousands of Indian migrants to work in plantations in their own Asian and African colonies. Chinese laborers were recruited to work on plantations in Cuba and Hawaii; mines in Malaya, Peru, South Africa, and Australia; and railroad projects in Canada, Peru, and the United States. African indentured servants moved in large numbers to the Caribbean, and Pacific islanders tended to move to other islands or to Australia.
The migration of European peoples to new lands was largely voluntary. Most migrants moved to the United States, where indentured servitude was illegal, Non-European migration brought relatively small numbers of people to the United States, but together, these various forms of migration produced one of the greatest population movements in the history of the world and transformed not just the United States, but much of the globe as well. •
UNDERSTAND, ANALYZE, AND EVALUATE
1.	What were some of the negative factors that motivated European and non-Europeans to leave their home countries for the United States? What were some of the positive factors in the United States that attracted them?
2.	Why did European empires encourage and facilitate the migration of Europeans and non-Europeans to new lands?
3.	Why did more Europeans than non-Europeans migrate to the United States?
Eastern	European
SOURCES OF IMMIGRATION FROM EUROPE, 1860-1900
This pie chart shows the sources of European immigration in the late nineteenth century. The largest number of immigrants continued to come from traditional sources (Britain, Ireland, Germany, Scandinavia), but the beginnings of what in the early twentieth century would become a major influx of immigrants from new sources—southern and eastern Europe in particular—are already visible here. Immigration from other sources—Mexico, South and Central America, and Asia—was also significant during this period. ® Why would these newer sources of European and other kinds of immigration create controversy among older-stock Americans?
Some ethnic neighborhoods consisted of people who had migrated to America from the same province, town, or village. Even when the population was more diverse, however, the immigrant neighborhoods offered newcomers much that was familiar. They could find newspapers and theaters in their native languages, stores selling their native n	foods, churches or synagogues, and fra-
Ethnic	ternal organizations that provided links
Communities	with their national pasts. Many immi-
grants also maintained close ties with their native countries. They stayed in touch with relatives who had remained behind. Some (perhaps as many as a third in the early years) returned to Europe or Asia or Mexico after a short time; others helped bring the rest of
their families to America.
The cultural cohesiveness of the ethnic communities clearly eased the pain of separation from the immigrants' native lands. What role it played in helping immigrants become absorbed into the economic life of America is a more difficult question to answer. It is clear that some ethnic groups (Jews and Germans in particular) advanced economically more rapidly than others (for example, the Irish). One explanation is that, by
huddling together in ethnic neighborhoods, immigrant groups tended to reinforce the cultural values of their previous societies. When those values were particularly well suited to economic advancement in an industrial society-as was, for example, the high value Jews placed on education-ethnic identification may have helped members of a group to improve their lots. When other values predominated-maintaining community solidarity, sustaining family ties, preserving order-progress could be less rapid.
Assimilation
Despite the substantial differences among the various immigrant communities, virtually all groups of the foreign-born had certain things in common. Most immigrants, of course, shared the experience of living in cities (and of adapting from a rural past to an urban present). Most were young; the majority of newcomers were between fifteen and forty-five years old. And in virtually all communities of foreign-born immigrants, the strength of ethnic ties had to compete against another powerful force: the desire for assimilation.
Many of the new arrivals from abroad had come to America with romantic visions of the New World. And however disillusioning they might find their first con-
Americanization tact witj] the united states, they usually
492 * CHAPTER 18
i ‘
ETHNIC AND CLASS SEGREGATION IN MILWAUKEE, 1850-1890
This map illustrates the complex pattern of settlement in Milwaukee, a pattern that was in many ways typical of many industrial cities, in the late nineteenth century. Two related phenomena— industrialization and massive immigration from abroad—shaped the landscape of the city in these years. By 1890, first- and second-generation immigrants made up 84 percent of the city’s population. Note the complicated distribution of ethnic groups in distinctive neighborhoods throughout the city, and note too the way in which middle-class people (especially "native-born" middle-class people, which included many people of German descent whose families had been in the United States for generations) isolated themselves from the areas in which the working class lived. * What were some of the advantages and disadvantages of this ethnic clustering to the immigrants who lived in these communities?
retained the dream of becoming true "Americans.” Even some first-generation immigrants worked hard to rid themselves of all vestiges of their old cultures, to become thoroughly Americanized. Second-generation immigrants were even more likely to attempt to break with the old ways, to try to assimilate completely into what they considered the real American culture. Some even looked with contempt on parents and grandparents who continued to preserve traditional ethnic habits and values.
The urge to assimilate put a particular strain on relations between men and women in immigrant communities. Many of the foreign-born came from cultures in which women were more subordinate to men, and more fully lodged within the family, than most women in the United States. In some immigrant cultures, parents expected to arrange their children's
marriages and to control almost every
Changing moment of their daughters' lives until Gender Roles	f	.
marriage. But out of either choice or economic necessity, many immigrant women (and even more of the American-born daughters of immigrants) began working outside the home and developing friendships, interests, and attachments outside the family. The result was not the collapse of the family-centered cultures of immigrant communi-1-iPQ- rhnqp cultures nroved remarkablv durable. But there were
adjustments to the new and more fluid life of the American city, and often considerable tension in the process.
Assimilation was not entirely a matter of choice. Native-born Americans encouraged it, both deliberately and inadvertently, in countless ways. Public schools taught children in English, and employers often insisted that workers speak English on the job. Although there were merchants in immigrant communities who sold ethnically distinctive foods and clothing, most stores by necessity sold mainly American products, forcing immigrants to adapt their diets, wardrobes, and lifestyles to American norms. Church leaders were often native-born Americans or assimilated immigrants who encouraged their parishioners to adopt American ways. Some even reformed their theology and liturgy to make it more compatible with the norms of the new country. Reform Judaism, imported from Germany to the United States in the midnineteenth century, was an effort by American Jewish leaders (as it had been among German leaders) to make their faith less "foreign” to the dominant culture of a largely Christian nation.
Exclusion
The arrival of so many new immigrants, and the way many of them clung to old ways and created culturally distinctive communities, provoked fear and resentment among some
Nativism native-born Americans, just as earlier arrivals had done. Some people reacted against the immigrants out of generalized fears and prejudices, seeing in their "foreignness” the source of all the disorder and corruption of the urban world. "These people,” a Chicago newspaper wrote shortly after the Haymarket bombing, referring to striking immigrant workers, "are not American, but the very scum and offal of Europe . . . Europe’s human and inhuman rubbish.” Native-born Americans on the West Coast had a similar cul-
tural aversion to Mexican, Chinese, and Japanese immigrants. Other native laborers were often incensed by the willingness of the immigrants to accept lower wages and to take over the jobs of strikers.
The rising nativism provoked political responses. In 1887, Henry Bowers, a self-educated lawyer obsessed with a hatred of Immigration Catholics and foreigners, founded the Restriction American Protective Association, a group League committed to stopping the immigrant tide.
By 1894, membership in the organization had reportedly reached 500,000, with chapters throughout the Northeast and Midwest. That same year a more genteel organization, the Immigration Restriction League, was founded in
4
THE AGE OF THE CITY
® 493 PUSHCART VENDOR
Many immigrants to American cities aspired to be merchants. But many people with such aspirations could not afford to rent or buy a shop. So they set up business instead in pushcarts, which they parked along sidewalks and from which they sold a variety of wares. This pushcart was photographed with its owner on the Lower East Side of Manhattan around the end of the nineteenth century. (© The Granger Collection, New York) Boston by five Harvard alumni. It was dedicated to the belief that immigrants should be screened, through literacy tests and other standards designed to separate the desirable from the undesirable. The league avoided the crude conspiracy theories and the rabid xenophobia of the American Protective Association. Its sophisticated nativism made it possible for many educated, middle-class people to support the restrictionist cause.
Even before the rise of these new organizations, politicians were struggling to find answers to the "immigration question/’
In 1882 Congress had responded to strong anti-Asian sentiment in California and elsewhere and restricted Chinese immigration, even though the Chinese made up only 1.2 percent of the population of the West Coast (see pp. 434-437). In the same year, Congress denied entry to "undesirables’-convicts, paupers, the mentally incompetent-and placed a tax of 50 cents on each person admitted. Later legislation of the 1890s enlarged the list of those barred from immigrating and increased the tax.
PRO-IMMIGRATION
This political cartoon from 1880, by Joseph Keppler, expresses the view that people from all over the world should be welcomed into the ever-expanding United States. While opposition to immigration from the restrictionist camp was great, immigrants were seen by many employers as a large and cheap labor supply necessary to support a rapidly growing economy. (© The Granger Collection, New York) 494 * CHAPTER 18
These laws kept out only a small number of aliens, however, and more-ambitious restriction proposals
Advantages of made little ProSress- Congress passed Cheap Labor a literacy requirement for immigrants in 1897, but President Grover Cleveland vetoed it. The restrictions had limited success because many native-born Americans, far from fearing immigration, welcomed it and exerted strong political pressure against the restrictionists. Immigration was providing a rapidly growing economy with a cheap and plentiful labor supply; many employers argued that America’s industrial (and indeed agricultural) development would be impossible without it.
THE URBAN LANDSCAPE
The city was a place of remarkable contrasts. It had homes of almost unimaginable size and grandeur, and hovels of indescribable squalor. It had conveniences unknown to earlier generations, and problems that seemed beyond society’s capacity to solve. Both the attractions and the problems were a result of the stunning pace at which cities were growing. The expansion of the urban population helped spur important new
technological and industrial developments. But the rapid growth also produced misgovernment, poverty, congestion, filth, epidemics, and great fires. Planning and building simply could not match the pace of growth.
The Creation of Public Space
In the eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries, cities had generally grown up haphazardly, with little central planning. By the mid-nineteenth century, however, reformers, planners, architects, and others began to call for a more ordered vision of the city. The result was the self-conscious creation of public spaces and public services.
Among the most important innovations of the mid-nineteenth century were great urban parks, which reflected the desire of a growing number of urban leaders to provide an antidote to the congestion of the city landscape. The most successful American promoters of this notion of the park as refuge were the landscape designers Frederick Law Olmsted and
Calvert Vaux, who teamed up in the late 1850s to design New York City’s Central Park. They deliberately created a public space that would look as little like the city as possible. Instead of the ordered, formal spaces common in some European cities, they created a space that seemed to be entirely natural-even though almost all of Central Park was carefully designed and constructed. Central Park was from the start one of the most popular and admired public spaces in the world, and as a result Olmsted and Vaux were recruited to design great parks and public spaces in other cities: Brooklyn, Boston, Philadelphia, Chicago, and Washington, D.C.
Frederick Law
Olmsted and Calvert Vaux
CENTRAL PARK BAND CONCERT
By the late nineteenth century, New York City's Central Park was already considered one of the great urban landscapes of the world. To New Yorkers, it was an irresistible escape from the crowded, noisy life of the rest of the city. But the park itself sometimes became enormously crowded as well, as this well-dressed audience at a band concert makes clear. (© The Granger Collection, New York) At the same time that cities were creating great parks, they were also creating great public buildings: libraries, art galleries, natural history museums, theaters, concert halls, and opera houses. New York City’s Metropolitan Museum of Art was only the largest and best known of many great museums taking shape in the late nineteenth century; others were created in such cities as Boston, Chicago, Philadelphia, and Washington, D.C. In one city after another, new and lavish public libraries appeared as if to confirm the city’s role as a center of learning and knowledge.
Wealthy residents of cities were the principal force behind the creation of the great public buildings and at times even parks. As their own material and social aspirations grew, they wanted the public life of the city to provide them with amenities to match their expectations. Becoming an important patron of a major cultural institution was an especially effective route to social distinction. But this philanthropy, whatever the motives behind it, also produced valuable assets for the city as a whole.
As the size and aspirations of the great cities increased, urban leaders launched monumental projects to remake the way their cities looked. Inspired by massive city rebuilding projects in Paris, London, Berlin, and other European cities, some American cities began to clear away older neighborhoods and streets and "City	create grand, monumental avenues lined
Beautiful” with new, more impressive buildings. A pan , ^^9,yEMENT ticularly important event in inspiring this effort to remake the city was the 1893
Columbian Exposition in Chicago, a world’s fair constructed to honor the 400th anniversary of Columbus’s first voyage to America. At the center of the wildly popular exposition was a
THE AGE OF THE CITY - 495
cluster of neoclassical buildings-the "Great White City”-constructed in the fashionable "beaux-arts” style of the time, arranged symmetrically around a formal lagoon. It became the inspiration for what became known as the "city beautiful” movement, led by the architect of the Great White City, Daniel Burnham. The movement aimed to impose a similar order and symmetry on the disordered life of cities around the country. "Make no little plans,” Burnham liked to tell city planners. His influence led to the remaking of cities all across the country-from Washington, D.C., to Chicago and San Francisco. Only rarely, however, were planners able to overcome the obstacles of private landowners and complicated urban politics. They rarely achieved more than a small portion of their dreams. There were no reconstructions of American cities to match the elaborate nineteenth-century reshaping of Paris and London.
The effort to remake the city did not just focus on redesigning the existing landscape. It occasionally led to the creation of entirely new ones. In Boston in the late 1850s, a large area of marshy tidal land was gradually filled in to create the neighborhood known as "Back Bay.” The landfill project took more
The Back Bay t^ian ^ortY Years t0 complete and was one of the largest public works projects ever undertaken in America to that point. But Boston was not alone. Chicago reclaimed large areas from Lake Michigan as it expanded and at one point raised the street level for the entire city to help avoid the problems the marshy land created. In
Washington, D.C., another marshy site, large areas were filled in and slated for development. In New York and other cities, the response to limited space was not so much creating new land as annexing adjacent territory. A great wave of annexations expanded the boundaries of many American cities in the 1890s and beyond.
Housing the Well-to-Do
One of the greatest problems of this precipitous growth was finding housing for the thousands of new residents who were pouring into the cities every day. For the prosperous, however, housing was seldom a worry. The availability of cheap labor and the reduced cost of building let anyone with even a moderate income afford a house.
Many of the richest urban residents lived in palatial mansions in the heart of the city and created lavish "fashionable districts”—Fifth Avenue in New York City, Back Bay and Beacon Hill in Boston, Society Hill in Philadelphia, Lake Shore Drive in Chicago, Nob Hill in San Francisco, and many others.
The moderately well-to-do (and as time went on, increasing numbers of wealthy people as well) took advantage of the less expensive land on the edges of the city and settled in Growth of new suburbs, linked to the downtowns by
Suburbs trains or streetcars or improved roads.
Chicago in the 1870s, for example, boasted
nearly 100 residential suburbs connected with the city by
railroad and offering the joys of ''pure air, peacefulness, qui-
etude, and natural scenery.” Boston, too, saw the develop-
ment of some of the earliest "streetcar suburbs”-Dorchester,
Brookline, and others-which catered to both the wealthy and the middle class. New Yorkers of moderate means settled in new suburbs on the northern fringes of Manhattan and commuted downtown by trolley or riverboat. Real estate developers worked to create and promote suburban communities that would appeal to nostalgia for the countryside that many city dwellers felt. Affluent suburbs, in particular, were notable for lawns, trees, and houses designed to look manorial. Even modest communities strove to emphasize the opportunities suburbs provided for owning land.
Housing Workers and the Poor
Most urban residents, however, could not afford either to own a house in the city or to move to the suburbs. Instead, they stayed in the city centers and rented. Because demand was so high and space so scarce, they had little bargaining power in the process. Landlords tried to squeeze as many rent-paying residents as possible into the smallest available space. In Manhattan, for example, the average population density in 1894 was 143 people per acre-a higher rate than that of the most crowded cities of Europe (Paris had 127 per acre, Berlin 101) and far higher than in any other American city then or since. In some neighborhoods-the Lower East Side of New York City, for example-density was more than 700 people per acre, among the highest levels in the world.
Landlords were reluctant to invest much in immigrant housing, confident they could rent dwellings for a profit regardless of their conditions. In the cities of the South-Charleston, New Orleans, Richmond-poor African Americans lived in crumbling former slave quarters. In Boston, they moved into cheap three-story wooden houses ("triple deckers”), many of them decaying fire hazards. In Baltimore and Philadelphia, they crowded into narrow brick row houses. And in New York, as in many other cities, more than a million people lived in tenements.
The word "tenement” had originally referred simply to a multiple-family rental building, but by the late nineteenth century it was being used to describe slum dwellings only. The first Tenements tenements, built in New York City in 1850, had been hailed as a great improvement in housing for the poor. "It is built with the design of supplying the laboring people with cheap lodgings,” a local newspaper commented, "and will have many advantages over the cellars and other miserable abodes which too many are forced to inhabit.” But tenements themselves soon became "miserable abodes,” with many windowless rooms, little or no plumbing or central heating, and often a row of privies in the basement. A New York state law of 1870 required a window in every bedroom of tenements built after that date; developers complied by adding small, sunless air shafts to their buildings. Most of all, tenements were incredibly crowded, with three, four, and, sometimes
many more people crammed into each small room.
Jacob Riis, a Danish immigrant and New York newspaper ob Riis reporter and photographer, shocked many
'	middle-class Americans with his sensa-
tional (and some claimed sensationalized) descriptions and
496 * CHAPTER 18
A TENEMENT LAUNDRY
Immigrant families living in tenements, in New York and in many other cities, earned their livelihoods as they could. This woman, shown here with some of her children, was typical of many working-class mothers who found income-producing activities they could pursue in the home (in this case, laundry). This room, dominated by large vats and piles of other people's laundry, is also the family's home, as the crib and religious pictures make clear. (© Bettmann/Corbis) pictures of tenement life in his 1890 book, How the Other Half Lives. Slum dwellings, he said, were almost universally sunless, practically airless, and "poisoned” by "summer stenches/' "The hall is dark and you might stumble over the children pitching pennies back there/' But the solution many reformers (including Riis) favored, and that governments sometimes adopted, was to raze slum dwellings without building any new or better housing to replace them.
Urban Transportation
Urban growth posed monumental transportation challenges. Old downtown streets were often too narrow for the heavy traffic that was beginning to move over them. Most were without a hard, paved surface producing either a sea of mud or a cloud of dust. In the last decades of the nineteenth century, more and more streets were paved, usually with wooden blocks,
Transportation
Problems
bricks, or asphalt; but paving could not keep up with the number of new thoroughfares the expanding cities were creating. By 1890, Chicago had paved only about 600 of its more than 2,000 miles of streets.
But it was not simply the conditions of the streets that impeded urban transportation. It was the numbers of people who needed to move every day from one part of the city to another, numbers that mandated the development of mass transportation. Streetcars drawn on tracks by horses had been introduced into some cities even before the Civil War. But the horsecars were not fast enough, so many communities developed new forms of mass transit.
In 1870, New York opened its first elevated railway, whose noisy, filthy steam-powered trains moved rapidly above the city streets on massive iron structures. New York, Chicago, San Francisco, and other cities also experimented with cable cats, Mass Transit towed bY continuously moving underground cables. Richmond, Virginia, introduced the
THE AGE OF THE CITY < 497
STREETCAR SUBURBS IN NINETEENTH-CENTURY NEW ORLEANS
This map of streetcar lines in New Orleans reveals a pattern that repeated itself in many cities: changing residential patterns emerging in response to new forms of transportation. The map reveals the movement of population outward from the central city as streetcar lines emerged to make access to the downtown easier. Note the dramatic growth of residential suburbs in the last forty years of the nineteenth century in particular. • What other forms of mass transportation were emerging in American cities in these years?
first electric trolley line in 1888, and by 1895 such systems were operating in 850 towns and cities. In 1897, Boston opened the first American subway when it put some of its trolley lines underground. At the same time, cities were developing new techniques of road and bridge building. One of the great technological marvels of the 1880s was the completion of the Brooklyn Bridge in New York City, a dramatic steel-cable suspension span designed by John A. Roebling.
The "Skyscraper"
Cities were growing upward as well as outward. Until the mid-nineteenth century, almost no buildings more than four or five stories high could be constructed. Construction techniques were such that it was difficult and expensive to build adequate structural supports for tall buildings. There was also a limit to the number of flights of stairs the users of buildings could be expected to climb. But by the 1850s, there had been successful experiments with machine-powered passenger elevators; and by the 1870s, new methods of construction using cast iron and steel beams made it easier to build tall buildings.
Not long after the Civil War, therefore, tall buildings began
to appear in the major cities. The Equitable Building in New
York City, completed in 1870 and rising seven and a half floors
above the street, was one of the first in the nation to be built with an elevator. A few years later, even taller buildings of ten and twelve stories were appearing elsewhere in New York, in Chicago, and in other growing cities around the country. With each passing decade, the size and number of tall buildings increased until, by the 1890s, the term "skyscraper” became a popular description of them.
STRAINS OF URBAN LIFE
The increasing congestion of the cities and the absence of adequate public services produced many hazards. Crime, fire, disease, indigence, and pollution all placed strains on the capacities of metropolitan institutions, and both governments and private institutions were for a time poorly equipped to respond to them.
Fire and Disease
One serious problem was fires. In one major city after another, fires destroyed large downtown areas, where many buildings were still constructed of wood. Chicago and Boston suffered "great fires” in 1871. Other cities-among them Baltimore and San Francisco, where a tremendous earthquake produced a
498 . CHAPTER 18
Development of Professional Fire
Departments
catastrophic fire in 1906-experienced similar disasters. The great fires were terrible and deadly experiences, but they also encouraged the construction of fireproof buildings and the development of professional fire departments. They also forced cities to rebuild at a time when new technological and architectural innovations were available. Some of the modern, high-rise
downtowns of American cities arose out of the rubble of great fires.
Environmental Degradation
Modern notions of environmentalism were unknown to most Americans in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. But the environmental degradation of many American cities was a visible and disturbing fact of life in those years. The frequency of great fires, the dangers of disease and plague, the extraordinary crowding of working-class neighborhoods were all examples of the environmental costs of industrialization and rapid urbanization.
Improper disposal of human and industrial waste was a common feature of almost all large cities in these years. Such practices contributed to the pollution of rivers and lakes and also, in many cases, to the compromising of the city's drinking water. This was particularly true in poor neighborhoods with primitive plumbing (and sometimes no indoor plumbing), outdoor privies that leaked into the groundwater, and overcrowded tenements. The presence of domestic animals-horses, which were the principal means of transportation until the late nineteenth century, but in poor neighborhoods also cows, pigs, and other animals-contributed as well to the environmental problems.
Air quality in many cities was poor as well. Few Americans had the severe problems that London experienced in these
Air Pollution Years with Its PerPetual “fogs’ created by the debris from the burning of soft coal.
But air pollution from factories and from stoves and furnaces in offices, homes, and other buildings was constant and at times severe. The incidence of respiratory infection and related diseases was much higher in cities than it was in non-urban areas, and it accelerated rapidly in the late nineteenth century.
By the early twentieth century, reformers were actively crusading to improve the environmental conditions of cities and were beginning to achieve some notable successes. By 1910, most large American cities had constructed sewage disposal systems, often at great cost, to protect the drinking water of their inhabitants and to prevent the great bacterial plagues that impure water had helped create in the past-such as the 1873 yellow fever epidemic in Memphis that killed more than 5,000 people.
Alice Hamilton, a physician who became an investigator for the U.S. Bureau of Labor, was a pioneer in the identification of pollution in the workplace. She documented
PU^L™
WayS in w^ic^ imProPer disposal of such potentially dangerous substances as lead
THE GREAT FIRE IN CHICAGO
This haunting photograph shows the intersection of State and Madison Streets, which Chicagoans liked to call "the world's busiest intersection,” in the aftermath of the great fire of 1871. It destroyed much of the city's downtown. Horse-drawn streetcars are shown here traveling the ghostly, still smoke-filled streets. At left, posters advertise the new locations of displaced stores and offices—prompting the photographer to attach the optimistic title "Back in Business" to this image. (© Archive Photos/Getty Images) (she was one of the first physicians to identify lead poisoning), chemical waste, and ceramic dust was creating widespread sickness. And despite considerable resistance from many factory owners, she did bring such problems to public attention and, in some states at least, inspired legislation to require manufacturers to solve them. In 1912, the federal government created the Public Health Service, which was charged with preventing such occupational diseases as tuberculosis, anemia, and carbon dioxide poisoning, which were common in the garment industry and other trades. It attempted to create common health standards for all factories; but since the agency had few powers of enforcement, it had limited impact. It did, however, establish the protection of public health as a responsibility of the federal government and also helped bring to public attention the environmental forces that endangered health. The creation of the Occupational Health and Safety Administration in 1970, which gave government the authority to require employers to create safe and healthy workplaces, was a legacy of the Public Health Service's early work.
Urban Poverty
Above all, perhaps, the expansion of the cities created widespread and often desperate poverty. Despite the rapid growth of urban economies, the sheer number of new residents ensured that many people would be unable to earn enough for a decent subsistence.
Public agencies and private philanthropic organizations offered very limited relief. They were generally dominated by middle-class people, who tended to believe that too much assistance would breed dependency and that poverty was the fault of the poor themselves-a result of laziness or alcoholism
THE AGE OF THE CITY * 499
or other kinds of irresponsibility. Most tried to restrict aid to the "deserving poor”-those who truly could not help themselves (at least according to the standards of the organizations themselves, which conducted elaborate "investigations” to separate the "deserving” from the "undeserving”).
Other charitable societies-for example, the Salvation Army, which began operating in America in 1879, one year after it
Salvation	was f°uncled in London-concentrated
Army	more on religious revivalism than on the
relief of the homeless and hungry. Tensions often arose between native Protestant philanthropists and Catholic immigrants over religious doctrine and standards of
morality.
Middle-class people grew particularly alarmed over the rising number of poor children in the cities, some of them orphans or runaways, living alone or in small groups scrounging for food. These "street arabs,” as they were often called, attracted more attention from reformers than any other group-although that attention produced no serious solutions to their problems.
Crime and Violence
Poverty and crowding naturally bred crime and violence. Much of it was relatively minor, the work of pickpockets, con
High Crime artists, swindlers, and petty thieves. But Rates	some was more dangerous. The American
murder rate rose rapidly in the late nineteenth century (even as such rates were declining in Europe), from 25 murders for every million people in 1880 to over 100 by the end of the century-a rate slightly higher than the relatively high rates of the 1980s and 1990s. That reflected in part a very high level of violence in some nonurban areas: the American South, where rates of lynching and homicide were particularly high; and the West, where the rootlessness and instability of new communities (cow towns, mining camps, and the like) created much violence. But the cities contributed their share to the increase in crime as well. Native-born Americans liked to believe that crime was a result of the violent proclivities of immigrant groups, and they cited the rise of gangs and criminal organizations in various ethnic communities. But native-born Americans were as likely to commit
crimes as immigrants.
The rising crime rates encouraged many cities to develop larger and more professional police forces. In the early nineteenth century, police forces had often been private and informal organizations; urban governments had resisted professionalized law enforcement. By the end of the century, however, professionalized public police departments were a part of the life of virtually every city and town. They worked closely with district attorneys and other public prosecutors, who were also becoming more numerous and more important in city life. Police forces themselves could also spawn corruption and brutality, particularly since jobs on them were often filled through political patronage. And complaints about police dealing differently with white and black suspects, or with
rich and poor communities, were common in the late nineteenth century.
Some members of the middle class, fearful of urban insurrections, felt the need for even more substantial forms of protection. Urban national guard groups (many of them created and manned by middle-class elites) built imposing armories on the outskirts of affluent neighborhoods and stored large supplies of weapons and ammunition in preparation for uprisings that, in fact, never occurred.
The Machine and the Boss
Newly arrived immigrants, many of whom could not speak English, needed help in adjusting to American urban life: its laws, its customs, usually its language. Some ethnic communities created their own self-help organizations. But for many residents of the inner cities, the principal source of assistance was the political machine.
The urban machine was one of America’s most distinctive political institutions. It owed its existence to the power vacuum that the chaotic growth of cities (and the
Boss Rule very limited growth of city governments)
PUCK MAGAZINE
Puck was the first successful humor magazine published in the United States. Issues were published from 1871 to 1918. It offered political cartoons, caricatures, and satire on the issues of the day. This cover takes on the graft and corruption of Tammany Hall. (The Library of Congress (LC-USZC4-7884)) 500 ® CHAPTER 18
had created. It was also a product of the potential voting power of large immigrant communities. Any politician who could mobilize that power stood to gain enormous influence, if not public office. And so there emerged a group of urban "bosses,” themselves often of foreign birth or parentage. Many were Irish, because they spoke English and because some had acquired previous political experience from the long Irish struggle against the English at home. Almost all were men (in most states women could not yet vote). The principal function of the political boss was simple: to win votes for his organization. That meant winning the loyalty of his constituents. To do so, a boss might provide potential voters with occasional relief-baskets of groceries, bags of coal. He might step in to save those arrested for petty crimes from jail. He rewarded many of his followers with patronage: with jobs in city government or in such city agencies as the police (which the machine’s elected officials often controlled); with jobs building or operating the new transit systems; and with opportunities to rise in the political organization itself.
Machines were also vehicles for making money. Politicians enriched themselves and their allies through various forms of graft and corruption. Some of it might be fairly open-what
Graft and George Washington Plunkitt of New York Corruption City’s Tammany Hall called "honest graft.”
For example, a politician might discover in advance where a new road or streetcar line was to be built, buy an interest in the land near it, and profit when the city had to buy the land from him or when property values rose as a result of the construction. But there was also covert graft: kickbacks from contractors in exchange for contracts to build streets, sewers, public buildings, and other projects; the sale of franchises for the operation of such public utilities as street railways, waterworks, and electric light and power systems. The most famously corrupt city boss was William M. Tweed, boss of New York City’s Tammany Hall in the 1860s and 1870s, whose excesses finally landed him in jail in 1872.
Middle-class critics saw the corrupt machines as blights on the cities and obstacles to progress. In fact, political organizations were often responsible not just for corruption, but also for modernizing city infrastructures, for expanding the role of government, and for creating stability in a political and social climate that otherwise would have lacked a center. The motives of the bosses may have been largely venal, but their achievements were sometimes greater than those of the scrupulous reformers who challenged them.
Several factors made boss rule possible. One was the power of immigrant voters, who were less concerned with middle-class Reasons for ic*eas P°^itical morality than with obtain-Boss Rule ing the services that machines provided and reformers did not. Another was the link between the political organizations and wealthy, prominent citizens who profited from their dealings with bosses. Still another was the structural weakness of city governments. The boss, by virtue of his control over his machine, formed an "invis-ible government” that provided an alternative to what was »ften the inadequacy of the regular government.
The urban machine was not without competition. Reform groups frequently mobilized public outrage at the corruption of the bosses and often succeeded in driving machine politicians from office. Tammany, for example, saw its candidates for mayor and other high city offices lose almost as often as they won in the last decades of the nineteenth century. But the reform organizations typically lacked the permanence of the machine. Thus, many critics of machines began to argue for more-basic reforms: for structural changes in the nature of city government.
Middle-Class
Culture
THE RISE OF MASS
CONSUMPTION
For urban middle-class Americans, the last decades of the nineteenth century were a time of dramatic advances. Indeed, it was in those years that a distinctive middle-class culture began to exert a powerful influence over American life. Much of the rest of American society-the majority of the population, which was neither urban nor middle class-advanced less rapidly or
not at all; but almost no one was unaffected by the rise of a new urban, consumer culture.
Patterns of Income
and Consumption
American industry could not have grown as it did without the expansion of markets. The growth of demand occurred at almost all levels of society, a result not just of the new techniques of production and mass distribution that were making consumer goods less expensive, but also of rising incomes.
Incomes in the industrial era were rising for almost everyone, although at highly uneven rates. The most conspicuous result of the new economy was the creation of vast fortunes. But more important for society as a whole were the growth and increasing Rising Income prosperity of the middle class. The salaries of clerks, accountants, middle managers, and other "white-collar” workers rose on average by a third between 1890 and 1910-and in some parts of the middle class, salaries rose by much more. Doctors, lawyers, and other professionals, for example, experienced a particularly dramatic increase in the
prestige and profitability of their professions.
Working-class incomes rose too in those years, although from a much lower base and considerably more slowly. Iron- and steelworkers, despite the setbacks their unions suffered, saw their hourly wages increase by a third between 1890 and 1910; but industries with large female, African American, or Mexican workforces-shoes, textiles, paper, laundries, many areas of commercial agriculture-saw very small increases, as did almost all industries in the South.
Also important to the new mass market were the develop' ment of affordable products and the creation of new merchandising techniques, which made many consumer goods available to a broad market for the first time. A good example
THE AGE OF THE CITY
501
New	of such changes was the emer-
Merchandising	gence of ready-made clothing
TECHN.QUES	,n thg early nineteenth cenm^
most Americans had made their own clothing-usually from cloth they bought from merchants, at times from fabrics they spun and wove themselves. Affluent people contracted with private tailors to make their clothes. But the invention of the sewing machine and the spur that the Civil War (and its demand for uniforms) gave to the manufacture of clothing created an enormous industry devoted to producing ready-made garments. By the end of the century, almost all Americans bought their clothing from stores.
Partly as a result, much larger numbers of people became concerned with personal style. Interest in women's fashion, for example, had once been a luxury reserved for the affluent. Now middle-class and even working-class women could strive to develop a distinctive style of dress. New homes, even modest ones, now included clothes closets. Even people in remote rural areas could develop stylish wardrobes by ordering from the new mail-order houses.
Another example of the rise of the mass market was the way Americans bought and prepared food. The development and mass production of tin cans in the 1880s created a large new industry devoted to packaging and selling canned food and (as a result of the techniques Gail Borden, an inventor and politician, developed in the 1850s) condensed milk. Refrigerated railroad cars made it possible for perishables-meats, vegetables, dairy products, and other foodstuffs-to travel long distances without spoiling. The development of artificially frozen ice made it possible for many more households to afford iceboxes. Among other things, the changes meant improved diets and better health; life expectancy rose six years in the first two decades of the twentieth century.
Chain Stores and
Mail-Order Houses
Changes in marketing also altered the way Americans bought Chain Stores g°°ds. Small local stores faced competition from new "chain stores.” The Great Atlantic &
Pacific Tea Company (A & P) began creating a national network of grocery stores as early as the 1850s and expanded it rapidly after the Civil War.
F. W.
Woolworth opened his first "Five and Ten Cent Store” in Utica, New York, in 1879 and went on to build a national chain of dry goods stores. Chain stores were able to sell manufactured goods at lower prices than the local, independent stores because the chains had so much more volume. From the beginning, the chains faced opposition from the established merchants they threatened to displace, and from others who feared that they would jeopardize the character of their communities. (Similar controversies have continued
DEPARTMENT STORES
Department stores often created "events" to help promote sales of their many wares. Here, Strawbridge and Clothier department store creates quite a stir on Market Street in Philadelphia in 1907. (© Corbis) into the twenty-first century over the spread of large chains such as Wal-Mart and Barnes & Noble.) But most customers, however loyal they might feel to a local merchant, found it difficult to resist the greater variety and lower prices the chains provided them.
Chain stores were slow to reach remote, rural areas, which remained dependent on poorly stocked and often very expensive country stores. But rural people gradually gained access to the new consumer world through the great mail-order houses. In 1872, Montgomery Ward-a Chicago-based traveling salesman-distributed a catalog of consumer goods in association with the farmers’ organization, the Grange (see p. 520). By the 1880s, he was offering thousands of items at low prices to farmers throughout the Midwest and beyond. He soon faced stiff competition from Sears Roebuck, first established by Richard
Sears in Chicago in 1887. Together, the bulky catalogs from Ward and Sears changed the lives of many isolated people-introducing them to (and explaining for them) new trends of fashion and home decor as well as making available new tools, machinery, and technologies for the home.
Department Stores
In larger cities, the emergence of great department stores (which had appeared earlier in Europe) helped transform buying habits and turn shopping into an alluring and glamorous activity. Marshall Field in Chicago created one of the first American department stores, and others soon followed: Macy’s in
New York City, Abraham and Straus in Brooklyn, Jordan Marsh and Filene’s in Boston, Wanamaker’s in Philadelphia.
Social
Consequences of Mail-Order Catalogs
Impact of the
Department
Store
502 * CHAPTER 18
Department stores transformed the concept of shopping in several ways. First, they brought together under one roof an enormous array of products that had previously been sold in separate shops. Second, they sought to create an atmosphere of wonder and excitement, to make shopping a glamorous activity. Department stores were elaborately decorated to suggest great luxury and elegance. They included restaurants and tearooms and comfortable lounges, to suggest that shopping could be a social event as well as a practical necessity. They hired well-dressed salesclerks, mostly women, to provide attentive service to their mostly female customers. Third, department stores-like mail-order houses-took advantage of economies of scale to sell merchandise at lower prices than many of the individual shops with which they competed.
Women as Consumers
The rise of mass consumption had particularly dramatic effects on American women. Women’s clothing styles changed much more rapidly and dramatically than men’s, which encouraged frequent purchases. Women generally bought and prepared food for their families, so the availability of new food products changed not only the way everyone ate, but also the way women shopped and cooked.
The consumer economy produced new employment opportunities for women as salesclerks in department stores
,,	and as waitresses in the rapidly prolifer-
National	r r
Consumers ating restaurants. And it spawned the League creation of a new movement in which women were to play a vital role: the consumer protection movement. The National Consumers League, formed in the 1890s under the leadership of Florence Kelley, a prominent social reformer, attempted to mobilize the power of women as consumers to force retailers and manufacturers to improve wages and working conditions for women workers. By defining themselves as consumers, many middle-class women were able to find a stance from which they could become active participants in public life. Indeed, the mobilization of women behind consumer causes-and eventually many other causes-was one of the most important political developments of the late nine-
teenth century.
LEISURE IN THE CONSUMER SOCIETY
Closely related to the growth of consumption was an increasing interest in leisure, in part because time away from work was expanding rapidly for many people. Members of the urban middle and professional classes had increasingly large blocks of time in which they were not at work-evenings, weekends, even vacations (previously almost unknown among salaried workers). Working hours in many factories declined, from an
average of nearly seventy hours a week in 1860 to under sixty in 1900. Industrial workers might still be on the job six days a week, but many of them had more time off in the evenings. Even farmers found that the mechanization of agriculture gave them more free time. The lives of many Americans were becoming compartmentalized, with clear distinctions between work and leisure.
Redefining Leisure
The growth of free time produced a redefinition of the idea of
"leisure.” In earlier eras, relatively few Americans had consid-
~ T	ered leisure a valuable thing. On the con-
New
Conceptions trary, many equated it with laziness or of Leisure sloth. "Rest,” as in the relative inactivity many Americans considered appropriate for the Sabbath, was valued because it offered time for spiritual reflection and prepared people for work. But leisure-time spent amusing oneself in nonproductive pursuits-was not only
unavailable to most Americans, but faintly scorned as well. But with the rapid expansion of the economy and the in-
creasing number of hours workers had away from work, it became possible to imagine leisure time as a normal part of the lives of many people. Industrial workers, in pursuit of shorter hours, adopted the slogan "Eight hours for work, eight hours for rest, and eight hours for what we will.” Others were equally adamant in claiming that leisure time was both a right and an important contribution to an individual’s emotional and even spiritual health.
The economist Simon Patten was one of the first intellectuals to articulate this new view of leisure, which he tied closely to the rising interest in consumption. Patten, in The Theory of Prosperity (1902), The Neiv Basis of Civilization (1910), and Simon Patten other works, challenged the centuries-old assumption that the normal condition of civilization was a scarcity of goods. "We are now in the transition stage,” he wrote, "from this pain economy [the economy of scarcity] to a pleasure economy.” The principal goal of such an economy, he claimed, "should be an abundance of goods
and the pursuit of pleasure.”
As Americans became more accustomed to leisure as a normal part of their lives, they began to look for new experi-Public	ences with which to entertain themselves.
Leisure Entertainment usually meant "going out,” spending leisure time in public places where there would be not only entertainment, but also other people. Thousands of working-class New Yorkers flocked to the amusement park at Coney Island, for example, not just for the rides and shows, but for the excitement of the crowds as well. So did the thousands who spent evenings in dance halls, vaudeville houses, and concert halls. Affluent New Yorkers enjoyed afternoons in Central Park, where a principal attraction was seeing other people (and being seen by them). Moviegoers were attracted not just by the movies themselves, but also by the energy of the audiences at the lavish "movie palaces that began to appear in cities in the early twentieth century
J
THE AGE OF THE CITY - 503
just as sports fans were drawn by the crowds as well as by the games.
Mass entertainment did not always bridge differences of class, race, or gender. Saloons and most sporting events tended to be male preserves. Shopping (itself becoming a valued leisure-time activity) and going to tearooms and luncheonettes were more characteristic of female leisure. Theaters, pubs, and clubs were often specific to particular ethnic communities or particular work groups. There were, in fact, relatively few places where people of widely diverse backgrounds gathered together.
When the classes did meet in public spaces-as they did, for example, in city parks-there was often conflict over what constituted appropriate public behavior. Elites in New York City, for example, tried to prohibit anything but quiet, "genteel” activities in Central Park, while working-class people wanted to use the public spaces for sports and entertainments. But even divided by class, ethnicity, and gender, leisure and popular entertainment did help sustain a vigorous public culture.
Spectator Sports
The search for forms of public leisure hastened the rise of organized spectator sports, especially baseball, which by the end of the century was well on its way to becoming the national pastime (see "Patterns of Popular Culture,” pp. 384-385). A game much like baseball, known as "rounders” and derived from cricket, had enjoyed limited popularity in Great Britain in the early nineteenth century. Versions of the game began to appear in America in the early 1830s, well before Abner Doubleday supposedly "invented” baseball. (Doubleday, in fact, had little to do with the creation of baseball and actually cared little for sports.
Alexander Cartwright, a member of a New York City baseball club in the 1840s, defined many of the rules and features of the game as we know it today.)
By the end of the Civil War, interest in baseball had grown rapidly. More than 200 amateur or semiprofessional teams or clubs existed, many of which joined a national association and agreed on standard rules. The first salaried team, the Major League Cincinnati Red Stockings, was formed in
Baseball 1869. Other cities soon fielded professional teams, and in 1876, at the urging of
Albert Spalding, they banded together in the National League. A rival league, the American Association, soon appeared. It eventually collapsed, but in 1901 the American League emerged to replace it. In 1903, the first modern World Series was played, in which the American League Boston Red Sox beat the National League Pittsburgh Pirates. By then, baseball had become an important business and a great national preoccupation (at least among men), attracting paying crowds in the thousands.
The second most popular game, football, appealed at first to an elite segment of the male population, in part because it originated in colleges and universities. The first intercollegiate football game in America occurred between Princeton and Rutgers in 1869, and soon the game became entrenched as part of collegiate life. Early intercollegiate football bore only an indirect relation to the modern game; it was more similar to what is now known as rugby. By the late 1870s, however, the game was becoming standardized and was taking on the outlines of its modern form.
As college football grew in popularity, it spread to other sections of the country, notably to the midwestern state Growth of universities, which were destined soon to College replace the eastern schools as the great powers of the game. It also began to exhibit
Football
THE AMERICAN NATIONAL GAME
Long before the modern major leagues began, local baseball clubs were active throughout much of the United States, establishing the game as the "national pastime." This print of a "grand match for the championship” depicts an 1866 game at Elysian Fields, a popular park just across the river from New York City in Hoboken, New Jersey. (© National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum, Inc.) Coney Island
;	who lived in the crowded cities of early-twentieth-century America yearned
, . at times for ways to escape the noise, smells, heat, and stress of the urban world. Wealthy families could travel to resorts or country houses, But most city dwellers could not afford to venture far, and for them ambitious entrepreneurs tried to provide dazzling escapes close to home. The most celebrated such escape was Coney Island in Brooklyn, New York—which became
for a time the most famous and popular urban resort in America.
With its broad oceanfront beach, Coney Island, located in Brooklyn, had been an attractive
destination for visitors since the early nineteenth century. In the 1870s and 1880s, investors built railroad lines from the city to the beach and began to create spectacular amusements to induce New Yorkers to visit. But the real success of Coney Island began in the 1890s, when the amusements and spectacles reached a new level. Sea Lion Park, which opened in 1895, showcased trained sea lions and exotic water rides. Steeplechase Park opened two years later, attracting visitors with a mechanical steeplechase ride in which visitors could pretend to be jockeys, and
stunt rooms with moving floors and powerful blasts of compressed air.
By then, Coney Island was a popular site for real horse racing, boxing matches, and other sports. It was
POSTCARD FROM LUNA PARK
Visitors to Coney Island sent postcards to friends and relatives by the millions, and those cards were among the most effective promotional devices for the amusement parks. This one shows the brightly lit entrance to Luna Park, Coney Island's most popular attraction for many years. (© Bettmann/Corbis) THE ELEPHANT HOTEL
One of the early attractions of Coney Island as it became a popular resort was this hotel, built inside a large wooden elephant. This picture, taken in 1890, shows Coney Island at a point when development was still relatively modest. (© Photo Collection Alexander Alland, Sr./Corbis) the taints of professionalism that have marked it ever since. Some schools used "ringers,” tramp athletes who were not even registered as students. In an effort to eliminate such abuses, Amos Alonzo Stagg, athletic director and coach at the University of Chicago, led in forming the Western Conference, or Big Ten, in 1896, which established rules governing eligibility.
Football also became known for a high level of violence on the field; eighteen college students died of football-related injuries and over a hundred were seriously hurt in 1905. The carnage prompted a White House conference on organized
sports convened by President Theodore Roosevelt. As a result of its deliberations, a new intercollegiate association (which in 1910 became known as the National College Athletic Association, the NCAA) revised the rules and the required equipment of the game in an effort to make it more honest and safer.
Other popular spectator sports were emerging at about the same time. Basketball was invented in 1891 at Springfield, Massachusetts, by Dr. James A. Naismith, a Canadian working as athletic director for a local college. Boxing, which had long been a disreputable activity concentrated primarily among
J
STEEPLECHASE PARK
Steeplechase Park opened in 1897 and immediately began attracting crowds eager to ride the mechanical steeplechase shown here. (© UIG/Getty Images) also attracting gambling casinos, saloons, and brothels. From the beginning, among affluent middle-class people at least, Coney Island had a reputation as a rough and unsavory place. But to the working-class immigrants and lower-middle-class people, it was a place of wonder, excitement, and escape.
The greatest Coney Island attraction, Luna Park, opened in 1903. It provided not just rides and stunts, but lavish reproductions of exotic places and spectacular adventures: Japanese gardens, Venetian canals with gondoliers, a Chinese theater, a simulated trip to the moon, and reenactments of such disasters as burning buildings, earthquakes, and even the volcanic eruption that destroyed Pompeii. A year later, a competing company opened Dreamland, which tried to outdo even Luna Park with a 375-foot tower, a three-ring circus, chariot races, and a Lilliputian village inspired by Gulliver's Travels. (A fire destroyed Dreamland in 1911.)
The popularity of Coney Island in these years was phenomenal. Thousands of people flocked to the large resort hotels that lined the beaches. Many thousands more made day trips out from the city by train and (after 1920) subway. In 1904, the average daily attendance at Luna Park alone was 90,000 people. On weekends, the Coney Island post office handled over 250,000 postcards, through which visitors helped spread the reputation of the resort across the nation.
Coney Island's popularity reflected a number of powerful impulses among urban Americans at the turn of the century. It provided visitors with an escape from the heat and crowding of the vast metropolis around it. It gave people who had few opportunities for travel a simulated glimpse of exotic places and events that they would never be able to experience in reality. For immigrants, many of whom lived in insular ethnic communities, Coney Island provided a way of experiencing American mass culture on an equal footing with people of backgrounds different from their own. Almost everyone
who found Coney Island appealing did so in part because it provided an escape from the genteel standards of behavior that governed so much of American life at the time. In the amusement parks of Coney Island, people delighted in finding themselves in situations that in any other setting would have seemed embarrassing or improper: women's skirts blown above their heads with hot air; people pummeled with water and rubber paddles by clowns; hints of sexual freedom as strangers were forced to come into physical contact with one another on rides and amusements and as men and women revealed themselves to each other wearing bathing suits on the beach.
Coney Island remained popular throughout the first half of the twentieth century, and it continues to attract visitors today (although in much smaller numbers). But its heyday was in the years before World War I, when the exotic sights and thrilling adventures it offered had almost no counterparts elsewhere in American culture. When radio, movies, and eventually television began to offer their own kind of mass escapism, Coney Island gradually ceased to be the dazzling, unmatchable marvel it had seemed to earlier generations. •
uWKkM AND ANALV/b, AND EVALUA'f E
1.	How did Coney Island reflect the new culture of mass consumption?
2.	What new ideas about leisure help account for the popularity of Coney Island in the early twentieth century?
3.	What forms of popular culture today continue the Coney Island tradition of offering escapism, adventure, and excitement to a mass audience?
the urban working classes, had become by the 1880s a more Popular and in some places more reputable sport, particularly after the adoption of the Marquis of Queensberry rules (by which fighters wore padded gloves and fought in three-minute rounds). The first modern boxing hero, John L. Sullivan, became heavyweight champion of the world in 1882. Even so, boxing remained illegal in some states until after World War I. Horse racing, popular since colonial times, became increasingly commercialized with the construction of large tracks and the establishment of large-purse races such as the Kentucky Derby.
Gambling and Sports
Even in their infancy, spectator sports were closely associated with gambling. There was elaborate betting-some of it organized by underground gambling syndicates-on baseball and football almost from the start. One of the most famous
incidents in the history of baseball was the alleged "throwing” of the 1919 World Series by the Chicago White Sox because of gambling (an incident that became known as the "Black Sox Scandal”). That event resulted in the banning of some of the game’s most notable figures from the sport for life and the establishment of the office of commissioner of baseball

506
CHAPTER 18
to "clean up” the game. Boxing was troubled throughout its history by the influence of gambling and the frequent efforts of managers to "fix” fights in the interests of bettors. Horse racing as it became commercialized was openly organized around betting, with the race tracks themselves establishing odds and taking bets.
The rise of spectator sports and gambling was largely a response to the desire of men to create a distinctively male culture in cities. But not all sports were the province of men. A number of sports were emerging in which women became important participants. Golf and tennis seldom attracted crowds in the late nineteenth century, but both experienced a rapid increase in participation among relatively wealthy men and women. Bicycling and croquet also enjoyed widespread popularity in the 1890s among women as well as men. Women’s colleges were beginning to introduce their students to strenuous sports as well-track, crew, swimming, and (beginning in the late 1890s) basketball-challenging the once prevalent notion that vigorous exercise was dangerous to women.
Music and Theater
Many ethnic communities maintained their own theaters, in which immigrants listened to the music of their homelands and heard comedians making light of their experiences in the New World. Italian theaters often drew on the traditions of Italian opera to create sentimental musical events. The Yiddish theater built on the experiences of American
Ethnic
Theater
Jews-and was the training ground for a remarkable group of musicians and playwrights who later went on to play a major role in mainstream, English-speaking theater.
Urban theaters also introduced one of the most distinctively American entertainment forms: the musical comedy, which evolved gradually from the comic operettas of European theater. George M. Cohan, an Irish vaudeville entertainer, became the first great creator of musical comedies in the early twentieth century; in the process of creating his many shows, he wrote a series of patriotic songs-"Yankee Doodle Dandy,” "Over There,” and "You’re a Grand Old Flag”-that remained popular many decades later. Irving Berlin, a veteran of the Yiddish theater, wrote more than 1,000 songs for the musical theater during his long career, including such popular favorites as "Alexander’s Ragtime Band” and "God Bless America.”
Vaudeville, a form of theater adapted from French models, was the most popular urban entertainment in the first decades of the twentieth century. Even saloons and small community theaters could afford to
offer their customers vaudeville, which consisted of a variety of acts (musicians, comedians, magicians, jugglers, and others) and was, at least in the beginning, inexpensive to produce. As the economic potential of vaudeville grew, some promoters-most prominently Florenz Ziegfeld of New York-staged much more elaborate spectacles. Vaudeville was also one of the few entertainment media open to black performers. They brought to it elements of the minstrel shows they had earlier developed for black audiences in the late nineteenth century. (See "Patterns of Popular Culture,” pp. 420-421.)
Vaudeville
THE FLORADORA SEXTET
The Floradora Sextet was a popular vocal group of the late nineteenth and early twentieth cent.,™* „ 4 u , t oc nf < cities and resorts. They are shown here in an elaborately costumed production number at the famous Weber and Fields Music Hall "	" b r”"* u" VaudeV'IIC and b“de8qU<l' Lffil
rieias Music Hall in New York City, which opened in 1896. (© Bettmann/Corbis)
THE AGE OF THE CITY
507
The Movies
The most important form of mass entertainment (until the invention of radio and television) was the movies. Thomas Edison and others had created the technology of the motion picture in the 1880s. Not long after, short films became available to individual viewers through "peep shows” in pool halls, penny arcades, and amusement parks. Soon larger projectors made it possible to project the images onto big screens, which permitted substantial audiences to see films in theaters.
By 1900, Americans were becoming attracted in large numbers to these early movies-usually plotless films of trains or waterfalls or other spectacles designed mainly to show off the technology. D. W. Griffith car-
The Birth of ried tbe motion picture into a new a Nation era with his silent epics-The Birth of a Nation (1915), Intolerance (1916), and others-which introduced serious plots and elaborate productions to filmmaking. Some of these films-most notably The Birth of a Nation, with its celebration
of the Ku Klux Kian and its demeaning portraits of African Americans-also contained notoriously racist messages, an indication, among other things, that the audiences for these early films were overwhelmingly white. Nevertheless, motion pictures were the first truly mass entertainment medium, reaching all areas of the country and almost all groups in the population.
Working-Class Leisure
Leisure had a particular importance to working-class men and women-in part because it was a relatively new part of their lives and in part because it stood in such sharp contrast to the grueling environments in which many industrial workers labored. More than most other groups in society, workers spent their leisure time on the streets-walking alone or in groups, watching street entertainers, meeting friends, talking and joking. For people with time but little money, the life of the street was an appealing source of camaraderie and energy.
Another important setting for the leisure time of working-class men was the neighborhood saloon, which became a place
Importance of	where a worker could be sure of encoun"
the Saloon	tering a regular circle of friends. Saloons
were often ethnically specific, in part because they served particular neighborhoods dominated by particular national groups. They also became political centers.
Saloonkeepers were especially important figures in urban political machines, largely because they had regular contact wkh so many men in a neighborhood. When the Anti-Saloon League and other temperance organizations attacked the saloon, one of the reasons they cited was that eliminating saloons would weaken political machines. Opponents also noted correctly that saloons were sometimes places of crime,
-
A NICKELODEON
Before the rise of the great movie palaces, urban families flocked to "nickelodeons,” small theaters that charged five cents for admission and showed many different films each day, including serials—dramas that drew audiences back into theaters day after day with new episodes of a running story. (© The Granger Collection, New York) violence, and prostitution-an entryway into the dark underworld of urban life.
Boxing was a particularly popular sport among working-class men. Many workers could not afford to attend the great public boxing matches pairing such popular heroes as John L. Sullivan and "Gentleman Jim” Corbett. But there were less glittering boxing matches in small rings and even in saloons-bare-knuckled fights organized by ethnic clubs and other groups that gave men an opportunity to demonstrate their strength and courage, something that the working world did not always provide them.
The Fourth of July
The Fourth of July played a large role in the lives of many working-class Americans. That was in part because in an age of six-day (and sometimes seven-day) workweeks and before regular vacations, it was for many decades one of the few full days of leisure-other than the Sabbath, during
which activities were often restricted by law-that many workers had. Fourth of July celebrations were one of the highlights of the year in many ethnic, working-class communities. In Worcester, Massachusetts, for example, the Ancient Order of Hibernians (an Irish organization) sponsored boisterous picnics for the Irish working class of the city. Competing with them were Irish temperance organizations, which offered more sober and "respectable” entertainments to those relatively few workers who wished to avoid the heavy drinking at the Hibernian affairs. Other ethnic groups organized their own Fourth of July events-picnics, games, parades-making the day a celebration not just of the nation’s independence, but of the cultures of
Importance of the Fourth of July
s*
508 • CHAPTER 18
immigrant communities. The city's affluent middle class, in the meantime, tended to stay away, remaining indoors or organizing family picnics at resort areas outside the city.
Mass Communications
Urban industrial society created a vast market for new methods of transmitting news and information. Between 1870 and 1910, the circulation of daily newspapers increased nearly ninefold (from under 3 million to more than 24 million), a rate three times as great as the rate of population increase. And while standards varied widely from one paper to another, American journalism began to develop the beginnings of a professional identity. Salaries of reporters increased; many newspapers began separating the reporting of news from the expression of opinion; and newspapers themselves became important businesses.
One striking change was the emergence of national press services, which made use of the telegraph to supply news and features to papers throughout the country and which contributed as a result to the standardization of the product. By the turn of the century, important newspaper chains had emerged as well. The most powerful was William Randolph Hearst's, which by 1914 controlled nine newspapers and two maga-
„	zines. Hearst and rival publisher Joseph
Emergence of ,	, ,	,	,	,
Newspaper Pulitzer helped popularize what became Chains	known as "yellow journalism”-a deliber-
ately sensational, often lurid style of reporting presented in bold graphics, designed to reach a mass audience. (See "Patterns of Popular Culture,” pp. 536-537.) Another major change occurred in the nature of American magazines. Beginning in the 1880s, new kinds of magazines appeared that were designed for a mass audience. One of the pioneers was Edward W. Bok, who took over the Ladies' Home Journal in 1899 and, by targeting a mass female audience, built
its circulation to over 700,000.
HIGH CULTURE IN THE AGE OF THE CITY
In addition to the important changes in popular culture that accompanied the rise of cities and industry, there were profound changes in the realm of "high culture”-in the ideas and activities of intellectuals and elites. Even the notion of a distinction between "highbrow” and "lowbrow” culture was relatively new to the industrial era. In the early nineteenth century, many cultural activities attracted people of widely varying backgrounds and targeted people of all classes. By the late nineteenth century, however, elites were developing a cultural and intellectual life quite separate from the popular amusements of the urban masses.
The Literature of Urban America
Some writers and artists-the local-color writers of the South, example, and Mark Twain, in such novels as Huckleberry
Finn and Tom Sumyerresponded to the new industrial civilization by evoking an older, more natural world. But others grappled directly with the modern order.
One of the strongest impulses in late-nineteenth- and early-twentieth-century American literature was the effort to Social	re-create urban social reality. This trend
Realism	toward realism found an early voice in
Stephen Crane, who-although best known for his novel of the Civil War, The Red Badge of Courage (1895)-was the author of an earlier, powerful indictment of the plight of the working class. Crane created a sensation in 1893 when he published Maggie: A Girl of the Streets, a grim picture of urban poverty and slum life. Theodore Dreiser was even more influential in encouraging writers to abandon the genteel traditions of earlier times and turn to the social dislocations and injustices of the present. He did so both in Sister Carrie and in other, later novels (including An American Tragedy, published
in 1925).
Many of Dreiser's contemporaries followed him in chronicling the oppression of America's poor. In 1901 Frank Norris published The Octopus, an account of a struggle between oppressed wheat farmers and powerful railroad interests in California. The socialist writer Upton Sinclair published The Jungle in 1906, a novel designed to reveal the depravity of capitalism. It exposed abuses in the American meatpacking industry; and while it did not inspire the kind of socialist response for which Sinclair had hoped, it did help produce legislative action to deal with the problem. Kate Chopin, a southern writer who explored the oppressive features of traditional marriage, encountered widespread public abuse after publication of her shocking novel The Awakening in 1899. It described a young wife and mother who abandons her family in search of personal fulfillment. It was formally banned in some communities. William Dean Howells, in The Rise of Silas Lapham (1884) and other works, described what he considered the shallowness and corruption in the search for wealth.
Other critics of American society responded to the new civilization not by attacking it but by withdrawing from it. The historian Henry Adams published a classic autobiography in 1906, The Education of Henry Adams, in which he portrayed himself as a man disillusioned with and unable to relate to his society, even though he continued to live in it. The novelist Henry James lived the major part of his adult life in England and Europe and produced a series of coldly realistic novels-The American (1877), Portrait of a Lady (1881), The Ambassadors (1903), and others—that showed his ambivalence about the character of modern, industrial civilization.
The growing popularity of literature helped spawn a remarkable network of clubs, mostly formed and populated by women, to bring readers together to talk about books. Reading clubs proliferated rapidly in cities and even small towns, among African American as well as white women. They made literature a social experience for hundreds of thousands of women and created a tradition that has continued into the twenty-hrst century.
THE AGE OF THE CITY
• 509 Art in the Age of the City
American art through most of the nineteenth century had been overshadowed by the art of Europe. Many American artists studied and even lived in Europe. But others broke from the Old World traditions and experimented with new styles. Winslow Homer was vigorously American in his paintings of New England maritime life and other native subjects. James McNeil Whistler was one of the first Western artists to appreciate the beauty of Japanese color prints and to introduce Oriental concepts into American and European art.
By the first years of the new century, some American artists were turning decisively away from the traditional academic Ashcan style, a style perhaps best exemplified in School America by the brilliant portraitist John Singer Sargent. Instead, many younger painters were exploring the same grim aspects of modern life that were becoming the subject of American literature. Members of the so-called Ashcan school produced work startling in its naturalism and stark in its portrayal of the social realities of the era. John Sloan portrayed the dreariness of American urban slums; George Bellows caught the vigor and violence of his time in paintings and drawings of prize fights; Edward Hopper explored the starkness and loneliness of the modern city. The Ashcan artists were also among the first Americans to appreciate expressionism and abstraction; and they showed their interest in new forms in 1913 when they helped stage the famous and controversial Armory Show in New York City, which displayed works of the French Postimpressionists and of some American moderns.
The work of these and other artists marked the beginning in America of an artistic movement known as modernism, a movement that had counterparts in many other areas of cultural and intellectual life as well. Rejecting the heavy reliance on established forms that characterized the "genteel tradition'’ of the nineteenth-century art world, modernists rejected the grip of the past and embraced new subjects and new forms. Where the genteel tradition emphasized the "dignified” and "elevated” aspects of civilization (and glorified the achievements of gifted elites), modernism gloried in the ordinary, even the coarse.
Where the genteel tradition placed great importance on respect for the past and the maintenance of "standards," modernism looked to the future and gloried in the new. Eventually, modernism developed strict orthodoxies of its own. But in its early stages, it seemed to promise an escape from rigid, formal traditions and an unleashing of individual creativity.
The Impact of Darwinism
The single most profound intellectual development
in the late nineteenth century was the widespread
acceptance of the theory of evolution, associated most promi-
«Natural nently with the English naturalist Charles
Selection” Darwin. Darwinism argued that the human species had evolved from earlier forms of life
(and most recently from simian creatures similar to apes) through a process of "natural selection.” It challenged the biblical story of the Creation and almost every other tenet of traditional American religious faith. History, Darwinism suggested, was not the working out of a divine plan, as most Americans had always believed. It was a random process dominated by the fiercest or luckiest competitors.
The theory of evolution met widespread resistance at first from educators, theologians, and even many scientists. By the end of the century, however, the evolutionists had converted most members of the urban professional and educated classes. Even many middle-class Protestant religious leaders had accepted the doctrine, making significant alterations in theology to accommodate it. Evolution had become enshrined in schools
ON THE STEPS
This painting is by George Luks (1867-1933), an American artist who belonged to the so-called Ashcan school. Luks and others revolted against what they considered the sterile formalism of academic painting and chose instead to portray realistic scenes of ordinary life. In 1913 they stirred the art world with a startling exhibition in New York, known as the Armory Show. In it they displayed not only their own work (which was relatively conventional in technique, even if sometimes daring in its choice of subjects), but also the work of innovative European artists, who were already beginning to explore wholly new artistic forms. (© David David Gallery/SuperStock) 510 CHAPTER 18
and universities; few serious scientists any longer questioned its basic validity.
Unseen by most urban Americans at the time, however, the rise of Darwinism was contributing to a deep schism between the new, cosmopolitan culture of the city-which was receptive to new ideas such as evolution-and a traditional, provincial culture located mainly (although not wholly) in rural areas-which remained wedded to fundamentalist religious beliefs and older values. Thus the late nineteenth century saw not only the rise of a liberal Protestantism in tune with new scientific discoveries but also the beginning of an organized Protestant fundamentalism, rejecting evolution, which would make its presence felt politically in the 1920s and again in the late twentieth century and beyond.
Darwinism helped spawn other new intellectual currents. There was the Social Darwinism of William Graham Sumner "Pragmatism” anc^ others, which industrialists used so enthusiastically to justify their favored position in American life. But there were also more sophisticated philosophies, among them a doctrine that became known as "pragmatism,” which seemed peculiarly a product of America's changing material civilization. William James, a Harvard psychologist (and brother of the novelist Henry James), was the most prominent publicist of the new theory, although earlier intellectuals such as Charles S. Peirce and later ones such as John Dewey were also important to its development and dissemination. According to the pragmatists, modern society should rely for guidance not on inherited ideals and moral principles but on the test of scientific
inquiry. No idea or institution (not even religious faith) was valid, they claimed, unless it worked and unless it stood the test of experience. "The ultimate test for us of what a truth means,” James wrote, "is the conduct it dictates or inspires.”
A similar concern for scientific inquiry was intruding into the social sciences and challenging traditional orthodoxies. Economists such as Richard T. Ely and Simon Patten argued for a more active and pragmatic use of scientific discipline. Sociologists such as Edward A. Ross and Lester Frank Ward urged applying the scientific method to the solution of social and political problems. Historians such as Frederick Jackson Turner and Charles Beard argued that economic factors more than spiritual ideals had been the governing force in historical development. John Dewey proposed a new approach to education that placed less emphasis on the rote learning of traditional knowledge and more on a flexible, democratic approach to schooling, one that enabled students to acquire knowledge that would help them deal with the realities of their society.
The relativistic implications of Darwinism also promoted
Growth of the growth of anthropology and encour-Anthropology aged some scholars to begin examining other cultures-most significantly, perhaps, the culture of American Indians-in new ways. A few white Americans began to look at Indian society as a coherent culture with its own norms and values that were worthy of respect and preservation, even though different from those of white society. But such ideas about Native Americans found very little support outside a few corners of the intellectual
world until much later in the twentieth century.
DEMPSEY AND FIRPO
The artist George Bellows began painting fight scenes in the first years of the twentieth century, when boxing appealed primarily to working-class urban communities. By 1924, when he painted this view of the Dempsey-Firpo fight, prizefighting had become one of the most popular sports in America. (© Whitney Museum of American Art, New York, USA/Bridgeman Images)
Toward Universal Schooling
A society that was coming to depend increasingly on specialized skills and scientific knowledge was, of course, a society with a high demand for education. The late nineteenth century, therefore, was a time of rapid expansion and reform of American schools and universities.
One example was the spread of free public primary and secondary education. In 1860, there
Spread of were only 100 publiC Public	schools in the entire United
Education	States. By 1900, the number
had reached 6,000, and by
1914 over 12,000. By 1900, compulsory school attendance laws were in effect in thirty-one states and territories. But education was still far from universal. Rural areas lagged far behind urban-industrial ones in funding public education. And in the South, many blacks had no access to schools.
Educational reformers, few of whom shared the relativistic views of anthropologists, sought to pr° vide educational opportunities for the Indian tribes as well, in an effort to "civilize” them and help
THE AGE OF THE CITY - 511
WILLIAM GRAHAM SUMNER
William Graham Sumner was an influential scholar who was appointed the first professor of sociology at Yale. A dynamic writer and teacher, he is best known for his promotion of "Social Darwinism”—a now-discredited theory that used the theory of evolution to explain differences among peoples. (© The Granger Collection, New York) them adapt to white society. In the 1870s, reformers recruited small groups of Indians to attend Hampton Institute, a primarily black college. In 1879, Richard Henry Pratt, a former army officer, organized the Carlisle Indian Industrial School in Pennsylvania. Carlisle emphasized the kind of practical "industrial” education that Booker T. Washington had urged at his school at Tuskegee. Equally important, it isolated Indians from their tribes and tried to force them to assimilate to white norms. The purpose, Pratt said, was to "kill the Indian and save the man.” Carlisle inspired other, similar schools in the West. Ultimately, the reform efforts failed, both because of Indian resistance and because of inadequate funding, incompetent administration, and poor teaching.
Colleges and universities were also proliferating rapidly in the Ute nineteenth century. They benefited particularly from the Morrill Land Grant Act of the Civil War era, by which the federal "Land-Grant” government had donated land to states for Institutions the establishment of colleges. After 1865, states in the South and West took particular advantage of the law. In all, sixty-nine "land-grant” institutions
were established in the last decades of the century-among them the state university systems of California, Illinois, Minnesota, and Wisconsin.
Other universities benefited from millions of dollars contributed by business and financial tycoons. Rockefeller, Carnegie, and others gave generously to such schools as the University of Chicago, Columbia, Harvard, Northwestern, Princeton, Syracuse, and Yale. Other philanthropists founded new universities or reorganized and renamed older ones to perpetuate their family
‘ names-Vanderbilt, Johns Hopkins, Cornell, Duke, Tulane, and
Stanford.
Education for Women
The post-Civil War era saw, too, an important expansion I of educational opportunities for women, although such opportunities continued to lag far behind those available
/ to men and were almost always denied to black women.
/	Most public high schools accepted women readily, but
/ opportunities for higher education were few. At the end of
/ the Civil War, only three American colleges were coeducational. In the years after the war, some of the land-grant col-
Women’s le&es universities in the Midwest and
Colleges such private universities as Cornell and Wesleyan began to admit women along with men. But coeducation provided fewer opportunities than the creation of a network of women's colleges. Mount Holyoke, which had begun its life in 1836 as a "seminary” for women, became a full-fledged college in the 1880s. At about the same time, new female institutions were emerging: Vassar, Wellesley, Smith, Bryn Mawr, Wells, and Goucher. A few of the larger private universities created separate colleges for women on their campuses (Barnard at Columbia and Radcliffe at Harvard, for example). Proponents of women's colleges saw the institutions as places where female students would not be treated as "second-class citizens” by predominantly male student bodies
and faculties.
The female college was part of an important phenomenon in the history of modern American women: the emergence of a distinctive women's community. Most faculty members and many administrators were women (often unmarried). And the life of the college produced a spirit of sorority and commitment among educated women that had important effects in later years, as women became the leaders of many reform activities. Most female college graduates eventually married, but many married at a later age than their non-college-educated counterparts and in some cases continued to pursue careers after marriage and motherhood. A significant minority, perhaps over 25 percent, did not marry, but devoted themselves exclusively to careers. A leader at Bryn Mawr remarked, "Our failures marry.” That was surely rhetorical excess. The growth of female higher education clearly became for some women a liberating experience, persuading them that they had roles to perform in society in addition to those of wives and mothers.
512 CHAPTER 18
LOOKING BACK
The extraordinary growth of American cities in the last decades of the nineteenth century led to both great achievements and enormous problems. Cities became centers of learning, art, and commerce. They produced great advances in technology, transportation, architecture, and communications. They provided their residents-and their many visitors-with varied and dazzling experiences, so much so that many rural people left the countryside to move to the city, and many more dreamed of doing so.
But cities were also places of congestion, filth, disease, and corruption. With populations expanding too rapidly for services to keep up, most American cities in this era struggled with makeshift governments and makeshift techniques to solve the basic problems of providing water, disposing of sewage, building roads, providing public transportation, fighting fire, stopping crime, and preventing or curing disease. City governments, many of them dominated by political machines and ruled by party bosses, were often models of inefficiency and corruption-although in their informal way they also provided substantial services to the working-class and immigrant constituencies who needed them most. They also managed, despite the administrative limitations of most
municipal governments, to oversee great public projects: the building of parks, museums, opera houses, and theaters, usually in partnership with private developers.
The city brought together races, ethnic groups, and classes of extraordinary variety-from the families of great wealth that the new industrial age was creating to the vast working class, much of it consisting of immigrants, that crowded into densely packed neighborhoods sharply divided by ethnicity. The city also produced new forms of popular culture. It produced new opportunities (and risks) for women. It created temples of consumerism: shops, boutiques, and, above all, the great department stores. And it created forums for public recreation and entertainment: parks, theaters, athletic fields, amusement parks, and later movie palaces.
Urban life created such great anxiety among those who lived within the cities and among those who observed them from afar that in some cities middle-class people armed themselves to prepare for the insurrections they expected from the poor. But, in fact, American cities adapted reasonably successfully over time to the great demands their growth made of them and learned to govern themselves, if not entirely honestly and efficiently, at least adequately to allow them to survive and grow.
Key Terms/People/Places/Events
Alice Hamilton 498
Armory Show 509
Ashcan school 509
’’City beautiful” movement 494 Darwinism 509 D. W. Griffith 507
Henry James 508
Jacob Riis 495
Kate Chopin 508
National Consumers League 502 Stephen Crane 508 Tammany Hall 500
Theodore Dreiser 508 Upton Sinclair 508 William James 510 William M. Tweed 500 Yellow journalism 508
RECALL AND REFLECT
1.	What groups of people were most likely to move to the cities of late-nineteenth-century America, and why?
2.	What was the relationship between immigration and urbanization in the late nineteenth century?
3.	In what way did the serious art and literature of the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries function as
social criticism? What were these artists and writers criticizing?
4.	How did the new consumer economy affect roles and expectations for women?
5.	What was Darwinism and what was its impact on American intellectual life?
THE AGE OF THE CITY 513
SIGNIFICANT EVENTS
New York City's Central Park opened	•		1894	# Immigration Restriction League founded		
	•	1869		• •	1895
A
Princeton and Rutgers play first intercollegiate football game 1899 First Coney Island amusement park opens Stephen Crane publishes The New York City opens elevated railroads	•	1871	Kate Chopin publishes The Awakening		Red Badge of Courage Boston opens first subway in America
		Great fires destroy much of			1900
1872 Tammany's Boss Tweed	•	Chicago and Boston	1901	• A	Theodore Dreiser publishes Sister Carrie
convicted of corruption	•	1876	Baseball's American League founded		
		Baseball's National League		• •	1903
1882 Congress restricts Chinese	•	founded	1906		Boston Red Sox win first World Series
immigration	•	1883	Upton Sinclair publishes The Jungle		
		Brooklyn Bridge opened	Earthquake and fire destroy much of San Francisco	• •	1910
1884 First steel girder "skyscraper" built in Chicago	•		1913		National College Athletic Association founded to regulate college football
		1890	Ashcan school artists stage		
	•	Jacob Riis publishes How the Other Half Lives	Armory Show in New York City	•	1915
1891 James Naismith invents basketball	• •	1893 Columbian Exposition opens in Chicago			D. W. Griffith's The Birth of a Nation debuts
i
FROM CRISIS TO EMPIRE
PARTY OF PATCHES,” JUDGE MAGAZINE, JUNE 6, 1891
This political cartoon suggests the contempt and fear with which many easterners, in particular, viewed the emergence of the People's Party in 1891, (© Kansas State Historical Society) !
LOOKING AHEAD
1. What were the major social and economic problems that beset the United States in the late nineteenth century, and how did the two major political parties respond to these problems?
2. What was Populism, what were its goals, and to what degree were these goals achieved? How did the United States become an imperial power?
SETTING THE STAGE
THE UNITED STATES APPROACHED THE
end of the nineteenth century as a fundamentally different nation from what it had been at the beginning of the Civil War, With rapid change came cascading social and political problems problems that the weak and conservative governments of the time showed little inclination or ability to address.
A catastrophic depression began in 1893, rapidly intensified, and created devastating hardship for millions of Americans. Farmers, particularly hard hit by the depression, responded by creating an agrarian political movement known as Populism. American workers, facing massive unemployment, staged large and occasionally violent strikes. Not since the Civil War had American politics been so polarized and impassioned. The presidential election of 1896 pitted the agrarian hero William Jennings Bryan against the solid, conservative William McKinley. Supported by the mighty Republican Party and many eastern groups that looked with suspicion and unease at the agricultural demands coming from the West, McKinley won an easy victory.
Although McKinley did little in his first term in office to resolve the problems and grievances of the time, the economy revived nevertheless. Having largely ignored the depression, however, McKinley took a great interest in another great national cause: the plight of Cuba in its war with Spain. In the spring of 1898, the United States declared war on Spain and entered the conflict in Cuba—a brief but bloody war that ended with an American victory four months later. The conflict had begun as a way to support Cuban independence from the Spanish. But a group of fervent and influential imperialists worked to convert the war into an occasion for acquiring overseas possessions. Despite a powerful anti-imperialist movement, the acquisition of the former Spanish colonies proceeded—only to draw Americans into yet another imperial war, this one in the Philippines, where the Americans, not the Spanish, were the targets of local enmity.
THE POLITICS OF EQUILIBRIUM
Electoral
Stability
The most striking feature of late-nineteenth-century politics was the remarkable stability of the party system. From the end of Reconstruction until the late 1890s, the electorate was divided almost precisely evenly between the Republicans and the Democrats. Sixteen states were solidly and consistently Republican, and fourteen states (most in the South) were solidly and consistently Democratic. Only five states (most
importantly New York and Ohio) were usually in doubt, and their voters generally decided the results of national elections. The Republican Party captured the presidency in all but two of the elections of the era, but in the five presidential elections beginning in 1876, the average popular-vote margin separating the Democratic and Republican candidates was 1.5 percent. The congressional balance was similarly stable, with the Republicans generally controlling the Senate and the Democrats generally controlling the House.
As striking as the balance between the parties was the intensity of public loyalty to them. In most of the country, Americans viewed their party affiliations with a passion and enthusiasm that is difficult for later generations to understand. Voter turnout in presidential elections between 1860 and 1900 averaged over 78 percent of all eligible voters (as compared with only about 50 percent in most recent elections). Even in nonpresidential years, from 60 to 80 percent of the voters turned out to cast ballots for con-
gressional and local candidates. Large groups of potential voters were disenfranchised in these years: women in most states; almost all blacks and many poor whites in the South. But for adult white males, there were few franchise restrictions.
What explains this extraordinary loyalty to the two political parties? It was not, certainly, that the parties took distinct positions on important public issues. They did so rarely. Party loyalties reflected other factors. Region was perhaps the most important. To white southerners, loyalty to the Democratic Party was a matter of unquestioned faith. It was the vehicle by which they had triumphed over Reconstruction and preserved white supremacy. To many northerners, white
High
Turnout
. 515

