162 • CHAPTER 6
M-'tt YORK 1‘tBIlf liHRARIt
A
Divided Convention ON THE ETY
or ORDER o r CONS I DERATIONS
CINCINNATI;
LATELY INSTITUTED
By the Major-Generals, Brigadier-Generals, and other Officers of the American Army.
PROVING THAT IT CREATES
A RACE OF HEREDITARY PATRICIANS,
O R
NOBILITY.
INTERSPERSED WITH REMARKS
On hi CONSEQUENCES to the PaiteoM and Hanmnsis of the Reroute. AddrefTed to the PEOPLE of South-Carolina, and their Representatives.
By € A 8 8 I P Mfr/A
Slippered to he written by jEDANUS BURKE, Efqoire, one of thv Chief juffieei of the State of Sautli -CarohiiS.
Jl/ne )» tit Trumftt in Zlm.	The But*.
PHllADStPgt At Mated and Sold by ROBERT BELL, to TUri-Stntt. Price,	»/ * DtMv. M,&cc,trx*ni.
A BROADSIDE AGAINST “NOBILITY”
This 1783 pamphlet was one of many expressions of the broad democratic sentiment that the Revolution unleashed in American society. The Society of the Cincinnati was an organization created shortly after the Revolution by men who had served as high-ranking officers in the Patriot army. To many Americans, however, the society—membership in which was to be hereditary—looked suspiciously like the inherited aristocracies of England. This pamphlet, printed in Philadelphia but intended for South Carolinians, warns of the dangers the society supposedly posed to the "Freedom and Happiness of the Republic.” (© Fotosearch/Getty Images) Fifty-five men, representing all the states except Rhode Island, attended one or more sessions of the convention that sat in the Philadelphia State House from May to September 1787. These "Founding Fathers,” as they would later become known, were relatively young; their average age was forty-four, and only one delegate (Benjamin Franklin, then eighty-one) was of advanced age. They were well educated by the standards of their time.
Most represented the great propertied interests of the country, and many feared what one of them called the "turbulence and follies” of democracy. Yet all were also products of the American Revolution and retained the
The
Founding
Fathers
uovninrinmrv Qiicnirinn nf concentrated

The convention unanimously chose Washington to preside over its sessions and then closed its business to the public and the press. The members then ruled that each state delegation would have a single vote. Major decisions would not require unanimity, as they did in Congress, but only a simple majority. Virginia, the most populous state, sent the best-prepared delegation to Philadelphia. James Madison (thirty-six years old) was its intellectual leader. He had devised a detailed plan for a new "national” government, and the Virginians used it to control the agenda from the moment the convention began.
Edmund Randolph of Virginia began the discussion by proposing that "a national government ought to be established, consisting of a supreme Legislative, Executive, and judiciary.” Despite its vagueness, it was a drastic proposal. It called for the creation of a government very different from the existing The Virginia Confederation, which, among other things, Plan	had no executive branch. But so committed
were the delegates to fundamental reform that they approved this resolution after only perfunctory debate. Then Randolph introduced the details of Madison’s plan. The Virginia Plan (as it came to be known) called for a new national legislature consisting of two houses. In the lower house, the states would be represented in proportion to their population; thus the largest state (Virginia) would have about ten times as many representatives as the smallest (Delaware). Members of the upper house were to be elected by the lower house under no rigid system of representation; thus some of the smaller
states might at times have no members in the upper house. The proposal aroused immediate opposition among delegates
from Delaware, New Jersey, and other small states. Some responded by arguing that Congress had called the convention "for the sole and express purpose of revising the Articles of Confederation and had no authority to do more than that. Eventually, however, William Paterson of New Jersey submitted a substantive alternative to the Virginia Plan, a proposal for a federal as opposed to a "national” government. The New Jersey Plan would preserve the existing one-house legislature, in which each state had equal representation, but it gave Congress expanded powers to tax and to regulate commerce. The delegates voted to table Paterson s proposal, but not without taking note of the substantial support for it among small-state representatives.
THE CONSTITUTION AND THE NEW REPUBLIC
« 163 The Virginia Plan remained the basis for discussion. But its supporters realized they would have to make concessions to the small states if the convention was ever to reach a general agreement. They soon conceded an important point by agreeing to permit the members of the upper house to be elected by the state legislatures rather than by the lower house of the national legislature. Thus each state would always have at least one member in the upper house.
But many questions remained. Would the states be equally represented in the upper house, or would the large states have
Small States more members than the small ones? Would versus Large slaves (who could not vote) be counted as
States	part of the population in determining the
size of a state’s representation in Congress, or were they to be considered simple property? Delegates from states with large and apparently permanent slave populations-especially those from South Carolina-wanted to have it both ways. They argued that slaves should be considered persons in determining representation. But they wanted slaves to be considered property if the new government were to levy taxes on each state on the basis of population. Representatives from
states where slavery had disappeared or was expected soon to disappear argued that slaves should be included in calculating taxation but not representation. No one argued seriously for giving slaves citizenship or the right to vote.
Compromise
The delegates bickered for weeks. By the end of June, as both temperature and tempers rose to uncomfortable heights, the convention seemed in danger of collapsing. Benjamin Franklin,
The Great who remaineb a calm voice of conciliation
Compromise through the summer, warned that if they failed, the delegates would "become a reproach and by-word down to future ages. And what is worse, mankind may hereafter, from this unfortunate instance, despair of establishing governments by human wisdom, and leave it to chance, war and conquest.” Partly because of Franklin’s soothing presence, the delegates refused to give up.
Finally, on July 2, the convention agreed to create a "grand committee,” with a single delegate from each state (and with Franklin as chairman), to resolve the disagreements. The
. . tLie imaninpd view of the Constitutional Convention in 1787 for the Weatherwises Federal Almanack, whose title suggested its THE GRAND CONVENTION” The enqraver John Norman created this imagin	,	,.	,	,
W ^WHVCIN IIUH I
lie 9 . ,. . p.-Iaf4e|Dhia where the convention took place, which gave this engraving a sense of reality—even though Norman never pro-Constitution political leanings. Norman was familiar with the interior of the hall in Hiilafleipnia wne
attended a session of the convention. (© Hall of Representatives, Washington, D.C./The Bn geman r i rary
DEBATING THE PAST

The Meaning of the Constitution
|-p f C cons^u^on has inspired debate from the moment it was drafted. Some people argue Jl H u that the Constitution is a flexible document intended to evolve in response to society s evolution, Others argue that it has a fixed meaning, rooted in the "original intent” of the framers, and that to move beyond that is to deny its value.
Historians, too, disagree about why the Constitution was written and what it meant, To some scholars, the creation of the federal system was an effort to preserve the ideals of the Revolution and to create a strong national government capable of exercising real authority, To others, the Constitution was an effort to protect the economic interests of existing elites, even at the cost of betraying the principles of the Revolution. To still others, the Constitution was designed to protect individual freedom and to limit the power of the federal government.
The first influential exponent of the heroic view of the Constitution as the culmination of the Revolution was John Fiske. In The Critical Period of American History (1888), Fiske described the many problems that beset the nation under the Articles of Confederation: economic difficulties, the weakness and ineptitude of the new national government, threats from abroad, interstate jealousies, and widespread lawlessness. Only the timely adoption of the Constitution, Fiske claimed, saved the young republic from disaster.
In An Economic Interpretation of the Constitution of the United States (1913), Charles A. Beard challenged Fiske's view. According to Beard, the 1780s had been a "critical period” primarily for conservative businessmen who feared that the decentralized political structure of the republic imperiled their financial position. Such men, he claimed, wanted a government able to promote industry and trade,
protect private property, and make good the public debt—much of which was owed to them. The Constitution was, Beard claimed, "an economic document drawn with superb skill by men whose property interests were immediately at stake" and who won its ratification over the opposition of a majority of the people.
A series of powerful challenges to Beards thesis emerged in the 1950s, as many scholars began to argue that the Constitution was not an effort to preserve property but, rather, an enlightened effort to ensure stability and order. Examining the debate between the Federalists and the Antifederalists, Forrest McDonald, in We the People (1958), concluded that there was no consistent relationship between wealth and property and support for the Constitution. Instead, opinion on the new system was far more likely to reflect local and regional interests. The cumulative effect of these challenges greatly weakened Beard's argument; few historians any longer accepted his thesis without reservation.
committee produced a proposal that became the basis of the "Great Compromise.” Its most important achievement was resolving the difficult problem of representation. The proposal called for a legislature in which the states would be represented in the lower house on the basis of population. Each slave would count as three-fifths of a free person in determining the basis for both representation and direct taxation. (The three-fifths formula was based on the false assumption that a slave was three-fifths as productive as a free worker and thus contributed only three-fifths as much wealth to the state.) The committee proposed that in the upper house, the states should be represented equally with two members apiece. The proposal broke the deadlock. On July 16, 1787, the convention voted to accept the compromise.
Over the next few weeks, the convention agreed to another important compromise on the explosive issue of slavery. The representatives of the southern states feared that the power to regulate trade might interfere with their agrarian economy, which relied heavily on sales abroad, and with slavery. In response, the convention agreed that the new legislature would not be permitted to tax exports; Congress would also be forbidden to impose a duty of more than $10 a head on imported slaves, and it would have no authority to stop the slave trade for twenty years. To those delegates who viewed the continued
164 ®
existence of slavery as an affront to the principles of the new nation, this was a large and difficult concession. They agreed to it because they feared that without it the Constitution would fail.
The convention chose to ignore differences of opinion it was unable to resolve, leaving important questions alive that would surface again in later years. The Constitution provided no definition of citizenship. Most important was the absence of a list of individual rights, which would restrain the powers of the national government in the way that bills of rights restrained the state governments. Madison opposed the idea, arguing that specifying rights that were reserved to the people would, in effect, limit those rights. Other delegates, however, feared that without such protections the national government might abuse its new authority.
The Constitution of 1787
Many people contributed to the creation of the American Constitution, but the single most important of them was James
James	Madison-the most creative political
Madison	thinker of his generation. Perhaps Madison’s
most important achievement was in helping resolve two important philosophical questions that had served as obstacles to the creation of an effective national
£

(National Archives and Records Administration)
-J
and property and to defend the nation against the dangers of too much liberty. But if Madison and Hamilton feared too much liberty, they also feared too little. And that made them receptive to the vigorous demands of the "Antifederalists" for protections of individual rights, which culminated in the Bill of Rights. The Constitution is not, Rakove argues, "infinitely malleable." But neither does it have a fixed meaning that can be a reliable guide to how we interpret it today, e
OM0ERSTAWIX AMALYZE,
AMD EVALUATE
In the 1960s, a new group of scholars began to revive an economic interpretation of the Constitution—one that differed from Beard's in important ways but that nevertheless emphasized social and economic factors as motives for supporting the federal system. Jackson Turner Main argued, in The Anti-federalists (1961), that supporters of the Constitution were cosmopolitan commercialists," eager to advance the economic development of the nation; the Antifederalists, by contrast, were "agrarian localists, fearful of centralization. Gordon Wood, in The Creation of the American Republic (1969), suggested that the debate over the state constitutions in the 1770s and 1780s reflected profound social divisions and that those same divisions helped shape the argument over the federal Constitution. The Federalists, Wood suggested, were largely traditional aristocrats deeply concerned over the instability of life un-
der the Articles of Confederation and particularly alarmed by the decline in popular deference toward social elites. The creation of the Constitution, Wood argued, was part of a larger search to create a legitimate political leadership based on the existing social hierarchy.
Historians have continued to examine the question of "intent.” Did the framers intend a strong, centralized political system; or did they intend to create a decentralized system with a heavy emphasis on individual rights? The answer, according to Jack Rakove in Original Meanings (1996) and Revolutionaries (2010), is both—and many other things as well. The Constitution, Rakove argues, was the result of a long and vigorous debate through which the views of many different groups found their way into the document. James Madison, a strong nationalist, believed that only a powerful central government could preserve stability in a large nation. Alexander Hamilton also saw the Constitution as a way to protect order
1.	Is the Constitution a conservative, liberal, or radical document? Did the framers consider the Constitution something "finished" (with the exception of constitutional amendments), or did they consider it a document that would evolve in response to changes in society over time?
2.	Which parts of the Constitution suggest that the framers' intent was to create a strong, centralized political system? Which parts suggest that the framers' intent was to create a decentralized system with heavy emphasis on individual rights?
3.	Although many amendments have been proposed, only twenty-seven have been added to the Constitution. Why do you think so few have been added?
government: the question of sovereignty and the question of limiting power.
The question of sovereignty had been one of the chief sources of friction between the colonies and Great Britain, and it continued to trouble Americans as they attempted to create their own government. How could both the national government and the state governments exercise sovereignty The Question at same time- Where did ultimate sov-of Sovereignty ereignty lie? The answer, Madison and his contemporaries decided, was that all power, at all levels of government, flowed ultimately from the people. Thus neither the federal government nor the state governments were truly sovereign. All of them derived their authority from below. The opening phrase of the Constitution (devised by Gouverneur Morris) was We the people of the United Statesman expression of the belief that the new government derived its power not from the states
but from its citizens.
Resolving the problem of sovereignty made possible one of the distinctive features of the Constitution-its distribution of powers between the national and state governments. It was, Madison wrote at the time, "in strictness, neither a national nor a federal Constitution, but a composition of both.” The Constitution and the government it created were
to be the "supreme law” of the land; no state would have the authority to defy it. The federal government was to have broad powers, including the power to tax, to regulate commerce, to control the currency, and to pass such laws as would be "necessary and proper” for carrying out its other responsibilities. Gone was the stipulation of the Articles that "each State shall retain every power, jurisdiction, and right not expressly delegated to the United States in Congress assembled.” On the other hand, the Constitution accepted the existence of separate states and left important powers in their hands.
In addition to solving the question of sovereignty, the Constitution produced a solution to a problem troubling to Americans: the problem of concentrated authority. Nothing so frightened the leaders of the new nation as the prospect of creating a tyrannical government. That fear had been one of the chief obstacles to the creation of a national government. Drawing from the ideas of the French philosopher Baron de Montesquieu, most Americans had long believed that the best way to avoid tyranny was to keep government close to the people. A republic, they thought, must remain confined to a small area. A large nation would breed corruption and despotism because the rulers would be so distant from most of the people that there would be no way to control them.
® 165
166 CHAPTER 6
In the first years of the new American nation, these assumptions had led to the belief that the individual states must remain sovereign and that a strong national government would be dangerous.
Madison, however, helped break the grip of these assumptions by arguing that a large republic would be less, not more, likely to produce tyranny, because it would contain so many different factions that no single group would ever be able to dominate it. (In this, he drew from-among other sources-the Separation	Scottish philosopher David Hume.) This
of Powers	idea of many centers of power "checking
each other” and preventing any single, despotic authority made possible the idea of a large republic and also helped shape the internal structure of the federal government. The Constitution’s most distinctive feature was its "separation of powers” within the government, its creation of "checks and balances” among the legislative, executive, and judicial branches. The array of forces within the government would constantly compete with (and often frustrate) one another. Congress would have two chambers, the Senate and the House of Representatives, each with members elected in a different way and for different terms, and each checking the other, since both would have to agree before any law could be passed. The president would have the power to veto acts of Congress. The federal courts would have protection from both the executive and the legislature because judges and justices, once appointed by the president and confirmed by the Senate,
would serve for life.
The "federal” structure of the government, which divided power between the states and the nation, and the system of "checks and bal-	vi
ances,” which divided power among various elements within the national government, were designed to protect the United States from the kind of despotism Americans believed had emerged in England. But they were also designed to protect the nation from another kind of despotism, perhaps equally menacing: the tyranny of the people. Fear of the "mob,” of an "excess of democracy,” was at least as important to the framers of the Constitution as fear of a single tyrant. Shays’s Rebellion had been only one example, they believed, of what could happen if a nation did not defend itself against the unchecked exercise of popular will. Thus, in the new government, only the members of the House of Representatives would be elected directly by the people. Senators, the president, and federal judges would be insulated in varying degrees from the public.
On September 17, 1787, thirty-nine delegates signed the Constitution, doubtless sharing the feelings that Benjamin Franklin expressed at the end: "Thus I consent, Sir, to this Constitution, because I expect no better, and because I am not sure it is not the best.”
k
SB!
The Limits of the Constitution
The Constitution of 1789 was a document that established a democratic republic for white people, mostly white men. Indians and African Americans, the two largest population groups sharing the lands of the United States with Anglo-Americans, enjoyed virtually none of the rights and privileges provided to the white population. Native Americans had at least the semblance of a legal status within the nation, through treaties that assured them lands that would be theirs forever. But most of these treaties did not survive for long, and the Indians found themselves driven farther and farther west with little of the protection that the government had promised them.
Among the white leaders of the United States, there were eminent figures who believed Indians could join the republic as citizens. Jefferson was among them, believing that Indians could be taught the ways of "civilization.” Jefferson, and other Americans with good intentions, sought to teach the Indians to live as white Americans did. Efforts to teach them Anglo farming methods were based on sedentary farms that relied on men doing the farming and women caring for the home. Indians had no interest in such ways and preferred to retain their traditional cultures. Their repudiation of white civilization contributed to the erosion of support among white Americans. Indians were not granted citizenship of the United States until the 1920s.

CONTENTS.
Number	_	Paoz
XVII.
The Subjed continued, and illuf-trated by Eximptes to fhw the Tendency of Federal Governments, rather to Anarchy among the Members than Tyranny in the Head. toz XVIII.
The Sahjed continued, with farther Examples.	107
XIX.
The Subjed continued, with farther Exsimp’cs.	.	11 +
XX.
The Subjed continued, with farther Examples.	121
XXI.
Farther Defeds of the prefeat Con-• flitution. ia6 XXII.
The s&sae, Subjed continued and concluded.	132
XXHI.
The ne-esfiity of a Government, at lead equally energetic with the one propo&d. 143 XXIV.
The Subjed continued, with an Anfwer to an Objedion con-cerni.ig iUndiug Armies. 149 XXV.
The Sahjed continued with the fame View.	155
XXVI.
The Subjed continued with the fame View.	161
XXVII,
The Subject continued with the fame View. XXVHI.
The fame Subjed concluded. XXIX,
Concerning the Militia. XXX.
Concerning Taxation. XXXI.
The fame Subjed continued. XXXIU
The fame Subjed continued. XXXIK.
The fame Subjed continued. XXXIV.
The fame Subjed continued. XXXV,
The fame Subjed continued. XXXVI,
The fame Subjed concluded. FEDERALIST:
A I) D
LtSSStn To the PEOPLE OF THE’STATE OF NEW-YORK.
N U M
It E R J. IntroducUc:'.,
AFTER an unequivocal experience of the ineft,-
cacy of the fubfi.UKg fe4€ril govfrnroent>
arc c tied upon to deliberate on a new conliituticn far tnc Uaned States of America. The fabjed fpeakska
TrnFrci,endin?’n «-s confluences, racing |{ , t„3n fSc exifo-K-e of the U N i O N, the Hfvty ansi welfare of the part, of which it is cotn-t -cv, the fate of an empire, in many refpeds, tlie .	10 thc world. Jt has been frequently
JT5 V
f K 10 fc®* beta refcrved to the people of this country. by their cooduft and example, mrn whether focieues of resJl/ «P*b!e or not, of eftablEhing good ******* *nd choice, or wheS ,
^flbSiS^^ <kfl^ed depend, for their political
teayS.fc^^^^wwhichwcarearrired,
, yWith propriety beregarded to tbeecra in which
A	that

FEDERALIST #1 The Federalist Papers, gathered here i
essays, letters, and articles published in newspapers throughout America during the debate over the Constitution. Ils e avs 7S 7	7' 7a Hamilt°n' J°hn Jay~Were defenders °f ,he Constitution and wrote these
T77 '77tanCe' They rCmain tOday °"e the iW American contributions,
political theory. The Granger Collection, New York)
; in a book distributed to the people of New York, began as
THE CONSTITUTION AND THE NEW REPUBLIC - 167
Far more removed from the guarantees of the Constitution were African American slaves, who were given virtually none of the rights and protections that the new government provided to white people. They were, one southern official noted, not "constituent members of our society.” The French-Canadian writer Hector St. John de Crevecoeur, who after the Revolution settled in the United States, wrote a famous book, Letters from an American Farmer, in 1782. In it, he posed what became a famous question: "What then is the American, this new man?” Crevecoeur answered his own question by noting that "individuals of all nations” would become "melted” into a common citizenry. But he too saw no room for African Americans in the community of the "new man.” Indeed, among the first laws passed by the new United States under the Constitution was the Naturalization Act of 1790, which helped legalize the stream of immigrants coming into the country and allowed them to become citizens. But it defined citizenry as a status available only to white people. Even free black people were barred from citizenship.
Jefferson, who had briefly tried without result to give Indians a legal status within the new nation, had no such aspirations for African Americans. He was an uneasy defender of slavery, worrying about excluding "a whole race of men” from the natural rights that Jefferson himself had done so much to promote. But he could never accept the idea that black men and black women could attain the level of knowledge and intelligence of white people. Jefferson’s long romantic relationship with a black woman, Sally Hemmings, did nothing to change his mind. Hemmings was a light-skinned woman who was a slave on Jefferson’s plantation in Virginia. Jefferson lived with her after the death of his wife and fathered several of her children. But his intimate relationship with the Hemmings family did not ultimately change his postion on slavery. Unlike George Washington, who stipulated that his slaves be freed after his death, Jefferson (deeply in debt) required his heirs to sell his slaves after he died (after liberating the Hemmings family). Not until the end of the Civil War were black men and black women eligible to live as citizens in the United States, and even then with only partial rights until a century later.
Federalists and
Antifederalists
The delegates at Philadelphia had greatly exceeded their instructions from Congress and the states. Instead of making simple revisions to the Articles of Confederation, they had produced a plan for a completely different form of government. They feared, therefore, that the Constitution might never be ratified under the rules of the Articles of Confederation, which required unanimous approval by the state legislatures. So the convention changed the rules. The Constitution specified that the new government would come into existence among the ratifying states when any nine of the thirteen had ratified it. The delegates recommended to Congress that special state
conventions, not state legislatures, consider the document. They were required to vote "yes” or "no” on the document. They could make no changes until after the Constitution was ratified by the required number of states, at which point the Constitution’s amendment process could be used (as it was for the Bill of Rights).
The old Confederation Congress, now overshadowed by the events in Philadelphia, passively accepted the Constitutional Convention’s work and submitted it to the states for approval. All the state legislatures except Rhode Island’s elected delegates to ratifying conventions, most of which began meeting by early 1788. Even before the ratifying conventions convened, however, a great national debate on the new Constitution had begun-in the state legislatures, in mass meetings, in the columns of newspapers, and in ordinary conversations. Occasionally, passions rose to the point that opposing factions came to blows. In at least one place-Albany, New York-such clashes resulted in injuries and death.
Supporters of the Constitution had a number of advantages. They were better organized than their opponents, and they had the support of the two most eminent men in America, Franklin and Washington. And they seized an ap-?	pealing label for themselves: "Federalists”-
Federalist the term that opponents of centralization Papers	had once used to describe themselves-
thus implying that they were less committed to a "nationalist” government than in fact they were. The Federalists also had the support of the ablest political philosophers of their time: Alexander Hamilton, James Madison, and John Jay. Those three men, under the joint pseudonym "Publius,” wrote a series of essays-widely published in newspapers throughout the nation-explaining the meaning and virtues of the Constitution. They did so in an effort to counter the powerful arguments that those opposed to the Constitution-those who became known as the Antifederalists-were making. Without a powerful defense of the new Constitution, they feared, the Antifederalists might succeed in several crucial states, most notably in New York. The essays were later issued as a book, and they are known today as The Federalist Papers. They are among the most important
American contributions to political theory.
The Federalists called their critics "Antifederalists,” implying that their rivals had nothing to offer except opposi-yHE	tion and chaos. But the Antifederalists
Antifederalists had serious and intelligent arguments of their own. They presented themselves as the defenders of the true principles of the Revolution.
The Constitution, they believed, would betray those principles by establishing a strong, potentially tyrannical, center of power in the new national government. The "federal” government, they claimed, would increase taxes, obliterate the states, wield dictatorial powers, favor the "well born” over the common people, and put an end to individual liberty. But their biggest complaint was that the Constitution lacked a bill of rights, a concern that revealed one of the most important sources of their opposition: a basic mistrust of
168 CHAPTER 6
Debating the Constitution
human nature and of the capacity of human beings to wield power. The Antifederalists argued that any government that centralized authority would inevitably produce despotism. Their demand for a bill of rights was a product of this belief: no government could be trusted to protect the liberties of its citizens; only by enumerating the natural rights of the people could there be any assurance that those rights would be preserved.
At its heart, then, the debate between the Federalists and the Antifederalists was a battle between two fears. The Federalists were afraid, above all, of disorder, anarchy, chaos; they feared the unchecked power of the masses, and they sought in the Constitution to create a government that would function at some distance from popular passions. The Antifederalists were not anarchists; they too recognized the need for an effective government. But they were much more
concerned about the dangers of concentrated power than about the dangers of popular will. They opposed the Constitution for some of the same reasons the Federalists supported it: because it placed obstacles between the people and the exercise of power.
Despite the Antifederalist efforts, ratification proceeded quickly (although not without occasional difficulty) during the winter of 1787-1788. The Delaware convention was the first to act, when it ratified the Constitution unanimously. The New Jersey and Georgia conventions did the same. In the larger states of Pennsylvania and Massachusetts, the Antifederalists put up a determined struggle but lost in the final vote. New Hampshire ratified the document in June 1788-the ninth state to do so. It was now theoretically possible for the Constitution to go into effect.
A new government could not hope to flourish, however, without the participation of Virginia and New York, the two most populous states, whose conventions remained closely divided. By the end of June, first Virginia and then New York had consented to the Constitution by narrow margins. The New York convention yielded to expediency-even some of the most staunchly Antifederalist delegates feared that the state’s commercial interests would suffer if, once the other states gathered under the "New Roof,” New York were to remain outside. Massachusetts, Virginia, and New York all ratified, on the assumption that a bill of rights would be added to the Constitution. The North Carolina convention adjourned without taking action, waiting to see what happened to the amendments. Rhode Island, whose leaders had opposed the Constitution almost from the start, did not even call a convention to consider ratification.
Completing the Structure
The first elections under the Constitution took place in the early months of 1789. Almost all the newly elected congressmen and senators had favored ratification, and many had served as delegates to the Philadelphia convention. There was
The Bill of Rights
never any real doubt about who would be the first president. George Washington had presided at the Constitutional Convention, and many delegates who had favored ratification did so only because they expected him to preside over the new government as well. Washington received the votes of all the presidential electors. John Adams, a leading Federalist, became vice president. After a journey from Mount Vernon marked by elaborate celebrations along the way, Washington was inaugurated in New York—the national capital for the time being-on April 30, 1789.
The first Congress served in many ways almost as a continuation of the Constitutional Convention, because its principal responsibility was filling in the various gaps in the Constitution.
Its most important task was drafting a bill of rights. By early 1789, even Madison had come to agree that some sort of bill
of rights was essential to legitimize the new government in the eyes of its opponents. Congress approved twelve amendments on September 25, 1789; ten of them were ratified by the states by the end of 1791. What we know as the Bill of Rights is these first ten amendments to the Constitution. Nine of them placed limitations on Congress by forbidding it to infringe on certain basic rights: freedom of religion, speech, and the press; immunity from arbitrary arrest; trial by jury; and others. The Tenth Amendment reserved to the states all powers except those specifically withheld from them or delegated to the federal government.
On the subject of the federal courts, the Constitution said only: "The judicial power of the United States shall be vested in one Supreme Court, and in such inferior courts as the Congress may from time to time ordain and establish.” It was left to Congress to determine the number of Supreme Court judges to be appointed and the kinds of lower courts to be organized. In the Judiciary Act of 1789, Congress provided for a Supreme Court of six members, with a chief justice and five associate justices; thirteen district courts with one judge apiece; and three circuit courts of appeal, each to consist of one of the district judges sitting with two of the Supreme Court justices. In the same act, Congress gave the Supreme Court the power to make the final decision in cases involving the constitutionality of state laws.
The Constitution referred indirectly to executive departments but did not specify what or how many there should be. The first Congress created three such departments state, trea-
The Cabinet sury’ anc* war-and also established the offices of the attorney general and the postmaster general. To the office of secretary of the treasury, Washington appointed Alexander Hamilton of New York, who at age thirty-two was an acknowledged expert in public finance. For secretary of war he chose a Massachusetts Federalist, General Henry Knox. As attorney general he named Edmund Randolph of Virginia, sponsor of the plan on which the Constitution had been based. As secretary of state he chose another Virginian, Thomas Jefferson, who had recently served
as minister to France.
THE CONSTITUTION AND THE NEW REPUBLIC * 169
FEDERALISTS AND
REPUBLICANS
The resolution of these initial issues, however, did not resolve the deep disagreements about the nature of the new government. On the contrary, for the first twelve years under the Constitution, American politics was characterized by a level of acrimony seldom matched in any period since. The framers of the Constitution had dealt with many disagreements not by solving them but by papering them over with a series of vague compromises; as a result, the conflicts survived to plague the new government.
At the heart of the controversies of the 1790s was the same basic difference in philosophy that had been at the heart of the debate over the Constitution. On one side stood a powerful group that believed America required a strong, national gov-
Competing ernment. that the country s mission was Visions	to become a genuine nation-state, with
centralized authority, a complex commercial economy, and a proud standing in world affairs. On the other side stood another group-a minority at first, but one that gained strength during the decade-that envisioned a far weaker central government. American society should not, this group believed, aspire to be highly commercial or urban. It should remain predominantly rural and agrarian, and it should have a central government of modest size and powers that would leave most power in the hands of the states and the people. The centralizers became known as the Federalists and gravitated to the leadership of Alexander Hamilton. Their opponents took the name Republicans and gathered under the
leadership of James Madison and Thomas Jefferson.
Hamilton and the Federalists
For twelve years, control of the new government remained firmly in the hands of the Federalists. That was in part because George Washington had always envisioned a strong national government and as president had quietly supported those who were attempting to create one. His enormous prestige throughout the nation was one of the Federalists’ greatest assets. But Washington also believed that the presidency should remain above political controversies, and so he avoided any personal involvement in the deliberations of Congress. As a result, the dominant figure in his administration became his talented secretary of the treasury, Alexander Hamilton, who exerted more influence on domestic and foreign policy than anyone else both during his term of office and, to an almost equal extent, after his resignation in 1794.
Of all the national leaders of his time, Hamilton was one of the most aristocratic in personal tastes and political philosophy ironically, perhaps, since his own origins as an illegitimate child in the Caribbean had been so humble. Far from embracing the republican ideals of the virtue of the people, he believed that a stable and effective government
ALEXANDER HAMILTON
As President George Washington’s secretary of the Treasury, Alexander Hamilton exerted enormous influence in both domestic and foreign affairs. Hamilton favored the establishment of an enlightened ruling class to govern the new nation. His plans for the new federal government to assume existing public debt and to establish a national bank were part of his vision of a powerful nation with a vigorous and independent commercial economy, a robust industrial sector, and a dynamic role in world economic affairs. (© De Agostini Picture Library/The Bridgeman Art Library) required an enlightened ruling class. Thus the new government needed the support of the wealthy and powerful; and to get that support, it needed to give those elites a stake in its
.	success. Hamilton proposed, therefore,
Debt	t t^ie new g°vernment take responsi-
bility for the existing public debt. Many of the miscellaneous, uncertain, depreciated certificates of indebtedness that the old Congress had issued during and after the Revolution were now in the hands of wealthy speculators; the government should call them in and exchange them for uniform, interest-bearing bonds, payable at definite dates. (This policy was known as "funding” the debt.) He also recommended that the federal government "assume” (or take over) the debts the states had accumulated during the Revolution; this assumption policy would encourage state as well as federal bondholders to look to the central government for
170 • CHAPTER 6
eventual payment. Hamilton did not, in other words, envision paying off and thus eliminating the debt. He wanted instead to create a large and permanent national debt, with new bonds being issued as old ones were paid off. The result, he believed, would be that creditors-the wealthy classes most likely to lend money to the government-would have a permanent stake in seeing the government survive.
Hamilton also wanted to create a national bank. At the time, there were only a few banks in the country, located principally in Boston, Philadelphia, and New York City. A new, national bank would help fill the void that the absence of a well-developed banking system had created. It would provide loans and currency to businesses. It would give the government a safe place to deposit federal funds. It would help collect taxes and disburse the government’s expenditures. The bank would be chartered by the federal government, would have a monopoly of the government’s own banking business, and would be controlled by directors, of whom one-fifth would be appointed by the government. It would provide a stable center to the nation’s small and feeble banking system.
The funding and assumption of debts would require new sources of revenue, since the government would now have to pay interest on the loans it was accepting. Up to now, most government revenues had come from the sale of public lands in
Hamilton’s	West- Hamilton proposed two new
Report on kinds of taxes. One was an excise to be Manufacturing	paid by distillers of alcoholic liquors, a tax
that would fall most heavily on the whiskey distillers of the backcountry, especially in Pennsylvania, Virginia, and North Carolina-small farmers who converted part of their corn and rye crop into whiskey. The other was a tariff on imports, which not only would raise revenue but also would protect American manufacturing from foreign competition. In his famous "Report on Manufactures” of 1791, Hamilton laid out a grand scheme for stimulating the growth of industry in the United States and wrote glowingly of the advantages to the
nation of a healthy manufacturing base.
The Federalists, in short, offered more than a vision of how to stabilize the new government. They offered a vision of the sort of nation America should become-a nation with a wealthy, enlightened ruling class, a vigorous, independent commercial economy, and a thriving industrial sector; a nation able to play a prominent role in world economic affairs.
Enacting the Federalist Program
Few members of Congress objected to Hamilton’s plan for funding the national debt, but many did oppose his proposal to accept the debt "at par,” that is, at face value. The old certificates had been issued to merchants and farmers in payment for
Debating war suPPlies during the Revolution, or to Hamilton’s officers and soldiers of the Revolutionary
Program army in payment for their services. But many of these original holders had sold their bonds during the hard times of the 1780s to speculators, who had bought them at a fraction of their face value. Many
members of Congress believed that if the federal government was to assume responsibility for these bonds, some of them should be returned to the original purchasers. James Madison, now a representative from Virginia, proposed dividing the federally funded bonds between the original purchasers and the speculators. But Hamilton’s allies insisted that such a plan was impractical and that the honor of the government required that it pay the bondholders themselves, not the original lenders who had sold their bonds of their own accord. Congress finally
passed the funding bill Hamilton wanted.
Hamilton’s proposal that the federal government assume the state debts encountered greater difficulty. His opponents argued that if the federal government took over the state debts, the people of states with few debts would have to pay taxes to service the larger debts of other states. Hamilton and his supporters struck a bargain with the Virginians to win passage of the bill.
The deal involved the location of the national capital. The capital had moved from New York City back to Philadelphia in
Location of 1790. But the Virginians wanted a new the Capital capital near them in the South. Hamiton met with Thomas Jefferson and agreed over dinner to provide northern support for placing the capital in the South in exchange for Virginia’s votes for the assumption bill. The bargain called for the construction of a new capital city on the banks of the Potomac River, which divided Virginia and Maryland, on land to be selected by Washington himself. The government would move there by the beginning
of the new century.
Hamilton argued that creation of a national bank was compatible with the intent of the Constitution, even though the Bank of the document did not explicitly authorize it. United States But Madison, Jefferson, Randolph, and others argued that Congress should exercise no powers that the Constitution had not clearly assigned it. Nevertheless, both the House and the Senate finally agreed to Hamilton’s bill. Washington displayed some uncertainty about its legality at first, but he finally signed it. The Bank of the United States began operations in 1791, under a charter that
granted it the right to continue for twenty years.
Once enacted, Hamilton’s program had many of the effects he had intended and won the support of influential segments of the population. It quickly restored public credit; the bonds of the United States were soon selling at home and abroad at prices even above their face value. Speculators (among them many members of Congress) reaped large profits as a result. Manufacturers profited from the tariffs, and merchants in the seaports benefited from the new banking system.
Small farmers, who formed the vast majority of the population, complained that they had to bear a disproportionate tax burden. Not only did they have to pay property taxes to their state governments, but they bore the brunt of the excise tax on distilleries that Hamilton had initiated. They also opposed a 1792 tariff, also promoted by Hamilton. Many Americans came to believe that the Federalist
THE CONSTITUTION AND THE NEW REPUBLIC
• 171 program served the interests not of the people but of small, wealthy elites. Partly as a result, an organized political opposition arose.
The Republican Opposition
The Constitution had made no reference to political parties, and the omission was not an oversight. Most of the framers-George Washington in particular-believed that organized parties were dangerous and should be avoided. Disagreement on particular issues was inevitable, but most of the founders believed that such disagreements need not and should not lead to the formation of permanent factions. "The public good is disregarded in the conflicts of rival parties,” Madison wrote in The Federalist Papers, Number 10, perhaps the most influential of all the essays, "and . . . measures are too often decided, not according to the rules of justice and the rights of the minor party, but by the superior force of an interested and overbearing majority.”
Yet, within just a few years after ratification of the Constitution, Madison and others became convinced that Hamilton and his followers had become just such an "interested and overbearing majority.” The Hamiltonians, Madison and others agreed, had worked to establish a national network of influence that embodied all the worst features of a party. The Federalists had used their control over appointments and the awarding of government franchises
to reward their supporters and win additional allies. They had encouraged the formation of local associations-largely
Establishment of THE
Federalist Party
Formation of THE Republican Party
aristocratic in nature-to strengthen their standing in local communities. They were doing many of the same things, their opponents believed, that the corrupt British governments of the early eighteenth century had done.
Because the Federalists appeared to be creating a menacing and tyrannical structure of power, their opponents believed that there was no alternative but to organize a vigorous opposition. The result was the emergence of an alternative political organization, which called itself the Republican Party. (This first "Republican” Party is not an ancestor of the modern Republican Party, which was born in the 1850s.) By the late 1790s, the Republicans
were going to even greater lengths than the Federalists to create an apparatus of partisan influence. In every state they formed committees, societies, and caucuses. Republican groups corresponded with one another across state lines. They banded together to influence state and local elections. And they justified their actions by claiming that they and they alone represented the true interests of the nation-that they were fighting to defend the people against a corrupt conspiracy by the Federalists. Just as Hamilton believed that the network of supporters he was creating represented the only legitimate interest group in the nation, so the Republicans believed that their party organization represented the best interests of the people. Neither side was willing to admit that it was acting as a party; neither would concede the right of the other to exist. This institutionalized factionalism is known to scholars as the "first party system.”
.. rpntgrv were drawn to tranquil rural scenes, symbolic of the Jeffersonian vision of a nation of small, independent farmers. THE JEFFERSONIAN IDYLL American artists in t e eary nine een	Farm,” the simple agrarian republic it depicts was already being transformed by rapid economic growth.
By 1822, when Francis Alexander painted this pastoral landscape o a p
(Courtesy, National Gallery of Art, Washington)
172
CHAPTER 6
From the beginning, the preeminent figures among the Republicans were Thomas Jefferson and James Madison. Indeed, the two men were such intimate collaborators with such similar political philosophies that it is sometimes difficult to distinguish the contributions of one from those of the other. But Jefferson, the more charismatic personality of the two, gradually emerged as the most prominent spokesman for the Republicans. Jefferson considered himself a farmer. (He was, in fact, a substantial planter; but he had spent little time in recent years at his estate in Virginia.) He believed in an agrarian republic, most of whose citizens would be sturdy, independent farmer-citizens tilling their own soil.
Jefferson did not scorn commercial activity; he assumed farmers would market their crops in the national and even international markets. Nor did he oppose industry; he believed the United States should develop some manufacturing capacity. But he was suspicious of large cities, feared urban mobs as "sores upon the body politic,” and opposed the development of an advanced industrial economy because it would, he feared, increase the number of propertyless workers packed in cities. In short, Jefferson envisioned a decentralized society, dominated by small property owners engaged largely in agrarian activities.
The difference between the Federalist and Republican social philosophies was visible in, among other things, reactions to the French Revolution. As that revolution
DlFFFRFNCFS
over the grew increasingly radical in the 1790s, French	with ^ts attacks on organized religion, the
Revolution overthrow of the monarchy, and eventually the execution of the king and queen, the
Federalists expressed horror. But the Republicans generally applauded the democratic, antiaristocratic spirit they believed the French Revolution embodied. Some even imitated the French radicals (the Jacobins) by cutting their hair short, wearing pantaloons, and addressing one another as "Citizen” and "Citizeness.”
Although both parties had supporters in all parts of the country and among all classes, there were regional and economic differences. The Federalists were most numerous in the commercial centers of the Northeast and in such southern seaports as Charleston; the Republicans were most numerous in the rural areas of the South and the West.
As the 1792 presidential election-the nation's second-approached, both Jefferson and Hamilton urged Washington to run for another term. The president reluctantly agreed. But while most Americans considered Washington above the partisan battle, he was actually much more in sympathy with the Federalists than with the Republicans. And during his presidency, Hamilton remained the dominant figure in government.
ESTABLISHING NATIONAL
SOVEREIGNTY
The Federalists consolidated their position-and for a time attracted wide public support for the new national govern-ment-by dealing effectively with two problems the old Confederation had been unable fully to resolve. They helped
stabilize the nation’s western lands, and they strengthened America's international position.
Securing the Frontier
Despite the Northwest Ordinance, the Confederation Congress had largely failed to tie the outlying western areas of the country firmly to the government. Farmers in western Massachusetts had risen in revolt; settlers in Vermont, Kentucky, and Tennessee had toyed with the idea of separating from the Union. The new government under the Constitution inherited these problems.
In 1794, farmers in western Pennsylvania raised a major challenge to federal authority when they refused to pay a whiskey excise tax and began terrorizing the tax collectors (much as colonists had done at the time of the Stamp Act). But the federal government did not leave settlement of the so-called Whiskey Rebellion to Pennsylvania, as the Confederation
Whiskey Congress had left Shays’s Rebellion to
Rebellion Massachusetts. At Hamilton’s urging, Washington called out the militias of three states, raised an army of nearly 15,000 (a larger force than he had commanded against the British during most of the Revolution), and personally led the troops into Pennsylvania. As the militiamen approached Pittsburgh, the center of the
resistance, the rebellion quickly collapsed.
The federal government won the allegiance of the whiskey rebels by intimidating them. It won the loyalties of other frontier people by accepting their territories as new states in the Union. The last of the original thirteen colonies joined the Union once the Bill of Rights had been appended to the Constitution-North Carolina in 1789 and Rhode Island in 1790. Then Vermont, which had had its own state government since the Revolution, became the fourteenth state in 1791 after New York and New Hampshire finally agreed to give up their claims to it. Next came Kentucky, in 1792, when Virginia gave up its claim to that region. After North Carolina finally ceded its western lands to the Union, Tennessee became first a territory and, in 1796, a state.
Native Americans
and the New Nation
The new government faced a greater challenge, also inherited from the Confederation, in the more distant areas of the Northwest and the Southwest, where Indians (occasionally in alliance with the British and Spanish) fought to retain tribal lands that the U.S. government claimed for itself. The ordinances of 1784-1787 had produced a series of border conflicts with Indian tribes resisting white settlement in what they considered their lands. Although the United States eventually defeated virtually every Indian challenge (if often at great cost), it was clear that the larger question of who was to control the lands of the West-the United States or the Indian nations-remained unanswered.
These clashes revealed another issue the Constitution had done little to resolve: the place of the Indian nations within
THE CONSTITUTION AND THE NEW REPUBLIC
« 173 the new federal structure. The Constitution barely mentioned Native Americans. Article I excluded "Indians not taxed” from
Indians	being counted in the	population totals
and the	that determined the	number of seats
Constitution	states would receive	in the House of
Representatives; and it	gave Congress the
power to "regulate Commerce with foreign Nations, and among the several States, and with the Indian tribes” Article VI bound the new government to respect treaties negotiated by the Confederation, most of which had been with the tribes. But none of this did much to clarify the precise legal standing of Indians or Indian nations within the United States.
On the one hand, the Constitution seemed to recognize the existence of the tribes as legal entities. On the other hand, it made clear that they were not "foreign Nations” (in the same sense that European countries were); nor were their members citizens of the United States. The tribes received no direct representation in the new government. Above all, the Constitution did not address the major issue that would govern relations between whites and Indians: land. Indian nations lived within the boundaries of the United States, yet they claimed (and the white government at times agreed) that they had some measure of sovereignty within their own lands. But neither the Constitution nor common law offered any clear guide to the rights of a "nation within a nation” or to the precise nature of tribal sovereignty, which ultimately depended on control of land. Thus the relationship between the tribes and the United States remained to be determined by a series of treaties, agreements, and judicial decisions in a process that has continued for more than 200 years.
Maintaining Neutrality
Not until 1791-eight years after the end of the Revolution-did Great Britain send a minister to the United States, and then
only because Madison and the Republicans were threatening to place special trade restrictions on British ships. That was one of many symbols of the difficulty the new government had in establishing its legitimacy in the eyes of the British. Another crisis in Anglo-American relations emerged in 1793 when the new French government, created by the Revolution of 1789, went to war with Great Britain and its allies. Both the president and Congress took steps to establish American neutrality in that conflict. But the neutrality quickly encountered severe tests.
The first challenge to American neutrality came from revolutionary France and its first diplomatic representative to America, the brash and youthful Edmond Genet. Instead of landing at Philadelphia and presenting himself immediately to the president, Genet disembarked at Charleston. There he made plans to use American ports to outfit French warships,
Citizen Genet encouraged American shipowners to serve as French privateers, and commissioned the aging George Rogers Clark to lead a military expedition against Spanish lands to the south. (Spain was at the time an ally of Great Britain and an enemy of France.) In all of this, Genet was brazenly ignoring Washington’s policies and flagrantly violating the Neutrality Act. His conduct infuriated Washington (who provided "Citizen Genet,” as he was known, with an icy reception in Philadelphia) and the Federalists; it also embarrassed all but the most ardent admirers of the French Revolution among the Republicans. Washington eventually demanded that the French government recall him, but by then Genet’s party was out of power in France. (The president granted him political asylum in the United States, and he settled with his American wife on a Long Island farm.) The
neutrality policy had survived its first serious test.
A second and even greater challenge came from Great
Britain. Early in 1794, the Royal Navy began seizing hundreds of American ships engaged in trade in the French West Indies,
A COMMENT ON THE WHISKEY
REBELLION
Although Thomas Jefferson and other Republicans claimed to welcome occasional popular uprisings, the Federalists were horrified by such insurgencies as Shays's Rebellion in Massachusetts and, later, the Whiskey Rebellion in Pennsylvania. This Federalist cartoon portrays the rebels as demons who pursue and eventually hang an unfortunate "exciseman” (tax collector), who has confiscated two kegs of rum. (© Philadelphia History Museum at the Atwater Kent,/ The Bridgeman Art Library) 174 CHAPTER 6
outraging public opinion in the United States. Anti-British feeling rose still higher at the report that the governor general of Canada had delivered a warlike speech to the Indians on the northwestern frontier encouraging them to challenge U.S. dominance there. Hamilton was deeply concerned. War would mean an end to imports from England, and most of the revenue for maintaining his financial system came from duties on those imports.
Jay's Treaty and Pinckney’s Treaty
This was, Hamilton believed, no time for ordinary diplomacy. He did not trust the State Department to reach a settlement with Britain. Jefferson had resigned as secretary of state in 1793 to devote more time to his political activities, but his successor, Edmund Randolph, was even more ardently pro-French than Jefferson had been. So Hamilton persuaded Washington to name a special commissioner to England: John Jay, chief justice of the United States Supreme Court and a staunch New York Federalist. Jay was instructed to secure compensation for the recent British assaults on American shipping, to demand withdrawal of British forces from the frontier posts, and to negotiate a new commercial treaty.
The long and complex treaty Jay negotiated in 1794 failed to achieve these goals. But it was not without merit. It settled the conflict with Britain and helped prevent what had seemed likely to become a war between the two nations. It established Jay's Treaty undisputed American sovereignty over the entire Northwest. And it produced a reasonably satisfactory commercial relationship with Britain, whose trade was important to the United States. Nevertheless, when the terms became public in America, there were bitter public denunciations of it for having failed to extract enough promises from the British. Jay was burned in effigy in various parts of the country. Opponents of the treaty-nearly all the Republicans and even some Federalists, encouraged by agents of France-went to extraordinary lengths to defeat it in the Senate. The American minister to France, James Monroe, and even the secretary of state, Edmund Randolph, joined the desperate attempt to prevent ratification. But in the end the
Senate ratified what was by then known as Jay’s Treaty.
Among other things, the treaty made possible a settlement of America’s conflict with the Spanish, because it raised fears in Spain that the British and the Americans might now join
Pinckney’s together to challenge Spanish possessions Treaty in North America. When Thomas Pinckney arrived in Spain as a special negotiator, he had no difficulty in gaining nearly everything the United States had sought from the Spaniards for more than a decade. Under Pinckney s Treaty (signed in 1795), Spain recognized the right of Americans to navigate the Mississippi to its mouth and to deposit goods at New Orleans for reloading on oceangoing ships; agreed to fix the northern boundary of Florida where Americans always had insisted it should be, along the 31st parallel; and required Spanish authorities to prevent the
Indians in Florida from launching raids across the border.
THE DOWNFALL OF THE
FEDERALISTS
The Federalists’ impressive triumphs did not ensure their continued dominance in the national government. On the contrary, success seemed to produce problems of its own - problems that led to their downfall.
Since almost all Americans in the 1790s agreed that there was no place in a stable republic for an organized opposition, the emergence of the Republicans as powerful contenders for popular favor seemed to the Federalists a grave threat to national stability. Beginning in the late 1790s, when international perils confronted the government as well, the Federalists could not resist the temptation to move forcefully against the opposition. Facing what they believed was a stark choice between respecting individual liberties and preserving stability, the Federalists chose stability. The result was political disaster. After 1796, the Federalists never won another election. The popular respect for the institutions of the federal government, which they had worked so hard to
£3	wasnington lavished enormous attention on t
thev hold lY"? imP°rtin9 materialS and W°rkmen from Eur°Pe <° a tasc t iers and" 7 T/ *e ele9ant “Un,ry h°meS °f	Like many wealthy
lives. (® Paul & RocTe’eau* e’r	Str°Ve b™9 refinement and 9en,ililV10 lheir
THE CONSTITUTION AND THE NEW REPUBLIC - 175
produce among the people, survived. But the Federalists themselves gradually vanished as an effective political force.
The Election of 1796
Despite strong pressure from his many admirers to run for a third term as president, George Washington insisted on retiring from office in 1797. In his Farewell Address to the American people (actually a long letter, composed in part by Hamilton and published in a Philadelphia newsletter), he reacted sharply to the
Washington’s RePublicans- His reference to the "insidi-Farewell ous w^es °f foreign influence” was not just Address	an abstract warning against international
entanglements; it was also a specific denunciation of those Republicans who had been conspiring with
the French to frustrate the Federalist diplomatic program.
With Washington out of the running, no obstacle remained
to an open expression of the partisan rivalries that had been building over the previous eight years. Jefferson was the uncontested candidate of the Republicans in 1796. The Federalists faced a more difficult choice. Hamilton, the personification of Federalism, had created too many enemies to be a credible
JOHN ADAMS
John Adams's illustrious career as Revolutionary leader, diplomat, and president marked the beginning of four generations of public distinction among members of his family. His son, John Quincy Adams, served as secretary of state and president. His grandson, Charles Francis Adams, was one of the great diplomats of the Civil War era. His great grandson, Henry Adams, was one of America’s most distinguished historians and writers. (Courtesy National Gallery of Art, Washington, D.C.)
candidate. So Vice President John Adams, who had been directly associated with none of the unpopular Federalist measures, became his party’s nominee for president.
The Federalists were still clearly the dominant party, and there was little doubt of their ability to win a majority of the presidential electors. But without Washington to mediate, they fell victim to fierce factional rivalries that almost led to their undoing. Hamilton and many other Federalists (especially in the South) were not reconciled to Adams’s candidacy and favored his running mate, Thomas Pinckney, instead. And when, as expected, the Federalists elected a majority of the presidential electors, some of these Pinckney supporters declined to vote for Adams; he managed to defeat Jefferson by only three electoral votes. Because a still-larger number of Adams’s supporters declined to vote for Pinckney, Jefferson finished second in the balloting and became vice president. (Until the Twelfth Amendment was adopted in 1804, the Constitution provided for the candidate receiving the second highest number of electoral votes to become vice president-hence the awkward result of men from different parties serving in the nation’s two highest elected offices.)
Adams thus assumed the presidency under unhappy circumstances. He presided over a divided party, which faced a Divided strong and resourceful Republican opposi-
Federalists tion committed to its extinction. Adams was not even the dominant figure in his own party; Hamilton remained the most influential Federalist, and Adams was never able to challenge him effectively. The new president was one of the country’s most accomplished and talented diplomats, but he had few skills as a politician. Austere, rigid, aloof, he had little talent at conciliating differences, soliciting support, or inspiring enthusiasm. He was a man of enormous, indeed intimidating, rectitude, and he seemed to assume that his own virtue and the correctness of
his positions would be enough to sustain him.
The Quasi War with France
American relations with Great Britain and Spain improved as a result of Jay’s and Pinckney’s Treaties. But the nation’s relations with revolutionary France quickly deteriorated. French vessels captured American ships on the high seas and at times imprisoned the crews. When the South Carolina Federalist Charles Cotesworth Pinckney, brother of Thomas Pinckney, arrived in France, the government refused to receive him as the official representative of the United States.
Some of President Adams’s advisers favored war, most notably Secretary of State Thomas Pickering, a stern New Englander who detested France. But Hamilton recommended conciliation, and Adams agreed. In an effort to stabilize relations, Adams appointed a bipartisan commission-consisting of Charles Cotesworth Pinckney, the recently rejected minister; John Marshall, a Virginia Federalist, later chief justice of the Supreme Court; and Elbridge Gerry, a Massachusetts Republican but a friend of the president-to negotiate with France. When the Americans arrived in Paris in 1797, three
176 « CHAPTER 6
agents of the French foreign minister, Prince Talleyrand, demanded a loan for France and a bribe for French officials before any negotiations could begin. Pinckney responded: "No! No! Not a sixpence!”
When Adams heard of the incident, he sent a message to Congress denouncing the French insults and urging preparations for war. He then turned the report of the American commissioners over to Congress, after deleting the names of the
The XYZ three French agents and designating them Affair	only as "Messrs. X, Y, and Z.” When the re-
port was published, it created widespread popular outrage at France's actions and strong support for the Federalists’ response. For nearly two years after the "XYZ Affair,” as it became known, the United States found itself en-
gaged in an undeclared war with France.
Adams persuaded Congress to cut off all trade with France and to authorize American vessels to capture French armed
The Quasi ships on the high seas. In 1798, Congress War	created a Department of the Navy and ap-
propriated money for the construction of new warships. The navy soon won a number of duels with French vessels and captured eighty-five ships, including armed merchantmen. The United States also began cooperating closely with the British and became an ally of Britain in the
war with France.
In the end, France chose to conciliate the United States before the conflict grew. Adams sent another commission to
Paris in 1800, and the new French government (headed now by "first consul” Napoleon Bonaparte) agreed to a treaty with the United States that canceled the old agreement of 1778 and established new commercial arrangements. As a result, the "quasi war” came to a reasonably peaceful end.
Repression and Protest
The conflict with France helped the Federalists increase their majorities in Congress in 1798. Armed with this new strength,
Alien and they be8an to consider ways to silence the Sedition Acts Republican opposition. The result was some of the most controversial legislation
in American history: the Alien and Sedition Acts.
The Alien Act placed new obstacles in the way of foreigners who wished to become American citizens, and it strengthened the president’s hand in dealing with aliens. The Sedition Act allowed the government to prosecute those who engaged in "sedition” against the government. In theory, only libelous or treasonous activities were subject to prosecution: but since such activities were open to widely varying definitions, the law made it possible for the federal government to stifle almost any opposition. The Republicans interpreted the new laws as part of a Federalist campaign to destroy them and fought back.
President Adams signed the new laws but was cautious in implementing them. He did not deport any aliens, and he
THE XYZ AFFAIR
Directory of the French government; he ,s demanding money, money, money" from the three diplomats at left who le P	Cen'er repreSen,S ,he
monster at the top right is operating a guillotine—a symbol of the violence and terror of the later staoes nF H, c u PanS rePresenti"9 the United Stales. The
stages of the French Revolution. (0 The Granger Collection, New York!
THE CONSTITUTION AND THE NEW REPUBLIC
• 177 prevented the government from launching a major crusade against the Republicans. But the legislation had a significant repressive effect nevertheless. The Alien Act helped discourage immigration and encouraged some foreigners already in the country to leave. And the administration made use of the Sedition Act to arrest and convict ten men, most of them Republican newspaper editors whose only crime had been to criticize the Federalists in government.
Republican leaders pinned their hopes for a reversal of the Alien and Sedition Acts on the state legislatures. (The Supreme Virginia and Court had not yet established its sole right
Kentucky to nullify congressional legislation, and
Resolutions there were many Republican leaders who believed that the states had that power too.) The Republicans laid out a theory for state action in two sets of resolutions in 1798-1799, one written (anonymously) by Jefferson and adopted by the Kentucky legislature and the other drafted by Madison and approved by the Virginia legislature. The Virginia and Kentucky Resolutions, as they were known, used the ideas of John Locke to argue that the federal government had been formed by a "compact” or contract among the states and possessed only certain delegated powers. Whenever the federal government exercised any undelegated powers, its acts were "unauthoritative, void, and of no force.” If the parties to the contract, the states, decided that the central government had exceeded those powers, the Kentucky Resolution claimed, they had the right to "nullify” the appropriate laws. (Such claims emerged again in the South in the
decades before the Civil War.)
The Republicans did not win wide support for nullification; only Virginia and Kentucky declared the congressional statutes void. The Republicans did, however, succeed in elevating their
dispute with the Federalists to the level of a national crisis. By the late 1790s, the entire nation was deeply and bitterly divided politically. State legislatures at times resembled battlegrounds. Even the United States Congress was plagued with violent disagreements. In one celebrated incident in the chamber of the House of Representatives, Matthew Lyon, a Republican from Vermont, responded to an insult from Roger Griswold, a Federalist from Connecticut, by spitting in Griswold’s face. Griswold attacked Lyon with his cane. Lyon fought back with a pair of fire tongs, and the two men ended up wrestling on the floor.
The "Revolution” of 1800
These bitter controversies shaped the 1800 presidential election. Adams and Jefferson were again the opposing candidates. But the The Election	campaign of 1800 was very different from
of 1800	the one preceding it. Indeed, it may have
been the ugliest in American history. Adams and Jefferson themselves displayed reasonable dignity, but their supporters showed no such restraint. The Federalists accused
Jefferson of being a dangerous radical and his followers of being wild men who, if they came to power, would bring on a reign of terror comparable to that of the French Revolution. The Republicans portrayed Adams as a tyrant conspiring to become king, and they accused the Federalists of plotting to subvert human liberty and impose slavery on the people. There was considerable personal invective as well. For example, it was during this campaign that the story of Jefferson’s romantic involvement with a slave woman on his plantation was first widely aired. (Recent DNA evidence has proven that the story was true.)
The election was close, and the crucial contest was in New York. There, Aaron Burr had mobilized an organization of
CONGRESSIONAL BRAWLERS
This cartoon lampoons a celebrated fight on the floor of the House of Representatives in 1798 between Matthew Lyon, a Republican from Vermont, and Roger Griswold, a Federalist from Connecticut. The conflict began when Griswold insulted Lyon by attacking his military record in the Revolutionary War. Lyon replied by spitting in Griswold’s face. Two weeks later, Griswold attacked Lyon with his cane, and Lyon seized a pair of fire tongs and fought back. That later scene is depicted (and ridiculed) here. Other members of Congress are portrayed as enjoying the spectacle. On the wall is a picture titled "Royal Sport,” showing animals fighting. (The Library of Congress (LC-DIG-ppmsca -31832)) 178 CHAPTER 6
Revolutionary War veterans, the Tammany Society, to serve as a Republican political machine. And through Tammany’s efforts, the Republicans carried the city by a large majority and, with it, the state. Jefferson was, apparently, elected.
But an unexpected complication soon jeopardized the Republican victory. The Constitution called for each elector to "vote by ballot for two persons.” The normal practice was for an elector to cast one vote for his party’s presidential candidate and another for the vice presidential candidate. To avoid a tie between Jefferson and Aaron Burr (the Republican vice presidential candidate), the Republicans had intended for one elector to refrain from voting for Burr. But the plan went awry. When the votes were counted, Jefferson and Burr each had 73. No candidate had a majority. According to the Constitution, the House of Representatives had to choose between the two leading candidates when no one had a majority; in this case, that meant deciding between Jefferson and Burr. Each state delegation would cast a single vote.
The new Congress, elected in 1800 with a Republican majority, was not to convene until after the inauguration of the president, so it was the Federalist Congress that had to decide the question. Some Federalists hoped to use the situation to salvage the election for their party; others wanted to strike a bargain with Burr and elect him. But after a long deadlock, several leading Federalists, most prominent among them Alexander
LOOKING BACK
The writing of the Constitution of 1787 was the single most important political event in the history of the United States, and a notable event in the political history of the modern world. In creating a "federal” system of dispersed and divided authority-authority divided among national and state governments, authority divided among an executive, a legislature, and a judiciary-the young nation sought to balance its need for an effective central government against its fear of concentrated and despotic power. The ability of the delegates to the Constitutional Convention to compromise to produce the ultimate structure gave evidence of the deep yearning among them for a stable political system. The same willingness to compromise allowed the greatest challenge to the ideals of the new democracy-slavery-to survive intact.
Hamilton, concluded that Burr (whom many suspected of having engineered the deadlock in the first place) was too unreliable to trust with the presidency. On the thirty-sixth ballot, Jefferson was elected.
After the election of 1800, the only branch of the federal government left in Federalist hands was the judiciary. The Adams administration spent its last months in office taking steps to make the party’s hold on the courts secure. By the Judiciary Act of
The Judiciary 180 X’ Passed bYthe lame duck Con8ress’ the Act of 1801 Federalists reduced the number of Supreme
Court justiceships by one but greatly increased the number of federal judgeships as a whole. Adams quickly appointed Federalists to the newly created positions. Indeed, there were charges that he stayed up until midnight on his last day in office to finish signing the new judges’ commissions. These officeholders became known as the "midnight appointments.”
Even so, the Republicans viewed their victory, incorrectly, as almost complete. The nation, they believed, had been saved from tyranny. A new era could now begin, one in which the true principles on which America had been founded would once again govern the land. The exuberance with which the victors viewed the future-and the importance they attributed to the Federalists’ defeat-was evident in the phrase Jefferson later used to describe his election: the "Revolution of 1800.” It remained to be seen how revolutionary it would really be.
The writing and ratifying of the Constitution settled some questions about the shape of the new nation. The first twelve years under the government created by the Constitution solved others. And yet by the year 1800, a basic disagreement about the future of the nation a disagreement personified by the differences between committed nationalist Alexander Hamilton and the self-proclaimed champion of democracy Thomas Jefferson-remained unresolved and was creating bitter divisions and conflicts within the political world. The election of Thomas Jefferson to the presidency that year opened a new chapter in the nation’s public history. It also brought to a close, at least temporarily, savage political conflicts that had seemed to threaten the nation’s future.
Key Terms/People Places Events
Alexander Hamilton 161 Alien and Sedition Acts 176 Antifederalists 167 Bill of Rights 168 Checks and balances 166 Citizen Genet affair 173 Federalists 167 Federal structure 166 Great Compromise 164
James Madison 164 Jay’s Treaty 174 John Adams 175 New Jersey Plan 162 Pinckney’s Treaty 174 Quasi war 176 Republicans 169 Revolution of 1800 177 Separation of powers 166
Sovereignty 165
The Federalist Papers 167
Virginia and Kentucky
Resolutions 177 Virginia Plan 162 Whiskey Rebellion 172 XYZ Affair 176
THE CONSTITUTION AND THE NEW REPUBLIC
• 179 recall and reflect	significant events
1.	How did the Constitution of 1787 attempt to resolve the weaknesses of the Articles of Confederation?
2.	What role did The Federalist Papers play in the battle over ratification of the Constitution?
3.	What were the main tenets of Alexander Hamilton’s financial program?
4.	What diplomatic crises did the United States face in the first decade of its existence, and how did the new government respond to these crises?
5.	What was the "Revolution of 1800,” and in what way was it a revolution?
1786
Annapolis Conference meets
1787-1788
States ratify
Constitution	*
1791
Hamilton issues "Report on Manufactures"
First Bank of the United States chartered
1787
Constitution adopted (September 17)
Constitutional Convention in Philadelphia meets
1789
Washington becomes first president
Bill of Rights adopted by Congress
Judiciary Act of 1789 passed French Revolution begins
1792
Washington reelected without opposition
1793
Citizen Genet affair challenges American neutrality
1795
Pinckney's Treaty signed
1794
Whiskey Rebellion quelled in Pennsylvania Jay's Treaty signed
1796
John Adams elected president
1798
XYZ
Affair precipitates state of quasi war with France Alien and Sedition Acts passed Virginia and Kentucky Resolutions passed
1801
Jefferson becomes president after Congress confirms election
Judiciary Act of 1801 passed
1800
Jefferson and Burr tie vote in electoral college
7 THE
JEFFERSONIAN
ERA
THE BURNING OF WASHINGTON
This dramatic engraving somewhat exaggerates the extent of the blazes in LOOKING AHEAD
Washington when the British occupied the city in August 1814. But the invaders did set fire to the Capitol, the White House, and other
. u	c ,	,	public buildings in retaliation for the American burning and looting
1.	How successful was Jefferson s effort to create a "republican" society	of the Canadian capital at York, The Grange,- Collection. New Yrok'i
dominated by sturdy, independent farmers?
2.	How did the Napoleonic Wars affect the United States?
3.	What events and issues led to the War of 1812?
The
Jeffersonian
Vision
SETTING THE STAGE
<! upiri ...
THOMAS JEFFERSON AND HIS FOLLOWERS
assumed control of the national government in 1801 as the champions of a distinctive vision of America—a vision sharply different from that of Andrew Hamilton and other Federalists. They envisioned a society of sturdy, independent farmers, happily free from the workshops, industrial towns, and city mobs of Europe. They promoted a cultural outlook that emphasized localism and republican simplicity. And they proposed a federal government of sharply limited power, with most authority remaining at the state level. Almost nothing worked out as they planned. For during their years in power, the young republic was developing in ways that made much of their vision obsolete. The American economy became steadily more diversified and complex. Growing cities, surging commerce,
and expanding industrialism made the ideal of a simple, agrarian society impossible to maintain. American cultural life, far from reflecting localism and simplicity, reflected a vigorous and ambitious nationalism.
The Republicans did manage to translate some of their political ideals into reality. Jefferson dismantled much of the bureaucratic power structure the Federalists had erected in the 1790s, and he helped ensure for a time that in many respects the federal government would remain a relatively unimportant force in American life. Yet he also frequently encountered situations that required him to exercise strong national authority, as, for example, when he arranged the greatest single increase in the size of the United States in its history. The Republicans did not always like these nationalizing and modernizing trends, but for the most part, they adjusted to them and, in doing so, became agents of the transformation of American life they had once resisted.
THE RISE OF CULTURAL NATIONALISM
In many respects, American cultural life in the early nineteenth century seemed to reflect the Republican vision of the nation's future. Opportunities for education increased; the nation's literary and artistic life began to free itself from European influences; and American religion began to confront and adjust to the spread of Enlightenment rationalism. In other respects, however, the new culture was posing a serious challenge to Republican ideals.
Patterns of Education
Central to the Republican vision of America was the concept of a virtuous and enlightened citizenry. Jefferson himself called emphatically for a national "crusade against ignorance.” Republicans believed, therefore, in the establishment of a nationwide system of public
Importance^of sch00js to create the educated electorate they believed a republic required. ACitizenryS a11 white male citizens (the nation's prospective voters) should, they argued,
receive free education.
Some states endorsed the principle of public education for all in the early years of the republic, but none actually created a working system of free schools. A Massachusetts law of 1789 reaffirmed the colonial laws by which each town was obligated to support a school, but there was little enforcement. In Virginia, the state legislature ignored Jefferson’s call for universal elementary education and for advanced education for the gifted. As late as 1815, not a single state had a comprehensive public school system.
Instead schooling became primarily the responsibility of private institutions, most of which were open only to those who could afford to pay for them. In the South and in the mid-Atlantic states, religious groups ran most of the schools. In New England and elsewhere,
Private	private academies were usually secular, many of them modeled on schools
Schooling	founcjecj by the Phillips family at Andover, Massachusetts, in 1778, and at
Exeter New Hampshire, three years later. By 1815, there were thirty such private secondary schools in Massachusetts, thirty-seven in New York, and several dozen more scattered throughout
, 181
