316 * CHAPTER 12
vistas of the rugged and still largely unsettled Hudson Valley. Hudson River	Emerson an^ Thoreau, whom many of
School the painters read and admired, they considered nature-more than civilization-the best source of wisdom and spiritual fulfillment. In portraying the Hudson Valley, they seemed to announce that in America, unlike in Europe, "wild nature” still existed; and that America, therefore, was a nation of greater promise than the played-out lands of the Old World. Yet there was also a sense of nostalgia in many of the Hudson River paintings, an effort to preserve and cherish a kind of nature that many Americans feared was
fast disappearing.
In later years, some of the Hudson River painters traveled farther west, in search of more profound spiritual experiences. They found an even more rugged and spectacular natural world. Their enormous canvases of great natural wonders-the Yosemite Valley, Yellowstone, the Rocky Mountains-touched a passionate chord among the American public. Some of the most famous of their paintings-particularly the works of Albert Bierstadt and Thomas Moran-traveled around the country attracting enormous crowds.
Literature and the Quest for Liberation
American readers in the first decades of the nineteenth century were relatively indifferent to the work of their nation’s own writers. The most popular novelist in America in these years was the British writer Sir Walter Scott, whose swashbuckling historical novels set in eighteenth-century England and Scotland won him an impassioned readership in both Britain and America. When Americans read books written in their own country, many were likely to turn to the large number of "sentimental novels,” written mostly by and for women. (See "Patterns of Popular Culture,” pp. 336-337.)
But even during the heyday of Scott in the 1820s, the effort to create a distinctively American literature-which Washington Irving and others had advanced in the first decades of the century-made considerable progress with the emergence of the first great American novelist: James Fenimore Cooper. The author of more than thirty novels in the space of three decades, Cooper was known to his contemporaries as a master of adventure and Cooperand susPense- What most distinguished his the American work, however, v\zas its evocation of the Wilderness American wilderness. Cooper had grown up in central New York, at a time when the edge of white settlement was not far away; and he retained throughout his life a fascination with man’s relationship to na-
ture and with the challenges (and dangers) of America’s expansion westward. His most important novels were known as the "Leatherstocking Tales.” Among them were The Last of the Mohicans (1826) and The Deerslayer (1841), which explored the American frontiersman’s experience with Indians, pioneers, violence, and the law.
Cooper’s novels were a continuation of the early-nineteenth-century effort to produce a truly American literature. But they
also served as a link to the concerns of later intellectuals. For in the "Leatherstocking Tales” could be seen not only a celebration of the American spirit and landscape but also an evocation, through the central character of Natty Bumppo, of the ideal of the independent individual with a natural inner goodness. There was also evidence of another impulse that would motivate American reform: the fear of disorder. Many of Cooper’s less savory characters illustrated the vicious, grasping nature of some of the nation’s western settlers and suggested a need for social discipline even in the wilderness.
Walt Whitman, the self-proclaimed poet of American democracy, became one of the most important writers of his time. He was born in 1819, on Long Island, to Quaker parents-the second of nine children. As he grew older, he worked as an
Hi

X

6kss
Including
Sands at Skvkxtv... rs/ Ahhs.i,
Gooi»-Bvk mv Fancy .. .J*/
A
Backward Glance o’er Travrl’d Roads, frwu f.tj’f aud Antogtuf>ft.
Comk, Mid rav S.xil,
Such vcrccs for my Body k, «< write, (tor we are one, ,
TXtt should 1 after death invisibly return.
Or, long, long hence, in other \(>neree.
There to tome group of mate* the chant* resuming,
(Tallying Earth’* *od, trees, wind*, tumultuoa* waves,)
Ever with pleased smile I may keep on.
Ever and ever yet the verses owning—», first, I here and now,
_______ Signing for Sotil and Body. set to them ray name.
fit «	-
TITLE PAGE FOR WHITMAN’S LEAVES OF GRASS
For more than thirty years after the publication of the original Leaves of Grass in 1855, Walt Whitman constantly revised and expanded the collection of poems and issued numerous subsequent editions. This sample title page, with notations by Whitman indicating changes and additions he wanted made, is for the final such edition, published in 1892, the year of Whitman’s death. In a statement Whitman wrote to announce publication, he said that "the book Leaves of Grass, which he has been working on at great intervals and partially issued for the past thirty-five or forty years, is now completed. .. . Faulty as it is, he decides it is by far his special and entire self-chosen poetic utterance.” (The Library of Congress) ANTEBELLUM CULTURE AND REFORM
® 317 apprentice in newspapers. At age sixteen, he moved to New York City, where he worked as a printer and later taught at several schools. After his teaching attempts, Whitman went to Huntington, New York, to found his own newspaper, the Long Islander, and served as its publisher, editor, pressman and distributor and even provided home delivery. But he began to write poetry when he could and eventually left his newspaper. In 1855, he hired a printer and published a first volume of work: Leaves of Grass. His poems were an unrestrained celebration of democracy, of the liberation of the individual, and of the pleasures of the flesh as well as of the spirit. They also expressed Whitman’s personal yearning for emotional and physical release and personal fulfillment-a yearning perhaps rooted in part in his own experience as a homosexual living in a society profoundly intolerant of unconventional sexuality. In his large body of poems, Whitman not only helped liberate verse from traditional, restrictive conventions but also helped express the soaring spirit of individualism that characterized his age.
The new literary concern with the unleashing of human
Herman emotions did not always produce such
Melville optimistic works, as the work of Herman Melville suggests. Born in New York in
1819, Melville ran away to sea as a youth and spent years sailing the world before returning home to become the greatest American novelist of his era. The most important of his novels was Moby Dick, published in 1851. His portrayal of Ahab, the powerful, driven captain of a whaling vessel, was a story of courage and of the strength of individual will; but it was also a tragedy of pride and revenge. Ahab’s maniacal search for Moby Dick, a great white whale that had maimed him, suggested how the search for personal fulfillment and triumph could not only liberate but destroy as well. The result of Ahab’s great quest was his own annihilation, reflecting Melville’s conviction that the human spirit was a troubled, often selfdestructive force.
Even more bleak were the works of one of the few southern writers of the time to embrace the search for the essence of the human spirit: Edgar Allan Poe. In the course of his short and unhappy life (he died in 1849 at the age of forty), Poe produced stories and poems that were primarily sad and macabre. His first book, Tamerlane and Other Poems (1827), received little recognition. But later works, including his most famous poem, "The Raven” (1845), established him as a major, if controversial, literary figure. Poe evoked images of individuals rising above the narrow confines of intellect and exploring the deeper world of the spirit and the emotions. Yet that world, he seemed to say, contained much pain and horror. Other American writers were contemptuous of Poe’s work and his message, but he was ultimately to have a profound effect on European poets such as Baudelaire.
Literature in the Antebellum South
Poe, however, was something of an exception in the world of southern literature. Like the North, the South experienced a
literary flowering in the mid-nineteenth century, and produced writers and artists who were concerned with defining the nature of American society and the American nation. But white southerners produced very different images of what that society was and should be.
Southern novelists of the 1830s (among them Beverly Tucker, William Alexander Caruthers, and John Pendleton
Southern Kennedy), some of them writers of great Romanticism	talent, many of them residents of Richmond,
produced historical romances or romantic eulogies of the plantation system of the upper South. In the 1840s, the southern literary capital moved to Charleston, home of the most distinguished of the region’s men of letters: William Gilmore Simms. For a time, Simms’s work expressed a broad nationalism that transcended his regional background; but by the 1840s he too had become a strong defender of southern institutions-especially slavery-against the encroachments of the North. There was, he believed, a unique quality to southern life that it was the duty of intellectuals
to defend.
One group of southern writers, however, produced works that were more broadly American and less committed to a glorification of the peculiarities of southern life. These were writers from the fringes of plantation society, who depicted the world of the backwoods rural areas. Augustus B. Longstreet, Joseph G. Baldwin, Johnson J. Hooper, and others focused not on aristocratic "cavaliers,” but on ordinary people and poor whites. Instead of romanticizing their subjects, they were deliberately and sometimes painfully realistic. And they seasoned their sketches with a robust, vulgar humor that was new to American literature. These southern realists established a tradition of American regional humor that was ultimately to find its most powerful voice in Mark Twain.
The Transcendentalists
One of the outstanding expressions of the romantic impulse in America came from a group of New England writers and philosophers known as the transcendentalists. Borrowing heavily from German philosophers such as Kant, Hegel, and Schelling, and from the English writers Coleridge and Carlyle, the transcendentalists embraced a theory of the individual that rested on a distinction (first suggested by Kant) between what they called "reason” and "understanding” words they used in ways that seem unfamiliar, even strange, to modern ears. Reason, as they defined it, had little to do with rationality. It was, rather, the individual’s innate capacity to grasp beauty and truth through giving full expression to the instincts and emotions; and as such, it was the highest human faculty. Understanding, the transcendentalists argued, was the use of intellect in the narrow, artificial ways imposed by society; it involved the repression of instinct and the victory of externally imposed learning. Every person’s goal, therefore, should be liberation from the confines of "understanding” and the cultivation of "reason.” Each individual should strive to "transcend” the limits of the intellect and allow
318 CHAPTER 12
the emotions, the "soul,” to create an "original relation to
the Universe.”
Transcendentalist philosophy emerged first among a small group of intellectuals centered in Concord, Massachusetts. Their leader and most eloquent voice was Ralph Waldo Emerson. A Unitarian minister in his youth,
^E^er5OND° Emerson left the church in 1832 to devote himself entirely to writing and teaching the elements of transcendentalism. He was a dazzling figure to his contemporaries-a lecturer whose public appearances drew rapturous crowds; a conversationalist who drew intellectuals
to his Concord home almost daily. He was the most important intellectual of his age.
Emerson produced a significant body of poetry, but he was most renowned for his essays and lectures. In "Nature” (1836), one of his best-known essays, Emerson wrote that in the quest for self-fulfillment, individuals should work for a communion with the natural world: "in the woods, we return to reason and faith.... Standing on the bare ground-my head bathed by the blithe air, and uplifted into infinite space-all mean egotism vanishes. ... I am part and particle of God.” In other essays, he was even more explicit. "Nothing is at last sacred,” he wrote in "Self-Reliance” (1841), perhaps his most famous essay, "but the integrity of your own mind.” The quest for self-reliance, he explained, was really a search for communion with the unity of the universe, the wholeness of God, the great spiritual force that he described as the "Oversoul.” Each person’s innate capacity to become, through his or her private efforts, a part of this essence was perhaps the classic expression of the romantic belief in the "divinity” of the individual.
Emerson was also a committed nationalist, an ardent proponent of American cultural independence. In a famous 1837 lecture, "The American Scholar,” he boasted that "our day of dependence, our long apprenticeship to the learning of other lands, draws to a close.” His belief that truth and beauty could be derived as much from instinct as from learning suggested that Americans, lacking the rich cultural heritage of European nations, could still aspire to artistic and literary greatness. Artistic and intellectual achievement need not rely on tradition and history; it could come from the instinctive creative genius of individuals. "Let the single man plant himself indomitably on his instincts and there abide,” Emerson once said, "and the huge world will come round to him.”
Almost as influential as Emerson was another leading Concord transcendentalist, Henry David Thoreau. Thoreau went even further than his friend Emerson in repudiating the repressive forces of society, which produced, he said, "lives of quiet desperation.” Individuals should work for self-realization by resisting pressures to conform to society’s expectations and responding instead to their own instincts. Thoreau’s own effort to free himself-immortalized in his most famous book, Walden (1854)-led him to build a small cabin in the Concord woods on the edge of Walden Pond, where he lived alone for two years as simply as he could. "I went to the woods,” he explained, "because I wished to live deliberately, to front only the essential facts of life, and see if I could not learn what it
had to teach, and not, when I came to die, discover that I had not lived.” Living simply, Thoreau believed, was a desirable alternative to the rapidly modernizing world around him-a world, he believed, that the disruptive and intrusive railroad
unhappily symbolized.
Thoreau’s rejection of what he considered the artificial constraints of society extended as well to his relationship with government. In 1846, he went to jail (briefly) rather than agree to pay a poll tax. He would not, he insisted, give financial support to a government that permitted the existence of slavery. In his 1849 essay "Resistance to Civil Government,” Thoreau explained his refusal by claiming that the
individual’s personal morality had the first claim on his or her actions, that a government which required violation of that morality had no legitimate authority. The proper response was "civil disobedience,” or "passive resistance”-a public refusal to nbpv lininsr laws
Thoreau and Civil
Disobedience
The Defense of Nature
The transcendentalists, and others, feared the impact of the new capitalist enthusiasms on the integrity of the natural world. "The mountains and cataracts, which were to have made poets and painters,” wrote the essayist Oliver Wendell Holmes, "have been mined for anthracite and dammed for water power.”
Nature was not just a setting for economic activity, as many farmers, miners, and others believed; and it was not simply a body of data to be catalogued and studied, as many scientists thought. It was the source of human inspiration the vehicle through which individuals could best realize the truth within their own souls. Genuine spirituality, they argued, came not from formal religion but through communion with the natural world. "In wildness is the preservation of the world.” Thoreau once wrote. Humans separated from nature, he believed, would lose a substantial part of their humanity.
In making such claims, the transcendentalists were among the first Americans to anticipate the environmental movement of the twentieth century. They had no scientific basis for their defense of the wilderness, no knowledge of modern ecology, little sense of the twentieth-century notion of the interconnectedness of species. But they did believe in, and articulate, an essential unity between humanity and nature-a spiritual unity, they believed, without which civilization would be impoverished. They looked at nature, they said, "with new eyes,’ and with those eyes they saw that "behind nature, throughout nature, spirit is present.”
Visions of Utopia
Although transcendentalism was above all an individualistic philosophy, it helped spawn the most famous of all nineteenth-Brook Farm century experiments in communal living-
Brook Farm, which the Boston transcendentalist George Ripley established as an experimental
ANTEBELLUM CULTURE AND REFORM * 319
community in West Roxbury, Massachusetts, in 1841. There, according to Ripley, individuals would gather to create a new form of social organization All residents would share equally in the labor of the community so that all could share too in the leisure because leisure was the first necessity for cultivation of the self (Ripley was one of the first Americans to attribute positive connotations to the idea of leisure; most of his contemporaries equated it with laziness and sloth.) Participation in manual labor served another purpose as well: it helped individuals bridge the gap between the world of the intellect and learning, and the world of instinct and nature. The obvious tension between the ideal of individual freedom and the demands of a communal society took their toll on Brook Farm. Many residents became disenchanted and left; when a fire destroyed the central building of the community in 1847, the experiment dissolved.
Among the original residents of Brook Farm was the writer Nathaniel Hawthorne, who expressed his disillusionment with the experiment and, to some extent, with transcendentalism in a series of notable novels. In The Blithedale Romance (1852), he wrote scathingly of Brook Farm itself, portraying the disastrous consequences of the experiment on the individuals who had submitted to it.
The failure of Brook Farm did not, however, prevent the formation of other experimental communities. Some borrowed, as Ripley had done, from the ideas of the French philosopher Charles Fourier, whose ideas of socialist communities organized as cooperative "phalanxes” received wide attention in America. Others drew from the ideas of the Scottish industrialist and philanthropist Robert Owen. Owen himself founded an experimental community in Indiana in 1825, which he named New Harmony New Harmony. It was to be a "Village of Cooperation,” in which every resident worked and lived in total equality. The community was an economic failure, but the vision that had inspired it continued to enchant Americans. Dozens of other "Owenite” experiments began in other locations in the following years.
Redefining Gender Roles
One of the principal concerns of many of the new utopian communities (and of the new social philosophies on which they rested) was the relationship between men and women. Transcendentalism and other movements of this period fostered expressions of a kind of feminism that would not gain a secure foothold in American society until the late twentieth century.
One of those most responsible for raising issues of gender was Margaret Fuller. A leading transcendentalist and a close associate of Emerson, she suggested the important relationship between the discovery of the "self’ that was so central to ante bellum reform and the questioning of gender roles. Many




MARGARET FULLER
As a leading transcendentalist, Fuller argued for the important relationship between the discovery of the "self” and the questioning of the prevailing gender roles of her era. In her famous feminist work, Women in the Nineteenth Century, Fuller wrote, "Many women are considering within themselves what they need and what they have not." She encouraged her readers, especially women, to set aside conventional thinking about the role of women in society: "I would have Woman lay aside all thought, such as she habitually cherishes, of being taught and led by men." Fuller provided a strong voice in the redefinition of gender roles in the nineteenth century. (© Corbis) women are considering within themselves what they need and what they have not,” she wrote in a famous feminist work, Woman in the Nineteenth Century (1844). "I would have Woman lay aside all thought, such as she habitually cherishes, of being taught and led by men.” Fuller herself, before her premature death in a shipwreck in 1850, lived a life far different from the domestic ideal of her time. She had intimate relationships with many men; became a great admirer of European socialists and a great champion of the Italian revolution of 1848, which she witnessed during travels there; and established herself as an intellectual leader whose power came in part from her perspective as a woman.
A redefinition of gender roles was crucial to one of the most enduring utopian colonies of the nineteenth century: the Oneida Community, established in 1848 in upstate New York by John Humphrey Noyes. The Oneida "Perfectionists,” as residents of the community called themselves, rejected traditional notions of family and marriage. All
residents, Noyes declared, were "married” to all other residents; there were no permanent conjugal ties. But Oneida was not, as its horrified critics often claimed, an experiment in "free love.” It was a place where the community carefully monitored sexual behavior; where women were to be protected from unwanted childbearing; in which children were raised communally, often seeing little of their own parents. The Oneidans took special pride in what they considered the liberation of their women from the demands of male "lust” and from the traditional bonds of family.
Redefined Gender Roles at the Oneida Community
320 * CHAPTER 12
The Shakers, even more than the Oneidans, made a redefinition of traditional sexuality and gender roles central to their society. Founded by "Mother"’ Ann Lee in the 1770s, the society of the Shakers survived throughout the nineteenth century and into the twentieth. (A tiny remnant survives today.) But the Shakers attracted a particularly large following in the antebellum period and established more than twenty communities throughout the Northeast and Northwest in the 1840s. They derived their name from a unique religious ritual, a sort of ecstatic dance, in which members of a congregation would "shake” themselves free of sin while performing a loud chant.
The most distinctive feature of Shakerism, however, was its
commitment to complete celibacy-which meant, of course,
that no one could be born to Shakerism; all Shakers had to
choose the faith voluntarily. Shaker communities attracted
„	about 6,000 members in the 1840s, more
The Shakers	.	, K ,.	, .
conditions in which contact between men and women was very limited. Shakers openly endorsed the idea of sexual equality; they even embraced the idea of a God who was not clearly male or female. Within the Shaker society as a whole, it was women who exercised the most power. Mother Ann Lee was succeeded as leader of the movement by Mother Lucy Wright. Shakerism, one observer wrote in the 1840s, was a refuge from the "perversions of marriage” and "the gross abuses which drag it down.”
The Shakers were not, however, motivated only by a desire to escape the burdens of traditional gender roles. They were trying as well to create a society separated and protected from the chaos and disorder that they believed had come to characterize American life as a whole. Less interested in personal freedom than in social discipline, they were like some other dissenting religious sects and utopian communities of their time. Another example was the Amana Community, founded by German immigrants in 1843, whose members settled in Iowa in 1855 and attempted to realize Christian ideals by creating an ordered, socialist society.
The Mormons
Among the most important efforts to create a new and more ordered society within the old was that of the Church of Jesus Joseph Smith Christ of Latter-Day Saints—the Mormons.
Mormonism began in upstate New York as a result of the efforts of Joseph Smith, a young, energetic, but economically unsuccessful man, who had spent most of his twenty-four years moving restlessly through New England and the Northeast. Then, in 1830, he published a remarkable document-the Book of Mormon, named for the ancient prophet who he claimed had written it. It was, Smith said, a translation of a set of golden tablets he had found in the hills of New York, revealed to him by an angel of God. The Book of Mormon told the story of an ancient and successful civilization in America, peopled by one of the lost tribes of Israel who had found their
way to the New World centuries before Columbus. Its members waited patiently for the appearance of the Messiah, and they were rewarded when Jesus came to America after his resurrection. Subsequent generations, however, strayed from the path of righteousness that Jesus had laid out for them. Ultimately, their civilization collapsed, and God punished the sinful by making their skin dark. These darkened people, Smith believed, were the descendants of the American Indians, although the modern tribes had no memory of their origins. But while the ancient Hebrew kingdom in America had ultimately vanished, Smith believed, its history as a righteous society could serve as a model for a new holy community in the United States.
In 1831, gathering a small group of believers around him,
Smith began searching for a sanctuary for his new community of "saints,” an effort that would continue unhappily for more than twenty years. Time and again, the Mormons attempted to establish their "New Jerusalem.” Time and again, they met with persecution from surrounding communities suspicious of their radical religious doctrines-which included polygamy (the right of men to take several wives), a rigid form of social organization, and, particularly damaging to their image, an intense secrecy, which gave rise to wild rumors among their critics of conspiracy and depravity.
Driven from their original settlements in Independence,
Missouri, and Kirtland, Ohio, the Mormons moved on to the new town of Nauvoo, Illinois, which by the early 1840s had become an imposing and economically successful community. In 1844, however, Joseph Smith was arrested, charged with treason (for allegedly conspiring against the government to win foreign support for a new Mormon colony in the Southwest), and imprisoned in Carthage, Illinois. There an an-
Establishment	mob attacked the iail> forced Sraith
of Salt Lake from ^is cefr an^ shot and killed him. The City	Mormons now abandoned Nauvoo and, un-
der the leadership of Smith’s successor,
Brigham Young, traveled across the desert-a society of 12,000 people, in one of the largest single group migrations in American history-and established a new community in Utah, the present Salt Lake City. There, at last, the Mormons were able to create a lasting settlement.
Like other experiments in social organization of the era,
Mormonism reflected a belief in human perfectibility. God had once been a man, the church taught, and thus every man or woman could aspire to become-as Joseph Smith had become-a saint. But unlike other new communities, such as the Oneidans, the Mormons did not embrace the doctrine of individual liberty. Instead, they created a highly organized, centrally directed, almost militarized social structure, a refuge against the disorder and uncertainty of the secular world. They placed particular emphasis on the structure of the family. Mormon religious rituals even included a process by which men and women went through baptism ceremonies in the name of deceased ancestors; as a result, they believed, they would be reunited with those ancestors in heaven. The intense Mormon interest in genealogy, which continues today, is a reflection of
ANTEBELLUM CULTURE AND REFORM
• 321 MORMONS HEADING WEST
This lithograph, by William Henry Jackson (1843-1942), shows Mormon handcart pioneers heading west to Utah in 1850. (Private Collection/© Peter Newark American Pictures/The Bridgeman Art Library) this belief in the possibility of reuniting present generations with those of the past.
The original Mormons were, for the most part, men and women who felt displaced in their rapidly changing society-people left behind or troubled by the material growth and social progress of their era. In the new religion, they found genuine faith. In the society Mormonism created, they found security and order.
remaking society
The simultaneous efforts to liberate the individual and impose order on a changing world also helped create a wide range of new movements to remake society—movements in which, to a striking degree, women formed the real rank and file and often the leadership as well. By the 1830s, such movements had taken the form of organized reform societies. "In no country in the world,” Tocqueville had observed, "has the principle of association been more successfully used, or more unsparingly applied to a multitude of different objects, than in America.
The new organizations did indeed work on behalf of a wide range of issues: temperance; education; peace; the care New Reform	Poor> the handicapped, and the
Movements mentally ill; the treatment of criminals;
the rights of women; and many more. Few eras in American history have witnessed as wide a range of reform efforts as emerged in the mid-nineteenth century. And few eras have exposed more clearly the simultaneous attraction of Americans to the ideas of personal liberty and
social order.
Revivalism, Morality, and Order
The philosophy of reform arose from several distinct sources. One was the optimistic vision of those who, like the tran-scendentalists, rejected Calvinist doctrines and preached the divinity of the individual. These included not only Emerson, Thoreau, and their followers, but also a much larger group of Americans who embraced the doctrines of Unitarianism and Universalism and absorbed European romanticism.
322 CHAPTER 12
A second, and in many respects more important, source was Protestant revivalism-the movement that had begun with the Second Great Awakening early in the century and had, by the 1820s, evolved into a powerful force for social reform. Although the New Light revivalists were theologically far removed from the transcendentalists and Unitarians, they had come to share the optimistic belief that every individual was capable of salvation. According to Charles Grandison Finney, an evangelistic Presbyterian minister who became the most influential revival leader of the 1820s and 1830s, traditional Calvinist doctrines of predestination and individual human helplessness were both obsolete and destructive. Each person, he preached, contained within himself or herself the capacity to experience spiritual rebirth and achieve salvation. A revival of faith need not depend on a miracle from God; it could be created by individual effort.
Finney enjoyed particular success in upstate New York, where he helped launch a series of passionate revivals in towns along the Erie Canal-a region so prone to religious awakenings that it was known as the "burned-over district/’ It was no coincidence that the new revivalism should prove so powerful
CHARLES GRANDISON FINNEY
Evangelistic Presbyterian minister Charles Grandison Finney became the most influential revival leader of the 1820s and 1830s. He argued that each person contained within herself or himself the capacity to experience spiritual rebirth and achieve salvation. Finney’s views on revivalist faith contrasted with earlier Calvinist doctrines of predestination and individual human helplessness. (© Bettmann/Corbis) Revivalism in the Burned-Over District
Finney's Doctrine of Personal Regeneration
there, for this region of New York was experiencing-largely as a result of the construction of the canal-a major economic transformation. And with that transformation had come changes in the social fabric so profound that many
men and women felt baffled and disoriented. (It was in roughly this same area of New York that Joseph Smith first organized
the Mormon church.)
In Rochester, New York, the site of his greatest success, Finney staged a series of emotionally wrenching religious meetings that aroused a large segment of the community. He had particular success in mobilizing women, on whom he tended to concentrate his efforts-both because women found the liberating message of revivalism particularly appealing and because, Finney discovered, they pro-
vided him with access to their male relatives. Gradually, he developed a large following among the prosperous citizens of the region. They were enjoying the economic benefits of the new commercial growth, but they were also uneasy about some of the social changes accompanying it (among them the introduction into their community of a new, undisciplined pool of transient laborers). For them, revivalism became not only a means of personal salvation but also a mandate for the reform (and control) of their society. Finney’s revivalism became a call for a crusade against personal immorality. "The church,” he maintained, "must take right ground on the subject of Temperance, the Moral Reform, and all the subjects of practical morality which come up for decision from time to time.”
The Temperance Crusade
Evangelical Protestantism added major strength to one of the most influential reform movements of the era: the crusade against drunkenness. No social vice, argued some reformers (including many of Finney’s converts in cities such as Rochester), was more responsible for crime, disorder, and poverty than the excessive use of alcohol. Women, who were particularly active in the temperance movement, claimed that alcoholism placed a special burden on wives: men spent money on alcohol that their families needed for basic necessities, and drunken husbands often abused their wives and children.
In fact, alcoholism was an even more serious problem in antebellum America than it has been in the twentieth and twenty-first centuries. The supply of alcohol was growing rapidly, particularly in the West; farmers there grew more grain than they could sell in the still-limited markets in this prerailroad era, so they distilled much of it into whiskey. But in the East, too, commercial distilleries and private stills were widespread. The appetite for alcohol was growing along with the supply: in isolated western areas, where drinking provided a social pastime in small towns and helped ease the loneliness and isolation on farms; in pubs and saloons in eastern cities, where drinking was the principal leisure activity for many workers. The average male in the 1830s drank nearly three times as much alcohol as the average person does today. And
ANTEBELLUM CULTURE AND REFORM
• 323 American
Society for the Promotion of Temperance
as that figure suggests, many people drank habitually and excessively, with bitter consequences for themselves and others Among the many supporters of the temperance movement were people who saw it as a way to overcome their own prob-lems with alcoholism.
Although advocates of temperance had been active since the late eighteenth century, the new reformers gave the movement an energy and influence it had never previously known. In 1826, the American Society for the Promotion of Temperance emerged as a coordinating agency among various groups; it attempted to use many
of the techniques of revivalism in preaching abstinence. Then, in 1840, six reformed alcoholics in Baltimore organized the Washington Temperance Society and began to draw large crowds-in which workers (many of them attempting to overcome their own alcoholism) were heavily represented-to hear their impassioned and intriguing confessions of past sins. By then, temperance advocates had grown dramatically in numbers; more than a million people had signed a formal pledge to forgo hard liquor.
As the movement gained in strength, it also became divided in purpose. Some temperance advocates now urged that abstinence include not only liquor but beer and wine as well. Not everyone agreed. Some began to demand state legislation to restrict the sale and consumption of alcohol (Maine passed
Cultural
Divisions over Alcohol
such a law in 1851); others insisted that temperance must rely on the conscience of the individual. Whatever their disagreements, by promoting abstinence reformers were attempting to promote the moral self-improvement of individuals. They were also trying to impose discipline on society.
The search for social discipline was particularly clear in the battle over prohibition laws, which pitted established Protestants against new Catholic immigrants, to many of whom drinking was an important social ritual and an integral part of the life of their communities. The arrival
of the immigrants was profoundly disturbing to established residents of many communities, and the restriction of alcohol seemed to them a way to curb the disorder they believed the new population was creating.
Health Fads and Phrenology
For some Americans, the search for individual and social perfection led to an interest in new theories of health and knowledge. Threats to public health were critical to the sense of insecurity that underlay many reform movements, especially after the terrible cholera epidemics of the 1830s and 1840s. Cholera is a severe bacterial infection of the intestines, usually a result of consuming contaminated food or water. In the nineteenth century, long before the discovery of antibiotics, less
. hows what temperance advocates argued was the inevitable consequence of alcohol consumption. Beginning with an apparently HE DRUNKARD’S PROGRESS This 1846 lithograph y a ame	,	.	dec|ines to desperation and suicide while his abandoned wife and child grieve. (The Library of Congress)
innocent "glass with a friend," the young man rises step by step to the summit o run e
324 CHAPTER 12
than half of those who contracted the disease survived. Thousands of people died of cholera during its occasional outbreaks, and in certain cities-New Orleans in 1833 and St. Louis in 1849-the effects were truly catastrophic. Nearly a quarter of the population of New Orleans died in the 1833 epidemic. Many municipalities, pressured by reformers, established city health boards to try to find solutions to the problems of epidemics. But the medical profession of the time, unaware of the nature of bacterial infections, had no answers; and the boards therefore found little to do.
Instead, many Americans turned to nonscientific theories for improving health. Affluent men and, especially, women flocked to health spas for the celebrated "water cure,” which purported to improve health through immersing people in hot or cold baths or wrapping them in wet sheets. Although the water cure delivered few of the benefits its promoters promised, it did have some therapeutic value; some forms of hydrotherapy are still in use today. Other people adopted new dietary theories. Sylvester Graham, a Connecticut-born Presbyterian minister and committed reformer, won many followers with his prescriptions for eating fruits, vegetables, and bread made from coarsely ground flour-a prescription not unlike some dietary theories today-instead of meat. (The "Graham cracker” is made from a kind of flour named for him.) Graham accompanied his dietary prescriptions with moral warnings about the evils of excess and luxury.
Perhaps strangest of all to modern sensibilities was the widespread belief in the new "science” of phrenology, which appeared first in Germany and became popular in the United States beginning in the 1830s through the efforts of Orson Phrenology and Lorenzo Fowler, publishers of the Phrenology Almanac. Phrenologists argued that the shape of an individual’s skull was an important indicator of his or her character and intelligence. They made elaborate measurements of bumps and indentations to calculate the size (and, they claimed, the strength) of different parts of the brain, each of which, they argued, controlled a specific kind of intelligence or behavior. For a time, phrenology seemed to many Americans an important vehicle for improving society. It provided a way of measuring an individual’s fitness for various positions in life and seemed to promise an end to the arbitrary process by which people matched their talents to occupations and responsibilities. The theory is now universally believed to
have no scientific value.
Medical Science
In an age of rapid technological and scientific advances, the science of medicine sometimes seemed to lag behind. In part, that was because of the greater difficulty of experimentation in medicine, which required human subjects as compared to other areas of science and technology that relied on inanimate objects. In part, it was because of the character of the medical profession, which—in the absence of any significant regulation-attracted many poorly educated people and many quacks, in addition to trained physicians. Efforts to regulate the profession
BATH AT WARM SPRINGS”
Among the many fads and theories about human health to gain currency in the 1830s and 1840s, one of the most popular was the idea that bathing in warm, sulphurous water was restorative. Visitors to “warm springs” all over the United States and Europe "took the baths,” drank the foul-smelling water, and sometimes stayed for weeks as part of a combination vacation and "cure.” This 1837 drawing is by Sophie Dupont, a visitor to a popular spa. She wrote to a friend that the water, "notwithstanding its odour of half spoiled eggs and its warmth, is not very nauseous to the taste.” (© Courtesy of Hagley Museum and Library) were opposed in the 1830s and 1840s by those who considered the licensing of physicians to be a form of undemocratic monopoly. The prestige of the profession, therefore, remained low, and it was for many people a career of last resort.
The biggest problem facing American medicine, however, was the absence of basic knowledge about disease. The great medical achievement of the eighteenth century-the development of a vaccination against smallpox by the English Physician Edward Jenner-came from no broad theory of infection, but from a brilliant adaptation of folk practices among country people. The development of anesthetics came not from medical doctors at first, but from a New England dentist, William Morton, who was looking for ways to help his patients endure the extraction of teeth. Beginning in 1844, Morton began experimenting with using sulphuric ether. John Warren, a Boston surgeon, soon began using ether to sedate surgical patients. Even these advances met with stiff resistance from traditional physicians, some of whom continued to believe that all medical knowledge derived from timeless truths and ancient scholars and who mistrusted innovation and experimentation. Others rejected scientific advances because of unorthodox, and untested "medical” techniques popularized by entrepreneurs, many of them charlatans.
In the absence of any broad acceptance of scientific methods and experimental practice in medicine, it was very diffi' cult for even the most talented doctors to succeed in treating disease. Even so, halting progress toward the discovery of the germ theory did occur in antebellum America. In 1843, the
ANTEBELLUM CULTURE AND REFORM * 325
PHRENOLOGY
This lithograph illustrates some of the ideas of the popular "science” of phrenology in the 1830s. Drawing from the concepts of the German writer Johann Gaspar Spurzheim, American phrenologists promoted the belief that a person's character and talents could be understood by the formation of his or her skull; that the brain was, in fact, a cluster of autonomous organs, each controlling some aspect of human thought or behavior. In this diagram, the areas of the brain that supposedly control "identity,” "acquisitiveness, secretiveness," marvelousness," and "hope” are clearly identified. The theory has no scientific basis. The Library of Congress,
Boston essayist, poet, and physician Oliver Wendell Holmes Discovery of Published his findings from a study of large
Contagion numbers of cases of ’’puerperal fever” (septicemia in children) and concluded that the disease could be transmitted from one person to another. This discovery of contagion met with a storm of criticism, but was later vindicated by the clinical success of the Hungarian physician Ignaz Semmelweis, who noticed that the infection seemed to be spread by medical students who had been work ing with corpses. Once he began requiring students to wash their hands and disinfect their instruments, the infections vir-
tually disappeared.
Reforming Education
One of the outstanding reform movements of the mid-nineteenth century was the effort to produce a system of universal pub ic
education. As of 1830, no state yet had such a system, although some states-such as Massachusetts-had supported a limited version for many years. In the 1830s, however, interest in public education grew rapidly. It was a reflection of the new belief in the innate capacity of every person and of society’s obligation to tap that capacity; but it was a reflection, too, of the desire to expose students to stable social values as a way to resist instability.
The greatest educational reformer was Horace Mann, the first secretary of the Massachusetts Board of Education, which was established in 1837. To Mann and his followers, education was the only way to ’’counterwork this tendency to the domination of capital and the servility of labor.” The only way to protect democracy, Mann believed, was to create an educated electorate. He reorganized the Massachusetts school system, lengthened the academic year (to six months), doubled teachers’ salaries (although he did nothing to eliminate the large disparities between the salaries of male and female teachers), enriched the curriculum, and introduced new methods of professional training for teachers.
Other states experienced similar expansion and development.
„	They built new schools, created teachers’
Rapid Growth /	’
of Public colleges, and offered large new groups of
Education children access to education. Henry Barnard helped produce a educational system in
Connecticut and Rhode Island. Pennsylvania passed a law in 1835 appropriating state funds for the support of universal education. Governor William Seward of New York extended public support of schools throughout the state in the early 1840s. By the 1850s, the principle of tax-supported elementary schools had been accepted in all the states; and all were making at least a start toward putting the principle into practice.
Yet the quality of the new education continued to vary widely. In some places-Massachusetts, for example, where Mann established the first American state-supported teachers’ college in 1839 and where the first professional association of teachers was created in 1845-educators were usually capable men and women, often highly trained, and with an emerging sense of themselves as career professionals. In other areas, however, teachers were often barely literate, and limited funding for education restricted opportunities severely. In the newly settled regions of the West, where the white population was highly dispersed, many children had no access to schools. In the South, the entire black population was barred from formal education (although approximately 10 percent of the slaves achieved literacy anyway), and only about a third of all white children of school age actually enrolled in schools in 1860. In the North the percentage was 72 percent, but even there, many students attended classes only briefly and casually.
The interest in education was visible too in the growing movement to educate American Indians in the antebellum period. Some reformers held racist assumptions about the un-redeemability of nonwhite peoples; but even many who accepted that idea about African Americans continued to believe that Indians could be ’’civilized” if only they could be taught the ways of the white world. Efforts to educate Native
326 « CHAPTER 12
Americans and encourage them to assimilate were particularly prominent in such areas of the Far West as Oregon. Substantial numbers of whites were beginning to settle there in the 1840s. Nevertheless, the great majority of Native Americans remained outside the reach of educational reform, either by choice or by circumstance or both.
Despite limitations and inequities, the achievements of A	the school reformers were impressive by
OF
Edlcationae anv standard. By the beginning of the Reform Civil War, the United States had one of the highest literacy rates of any nation: 94 percent of the population of the North and 83 percent of the white population of the South (58 percent of the total southern population).
The conflicting impulses underlying the movement for school reform were visible in some of the different educational institutions that emerged. In New England, for example, the transcendentalist Bronson Alcott established a controversial experimental school in Concord that reflected his strong belief in the importance of complete self-realization. He urged children to learn from their own inner wisdom, not from the imposition of values by the larger society. Children were to teach themselves, rather than rely on teachers.
A similar emphasis on the potential of the individual The	sparked the creation of new institutions to
Benevolent help the handicapped, institutions that Empire formed part of a great network of charitable activities known as the Benevolent
Empire. Among them was the Perkins School for the Blind in Boston, the first such school in America. Nothing better exemplified the romantic impulse of the era than the belief of those who founded Perkins that even society’s supposedly least-favored members-the blind and otherwise handicapped-could be helped to discover inner strength and wisdom.
More typical of educational reform, however, were efforts to use schools to impose a set of social values on children-the values that reformers believed were appropriate for their new, industrializing society. These values included thrift, order, discipline, punctuality, and respect for authority. Horace Mann, for example, spoke frequently of the role of public schools in extending democracy and expanding individual opportunity. But he spoke, too, of their role in creating social order. "The unrestrained passions of men are not only homicidal, but suicidal,” he said, suggesting a philosophy very different from that of Alcott and other transcendentalists, who emphasized instinct and emotion. "Train up a child in the way he should go, and when he is old he will not depart from it.”
Rehabilitation
Similar impulses helped create another powerful movement of reform, the creation of asylums (as they now were called) for criminals and for the mentally ill. On the one hand, in advocat-
The Asylum in£ Prison and hospital reform, Americans Movement were reacting to one of society’s most glaring ills. Criminals of all kinds, debtors
unable to pay their debts, the mentally ill, even senile paupers-all were crowded together indiscriminately into prisons and jails, which in some cases were holes in the ground; one jail in Connecticut was an abandoned mine shaft. Beginning in the 1820s, numerous states replaced these antiquated facilities with new "penitentiaries” and mental institutions designed to provide a proper environment for inmates. New York built the first penitentiary at Auburn in 1821. In Massachusetts, the social reformer Dorothea Dix began a national movement for new methods of treating the mentally ill. Imprisonment of debtors and paupers gradually disappeared, as did such traditional practices as legal public hangings.
But the creation of "asylums” for social deviants was not Prison	simply an effort to curb the abuses of the
Reform	old system. It was also an attempt to re-
form and rehabilitate the inmates. New forms of rigid prison discipline were designed to rid criminals of the "laxness” that had presumably led them astray. Solitary confinement and the imposition of silence on work crews (both adopted in Pennsylvania and New York in the 1820s) were meant to give prisoners opportunities to meditate on their wrongdoings (hence the term "penitentiary”: a place for individuals to cultivate penitence). Some reformers argued that the discipline of the asylum could serve as a model for other potentially disordered environments-for example, factories and schools. But penitentiaries and mental hospitals often fell victim to overcrowding, and the original reform ideal gradually faded. Many prisons ultimately degenerated into little more than warehouses for criminals, with scant emphasis on rehabilitation, which was far from the original,
optimistic vision.
The "asylum” movement was not, however, restricted to criminals and people otherwise considered "unfit.” The idea that a properly structured institution could prevent moral failure or rescue individuals from failure and despair helped spawn the creation of new orphanages designed as educational institutions. Such institutions, reformers believed, would provide an environment in which children who might otherwise be drawn into criminality could be trained to become useful citizens. Similar institutions emerged to provide homes for "friendless” women-women without families or homes, but otherwise "respectable,” for whom the institutions might provide an opportunity to build a new life. (Such homes were in part an effort to prevent such women from turning to prostitution.) There were also new facilities for the poor: almshouses and workhouses, which created closely supervised environments for those who had failed to work their way up in society. Such an environment, reformers believed, would train them to live more productive lives.
The Indian Reservation
Some of these same beliefs underlay the emergence in the 1840s and 1850s of a new "reform” approach to the problems of Native Americans: the idea of the reservation. For several decades, the dominant thrust of U.S. policy toward the Indians
ANTEBELLUM CULTURE AND REFORM
• 327 PERKINS SCHOOL FOR THE BLIND
The Perkins School in Boston was the first school for the blind in the United States and was committed to the idea that the blind could be connected effectively to the world through the development of new skills, such as reading through the relatively new technique of embossed writing systems. This woodcut shows Perkins's main building in the mid-1850s, by which time the school was already over twenty years old. It continues to educate the blind today. (© Courtesy of Perkins School for the Blind, Watertown, Massachusetts) in areas of white settlement had been relocation. The principal motive behind relocation had always been a simple one: getting the tribes out of the way of white civilization. But among some whites there had also been another, if secondary, intent: to move the Indians to a place where they would be protected from whites and allowed to develop to a point where assimilation might be possible. Even Andrew Jackson, whose animus toward Indians was legendary, once described the removals as part of the nation’s "moral duty ... to protect and if possible to preserve and perpetuate the scattered remnants of the Indian race.”
It was a small step from the idea of relocation to the idea of the reservation: the idea of creating an enclosed region in which Indians would live in isolation from white society. The reservations served white economic purposes above allmoving Native Americans out of good lands that white settlers wanted. But they were also supposed to serve a reform purpose. Just as prisons, asylums, and orphanages would provide society with an opportunity to train and uplift misfits and unfortunates within white society, so the reservations might provide a way to undertake what one official called "the great work of regenerating the Indian race/’ Native Americans on reservations, reformers argued, would learn the ways of civilization in a protected setting.
The Emergence of Feminism
The reform ferment of the antebellum period had a particular meaning for American women. They played central roles in a wide range of reform movements and a particularly important role in the movements on behalf of temperance and the aboli tion of slavery. In the process, they expressed their awareness of
Reform Movements and the Rise of Feminism
the problems that women themselves faced in a male-dominated society. The result was the creation of the first important American feminist movement, one that laid the groundwork for more than a century of agitation for women’s rights.
Women in the 1830s and 1840s faced not only all the traditional restrictions imposed on members of their sex by society, but also a new set of barriers that had emerged from the doctrine of "separate spheres” and the transformation of the family. Many women who began to involve themselves in reform movements in the 1820s and 1830s came to look on such restrictions with rising resentment. Some began to defy them. Sarah and Angelina Grimke, sisters born in South Carolina who had become active and outspoken abolitionists, ignored attacks by
men who claimed that their activities were inappropriate for their sex. "Men and women were CREATED EQUAL,” they argued. "They are both moral and accountable beings, and whatever is right for man to do, is right for women to do.” Other reformers-Catharine Beecher, Harriet Beecher Stowe (her sister), Lucretia Mott, Elizabeth Cady Stanton, and Dorothea Dix-also chafing at the restrictions placed on them by men, similarly pressed at the boundaries of "acceptable” female behavior.
Finally, in 1840, the patience of several women snapped. A group of American female delegates arrived at a world antislavery convention in London, only to be turned away by the men who controlled the proceedings. Angered at the rejection, several of the delegates-notably Lucretia Mott and Elizabeth Cady Stanton-became convinced that their first duty as reformers should now be to elevate the status of women. Over the next several years, Mott, Stanton, Susan B. Anthony, and
THE RISE OF FEMINISM
IN THE 1840S,
a group of women who had started out as abolitionists began to advocate for the rights of women. "All men and women are created equal,” they declared. They argued that women should have the same opportunities as men and should no longer be restricted to the domestic sphere. This effort reached its peak at the 1848 convention in Seneca Falls, New York, where a Declaration of Sentiments was proclaimed. Just as the women’s rights movement of the nineteenth century grew out of the abolitionist movement, so the feminist movement of the twentieth century built upon the civil rights movement. The modern feminist movement often marks its beginning with the publication of Betty Friedan’s The Feminine Mystique in 1963 and the formation of the National Organization for Women (NOW) in 1966. Despite the more than one hundred years separating the two documents that follow, the basic sentiments of the Seneca Falls Declaration bear many similarities to the ideas that have shaped feminist thinking of the twentieth and twenty-first centuries.
SENECA FALLS—1848
The Declaration of Sentiments, Seneca Falls Convention, 1848
When, in the course of human events, it becomes necessary for one portion of the family of man to assume among the people of the earth a position different from that which they have hitherto occupied, but one to which the laws of nature and of nature’s God entitle them, a decent respect to the opinions of mankind requires that they should declare the causes that impel them to such a course.
We hold these truths to be self-evident: that all men and women are created equal; that they are endowed by their Creator with certain inalienable rights; that among these are life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness; that to secure these rights governments are instituted, deriving their just powers from the consent of the governed. Whenever any form of government becomes destructive of these ends, it is the right of those who suffer from it to refuse allegiance to it, and to insist upon the institution of a new government, laying its foundation on such principles, and organizing its powers in such form, as to them shall seem most likely to effect their safety and happiness. . . . Such has been the patient sufferance of the women under this government, and such is now the necessity which constrains them to demand the equal station to which they are entitled. The history of mankind is a history of repeated injuries and usurpations on the part of man toward woman, having in direct object the establishment of an absolute tyranny over her.
Now, in view of this entire disfranchisement of one-half the people of this country, . . . because women do feel themselves aggrieved, oppressed, and fraudulently deprived of their most sacred rights, we insist that they have immediate admission to all the rights and privileges which belong to them as citizens of the United States.
From Elizabeth Cady Stanton, A History of Woman Suffrage, vol. 1 (Rochester, NY: Fowler and Wells, 1889), pp. 70-71.
UNDERSTAND, ANALYZE, AND EVALUATE
1.	The Seneca Falls Declaration is modeled on the U.S. Declaration of Independence. Why do you think the women who wrote the Seneca Falls Declaration used that model? How did they adapt the U.S. Declaration of Independence to fit their specific demands?
2.	What is the primary grievance expressed in the document? How long did it take for this grievance to be addressed? Why did it take so long?
NATIONAL ORGANIZATION FOR WOMEN (NOW)-1966
The National Organization for Women's 1966	j
Statement of Purpose	j
We, men and women who hereby constitute ourselves as the National Organization for Women, believe that the time has J come for a new movement toward true equality for all women in America, and toward a fully equal partnership of the	j
sexes, as part of the worldwide revolution of human rights now taking place within and beyond our national borders.	<
The purpose of NOW is to take action to bring women into full participation in the mainstream of American society now, exercising all the privileges and responsibilities thereof in truly equal partnership with men.	!
We believe the time has come to . . . confront, with concrete action, the conditions that now prevent women from enjoying the equality of opportunity and freedom of choice which is their right, as individual Americans, and as human beings.
NOW is dedicated to the proposition that women, first and foremost, are human beings, who, like all other people in our society, must have the chance to develop their fullest human potential. We believe that women can achieve such equality only by accepting to the full the challenges and responsibilities they share with all other people in our society, as part of the decision making mainstream of American political, economic and social life.
WE BELIEVE
that the power of American law, and the protection guaranteed by the U.S. Constitution to the civil rights of all individuals, must be effectively applied and enforced to isolate and remove patterns of sex discrimination, to ensure equality of opportunity in employment and education, and equality of civil and political rights and responsibilities on behalf of women, as well as for Negroes and other deprived groups. WE BELIEVE
T’l I AT women will do most to create a new image of women by acting now, and by speaking out in behalf of their own equality, freedom, and human dignity-not in pleas for special privilege, nor in enmity toward men, who are also victims of the current, half-equality between the sexes—but in an active, self-respecting partnership with men. By so doing, women will develop confidence in their own ability to determine actively, in partnership with men, the conditions of their life, their choices, their future and their society. This Statement of Purpose iuas written by Betty Friedan, author o/The Feminine Mystique.
Source: National Organization for Women Statement of Purpose (1966).
MAKE CONNECTIONS
1.	How does the NOW statement of purpose echo the sentiments of the Seneca Falls Declaration?
2.	What image of women's status does each document create? How do these images differ?
3.	What rights that are asked for in the Declaration of 1848 ha women gained by 1966? Has the vision outlined in the NOW statement of purpose been achieved today?
329
330 * CHAPTER 12
Seneca Falls Convention
7
IbturiueK IM>uglabs» Amt PoeT\ CiTffOfWt Stebbins, and Klixabetii <L Stotoh, and wm unanimously adopted, as follows :
DECLARATION OF SENTIMENTS
When, in the course of human events, it W* tomes necessary for one portion of the family of man to assume among the ,x*ojle of the earth a position different from that which they have hitherto occupied, tmt one to u Inch ifce laws of nfture and of nature’» (oxi entitle them, a decent respect to the opinions of mankind requires that they should declare the causes that impel them to such a course,
THE “DECLARATION OF SENTIMENTS”
Frederick Douglass joined female abolitionists in signing the famous "Declaration of Sentiments" that emerged out of the Women s Rights Convention at Seneca Falls, New York, in 1848—one of the founding documents of American feminism. (The Library of Congress) others began drawing pointed parallels between the plight of women and the plight of slaves; and in 1848, they organized a convention in Seneca Falls, New York, to discuss the
question of women’s rights. Out of the meeting emerged a
"Dec laration of Sentiments” (patterned on the 1776 Declaration of Independence), which stated that "all men and women are created equal,” that women no less than men have certain inalienable rights. Their most prominent demand was for the right to vote, thus launching a movement for woman suffrage that would continue until 1920. But the document was in many ways more important for its rejection of the whole notion that men and women should be assigned separate "spheres” in society.
It should not be surprising, perhaps, that many of the women involved in these feminist efforts were Quakers. Quakerism had long embraced the ideal of sexual equality and had tolerated, indeed encouraged, the emergence of women as preachers and community leaders. Women taught to expect the absence of gender-based restrictions in their own communities naturally resented the restrictions they encountered when they moved outside them. Quakers had also been among the leaders of the antislavery movement, and Quaker women played a leading role within those efforts. Of the women who drafted the Declaration of Sentiments, all but Elizabeth Cady Stanton were Quakers.
Progress toward feminist goals was limited in the antebellum years, but individual women did manage to break the social barriers to advancement. Elizabeth Blackwell, bom in England, gained acceptance and fame as a physician. Her sister-Limited in'law Ant°inette Brown Blackwell be-Progress for came the first ordained woman minister in
Women the United States; and another sister-in-law, Lucy Stone, took the revolutionary step of
retaining her maiden name after marriage (as did the abolitionist Angelina Grimke). Stone became a successful and influential lecturer on women’s rights. Emma Willard, founder of the Troy Female Seminary in 1821, and Catharine Beecher, who founded the Hartford Female Seminary in 1823, worked on behalf of women’s education. Some women expressed their feminist sentiments even in their choice of costume-by wearing a distinctive style of dress (introduced in the 1850s) that combined a short skirt with full-length pantalettes-an outfit that allowed freedom of movement without loss of modesty. Introduced by the famous actress Fanny Kemble, it came to be called the "bloomer” costume, after one of its advocates, Amelia Bloomer. (It provoked so much controversy that feminists finally abandoned it, convinced that the furor was drawing attention away from their more important demands.)
There was an irony in this rise of interest in the rights of women. Feminists benefited greatly from their association with other reform movements, most notably abolitionism; but they also suffered from them. For the demands of women were usually assigned-even by some women themselves-a secondary position to what many considered the far greater issue of the rights of slaves.
THE CRUSADE AGAINST
SLAVERY
The antislavery movement was not new to the mid-nineteenth century. There had been efforts even before the Revolution to limit, and even eliminate, the institution. Those efforts had helped remove slavery from most of the North by the end of the eighteenth century and had led to the legal prohibition of the international slave trade in 1808. There were powerful antislavery movements in Europe that cried out forcefully against human bondage, perhaps most notably from Britain, where the great antislavery leader, William Wilberforce, had led the effort to abolish the slave trade, and later slavery itself, from the British Empire. But American anti-slavery sentiment remained relatively muted in the first decades after independence. Not until 1830 did it begin to gather the force that would ultimately enable it to overshadow virtually all other efforts at social reform.
Early Opposition to Slavery
In the early years of the nineteenth century, those who opposed slavery were, for the most part, a calm and genteel lot, expressing moral disapproval but engaging in few overt activities. To the extent that there was an organized antislavery movement, it centered on the concept of colonization-the effort to encourage the resettlement of African Americans in Africa or the
American Caribbean. In 1817, a group of prominent Colonization white Virginians organized the American Society Colonization Society (ACS), which worked carefully to challenge slavery without chaf lenging property rights or southern sensibilities. The ACS proposed
ANTEBELLUM CULTURE AND REFORM
• 331 a gradual manumission (or freeing) of slaves, with masters receiving compensation through funds raised by private charity or appropriated by state legislatures. The Society would then transport liberated slaves out of the country and help them to establish a new society of their own elsewhere.
The ACS was not without impact. It received some funding from private donors, some from Congress, some from the legislatures of Virginia and Maryland. And it arranged the shipment of several groups of African Americans out of the country, some of them to the west coast of Africa, where in 1830 they established the nation of Liberia (which became an independent republic in 1846 its capital, Monrovia, was named for the American president who had presided over the initial settlement).
But the ACS was in the end a negligible force. Neither private nor public funding was nearly enough to carry out the vast projects its supporters envisioned. In the space of a decade, they
Failure of	managed to "colonize” fewer slaves than
Colonization were born in the United States in a month.
No amount of funding, in fact, would have been enough; there were far too many black men and women in America in the nineteenth century to be transported to Africa by any conceivable program. And in any case, the ACS met resistance from African Americans themselves, many of whom were now three or more generations removed from Africa and had no wish to move to a land of which they knew almost nothing. (The Massachusetts free black Paul Cuffe had met similar resistance from members of his own race in the early 1800s
when he proposed a colonization scheme of his own.)
By 1830, in other words, the early antislavery movement was rapidly losing strength. Colonization was proving not to be a viable method of attacking the institution, particularly since the cotton boom in the Deep South was increasing the commitment of planters to their "peculiar” labor system. Those opposed to slavery had reached what appeared to be a dead end.
Garrison and Abolitionism
ery newspaper
Garrison and the Liberator
V this crucial juncture, with the antislavery movement seem-ngly on the verge of collapse, a new figure emerged to trans-orm it into a dramatically different phenomenon. He was AZilliam Lloyd Garrison. Born in Massachusetts in 1805, larrison was an assistant in the 1820s to the New Jersey Quaker Benjamin Lundy, who published the leading antislav-of the time-the Genius of Universal Emancipation-in Baltimore. Garrison shared Lundy’s abhorrence of slavery, but he soon grew impatient with his employers mod-
rate tone and mild proposals for reform. In 1831, therefore, ie returned to Boston to found his own weekly newspaper, he Liberator.
Garrison’s simple philosophy was genuinely revolutionary. Opponents of slavery, he said, should view the institution rom the point of view of the black man, not the white slaveowner. They should not, as earlier reformers had done, talk about t e evil influence of slavery on white society; instead, they s ou talk about the damage the system did to Africans. An t y
should, therefore, reject "gradualism” and demand the immediate, unconditional, universal abolition of slavery. Garrison spoke with particular scorn about the advocates of colonization. They were not emancipationists, he argued; on the contrary, their real aim was to strengthen slavery by ridding the country of those African Americans who were already free. The true aim of foes of slavery, he insisted, must be to extend to African Americans all the rights of American citizenship. As startling as the drastic nature of his proposals was the relentless, uncompromising tone with which he promoted them. "I am aware,” he wrote in the first issue of the Liberator, "that many object to the severity of my language; but is there not cause for severity? I will be as harsh as truth, and as uncompromising as justice. . . . I am in earnest-I will not equivocate-I will not excuse-I will not retreat a single inch-AND I WILL BE HEARD.”
Garrison soon attracted a large group of followers throughout the North, enough to enable him to found the New England
American Anti-Slavery Society in 1832 and a year Anti-Slavery later, after a convention in Philadelphia, the Society American Anti-Slavery Society. Membership in the new organizations mushroomed. By
1835, there were more than 400 chapters of the societies; by 1838, there were 1,350 chapters, with more than 250,000 members. Antislavery sentiment was developing a strength and assertiveness greater than at any other point in the nation’s past history.
Black Abolitionists
Abolitionism had a particular appeal to the free blacks of the North, who in 1850 numbered about 250,000, mostly concentrated in cities. They lived in conditions of poverty and oppression often worse than those of their slave counterparts in the South. An English traveler who had visited both sections of the country wrote in 1854 that he was "utterly at a loss to imagine the source of that prejudice which subsists against [African Americans] in the Northern states, a prejudice unknown in the South, where the relations between the Africans and the European [white American] are so much more intimate.” This confirmed an earlier observation by the French observer Alexis de Tocqueville that "the prejudice which repels the Negroes seems to increase in proportion as they are emancipated.” Northern blacks were often victimized by mob violence; they had virtually no access to education; they could vote in only a few states; and they were barred from all but the most menial of occupations. Most worked either as domestic servants or as sailors in the American merchant marine, and their wages were such that they lived in squalor. Some were kidnapped by whites and forced back into slavery.
For all their problems, however, northern blacks were aware of, and fiercely proud of, their freedom. And they remained acutely sensitive to the plight of those members of their race who remained in bondage, aware that their own position in society would remain precarious as long as slavery existed. Many in the 1830s came to support Garrison, to subscribe to his newspaper, and to sell subscriptions to it in their
332 * CHAPTER 12
FUGITIVE SLAVE LAW
CONVENTION
Abolitionists gathered in Cazenovia, New York, in August 1850 to consider how to respond to the law recently passed by Congress requiring northern states to return fugitive slaves to their owners. Frederick Douglass is seated just to the left of the table in this photograph of some of the participants. The gathering was unusual among abolitionist gatherings in including substantial numbers of African Americans. (From the Collection of the Madison County Historical Society, Oneida, New York) Free Blacks’ Commitment to Abolition
own communities. Indeed, the majority of the Liberator's early subscribers were free African Americans.
There were also important African American leaders who expressed the aspirations of their race. One of the most militant was David Walker, a free black from Boston, who in 1829 published a harsh pamphlet: Walker's Appeal... to the Colored Citizens. In it he declared: "America is more our country than it is the whites-we have enriched it with our blood and tears.” He warned: ’The whites want slaves, and want us for their slaves, but some of them will curse the day they ever saw us.” Slaves should, he declared, cut their masters’ throats, should "kill, or be killed!”
Most African American critics of slavery, however, were less violent in their rhetoric. Sojourner Truth, a freed black woman, spent several years involved in a strange religious cult in upstate New York. She emerged as a powerful and eloquent spokeswoman for the abolition of slavery.
The greatest African American abolitionist of all-and one
Frederick	most electrifying orators of his time,
Douglass black or white-was Frederick Douglass.
Born a slave in Maryland, Douglass escaped to Massachusetts in 1838, became an outspoken leader of antislavery sentiment, and spent two years lecturing in England, where members of that country’s vigorous antislavery movement lionized him. On his return to the United States in 1847, Douglass purchased his freedom from his Maryland owner and founded an antislavery newspaper, the North Star, in Rochester, New York. He achieved wide renown
as well for his autobiography, Narrative of the Life of Frederick Douglass (1845), in which he presented a damning picture of slavery. Douglass demanded for African Americans not only freedom but full social and economic equality as well. "What, to the American slave, is your 4th of July?” Douglass harshly asked in an Independence Day speech in Rochester, New York, in 1854. "I answer: a day that reveals to him, more than all other days in the year, the gross injustice and cruelty to which he is the constant victim. . . . There is not a nation on earth guilty of practices, more shocking and bloody, than are the people of these United States at this very hour.”
Black abolitionists had been active for years before Douglass emerged as a leader of their cause; they had held their first national convention in 1830. But with Douglass’s leadership, they became a more influential force; and they began, too, to forge alliances with white antislavery leaders such as Garrison.
Anti-Abolitionism
Abolitionism was a powerful force, but it provoked a powerful opposition as well. Almost all white southerners, of course, looked on the movement with fear and contempt. But so too did many northern whites. Indeed, even in the North, aboli-tionists were never more than a small, dissenting minority.
To its critics, the abolitionist crusade was a dangerous and frightening threat to the existing social system. Some whites correctly warned that it would produce a terrible war between the sections. Others feared, also correctly, that it might
ANTEBELLUM CULTURE AND REFORM * 333
lead to a great influx of free blacks into the North. The strident, outspoken abolition movement seemed to many northern whites a sign of the disorienting social changes their society was experiencing-yet another threat to stability and order. To other northerners, mostly men of business, abolition was a threat to lucrative trade with the South.
The result was an escalating wave of violence directed against abolitionists in the 1830s. When Prudence Crandall attempted to admit several African American girls to her private school in Connecticut, local citizens had her arrested, Violent threw filth into her well, and forced her to
Reprisals close down the school. A mob in Philadelphia attacked the abolitionist headquarters, the "Temple of Liberty,” in 1834, burned it to the ground, and began a bloody race riot. Another mob seized Garrison on the streets of Boston in 1835 and threatened to hang him. Authorities saved him from death only by locking him in jail. Elijah Lovejoy, the editor of an abolitionist newspaper in Alton, Illinois, was a repeated victim of mob violence.
WILLIAM LLOYD GARRISON
Garrison was the first member of the antislavery Movement to call publicly for "immediate and complete emancipation of slaves. That was in 1831, and for the next three decades he remained a stern and uncompromising enemy of slavery. After the Civil War, however, Garrison displayed little interest in the plight of the blacks he had tried to emancipate. Instead, he turned to women s suffrage, Indian rights, and the Prohibition of alcohol. (© FPG/Getty Images) Three times, angry whites invaded his offices and smashed his presses. Three times, Lovejoy installed new machines and began publishing again. When a mob attacked his office a fourth time, late in 1837, he tried to defend his press. The attackers set fire to the building and, as Lovejoy fled, shot and killed him.
That so many men and women continued to embrace abolitionism in the face of such vicious opposition from within their own communities suggests much about the nature of the movement. Abolitionists were not people who made their political commitments lightly or casually. They were strong-willed, passionate crusaders, displaying enormous courage and moral strength, and displaying, too, at times a level of fervor that many of their contemporaries found disturbing. Abolitionists were widely denounced, even by some who shared their aversion to slavery, as wild-eyed fanatics bent on social revolution. The anti-abolitionist mobs, in other words, were only the most violent expression of a sentiment that many other white Americans shared.
Abolitionism Divided
Moderates
versus
Extremists
By the mid-1830s, the abolitionist crusade had become impossible to ignore. It had also begun to experience serious internal strains and divisions. One reason was the violence of the anti-abolitionists, which persuaded some members of the movement that a more moderate approach was necessary. Another reason was the growing radicalism of William Lloyd Garrison, who shocked even many of his
own allies (including Frederick Douglass) by attacking not only slavery but the government itself. The Constitution, he said, was "a covenant with death and an agreement with hell.” The nation’s churches, he claimed, were bulwarks of slavery. In 1840, finally, Garrison precipitated a formal division within the American Anti-Slavery Society by insisting that women, who had always been central to the organization’s work, be permitted to participate in the movement on terms of full equality. He continued after 1840 to arouse controversy with new, more-radical stands: an extreme pacifism that rejected even defensive wars; opposition to all forms of coercion-not just slavery but prisons and asylums as well; and finally, in 1843, a call for northern disunion from the South. The nation could, Garrison suggested, purge itself of the sin of slavery by expelling the slave states from the Union.
From 1840 on, therefore, abolitionism moved in many channels and spoke with many different voices. The Garrisonians remained influential, with their uncompromising moral stance. Others operated in moderate ways, arguing that abolition could be accomplished only as the result of a long, patient, peaceful struggle-Hmmediate abolition gradually accomplished,” as they called it. At first, such moderates depended on "moral suasion.” They would appeal to the conscience of the slaveholders and convince them that their institution was sinful. When that produced no results, they turned to political action, seeking to induce the northern states and the federal government to aid the cause wherever
The Abolition of Slavery
FT1TT T?
Thirteenth Amendment to the Constitution, ratified in 1865, following the Civil War, abol-1 JlI £e ished slavery in the United States. But the effort to abolish slavery did not begin or end in North America. Emancipation in the United States was part of a worldwide antislavery movement that had begun in the late eighteenth century and continued through the end of the nineteenth. The movement to end slavery reflected the ideals of the Enlightenment, which inspired new concepts of individual freedom and political equality. As Enlightenment ideas spread throughout the Western world in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, introducing human rights and individual liberty to the concept of civilization, people on both sides of the Atlantic began to ask whether slavery was compatible with these new ideas. Some Enlightenment thinkers, including some of the founders of the American republic,
ANTI-SLAVE MESSAGE
This sampler conveys a potent anti-slave message, "Thou God Seest Me.” Originally from the Bible (Genesis 16:13), this quote expresses the sentiment that the kneeling slave should be seen as a man rather than chattel. (© Wilberforce House, Hull City Museums and Art Galleries, UK/The Bridgeman Art Library) believed that freedom was appropriate for white people, but not for people of color. But others came to believe that all human beings had an equal claim to liberty, and their views became the basis for an escalating series of antislavery movements.
Opponents of slavery first targeted the slave trade— the vast commerce in human beings that had grown up in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries and had come to involve large parts of Europe, Africa, the Caribbean, and North and South America. In the aftermath of the revolutions in America, France, and Haiti in the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries, the attack on the slave trade gained momentum. The English reformer William Wilberforce spent years attacking Britain's connection with the slave trade, arguing against it on moral and religious grounds. After the Haitian revolution, he argued as well that the continuation of slavery would create more slave revolts. In 1807, he persuaded Parliament to pass a law ending the slave trade within the entire British Empire, The British example—combined with political, economic, and military pressure from London—persuaded many other nations to make the international slave trade illegal: the United States in 1808, France in 1814, Holland in 1817, and Spain in 1845. Trading in slaves continued within countries and colonies where slavery remained legal (including the United States), and some illegal slave trading continued throughout the Atlantic world. But the sale of slaves steadily declined after 1807. The last known shipment of slaves across the Atlantic—from Africa to Cuba-occurred in 1867.
Ending the slave trade was a great deal easier than ending slavery itself. But pressure to abolish slavery grew steadily throughout the nineteenth century, with Wilberforce once more helping lead the international outcry against the institution. In Haiti, the slave revolts that began in 1791 eventually abolished not only slavery but also French rule. In some parts of South America, slavery came to an end with the overthrow of Spanish rule in the
possible. They joined the Garrisonians in helping runaway slaves find refuge in the North or in Canada through the so-called underground railroad (although their efforts were never as highly organized as the term suggests). They helped fund the legal battle over the Spanish slave vessel Amistad.
Later, after the Supreme Court (in Prigg v. Pennsylvania, 1842) ruled that states need not aid in enforcing the 1793 law requiring the return of fugitive slaves to their owners, abolitionists secured the passage of "personal liberty laws” in several northern states. These laws forbade state officials to assist
334 *
in the capture and return of runaways. Above all, the antislavery societies petitioned Congress to abolish slavery in places where the federal government had jurisdiction-in the territories and in the District of Columbia—and to prohibit the interstate slave trade. But political abolitionism had severe limits. Few members of the movement believed that Congress could constitutionally interfere with a "domestic” institution such as slavery within the individual states themselves.
The abolitionists never formed a political party. Antislavery sentiment underlay the formation in 1840 of the Liberty Party,
ANTEBELLUM CULTURE AND REFORM
• 335 1820s. Simon Bolivar, the great leader of Latin American independence, considered abolishing slavery an important part of his mission. He freed those slaves who joined his armies, and he insisted on prohibitions of slavery in several of the constitutions he helped frame. In 1833, the British Parliament passed a law abolishing slavery throughout the British Empire and compensated slaveowners for freeing their slaves. France abolished slavery in its empire in 1848. In the Caribbean, Spain followed Britain in slowly eliminating slavery from its colonies. Puerto Rico abolished slavery in 1873 and Cuba became the last colony in the Caribbean to end slavery, in 1886, in the face of increasing slave resistance and the declining profitability of slave-based plantations. Brazil was the last nation in the Americas to end the system, in 1888. The Brazilian military began to turn against slavery after the valiant participation of slaves in Brazil's war with Paraguay in the late 1860s; eventually, educated Brazilian civilians began to oppose the system too, arguing that it obstructed economic and social progress.
In the United States, the power of world opinion—and the example of Wilberforce’s movement in England—became an important spur to the abolitionist movement as it gained strength in the 1820s and 1830s, American abolitionism, in turn, helped reinforce the movements abroad. Frederick Douglass, the former slave turned abolitionist, became a major figure in the international antislavery movement and was a much-admired and much-sought-after speaker in England and Europe in the 1840s and 1850s. No other nation paid as terrible a price for abolishing slavery as did the United States during its Civil War, but American emancipation was nevertheless a part of a worldwide movement toward ending legalized human bondage. •
UNDERSTAND, ANALYZE, AND EVALUATE
1.	Why did opponents of slavery focus first on ending the slave trade, rather than abolishing slavery itself? Why was ending the slave trade easier than ending slavery?
2.	How do William Wilberforce's arguments against slavery compare with those of the abolitionists in the United States?
3.	How could a nation that declared "all men are created equal" justify slavery?
which chose the Kentucky antislavery leader James G. Birney its presidential candidate. But this party, and its successors, never campaigned for outright abolition (an illustration of the important fact that "antislavery” and "abolitionism were, not always the same thing). They stood instead for free soil, for keeping slavery out of the territories. Some free-soilers were concerned about the welfare of African Americans; others cared nothing about the slaves but simply wanted to keep the
West a country for whites. Garrison dismissed free soilism as "white-manism.” But the free-soil position would ultimately do
Harriet
Beecher
Stowe
what abolitionism never could accomplish: attract the support of large numbers, even a majority, of the white population of the North.
The frustrations of political abolitionism drove some critics of slavery to embrace more drastic measures. A few began to advocate violence; a group of prominent abolitionists in New England, for example, funneled money and arms to John Brown to enable bloody uprisings in Kansas and Virginia (see pp. 356-357, 360). Others attempted to arouse widespread public anger through propaganda. Abolitionist descriptions of slavery-for example, Theodore Dwight Weld and Angelina Grimke’s American Slavery as It Is: Testimony of a Thousand Witnesses (1839)-presented what the authors claimed were careful, factual pictures of slavery, but what were in fact highly polemical, often wildly distorted images.
The most powerful document of abolitionist propaganda, however, was a work of fiction: Harriet Beecher Stowe's Uncle Tom’s Cabin. It appeared first, in 1851-1852, as a serial in an antislavery weekly. Then, in 1852, it was
published as a book. It rocked the nation, selling more than 300,000 copies within a year of publication, and was later issued again and again to become one of the most remarkable best-sellers in American history.
Stowe’s novel emerged not just out of abolitionist politics, but also out of a popular tradition of sentimental novels written by, and largely for, women. (See "Patterns of Popular Culture,” pp. 336-337) Stowe combined the emotional conventions of the sentimental novel with the political ideas of the abolition movement, and to sensational effect. Her novel, by embedding the antislavery message within a familiar and popular literary form, succeeded in bringing the message of abolitionism to an enormous new audience-not only those who read the book but also those who watched dramatizations of its story by countless theater companies throughout the nation. The novel’s emotional portrayal of good, kindly slaves victimized by a cruel system; of the loyal, trusting Uncle Tom; of the vicious overseer Simon Legree (described as a New Englander so as to prevent the book from seeming to be an attack on southern whites); of the escape of the beautiful Eliza; of the heartrending death of Little Eva-all became a part of American popular legend. Reviled throughout the South, Stowe became a hero to many in the North. And in both regions, her novel helped to inflame sectional tensions to a new level of passion. Few books in American history have had so great an impact on the course of public events.
Even divided, therefore, abolitionism remained a powerful influence on the life of the nation. Only a relatively small number of people before the Civil War ever accepted the abolitionist position that slavery must be entirely eliminated in a single stroke. But the crusade that
Garrison had launched, and that thousands of committed men and women kept alive for three decades, was a constant, visible reminder of how deeply the institution of slavery was dividing America.
Abolitionism’s
Enduring
Influence
Sentimental Novels
I A
’s now wh°Hy 9'ven over t° a damned mob of scribbling women, ’ \ Nathaniel Hawthorne complained in 1855, "and I should have no
chance of success while the public taste is occupied with their trash." Hawthorne, one of the leading novelists of his time, was complaining about the most popular form of fiction in mid-nineteenth-century America—not his own dark and serious works, but the "sentimental novel," a genre of literature written and read mostly by middle-class women.
In an age when affluent women occupied primarily domestic roles, and in which finding a favorable marriage was the most important thing many women could do to secure or improve their lots in life, the sentimental novel gave voice to both female hopes and female anxieties. The plots of sentimental novels were usually filled with character-improving problems and domestic trials, but most of them ended with the heroine securely and happily married. They were phenomenally successful, many of them selling more than 100,000 copies each—far more than almost any other books of the time.
Sentimental heroines were almost always beautiful and endowed with specifically female qualities— "all the virtues," one novelist wrote, "that are founded in the sensibility of the heart: Pity, the attribute of angels, and friendship, the balm of life, delight to dwell in the female breast." Women were highly sensitive creatures, the sentimental writers believed, incapable of disguising their feelings, and subject to fainting, mysterious illnesses, trances, and, of course, tears—things rarely expected of men. But they were also capable of a kind of nurturing love and natural sincerity that was hard to find in the predominantly male public world. In Susan Warner's The Wide, Wide World (1850), for example, the heroine, a young girl named Ellen Montgomery, finds herself suddenly thrust into the "wide, wide
world" of male competition after her father loses his fortune. She is unable to adapt to this world, but she is saved in the end when she is taken in by wealthy relatives, who will undoubtedly prepare her for a successful marriage. They restore to her the security and comfort to which she had been born and without which she seemed unable to thrive.
Sentimental novels accepted uncritically the popular assumptions about women's special needs and desires, and they offered stirring tales of how women satisfied them. But sentimental novels were not limited to romanticized images of female fulfillment through protection and marriage. They hinted as well at the increasing role of women in reform movements. Many such books portrayed women dealing with social and moral problems— and using their highly developed female sensibilities to help other women escape from their troubles, Women were particularly suitable for such reform work, the writers implied, because they were specially gifted at helping and nurturing others.
LOOKING BACK
The rapidly changing society of antebellum America produced a remarkable upsurge of cultural nationalism and reform. Writers, artists, intellectuals, and others drew heavily from new European notions of personal liberation-a set of ideas often known as romanticism. But they also strove to create a truly American culture, unbeholden to European models. The literary and artistic life of the nation expressed the rising interest in personal liberation-in giving individuals the freedom to explore their own souls and to find in nature a full expression of their divinity. It also called attention to some of the nation’s glaring social problems.
Reformers, too, made use of the romantic belief in the divinity of the individual. They flocked to religious revivals, worked on behalf of such "moral” reforms as temperance, supported education, and stirred the beginnings of feminism. Above all, in the North, they rallied against slavery. Out of this growing antislavery movement emerged a new and powerful phenomenon: abolitionism, which rejected moderate reform and insisted on nothing less than immediate emancipation of the slaves. The abolitionist crusade galvanized much of the North. It also contributed greatly to the growing schism between North and South.
Key Terms/People/Places/Events
Amistad 334
Charles Grandison
Finney 322 Edgar Allan Poe 317 Elizabeth Cady
Stanton 327 Frederick Douglass 332 Harriet Beecher
Stowe 335
Henry David Thoreau 318 Herman Melville 317
Horace Mann 325 Hudson River School 315 James Fenimore
Cooper 316 Joseph Smith 320 Lucretia Mott 327 Margaret
Fuller 319 Nathaniel
Hawthorne 319 Ralph Waldo Emerson 318
Sarah and Angelina Grimke 327 Seneca Falls
Convention 330 Shakers 320 Susan B. Anthony 327 Transcendentalism 317 Walt Whitman 316 William Lloyd Garrison 331
135,808 SETS, 270,800 VOlfWES SOLD.
UNCLE TOMS CABIN
fob sale here.
U EMTIO* WR THE WILLIOV
EtWMXTE l> I HI, FHII'E 3? II fEYTX. - ■ l\ (ERR Ci. I* I HU H«HE 3» TEXTS. •	•	I* t »*h. (WITH, « ELITES, PRUE SIJ«.
SIPERB IIIISTRITEB EOITIOV I* I
Id, WITH 133 EM.RUTXES. PRK'KN KROH **..W T» HS.OO.
The Greatest Book of the Age.
UNCLE TOM’S CABIN
Uncle Tom s Cabin did much to inflame public opinion in both the North and the South in the last years before the Civil War. When Abraham Lincoln was introduced to Stowe once in the White House, he reportedly said to her: "So you are the little lady that has brought this great war.” At the time, however, Stowe was equally well known as one of the most successful American writers of sentimental novels. 7( Corbis) The most famous sentimental novelist of the nineteenth century was Harriet Beecher Stowe. Most of her books— The Minister's Wooing, My Wife and I, We and Our Neighbors, and others—portrayed the travails and ultimate triumphs of women as they became wives, mothers, and hostesses. But Stowe was and remains best known for her 1852 antislavery novel, Uncle Toms Cabin, one of the most influential books ever published in America. As a story about slavery, and about an aging black man— Uncle Tom—who is unfailingly submissive to his white masters, it is in many ways very different from her other novels. But Uncle Tom's Cabin is a sentimental novel, too. Stowe's critique of slavery is based on her belief in the importance of domestic values and family security. Slavery's violation of those values, and its denial of that security, is what made it so abhorrent to her. The simple, decent Uncle Tom faces many of the same dilemmas that the female heroines of other sentimental novels encounter in their struggles to find security and tranquillity in their lives.
Another way in which women were emerging from their domestic sphere was in becoming
consumers of the expanding products of America's industrializing economy. The female characters in sentimental novels searched not just for love, security, and social justice; they also searched for
luxury and for the pleasure of buying some favored item. Susan Warner illustrated this aspect of the culture of the sentimental novel—and the desires of the women who read them—in The Wide, Wide World, in her description of the young Ellen Montgomery in an elegant bookstore, buying a Bible: "Such beautiful Bibles she had never seen; she pored in ecstasy over their varieties of type and binding, and was very evidently in love with them all.'' •
; ’rFv AND
1.	How did the lives of the heroines of the sentimental novels compare with the lives of real women of the nineteenth century? What made them so popular?
2.	How did the sentimental novels encourage women’s participation in public life? Did the novels reinforce prevailing attitudes toward women or broaden the perception of women’s "proper role’’?
3.	Uncle Tom's Cabin is probably one of the best-known works of American fiction. Why was this novel so much more powerful than other sentimental novels? Why has it endured?
RECALL AND REFLECT
1.	What is "romanticism” and how was it expressed in American literature and art?
2.	How did religion affect reform movements, and what was the effect of these movements on religion?
3.	What were the aims of the women’s movement of the nineteenth century? How successful were women in achieving these goals?
4. What arguments and strategies did the abolitionists use in their struggle to end slavery? Who opposed them and why?
* 337
338 . CHAPTER 12
SIGNIFICANT EVENTS
1817			1841		
American Colonization			Brook Farm founded in		
Society founded			Roxbury, Massachusetts		
		1821		•	1844
	•	New York constructs first			Mormon leader Joseph
		penitentiary			Smith killed
1825			1845	•	
Robert Owen founds New			Frederick Douglass publishes		
Harmony community in Indiana			autobiography		
	•	1826		•	1847
		James Fenimore Cooper			Mormons found Salt Lake City
		publishes The Last of the			
1829		Mohicans	1848	A	
David Walker publishes	w	American Society for the	Women's rights convention held		
Appeal... to the Colored		Promotion of Temperance	at Seneca Falls, New York		
Citizens		founded	Oneida Community founded in	•	1850
		1830	New York		Nathaniel Hawthorne publishes
	w	American Colonization Society			The Scarlet Letter
		helps create Liberia for	1851		
1831		emigrating American slaves	Herman Melville publishes	V	
William Lloyd Garrison begins	w	Joseph Smith publishes the	Moby Dick		
publishing the Liberator		Book of Mormon		•	1852
	HI	1833			Harriet Beecher Stowe
		American Anti-Slavery Society			publishes Uncle Tom's Cabin
		founded	1854		
1837			Henry David Thoreau	•	
Horace Mann becomes first	W		publishes Walden		
secretary of Massachusetts					1855
Board of Education	•	1840		•	Walt Whitman publishes Leaves
		Liberty Party formed			of Grass
Q THE IMPENDING
jjj CRISIS Squatter Sovereignty
VINDICATED!
KANSAS”
The battle over the fate of slavery in Kansas was one of the most turbulent events of the 1850s. This 1855 poster invites antislavery forces to a meeting to protest the actions of the "bogus" proslavery territorial legislature, which had passed laws that, among other things, made it illegal to speak or write against slavery. "Squatter sovereignty" was another term for "popular sovereignty," the doctrine that gave residents of a prospective state the power to decide the fate of slavery there. (© Bettmann/Corbisj 
1
SLAVERY
The Squatters of Kansas who are favora*
hie to FREEDOM OF SPEECH on all subjects which interest them, and an utk 4&utzlcd PRESS: who are determined to do their own THINKING and VOTING tlndepeodent of FOREIGN DICTATION, ore requested to assemble in
HASSMEETIHB
>t the time and jplaces following to wifi
THlt following speakers will be in attendance, who w«ll address you on the impOFlJMit --- ‘efe*	*-M*»<«<-
» «»c (allowing sproRci'i ”	---------
question* now before the people of ICnnsa*-
(M»y
" I'wiS.-**
*	s*»«,	iw, —
’	3 m.ny «*rt
*	SWWn *
‘ fchr 4«.vr,h,,.M»'>M tf.l '■ ” &•»<■» ISm*	TWWm
*	*»-*«»*»	F«Uy
»wr**. *♦ H-SwOS *
; tty



0SJ ^51 B	tSJ U3J 09 'SCI	w» «a*
X A.
Wakefield, C. K. Holliday, M. F. Conway* w K. V«a, d. I^ Speer. W. A. Ela, Jnsiah.WMler, O. €. Brown, X K. Geodm. Doc* Gdpetriefc, Revs. Mr. Tuton and d. E. Stewart, C. A. Foster, X F, Fes, IF Bro»s«<| (a. W. Brown, A, H. Halley and others,
TURN OUT AN» HEAR THEM!
LOOKING AHEAD
1.	How did the annexation of western territories intensify the conflict over slavery and lead to deeper divisions between the North and the South?
2.	What compromises attempted to resolve the conflicts over the expansion of slavery into new territories? To what degree were these compromises successful? Why did they eventually fail to resolve the differences between the North and the South?
3.	What were the major arguments for and against slavery and its expansion into new territories?
i'hlhit aili- N-l. •I'.irteifnmvt,-,. n»
SETTING THE STAGE
UNTIL THE 1840S, THE TENSIONS BETWEEN THE NORTH AND
the South remained relatively contained. Had no new sectional controversies arisen, the United States might have avoided a civil war and the two sections might have resolved their differences peaceably over time. But new controversies did arise, all of them centered on slavery. From the North came the powerful abolitionist movement, which rejected compromise and conciliation and attempted, with great success, to make the elimination of slavery a moral issue that would not be open to compromise. From the South came a belligerent defense of slavery. Slavery, its proponents argued, was not a necessary evil, but a positive good-the best possible system for white southerners, who needed a labor force, and the best possible system as well for black southerners, whom the defenders of slavery insisted needed the paternalistic supervision of white masters.
The West brought these differences to a head most forcefully. As the nation annexed extensive new lands— Texas, the Southwest territories, California, Oregon Country, and others a single question arose again and again: What would be the status of slavery in the territories? Two compromises—one in 1850 and another in 1854—failed to contain the conflict. The result was a dangerous and persistent crisis that produced such bitterness, anger, and despair on both sides that it could no longer be contained. By the time Abraham Lincoln became president in 1860, the nation was beginning to break apart and the momentum toward civil war was becoming almost impossible to reverse.
LOOKING WESTWARD
The United States acquired more than a million square miles of new territory in the 1840s the greatest wave of expansion since the Louisiana Purchase nearly forty years before. By the end of the decade, the nation possessed all the territory of the present-day United States except Alaska, Hawaii, and a few relatively small areas acquired later through border adjustments. Many factors accounted for this great new wave of expansion, the most important of which were the hopes and ambitions of the many thousands of white Americans who moved into or invested in these new territories. Advocates of expansion justified their goals with a carefully articulated set of ideas-an ideology known as "Manifest Destiny,” which became one of the factors driving white Americans to look to the West.
Manifest Destiny
Manifest Destiny reflected both the burgeoning pride that characterized American nationalism in the mid-nineteenth century and the idealistic vision of social perfection that fueled so much of the reform energy of the time. It rested on the idea that America was destined - by God and by history-to expand its boundaries over a vast area, an area that included, but was not necessarily restricted to, the continent of North America. American expansion was not selfish, its advocates insisted; it was an altruistic attempt to extend American liberty to new realms. John L. O’Sullivan, the influential Democratic editor who gave the movement its name, wrote in 1845 that the American claim to new territory
is by the right of our manifest destiny to overspread and to possess the whole of the continent which Providence has given us for the development of the great experiment of liberty and federative self government entrusted to us.
mdimesi uestiny represented more tnan pride in the nation’s political system. Running throughout many of the arguments for expansion was an explicitly racial justification. Throughout the Racial	1840s, many Americans defended the idea of westward expansion by citing the
Justification superiority of the 'American race’-white people of northern European origins.
The 'nonwhite” peoples of the territories could not be absorbed into the republican system. The Indians, the Mexicans, and others in the western regions were racially unfit to be part of an American” community, Manifest Destiny advocates insisted. Westward expansion
THE IMPENDING CRISIS * 341
EXPANDING SETTLEMENT, 1810-1850
This map shows the dramatic expansion of the territorial boundaries of the United States in the decades after the Louisiana Purchase. By 1850, the nation had reached its present boundaries (with the exception of Alaska and Hawaii, which it acquired later). Much of this acquisition occurred in the 1840s. It also shows the spread of white settlement within the territories and states. * What events contributed to the annexation of new land to the United States in those years?
was, therefore, a movement to spread both a political system and a racially defined society. O’Sullivan called "racial purity” (or "whiteness”) the "key” to the triumph of the nation.
By the 1840s, the idea of Manifest Destiny had spread throughout the nation, publicized by the new "penny press” (inexpensive newspapers aimed at a mass audience) and fanned by the rhetoric of nationalist politicians. Advocates of Manifest Destiny disagreed, however, about how far and by what means the nation should expand. Some had relatively limited territorial goals; others envisioned a vast new "empire of liberty that would include Canada, Mexico, Caribbean and Pacific islands, and ultimately, a few dreamed, much of the rest of the world. Some believed America should use force to achieve its expansionist goals, while others felt that the nation should expand peacefully or not at all.
Not everyone embraced the idea of Manifest Destiny. Henry Clay and other prominent politicians feared, correctly as it turned out, that territorial expansion
Opposition to would reopen the painful controversy over
Further s, and threaten the stability of the
Expansion Union Bm their voices were barely audible
over the clamor of enthusiasm for expansion in the 1840s, which began with the issues of Texas and Oregon.
THE LONE STAR FLAG
