658 • CHAPTER 27


 already well inside the Soviet zone, but because of its symbolic importance, it would itself be divided into four occupied s­ ectors. At an unspecified date, Germany would be reunited. As for the rest of Europe, the conference produced a murky accord on the establishment of governments “broadly representative of all democratic elements” and “responsible to the will of the people.” The Yalta accords, in other words, were less a settlement of postwar issues than a set of loose principles that sidestepped the most difficult questions. Roosevelt, Churchill, and Stalin returned home from the conference, each apparently convinced that he had signed an important agreement. But the Soviet interpretation of the accords differed so sharply from the Anglo-American interpretation that the illusion endured only briefly. In the weeks following the Yalta Conference, Roosevelt watched with growing alarm as the Soviet Union moved systematically to establish pro-communist governments in one Soviets in Central and Eastern Europe Central or Eastern European nation after another and as Stalin refused to make the changes in Poland that the president believed Stalin had ­promised. Still believing the differences could be settled, Roosevelt left Washington early in the spring for a vacation at his retreat in Warm Springs, Georgia. There, on April 12, 1945, he suffered a sudden massive stroke and died.

THE COLLAPSE OF THE PEACE
 The new president, Harry S. Truman, had almost no familiarity with international issues. Nor did he share Roosevelt’s apparent faith in Soviet flexibility. Truman sided with the many people inside the government who considered the Soviet Union fundamentally untrustworthy and viewed Stalin himself with suspicion and even loathing.

The Failure of Potsdam
 Truman had been in office only a few days before he decided to “get tough” with the Soviet Union. On April 23, he met with Soviet foreign minister Molotov and sharply chastised him for violations of the Yalta accords. In fact, Truman had little leverage. Russian forces already occupied Poland and much of the rest of Central and Eastern Europe. Germany was already divided among the Allies. The United States was still engaged in a war in the Pacific and was neither able nor willing to enter into a second conflict in Europe. Truman insisted that the United States should be able to get “85 percent” of what it wanted, but he was ultimately forced to settle for much less. He conceded first on Poland. When Stalin made a few minor concessions to the pro-Western exiles, Truman recognized the Warsaw government, hoping that noncommunist forces might gradually expand their influence there. (Until the 1980s, they did not.) To settle other questions, Truman met in July at Potsdam, in Russian-occupied Germany, with Stalin and Churchill (who, after elections in Britain in the midst of the talks, was replaced as prime minister by Clement Attlee). Truman reluctantly accepted the adjustments of the Polish–German border that Stalin had long demanded; he refused, however, to permit the Russians to claim any reparations from the American, French, and British zones of Germany. This stance effectively confirmed that Germany would remain divided. The western zones ultimately united into one nation, friendly to the United States, and the Russian zone survived as another nation, with a pro-Soviet, communist government.

THE COLD WAR
• 659 

The China Problem and Japan
 American hopes for an open, peaceful world “policed” by the great powers required a strong, independent China. But those hopes faced a major obstacle: the Chinese government of Chiang Kai-shek. Chiang was generally friendly to the Chiang versus Mao in China United States, but his government was corrupt and incompetent, with feeble popular support. Ever since 1927, the nationalist government he headed had been engaged in a bitter rivalry with the communist armies of Mao Zedong. By 1945, Mao was in control of one-fourth of the population. Some Americans urged the government to try to find a “third force” to support as an alternative to either Chiang or Mao. Truman, however, decided reluctantly that he had no choice but to continue supporting Chiang. For the next several years, the United States continued to pump money and weapons to Chiang, even as it was becoming clear that the cause was lost. But Truman was not prepared to intervene militarily to save the nationalist regime. Instead, the American government began to consider an alternative to China as the strong, pro-Western force in Asia: a revived Japan. Abandoning the strict Support for Japan occupation policies of the first years after the war (when General Douglas MacArthur had governed the nation), the United States lifted restrictions on industrial development and encouraged rapid economic growth in Japan. The vision of an open, united world was giving way in Asia, as it was in Europe, to an acceptance of a divided world with a strong pro-American sphere of influence.

The Containment Doctrine
 By the end of 1945, a new American foreign policy was slowly emerging. It became known as containment. Rather than attempting to create a unified, “open” world, or to destroy communism where it already existed, the United States and its allies would work to prevent Soviet expansion. The new doctrine emerged in part as a response to events in Europe in 1946. In Turkey, Stalin was trying to win control over the vital sea-lanes to the Mediterranean. In Greece, communist forces were threatening the pro-Western government; the British had announced they could no longer provide assistance. Faced with these challenges, Truman decided to enunciate a firm new policy. In doing so, he drew from the ideas of the American diplomat George F. Kennan, who had warned not long after the war that the only viable American response to Soviet power was “a long-term, patient but firm and vigilant containment of Russian expansive tendencies.” On March 12, 1947, Truman appeared before Congress and used Kennan’s warnings as the basis of what became known as the Truman Doctrine. “I believe,” he argued, “that it must be the policy of the United States to Truman Doctrine ­support free peoples who are resisting attempted subjugation by armed minorities or by outside pressures.” In the same speech, he requested $400 million for aid to Greece and Turkey, which Congress quickly approved. The American commitment ultimately helped reduce Soviet pressure on Turkey and helped the Greek government defeat the communist insurgents and, in the process, establish containment as a basis for American policy that survived for more than forty years.

The Conservative Opposition to Containment
 The containment doctrine attracted broad, bipartisan support for dealing with the Cold War. But not everyone believed that containment was the right way to deal with

660 • CHAPTER 27


 c­ ommunism. Some Americans on the left believed that containment was an unnecessarily belligerent approach to the Soviet Union, that the United States could have made peace with the Russians. Wider opposition to containment came from conservative Americans, who believed that containment was too weak a response to communism—that, indeed, it was a kind of appeasement. Among the conservatives who disdained containment were members of an anticomJohn Birch Society munist organization known as the John Birch Society. Its leader was Robert Welch, a man so fearful of communism that he believed that some of the most important leaders of American government were trying to undermine the United States and collaborating with the Soviets. Welch presented his opposition in The Blue Book of the John Birch Society, in which he argued that much of the American government was riddled with treason. “For years,” he wrote, “we have been taken steadily down the road to Communism by steps supposedly designed . . . as ways of fighting Communism.” Instead, he argued, it was communist Americans themselves who were undermining the nation. “Both the U.S. and Soviet governments are controlled by the same furtive conspiratorial cabal of internationalists, greedy bankers, and corrupt politicians,” Welch wrote. “If left unexposed, the traitors inside the U.S. government would betray the country’s sovereignty to the United Nations for a collectivist New World Order, managed by a ‘one-world’ socialist government.” Among the sources of treason, Welch claimed, was the creation of the United Nations and other international institutions. Many Americans considered the John Birch Society an extremist organization, but the belief that communism was the greatest danger facing the United States was widely supported. The opposition to containment reached some of the highest levels of the government. John Foster Dulles, who would soon become secretary of state in the Eisenhower administration, wrote the foreign policy plank in the Republican platform in 1952. “We charge that the leaders of the Administration in power lost the peace so dearly earned by World War II,” Dulles charged. “They abandoned friendly nations such as Latvia, Lithuania, Estonia, Poland, and Czechoslovakia.” Containment, they argued, was a policy of weakness that had allowed the communists to take over much of the world. Instead, those who opposed containment called for what was known as “rollback.” Instead of containing communism, the United States should be pushing back the borders of communism, despite the possibility of another war. President Dwight Eisenhower, however, did not share Dulles’s belief in rollback, and the government abided by the containment strategy throughout the 1950s and beyond—despite the fevered opposition to what some still ­considered to be treason.

The Marshall Plan
 An integral part of the containment policy was a proposal to aid in the economic reconstruction of Western Europe. There were many motives: humanitarian concern for the European people; a fear that Europe would remain an economic drain on the United States if it could not quickly rebuild; and a desire for a strong European market for American goods. But above all, American policymakers believed that unless something could be done to strengthen the shaky pro-American governments in Western Europe, those governments might fall under the control of the growing domestic communist parties. In June 1947, Secretary of State George C. Marshall announced a plan to provide economic assistance to all European nations (including the Soviet Union) that would join in drafting a program for recovery. Although Russia and its Eastern satellites predictably

THE COLD WAR
• 661 

 rejected the plan, sixteen Western European nations eagerly participated. Whatever isolationist opposition there was in the United States largely vanished after a sudden coup in Czechoslovakia in February 1948, which established a Soviet-dominated communist government. In April, Congress approved the creation of the Economic Cooperation Administration, the agency that would administer the Marshall Plan, as it became known. Over the next three years, the Marshall Plan channeled $13 billion of American aid into Europe, helping to spark a substantial economic revival. By the end of 1950, European industrial production had risen 64 percent, communist strength in the member nations had declined, and opportunities for American trade had revived.

Mobilization at Home
 In 1948, at the president’s request, Congress approved a new military draft and revived the Selective Service System. In the meantime, the United States, having failed to reach agreement with the Soviet Union on international control of nuclear weapons, redoubled its own efforts in atomic research, elevating nuclear weaponry to a central place in its military arsenal. The Atomic Energy Commission, established in 1946, became the supervisory body charged with overseeing all nuclear research, civilian and military alike. And in 1950, the Truman administration approved the development of the new hydrogen bomb, a nuclear weapon far more powerful than those used in 1945. The National Security Act of 1947 reshaped the nation’s military and diplomatic institutions. A new Department of Defense would oversee all branches of the armed services, combining functions previously performed separately by the War and Navy Departments. A National Security Council (NSC), operating out Creation of NSC, CIA, and Defense Department of the White House, would govern foreign and military policy. A Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) would replace the wartime Office of Strategic Services and would be responsible for collecting information through both open and covert methods; as the Cold War continued, the CIA would also engage in secret political and military operations on behalf of American interests. The National Security Act, in other words, gave the president expanded powers with which to pursue the nation’s international goals.

 The Road to NATO The United States also moved to strengthen the military capabilities of Western Europe. Convinced that a reconstructed Germany was essential to the needs of the West, Truman reached an agreement with England and France to merge the three western zones of occupation into a new West German republic (which would include the three non-Soviet sectors of Berlin, even though that city lay within the Soviet zone). Stalin responded quickly. On June 24, 1948, he imposed a tight blockade around the western sectors of Berlin. Berlin Airlift If Germany was to be officially divided, Stalin was implying, then the country’s Western government would have to abandon the capital city in the heart of the Soviet-controlled eastern zone. Truman refused to do so. Unwilling to risk war through a military challenge to the blockade, he ordered a massive airlift to supply the city with food, fuel, and other needed goods. The airlift continued for more than ten months, transporting nearly 2.5 million tons of food and other material, keeping a city of 2 million people alive. In the spring of 1949, Stalin lifted the now ineffective blockade. And in October, the division of Germany into two nations—the Federal Republic in the west (with its new capital in Bonn) and the Democratic Republic in the East (with its capital in East Berlin)—became official.

662 • CHAPTER 27


EAST
GERMANY


 Reykjavik ICELAND

West
Faeroe Is.
(Den.)


AT L A N T I C
OCEAN


NORWAY
Oslo
Stockholm


U.S.


French


British


Soviet


Ba


DENMARK


Berlin Wall


Moscow


 lti

GREAT
BRITAIN


FINLAND
Helsinki


 c S ea

North
Sea
IRELAND


Berlin


SWEDEN


Shetland Is.
(Br.)


East
Berlin


Copenhagen


Amsterdam
London


Berlin
NETH.
Brussels
EAST
Bonn
BELG.
GERMANY


Paris


Warsaw


SOVIET UNION


POLAND


WEST
Prague C Z EC GERMANY H. Vienna Budapest AUSTRIA SWITZ. HUNGARY ROMANIA Belgrade Bucharest YU GO SLA ITALY VIA Sofia A Corsica RI Rome GA (Fr.) BUL Tirane LUX. 
POR


Sardinia
(It.)


Ankara
TURKEY


Sicily


MOROCCO


Black Sea


ALBANIA


GREECE
Athens


 ALGERIA (Fr.) Malta (Br.)

 NATO countries, 1956

TUNISIA


Me
Crete
 dit erra n ea n S e a

Warsaw Pact
 countries, 1956 Unaffiliated countries

 i

 a

SPAIN


 sp

Se


Madrid


Ca


 an

Lisbon


TU
GA
L


FRANCE


IRAN
SYRIA


Cyprus
(Br.)


IRAQ


LEBANON
KUWAIT


ISRAEL
JORDAN


Suez
Canal
LIBYA


SAUDI ARABIA


EGYPT


DIVIDED EUROPE AFTER WORLD WAR II
This map shows the sharp division that emerged in Europe after World War II between the area under the control of the Soviet Union and the area allied with the United States. In the east, Soviet control or influence extended into all the nations shaded brown—including the eastern half of Germany. In the west and south, the green-shaded nations were allied with the United States as members of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO). The countries shaded gold were aligned with neither of the two superpowers. The small map in the upper right shows the division of Berlin among the various occupying powers at the end of the war. Eventually, the American, British, and French sectors were combined to create West Berlin, a city governed by West Germany but entirely surrounded by communist East Germany. The airplane icons represent the airlift of supplies ordered by President Truman into the blockaded zones of West Berlin beginning in June 1948. • How did the West prevent East Germany from absorbing West Berlin? 
 The crisis in Berlin accelerated the consolidation of what was already in effect an alliance among the United States and the countries of Western Europe. On April 4, 1949, twelve nations signed an agreement establishing the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO)—declaring that an armed attack against one member would be considered an attack against all. The NATO countries would, moreover, maintain a standing military force in Europe to defend against what they believed was the threat of a Soviet invasion. The formation of NATO eventually spurred the Soviet Union to create an alliance of its Warsaw Pact own with the communist governments in Eastern Europe, as formalized in 1955 by the Warsaw Pact.

THE COLD WAR
• 663 

Reevaluating Cold War Policy
 In September 1949, the Soviet Union successfully exploded its first atomic weapon. The Russian nuclear capacity came years earlier than predicted, shocking and frightening many Americans. So did the collapse of Chiang Kai-shek’s nationalist government in China, which occurred with startling speed in the last months of 1949. Chiang fled with his political allies and the remnants of his army to the offshore island of Formosa (Taiwan), and the entire Chinese mainland came under the control of a Communist Victory in China communist government led by Mao Zedong that many Americans believed to be an extension of the Soviet Union. The United States refused to recognize the new communist regime. The fall of China to communism was one of the most traumatic events of the Cold War. It accelerated the fear of communism, and it persuaded many Americans that the defeat was a result of weakness, and even treason. As a result, American friends of China formed what came to be known as the China Lobby. Among its eminent leaders were members of Congress, high-level military figures, and powerful journalists. They believed that the United States had not done enough to prevent the communists from taking over mainland China. The failure persuaded many Americans that the government—particularly members of the State Department—was responsible. In this atmosphere of escalating crisis, Truman called for a thorough review of American foreign policy. The result, a National Security Council report, issued in 1950 and commonly known as NSC-68, outlined a shift in the American position. The first statements of the containment doctrine—the writings of George Kennan, the Truman Doctrine speech—had made distinctions between areas of vital interest to the United States and areas of less importance to the nation’s foreign policy. The containment doctrine also called for sharing the military burden of protecting the Western nations. But NSC-68 argued that the United States could no longer rely on other nations to take the initiative in resisting communism. It must move on its own to stop communist expansion virtually anywhere it occurred, regardless of the intrinsic strategic or economic value of the lands in question. Among other things, the report called for a major expansion of American military power, with a defense budget almost four times the previously projected figure. (See “Consider the Source: National Security Council Paper No. 68.”)

AMERICA AFTER THE WAR
 The crises overseas were not the only frustrations the American people encountered after the war. The nation also faced serious, if short-lived, economic difficulties in adapting to peace. And it suffered from an exceptionally heated political climate that produced a new wave of insecurity and repression.

The Problems of Reconversion
 Despite widespread predictions that the end of the war would return America to depression conditions, economic growth continued after 1945. Pent-up consumer demand from workers who had accumulated substantial savings during the war helped spur the boom. So did a $6 billion tax cut. The Servicemen’s Readjustment Act of 1944, better known as the GI Bill of Rights, provided housing, education, and job-training subsidies to GI Bill veterans and increased spending even further.

CO NS IDER T HE S O URC E
NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL PAPER NO. 68 (NSC-68)
 On April 7, 1950, foreign policy experts in the Truman administration completed a top-secret report calling for an expansion of the American commitment to containing the Soviet Union. They based that call, as outlined in the selection below, on their dim view of Soviet character and on their understanding of international power relations in the previous four decades. Within the past thirty-five years the world has experienced two global wars of tremendous violence. It has witnessed two revolutions— the Russian and the Chinese—of extreme scope and intensity. It has also seen the collapse of five empires—the Ottoman, the Austro-Hungarian, German, Italian, and Japanese—and the drastic decline of two major imperial systems, the British and the French. During the span of one generation, the international distribution of power has been fundamentally altered. For several centuries it had proved impossible for any one nation to gain such preponderant strength that a coalition of other nations could not in time face it with greater strength. The international scene was marked by recurring periods of violence and war, but a system of sovereign and independent states was maintained, over which no state was able to achieve hegemony. Two complex sets of factors have now basically altered this historical distribution of power. First, the defeat of Germany and Japan and the decline of the British and French Empires have interacted with the development of the United States and the Soviet Union in such a way that power has increasingly gravitated to these two centers. Second, the Soviet Union, unlike previous aspirants to hegemony, is animated by a new fanatic faith, antithetical to our own, and seeks to impose

 its absolute authority over the rest of the world. Conflict has, therefore, become endemic and is waged, on the part of the Soviet Union, by violent or nonviolent methods in accordance with the dictates of expediency. With the development of increasingly terrifying weapons of mass destruction, every individual faces the ever-present possibility of annihilation should the conflict enter the phase of total war. [. . .] Our overall policy at the present time may be described as one designed to foster a world environment in which the American system can survive and flourish. It therefore rejects the concept of isolation and affirms the necessity of our positive participation in the world community. This broad intention embraces two subsidiary policies. One is a policy which we would probably pursue even if there were no Soviet threat. It is a policy of attempting to develop a healthy international community. The other is the policy of “containing” the Soviet system. These two policies are closely interrelated and interact on one another. Nevertheless, the distinction between them is basically valid and contributes to a clearer understanding of what we are trying to do. UNDERSTAND, ANALYZE, & EVALUATE 1. What broader historical trends did the

 authors of this memorandum identify as precursors to global power relations ­after World War II? 2. How did Memorandum NSC-68 characterize the Soviet Union? How did it characterize the goals of the United States? How does this compare to the historical record presented to you in this text?

Source: U.S. Department of State, Foreign Relations of the United States, 1950. National Security Affairs; Foreign Economic Policy
D.C.: U.S.
Government Printing Office, 1977), I, pp. 237, 252–253, 262–263, 264, 282, 290. Located  in Elizabeth Cobbs Hoffman and Jon Gjerde (eds.), Major Problems in American History. Volume II: Since 1865 (Boston: Houghton Mifflin Company, 2002), pp. 287–288.

664 •


THE COLD WAR
• 665 

 The GI Bill expressed the progressive hopes of many Americans who wanted to see the government do more to assist its citizens. But it also expressed some of the enduring inequalities in American life. Few GI Bill benefits were available to women, even though many women had assisted the war effort in important ways. And while the GI Bill itself did not discriminate against African Americans, its provisions giving local governments jurisdiction allowed southern states, in particular, to deny or limit benefits to black veterans. The flood of consumer demand contributed to more than two years of inflation, during which prices rose at annual rates of 14 to 15 percent. Compounding the economic difficulties was a sharp rise in labor unrest. By the end of 1945, major strikes had occurred in the automobile, electrical, and steel industries. In April 1946, John L. Lewis led the United Mine Workers out on strike, shutting down the coal fields for forty days. Truman finally forced coal production to resume by ordering government seizure of the mines. Inflation and Strikes But in the process, he pressured mine owners to grant the union most of its demands. Almost simultaneously, the nation’s railroads suffered a total shutdown—the first in the nation’s history—as two major unions walked out on strike. By threatening to use the army to run the trains, Truman pressured the strikers back to work after only a few days. Reconversion was particularly difficult for the millions of women and minorities who had entered the workforce during the war. With veterans returning home, employers tended to push women, African Americans, Hispanics, and others out of the plants to make room for white males. Some war workers, particularly women, left the workforce voluntarily, out of a desire to return to their former domestic lives. But as many as 80 percent of women workers, and virtually all black and Hispanic males, wanted to continue working. The postwar inflation, the pressure of a growing high-consumption society, the rising divorce rate (which left many women responsible for their own economic wellbeing)—all combined to create a high demand for paid employment among women. As women workers found themselves excluded from industrial jobs, therefore, they moved increasingly into other areas of the economy (above all, the service sector).

The Fair Deal Rejected
 Days after the Japanese surrender, Truman submitted to Congress a twenty-one-point domestic program outlining what he later named the “Fair Deal.” It called for an expansion of Social Security benefits, the raising of the legal minimum wage from 40 to 65 cents an hour, a program to ensure full employment through aggressive use of federal spending and investment, a permanent Fair Employment Practices Act, public housing and slum clearance, long-range environmental and public works planning, and government promotion of scientific research. Weeks later he added other proposals: federal aid to education, government health insurance and prepaid medical care, funding for the St. Lawrence Seaway, and nationalization of atomic energy. But most of Truman’s programs fell victim to the same public and congressional conservatism that had crippled the last years of the New Deal. Indeed, that conservatism seemed to be intensifying, as the November 1946 congressional elections suggested. Using the simple but devastating slogan “Had Enough?” the Republican Party won control of both houses of Congress, which quickly moved to reduce government spending and chip away at New Deal reforms. Its most notable action was its assault on the Wagner Act of 1935, in the form of the Labor-Management Relations Act of 1947, better known as the Taft-Hartley Act. It made illegal the closed shop (a workplace in which no one can be hired without first being a member of a union). And although it continued to permit the creation of union shops (in which workers must join a union after being hired), it ­permitted states to pass “right-to-work” laws

666 • CHAPTER 27


 prohibiting even that. The Taft-Hartley Act also empowered the president to call for a ten-week “cooling-off ” period before a strike by issuing an injunction against any work stoppage that endangered national safety or health. Outraged workers and union leaders denounced the measure as a “slave labor bill.” Truman vetoed it. But both houses easily overruled him the same day. The Taft-Hartley Act did not destroy the labor movement. But it did damage weaker unions in relatively lightly organized industries such as chemicals and textiles, and it made much more difficult the organizing of workers who had never been union members at all, especially in the South and the West.

Taft-Hartley Act


The Election of 1948
 Truman and his advisers believed that the American public was not ready to abandon the achievements of the New Deal, despite the 1946 election results. As they planned their strategy for the 1948 campaign, therefore, they hoped to appeal to enduring Democratic loyalties. Throughout 1948, Truman proposed one reform measure after another (including, on February 2, the first major civil rights bill of the century). To no one’s surprise, Congress ignored or defeated them all, but the president was building campaign issues for the fall.



































































Candidate (Party)
Harry S. Truman
(Democratic)
Thomas E. Dewey
(Republican)
Strom Thurmond
(States’ Rights)
Henry A. Wallace
(Progressive)
Other Candidates
(Prohibition, Socialist Labor,
Socialist, Socialist Workers)


Electoral Vote
—
—


Popular Vote (%)
24,105,695
(49.5)
21,969,170
(45.1)
1,169,021
(2.4)
1,156,103
(2.4)
272,713


 53% of electorate voting THE ELECTION OF 1948 Despite the widespread expectation that the Republican candidate, Thomas Dewey, would easily defeat Truman in 1948, the president in fact won a substantial reelection victory that year. This map shows the broad geographic reach of Truman’s victory. Dewey swept most of the Northeast, but Truman dominated almost everywhere else. Strom Thurmond, the States’ Rights candidate, carried four states in the South. • What had prompted Thurmond to desert the Democratic Party and run for president on his own?

THE COLD WAR
• 667 

 There remained, however, the problems of Truman’s personal unpopularity—the assumption among much of the electorate that he lacked stature and that his administration was weak and inept—and the deep divisions within the Democratic Party. At the Democratic National Convention that summer, two factions abandoned the party a­ ltogether. Angered by Truman’s proposed civil rights bill and by the approval at the convention of a civil rights plank in the platform (engineered by Hubert Humphrey, the reform mayor of Minneapolis), some southern conservatives walked out and formed the States’ Rights (Democratic or “Dixiecrat”) Party, with Governor Strom Thurmond Divided Democratic Party of South Carolina as its nominee. At the same time, some members of the party’s left wing—contemptuous of what they considered Truman’s ineffectual leadership and his excessively confrontational stance toward the Soviet Union—joined the new Progressive Party, whose candidate was Henry A. Wallace. Many Democratic liberals who were unhappy with Truman were unwilling to leave the party. The Americans for Democratic Action (ADA), a coalition of anticommunist liberals, tried to entice Dwight D. Eisenhower, the popular war hero, to contest the nomination. Only after Eisenhower refused did liberals concede the nomination to Truman. The Republicans, in the meantime, once again nominated Governor Thomas E. Dewey of New York. Austere, dignified, and competent, he seemed to offer an unbeatable alternative to the president. Only Truman seemed to believe he could win. As the campaign gathered momentum, he became more and more aggressive, turning the fire away from himself and toward Dewey and the “do-nothing, good-for-nothing” Republican Congress, which was, he told voters, responsible for fueling inflation and abandoning workers and common people. To dramatize his point, he called Congress into special session in July to give it a chance, he said, to enact the liberal measures the Republicans had recently written into their platform. Congress met for two weeks and, predictably, managed to pass almost nothing. On election night, to the surprise of almost everyone, Truman won a narrow but decisive and dramatic victory: 49.5 percent of the popular vote to Dewey’s Truman Defeats Dewey 45.1 percent (with the two splinter parties dividing the small remainder evenly between them), and an electoral margin of 303 to 189. Democrats regained both houses of Congress by substantial margins.

The Fair Deal Revived
 Despite the Democratic victories, the Eighty-First Congress was little more hospitable to Truman’s Fair Deal reform. Truman did win some important victories. Congress raised the legal minimum wage from 40 cents to 75 cents an hour. It approved an important expansion of the Social Security system, increasing benefits by 75 percent and extending them to 10 million additional people. And it passed the National Housing Act of 1949, which provided for the construction of 810,000 units of low-income housing accompanied by long-term rent subsidies. But on other issues—national health insurance and aid to education, among them— Truman made little progress. Nor was he able to persuade Congress to accept the civil rights legislation he proposed in 1949, legislation that would make lynching a federal crime, provide federal protection of black voting rights, abolish the poll tax, and establish a new Fair Employment Practices Commission to curb discrimination in hiring. Southern Democrats filibustered to kill the bill. Undeterred, Truman proceeded on his own to battle several forms of racial discrimination. He ordered an end to discrimination in the hiring of government employees. He

668 • CHAPTER 27


 began to dismantle segregation within the armed forces. And he allowed the Justice Department to become actively involved in court battles against discriminatory statutes. The Supreme Court, in the meantime, signaled its own growing awareness of the issue by ruling, in Shelley v. Kraemer (1948), that courts could not be used to enforce private “covenants” meant to bar blacks from residential neighborhoods.

The Nuclear Age
 Looming over the many struggles of the postwar years was the image of the great and terrible mushroom clouds that had risen over Alamogordo in July 1945 and over the ruined Japanese cities of Hiroshima and Nagasaki. Americans greeted these terrible new instruments of destruction with fear and awe, but also with expectation. Postwar culture was torn between a dark image of the nuclear war that many Americans feared would result from the rivalry with the Soviet Union, and the bright image of a dazzling technological future that atomic power might help to produce. The fear of nuclear weapons appeared widely in popular culture, but it was often disMenace in Films guised. The late 1940s and early 1950s were the heyday of film noir, a kind of filmmaking that originated in France and had been named for the dark lighting characteristic of the genre. American film noir portrayed the loneliness of individuals in an impersonal world—a staple of American culture for many decades—but also suggested the menacing character of the age, the looming possibility of vast destruction. Sometimes,

 This 1949 movie poster suggests how much attention was directed to the threat of communism. The film told the story of a man and a woman who joined the Communist Party, only to become disillusioned when they watched the murder of a party member who had begun to doubt the party’s principles. (© Republic Pictures/Photofest) THE RED MENACE

THE COLD WAR
• 669 

 popular fears addressed nuclear fear explicitly—for example, the celebrated television show of the 1950s and early 1960s, The Twilight Zone, which featured dramatic portrayals of the aftermath of nuclear war; or postwar comic books, which depicted powerful superheroes saving the world from destruction. Such images resonated with the public because awareness of nuclear weapons was increasingly built into their daily lives. Schools and office buildings held regular air-raid drills to prepare people for the possibility of nuclear attack. Radio stations regularly tested the Emergency Broadcast System, which stood in readiness for war. Fallout shelters stocked with water and canned goods sprang up in public buildings and private homes. Though few Americans went about their daily lives in a state of panic, anxiety simmered below the surface. And yet, the United States was also an exuberant nation in these years, dazzled by its own prosperity and excited by the technological innovations transforming the nation, including nuclear power. The same scientific knowledge that could destroy the world, many believed, might also lead it into a glimmering future. The New York Times, only days after Hiroshima, expressed its own rosy view of the nuclear future: “This new knowledge . . . can bring to this earth not death but life, not tyranny and cruelty, but a divine freedom.” That kind of optimism soon became widespread. The “secret of the atom,” many Americans predicted, would bring “prosperity and a more complete life.” A public opinion poll late in 1948 revealed that approximately two-thirds of those questioned believed that, “in the long run,” atomic energy would “do more good than harm.” Nuclear Power Nuclear power plants began to spring up in many areas of the country and were welcomed as the source of cheap and unlimited electricity, their potential dangers scarcely even discussed by those who celebrated their creation.

THE KOREAN WAR
 Though the Cold War started in Europe, it quickly spread to Asia. On June 24, 1950, the armies of communist North Korea swept across their southern border and invaded the pro-Western half of the Korean peninsula. Within days, they had occupied much of South Korea, including Seoul, its capital. True to the dictates of containment, the United States almost immediately committed itself to the conflict.

The Divided Peninsula
 When World War II ended, both the United States and the Soviet Union had troops in Korea fighting the Japanese; neither army was willing to leave. Instead, they divided the nation, supposedly temporarily, along the 38th parallel. The Russians finally departed in 1949, leaving behind a communist government in the north with a strong, Soviet-equipped army. The Americans left a few months later, handing control to the pro-Western government of Syngman Rhee. Anticommunist but only nominally Syngman Rhee ­ ­democratic, he used his relatively small military primarily to suppress internal opposition. The relative weakness of South Korea offered a strong temptation to nationalists in the North Korean government who wanted to reunite the country, particularly after the American government implied that it did not consider Korea within its own “defense perimeter.” The Soviets and Chinese did not order the invasion, but they did not try to stop it. They supported the offensive once it began.

670 • CHAPTER 27


 Almost immediately, on June 27, 1950, the president ordered limited American military assistance to South Korea, and on the same day he appealed to the United Nations to intervene. The Soviet Union was boycotting the Security Council at the time (to protest the council’s refusal to recognize the new communist government of China) and was thus unable to exercise its veto power. As a result, American delegates were able to win UN agreement to a resolution calling for international assistance to the Rhee government. On June 30, the United States ordered its own ground forces into Korea, and Truman appointed General Douglas MacArthur to command the UN operations there. (Several other nations provided assistance and troops, but the “UN” armies were, in fact, overwhelmingly American.) After a surprise American invasion at Inchon in September had routed the North Korean forces from the south and sent them back across the 38th parallel, Truman gave

 North Korean forces, June 25, 1950–Sept. 10, 1950

 Chinese and North Korean counterattack Nov. 26, 1950–Jan. 24, 1951

CHINA
(MANCHURIA)


CHINA
(MANCHURIA)


R.


 Final UN counterattack Jan. 25, 1951–April 21, 1951 R.

 UN counterattack Sept. 15, 1950–Nov. 24, 1950

 n Tume

100 mi


Chongjin


200 km




 n Tume

100 mi


Chongjin


200 km


Chosan


Chosan


NORTH
KOREA


R
.


R.
 lu Ya

 u Yal

 Farthest extent of UN counteroffensive Nov. 24, 1950

Se a of
 J apan

Pyongyang


Sea of
Japan


Pyongyang


Armistice Line,
Nov. 1951–July 1953


NORTH
KOREA
Kaesong
Panmunjom
 Inchon landing Sept. 15, 1950

Kaesong
Panmunjom


 38th parallel Seoul

Inchon


Seoul


Extent of
 communist counterattack Jan. 12, 1951

Ma
 cAr thu

Yellow
Se a


 r

Yellow
Se a


 38th parallel

SOUTH
KOREA
 UN defensive line Sept. 10, 1950

Pusan


SOUTH
KOREA


Pusan


 These two maps illustrate the changing fortunes of UN forces (which were mostly American) during the 1950–1953 Korean War. The map at the left shows the extent of the North Korean invasion of South Korea in 1950; communist forces for a time controlled all of Korea except a small area around Pusan in the southeast. On September 15, 1950, UN troops under Douglas MacArthur landed in force at Inchon and soon drove the North Koreans back across the border. MacArthur then pursued the North Koreans well into their own territory. The map at right shows the very different circumstances once the Chinese entered the war in November 1950. Chinese forces drove the UN army back below the 38th parallel and, briefly, deep into South Korea, below Seoul. The UN troops fought back to the prewar border between North and South Korea late in 1951, but the war then bogged down into a stalemate that continued for a year and a half. • What impact did the Korean War have on American politics in the early 1950s?

THE KOREAN WAR, 1950–1953


THE COLD WAR
• 671 

 MacArthur permission to pursue the communists into their own territory. Hoping now to create “a unified, independent and democratic Korea,” the president had moved beyond simple containment to an attempted rollback of communist power.

From Invasion to Stalemate
 For several weeks, MacArthur’s invasion of North Korea proceeded smoothly. On October 19, the capital, Pyongyang, fell to the UN forces. Victory seemed near—until the Chinese government, alarmed by the movement of American forces toward its China Intervenes ­border, intervened. In early November, eight divisions of the Chinese army entered the war. The UN offensive stalled and then collapsed. Through December 1950, outnumbered American forces were forced into a rapid, bitter retreat in numbingly cold temperatures. Within weeks, communist forces had pushed the Americans back below the 38th parallel once again and had recaptured the South Korean capital of Seoul. By mid-January 1951 the rout had ceased; and by March the UN armies had managed to regain much of the territory they had recently lost, taking back Seoul and pushing the communists north of the 38th parallel for the second time. With that, the war turned into a protracted stalemate. From the start, Truman had been determined to avoid a direct conflict with China, which he feared might lead to a new world war. Once China Truman–MacArthur Controversy entered the war, he began seeking a negotiated solution to the struggle. But General MacArthur had ideas of his own. The United States was really fighting the Chinese, MacArthur argued. It should, therefore, attack China itself, if not through an actual invasion, then at least by bombing communist forces massing north of the Chinese border with conventional or even atomic weapons. In March 1951, he indicated his unhappiness with Truman’s reluctance to invade China. In a public letter to House Republican Leader Joseph W. Martin, he concluded: “There is no substitute for victory.” His position had wide popular support. Yet the release of the Martin letter struck the president as intolerable insubordination. On April 11, 1951, he relieved MacArthur of his command. Sixty-nine percent of the American people supported MacArthur, a Gallup poll reported. When the general returned to the United States later in 1951, he was greeted with wild enthusiasm. Public criticism of Truman finally abated somewhat when a number of prominent military figures, including General Omar Bradley, publicly supported the president’s decision. But substantial hostility toward Truman remained. In the meantime, the Korean stalemate continued. Negotiations between the opposing forces began at Panmunjom in July 1951, but the talks—and the war—dragged on until 1953.

Limited Mobilization
 The war in Korea produced only a limited American military commitment abroad. It also created only a limited economic mobilization at home. Truman set up the Office of Defense Mobilization to fight inflation by holding down prices and discouraging high union wage demands. When these cautious regulatory efforts failed, the president took more drastic action. Railroad workers walked off the job in 1951, and Truman, who considered the workers’ demands inflationary, ordered the government to seize control of the railroads. In 1952, during a nationwide steel strike, Truman seized the steel mills, citing his powers as commander in chief. But in a 6-to-3 decision, the Supreme Court ruled that the president had exceeded his authority, and Truman was forced to relent.

672 • CHAPTER 27


 The Korean War significantly boosted economic growth by pumping new government funds into the economy at a point when many believed it was about to decline. But the war had other, less welcome effects. It came at a time of rising insecurity about America’s position in the world and intensified anxiety about communism. As the long stalemate continued, producing 140,000 American dead and wounded, frustration turned to anger. The United States, which had recently won the greatest war in history, seemed unable to conclude what many Americans considered a minor border skirmish in a small country. They began to believe that something must be deeply wrong—not only in Korea but within the United States as well. Such fears contributed to the rise of the second major campaign of the century against domestic communism.

THE CRUSADE AGAINST SUBVERSION
 Why did the American people develop a growing fear of internal communist subversion— a fear that by the early 1950s occasionally reached the point of hysteria? There are many possible answers but no single definitive explanation. (See “Debating the Past: McCarthyism.”) One factor was obvious: communism was not an imagined enemy. It had tangible shape, in Josef Stalin and the Soviet Union. Adding to the concern were the Korean stalemate, the “loss” of China, and the Soviet development of an atomic bomb. Searching for someone to blame, many began to believe that there was a communist conspiracy within American borders. But there were other factors as well, rooted in events in American domestic politics.

 HUAC and Alger Hiss Much of the anticommunist furor emerged out of the search by Republicans for an issue with which to attack the Democrats, and out of the efforts of the Democrats to take that issue away from them. Beginning in 1947, the House Un-American Activities Committee (HUAC) held widely publicized investigations to prove that, under Democratic rule, the government had tolerated (if not actually encouraged) communist subversion. The committee turned first to the movie industry, arguing that communists had infiltrated Hollywood and tainted American films with propaganda. Writers and producers, some of them former communists, were called to testify; and when some of them (the “Hollywood Ten”) refused to answer questions about their political beliefs and those of their colleagues, they were sent to jail for contempt. Others were barred from employment in the industry when Hollywood, attempting to protect its public image, adopted a “blacklist” of those of “suspicious loyalty.” More alarming to the public was HUAC’s investigation into charges of disloyalty Alger Hiss leveled against Alger Hiss, a former high-ranking member of the State Department. In 1948, Whittaker Chambers, a former communist agent, now a ­conservative editor at Time ­ magazine, told the committee that Hiss had passed classified State Department documents to him in 1937 and 1938. When Hiss sued him for slander, Chambers produced microfilms of the documents (called the “pumpkin papers,” because Chambers had kept them hidden in a pumpkin in his vegetable garden). Hiss could not be tried for espionage because of the statute of limitations (which protects individuals from prosecution for most crimes after seven years have passed). But largely because of

THE COLD WAR
• 673 

 the relentless efforts of Richard M. Nixon, a first-term congressman from California and a member of HUAC, Hiss was convicted of perjury and served several years in prison. The Hiss case not only discredited a prominent young diplomat, it also cast suspicion on a generation of liberal Democrats. It also transformed Nixon into a national figure and helped him win a Senate seat in 1950.

The Federal Loyalty Program and the Rosenberg Case
 Partly to protect itself against Republican attacks and partly to encourage support for the president’s foreign policy initiatives, the Truman administration in 1947 initiated a widely publicized program to review the “loyalty” of federal employees. By 1951, more than 2,000 government employees had resigned under pressure and 212 had been dismissed. The Federal Employee Loyalty Program helped launch a major assault on subversion throughout the government—and beyond. The attorney general established a widely cited list of supposedly subversive organizations. The director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI), J. Edgar Hoover, investigated and harassed alleged radicals. In 1950, Congress passed the McCarran Internal Security Act, which, among other restrictions on “subversive” activity, required that all communist organizations register with the government and publish their records. Congress easily overrode Truman’s veto of the bill. The successful Soviet detonation of an atomic bomb in 1949 suggested to some that there had been a conspiracy to pass American atomic secrets to the Russians. In 1950, Klaus Fuchs, a young British scientist, seemed to confirm those fears when he testified that he had delivered to the Russians details of the bomb’s manufacture. The case ultimately moved to an obscure New York couple, Julius Julius and Ethel Rosenberg and Ethel Rosenberg, members of the Communist Party. The government claimed the Rosenbergs had received secret information from Ethel’s brother, a machinist on the Manhattan Project in New Mexico, and had passed it on to the Soviet Union through other agents (including Fuchs). The Rosenbergs were convicted and, on April 5, 1951, sentenced to death. After two years of appeals and public protests, they died in the electric chair on June 19, 1953. Historians now believe that Julius—but not Ethel—was guilty as charged. All these factors—the HUAC investigations, the Hiss trial, the loyalty investigations, the McCarran Act, the Rosenberg case—combined with other concerns by the early 1950s to create a fear of communist subversion that seemed to grip the entire country. State and local governments, the judiciary, schools and universities, labor unions—all sought to purge themselves of real or imagined subversives. It was a climate that made possible the rise of an extraordinary public figure.

 McCarthyism Joseph McCarthy was an undistinguished first-term Republican senator from Wisconsin until, in February 1950, in the midst of a speech in Wheeling, West Virginia, he lifted up a sheet of paper and claimed to “hold in my hand” a list of 205 known communists currently working in the American State Department. No person of comparable stature had ever made so bold a charge against the federal government. In the months to come, as McCarthy repeated and expanded on his accusations, he emerged as the nation’s most prominent leader of the crusade against domestic subversion.

DEBATING THE PAST


 McCarthyism The American Civil Liberties Union warned in the early 1950s, at the peak of what is now known as McCarthyism, that “the threat to civil liberties today is the most ­serious in the history of our country.” It was expressing a view with which many Americans wholeheartedly agreed. But while there were unusually powerful challenges to freedom of speech and association in the late 1940s and early 1950s, there is wide disagreement about the causes and meaning of those challenges. The simplest argument—and one that continues to attract scholarly support—is that the postwar Red Scare expressed real and legitimate concerns about communist subversion in the United States. William O’Neill, in A Better World (1982), and Richard Gid Powers, in Not Without Honor (1995), have both argued that anticommunism was a serious, intelligent, and patriotic movement, despite its excesses. The American Communist Party, according to this view, was an agent of Stalin and the Soviet Union within the United States, actively engaged in espionage and subversion. The effort to root communists out of public life was both understandable and justifiable—and the hysteria it sometimes produced was an unhappy but predictable by-product of an essentially rational and justifiable effort. “Anticommunism,” Powers wrote, “expressed the essential American determination to stand against attacks on human freedom and foster the growth of democracy throughout the world. . . . To superimpose on this rich history the cartoon features of Joe McCarthy is to reject history for the easy comforts of moralism.” 674 •

 Most interpretations, however, have been less charitable. In the 1950s, in the midst of the Red Scare itself, an influential group of historians and social scientists ­began to portray the anticommunist fervor of their time as an expression of deep ­social maladjustment—an argument perhaps most closely associated with a famous essay by Richard Hofstadter, “The Paranoid Style in American Politics.” There was, they ­argued, no logical connection between the modest power of actual communists in the United States and the hysterical form these scholars believed anticommunism was ­assuming. The explanation, therefore, had to lie in something other than reality, in a deeper set of social and cultural anxieties that had only an indirect connection with the political world as it existed. Extreme ­anticommunism, they claimed, was something close to a pathology; it expressed fear of and alienation from the modern world. A person afflicted with the “paranoid style,” Hofstadter wrote, believes himself to be living in a world in which he is spied upon, plotted against, betrayed, and very likely destined for total ruin. He feels that his liberties have been arbitrarily and outrageously invaded. He is opposed to almost everything that has happened in American politics in the past twenty years.

 Other scholars, writing not long after the decline of McCarthyism, rejected the sociocultural arguments of Hofstadter and others but shared the belief that the crusade against subversion was a distortion of normal public life. They saw the anticommunist crusade as an example of party politics run amok. Richard Freeland, in

(Rare Book and Special Collection Division, The
Library of Congress)


The Truman Doctrine and the Origins of
 McCarthyism (1971), argued that the Democrats began the effort to purge the government of radicals to protect themselves from attacks by the Republicans. Nelson Polsby, Robert Griffith, and others have noted how Republicans seized on the issue of communism in government in the late 1940s to reverse their nearly twentyyear exclusion from power. With each party trying to outdo the other in its effort to demonstrate its anticommunist credentials, it was hardly surprising that the ­crusade reached extraordinarily intense proportions. Still other historians have emphasized the role of powerful government officials and agencies with a strong commitment to anticommunism—most notably J. Edgar Hoover and the FBI. Athan Theoharis and Kenneth

 O’Reilly introduced the idea of an anticommunist bureaucracy in work published in the 1970s and 1980s. Ellen Schrecker’s Many Are the Crimes (1998) likewise identified an interlocking cluster of official agencies committed to anticommunism and operating across many years—not just those dominated by McCarthy. Yet those agencies and individuals, she argued, whatever the sincerity of their anticommunist fervor, oversaw a period of repression that recklessly destroyed careers and lives, shattered the left, chilled dissent, and narrowed the terms of political debate. Several scholars, finally, have presented an argument that does not so much challenge other interpretations as complement them. Anticommunist zealots were not alone to blame for the excesses of McCarthyism, they argue. It was also the fault of ­liberals— in politics, in academia, and, perhaps above all, in the media—who were so intimidated by the political climate, or so imprisoned within the conventions of their professions, that they found themselves unable to ­respond effectively to the distortions and excesses that they recognized around them.

•


UNDERSTAND, ANALYZE, & EVALUATE
 1. Why did the American public feel so

 threatened by communism? Who exploited the public’s fears and why? 2. Was the public reaction to the Red Scare a logical response or disproportionate to the actual threat posed by communism? 3. How were party politics and McCarthyism connected? Do you find elements similar to McCarthyism in ­politics today?

 Within weeks of his charges against the State Department, McCarthy leveled accusations at other agencies. After 1952, with the Republicans in control of the Senate and McCarthy now the chair of a special subcommittee, he conducted highly publicized investigations of alleged subversion in many areas of the government. McCarthy never produced conclusive evidence that any federal employee was a communist. But a growing constituency adored him • 675

676 • CHAPTER 27


 nevertheless for his coarse, “fearless” assaults on a government establishment that many considered arrogant, effete, even traitorous. Republicans, in particular, rallied to his claims that the Democrats had been responsible for “twenty years of treason” and that only a change of parties could rid the country of subversion. McCarthy, in short, provided his followers with an issue into which they could channel a wide range of resentments: fear of communism, animosity toward the country’s “eastern establishment,” and frustrated partisan ambitions. For a time, McCarthy intimidated all but a few people from opposing him. Even the highly popular Dwight D. Eisenhower, running for president in 1952, did not speak out against him, although he disliked McCarthy’s tactics and was outraged at, among other things, McCarthy’s attacks on General George Marshall. Eventually his assaults against such respected figures and institutions drove McCarthy from popular favor—but not before “McCarthyism” came to define an era of hysterical and often unfounded accusations.

The Republican Revival
 Public frustration over the stalemate in Korea and popular fears of internal subversion combined to make 1952 a bad year for the Democratic Party. Truman, now deeply unpopular, withdrew from the presidential contest. The party united instead behind Governor Adlai E. Stevenson of Illinois. Stevenson’s dignity, wit, and eloquence made him a beloved figure to many liberals and intellectuals. But those same qualities seemed only to fuel Republican charges that Stevenson lacked the strength or the will to combat communism sufficiently. Stevenson’s greatest problem, however, was the Republican candidate opposing him. Rejecting the efforts of conservatives to nominate Robert Taft or Douglas MacArthur, the Republicans turned to a man who had no previous identification with the party: General Dwight D. Eisenhower—military hero, commander of NATO, president of Columbia University—who won nomination on the first ballot. He chose as his running mate the young California senator who had gained national prominence through his crusade against Alger Hiss: Richard M. Nixon. In the fall campaign, Eisenhower attracted support through his geniality and his statesmanlike pledges to settle the Korean conflict. Nixon (after surviving early accusations of financial improprieties, which he effectively neutralized in a famous television address, the Checkers speech) exploited the issue of domestic anticommunism by attacking the Democrats for “cowardice” and “appeasement.” The response at the polls was overwhelmEisenhower Elected ing. Eisenhower won both a popular and an electoral landslide: 55 p ­ ercent of the popular vote to Stevenson’s 44 percent, 442 electoral votes to Stevenson’s 89. Republicans gained control of both houses of Congress for the first time since 1946.

CONCLUSION
 Even during World War II, when the United States and the Soviet Union were allies, it was evident to leaders in both nations that America and Russia had quite different visions of what the postwar world should look like. Very quickly after the war ended, the once fruitful relationship between the world’s greatest powers quickly soured. Americans came to believe that the Soviet Union, like Hitler’s Germany, harbored dangerous expansionist ambitions. Soviets came to believe that the United States was trying to protect its own dominance in the world by encircling the Soviet Union. The result of these tensions was what became known by the end of the 1940s as the Cold War.

THE COLD WAR
• 677 

 In the early years of the Cold War, the United States constructed a series of policies designed to prevent both war and Soviet aggression. It helped rebuild the shattered economies of Western Europe through the Marshall Plan, to stabilize those nations and prevent them from becoming communist. America embraced a new foreign policy—known as containment—that committed it to keeping the Soviet Union from expanding its influence further into the world. The United States and Western Europe formed a strong and enduring alliance, NATO, to defend Europe against possible Soviet advances. In 1950, the armed forces of communist North Korea launched an invasion of noncommunist South Korea; and to most Americans, the conflict quickly came to be seen as a test of American resolve. The Korean War was long, costly, and unpopular, with many military setbacks and frustrations. In the end, however, the United States—working through the United Nations—managed to drive the North Koreans out of South Korea and stabilize the original division of the peninsula. The Korean War hardened American foreign policy into a much more rigidly anticommunist form. It undermined the Truman administration, and the Democratic Party, and helped strengthen conservatives and Republicans. It greatly bolstered an already powerful crusade against communists, and those believed to be communists, within the United States—a crusade often known as McCarthyism, because of the notoriety of Senator Joseph McCarthy of Wisconsin, the most celebrated leader of the effort. America after World War II was indisputably the wealthiest and most powerful nation in the world. But in the harsh climate of the Cold War, neither wealth nor power could dispel deep anxieties and bitter divisions.

KEY TERMS/PEOPLE/PLACES/EVENTS
Alger Hiss 672
Central Intelligence Agency
(CIA) 661
Cold War 653
 containment 659 Douglas MacArthur 670 Fair Deal 665 GI Bill 663 House Un-American Activities Committee (HUAC) 672

John Birch Society 660
Julius and Ethel
Rosenberg 673
Korean War 669
Mao Zedong 663
Marshall Plan 661
 McCarthyism 676 North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) 662 NSC-68 663

Syngman Rhee 669
Taft-Hartley Act 665
Truman Doctrine 659
United Nations 655
Warsaw Pact 662
Yalta Conference 657


RECALL AND REFLECT
 1. 	How did American diplomats plan for the postwar world and settle postwar issues?

 How did opposing visions of the postwar world order thwart those efforts? 2. 	How did postwar economic problems affect American politics and society? 3. 	Why did the United States become involved in the war in Korea? What was the result

 of U.S. involvement in that war? 4. 	Why did the fear of communism at home reach such great proportions? What events

 helped fan that fear?



THE AFFLUENT
SOCIETY
THE ECONOMIC “MIRACLE”
THE EXPLOSION OF SCIENCE AND
TECHNOLOGY
PEOPLE OF PLENTY
THE OTHER AMERICA
THE RISE OF THE CIVIL RIGHTS MOVEMENT
EISENHOWER REPUBLICANISM
EISENHOWER, DULLES, AND THE COLD WAR


LOOKING AHEAD
 1. Why did the U.S. economy experience such a boom in the late 1950s and early 1960s? How did this boom affect American society? 2. Who constituted the “other America,” who failed to share in the economic prosperity and affluence of the postwar era? Why were they left out? 3. What was the response to the Supreme Court decision in Brown v. Board of Education? How did the Court’s decision affect African Americans and the early civil rights movement? How did it affect white southerners? 4. What policy guided foreign affairs under Eisenhower, and how was that policy implemented around the world?

IF AMERICA EXPERIENCED A GOLDEN
age in the 1950s and early 1960s, as many Americans believed at the time and many continue to believe today, it was largely a result of two developments. One was a booming national prosperity, which profoundly altered the social, economic, and even physical landscape of the United States. The other was the continuing struggle against communism, a struggle that created considerable anxiety but that also encouraged many Americans to look even more approvingly at their own society. But if these powerful forces created a widespread sense of national purpose and selfsatisfaction, they also helped blind many Americans to serious problems developing at home. 
678 •


THE ECONOMIC
“MIRACLE”
 Perhaps the most striking feature of American society in the 1950s and early 1960s was the booming economic growth that made even the heady 1920s seem pale by comparison. It was a better-balanced and more widely distributed prosperity than that of thirty years earlier. It was not, however, as universal as some Americans liked to believe.

Economic Growth
 By 1949, despite the continuing problems of postwar reconversion, an economic expansion had begun that would continue with only brief interruptions for almost twenty years. Between 1945 and 1960, the gross national product grew by 250 percent, from $200 billion to over $500 billion. Unemployment remained at about 5 percent or lower throughout the 1950s and early 1960s. Inflation, in the meantime, hovered around 3 percent a year or less. The causes of this growth were varied. Part of the growth came from Americans throwing off the emotional shackles of the Great Depression. Buoyed by victory in the world war, Americans again began to believe in a brighter future, and they invested in it. Government spending, which had reached new levels from fighting a world war and the Great Depression, continued to stimulate growth through public funding of schools, housing, veterans’ benefits, welfare, interstate highways, and, above all, the military. Economic growth peaked during the first half of the 1950s, when military spending was highest because of the Korean War. Additionally, trade agreements after the war began to open markets for goods and services like no other time in its history. Virtually untouched by the destruction of war, U.S. manufacturing and services reaped the initial rewards of international trade.

TIME LINE
 Levittown construction begins Korean War ends Brown v. Board of Education Army–McCarthy hearings Montgomery bus boycott Federal Highway Act Eisenhower reelected Suez crisis Sputnik launched Kerouac’s On the Road Little Rock desegregation crisis Castro seizes power in Cuba U-2 incident Eisenhower’s farewell address First American in space



 U.S. severs diplomatic relations with Cuba

 Americans land on moon

• 679


