568 • CHAPTER 23


 supply shrank by perhaps a third or more between 1930 and 1933, which caused a decline in purchasing power and thus deflation. Manufacturers and merchants began reducing prices, cutting back on production, and laying off workers. Some economists argue that a severe depression could have been avoided if the Federal Reserve system had acted responsibly. But late in 1931, in a misguided effort to build international confidence in the dollar, it raised interest rates, which contracted the money supply even further. The American gross national product plummeted from over $104 billion in 1929 to $76.4 billion in 1932—a 25 percent decline in three years. By 1932, according to the relatively crude estimates of the time, 25 percent of the American workforce was unemployed. (Some argue that the figure was even higher.) For the rest of the decade, unemployment averaged nearly 20 percent, never dropping below 15 percent. Up to another one-third of the workforce was “underemployed”—experiencing major reductions in wages, hours, or both.

THE AMERICAN PEOPLE IN HARD TIMES
 Someone asked the British economist John Maynard Keynes in the 1930s whether he was aware of any historical era comparable to the Great Depression. “Yes,” Keynes replied. “It was called the Dark Ages, and it lasted 400 years.” The Depression did not last 400 years. It did, however, bring unprecedented economic despair to the United States and much of the Western world.

THE HUNGRY
Hundreds of men wait to be fed outside the Municipal Lodging House in New York City. (© Bettmann/Corbis) 
THE GREAT DEPRESSION
• 569 

Unemployment and Relief
 In the industrial Northeast and Midwest, cities were virtually paralyzed by unemployment. Cleveland, Ohio, for example, had an unemployment rate of 50 percent in 1932; Akron, 60 percent; Toledo, 80 percent. Unemployed workers walked through the streets day after day looking for jobs that did not exist. An increasing number of families turned to state and local public relief systems, just to be able to eat. But those systems, which in the 1920s had served only a small number of indigents, were totally unequipped to handle the heavy new demands. In many cities, therefore, relief simply collapsed. Private charities attempted to supplement the public relief efforts, but the problem was far beyond their capabilities as well. In rural areas, conditions were in many ways worse. Farm income declined by 60 percent between 1929 and 1932. A third of all American farmers lost their land. In addition, a large area of agricultural settlement in the Great Plains suffered from a catastrophic natural disaster: one of the worst droughts in the history of the nation. Beginning in 1930, the region that came to be known as the “Dust Bowl,” which stretched north from Texas into the Dakotas, experienced a steady decline “Dust Bowl” in rainfall and an accompanying increase in heat. The drought continued for a decade, turning what had once been fertile farm regions into virtual deserts. Severe winds blew dust across the eastern United States. Many farmers, like many urban unemployed, left their homes in search of work. In the South, in particular, many dispossessed farmers—black and white—simply wandered from town to town, hoping to find jobs or handouts. Hundreds of thousands of families from the Dust Bowl (often known collectively as “Okies,” though not all came from “Okies” Oklahoma) traveled to California and other states, where they found conditions little better than those they had left. Many worked as agricultural migrants, traveling from farm to farm, picking fruit and other crops at starvation wages.

DUST STORM, SOUTHWEST PLAINS, 1937
The dust storms of the 1930s were a terrifying experience for all who lived through them. Resembling a black wall sweeping in from the western horizon, such a storm engulfed farms and towns alike, blotting out the light of the sun and covering everything with a fine dirt. (© Bettmann/Corbis) 
570 • CHAPTER 23


African Americans and the Depression
 Most African Americans had not shared very much in the prosperity of the previous decade. But they did share in the hardships of the Great Depression. As the Depression began, over half of all black Americans still lived in the South. Most were farmers. The collapse of prices for cotton and other staple crops left some with no income at all. Many left the land altogether—either by choice or because they had been evicted by landlords who no longer found sharecropping profitable. Some migrated to southern cities. But there, unemployed whites believed they had first claim to what work there was, and some now began to take positions as janitors, street cleaners, and domestic servants, displacing the African Americans who formerly occupied those jobs. By 1932, over half the blacks in the South were unemployed. Unsurprisingly, therefore, many black southerners—perhaps 400,000 in all—left the South in the 1930s and journeyed to the cities of the North. But conditions there were little better. In New York, black unemployment was nearly 50 percent. In other cities, it was higher. Two million African Americans—half the total black population of the country— were on some form of relief by 1932. Traditional patterns of segregation and disenfranchisement in the South survived the Depression largely unchallenged. But a few particularly notorious examples of racism did attract the attention of the nation. The most celebrated was the Scottsboro case. In Scottsboro Case March 1931, nine black teenagers were taken off a freight train in northern Alabama (in a small town near Scottsboro) and were arrested for vagrancy and disorder. Later, two white women who had also been riding the train accused them of rape. In fact, there was overwhelming evidence, medical and otherwise, that the women had not been raped at all; they may have made their accusations out of fear of being arrested themselves. Nevertheless, an all-white jury in Alabama quickly convicted all nine of the “Scottsboro boys” (as they were known to both friends and foes) and ­sentenced eight of them to death. The Supreme Court overturned the convictions in 1932, and a series of new trials began. The International Labor Defense, an organization associated with the Communist Party, came to the aid of the accused youths and began to publicize the case. Although the white southern juries who sat on the case never acquitted any of the defendants, all of the accused eventually gained their freedom—although the last of the Scottsboro defendants did not leave prison until 1950.

Hispanics and Asians in Depression America
 Similar patterns of discrimination confronted many Mexicans and Mexican Americans. The Hispanic population of the United States had been growing steadily since early in the century, largely in California and other areas of the Southwest. Chicanos (Mexican Americans) filled many of the same menial jobs there that blacks had traditionally filled in other regions. Some farmed small, marginal tracts; others became agricultural migrants. It had always been a precarious existence, and the Depression made things significantly worse. Unemployed whites in the Southwest demanded jobs held by Hispanics, jobs that whites had previously considered beneath them. Thus Mexican unemployment rose quickly to levels far higher than those for whites. Some officials arbitrarily removed Mexicans from relief rolls or simply rounded up and deported them. Perhaps half a million Chicanos left the United States for Mexico in the first years of the Depression.

Hispanic Workers Targeted


THE GREAT DEPRESSION
• 571 

 There were occasional signs of organized resistance by Mexican Americans themselves, most notably in California, where some formed a union of migrant farmworkers. But harsh repression by local growers and the public authorities allied with them prevented such organizations from having much impact. As a result, many Hispanics began to migrate to cities such as Los Angeles, where they lived in poverty comparable to that of urban blacks in the South and Northeast. For Asian Americans, too, the Depression reinforced long-standing patterns of discrimination and economic marginalization. In California, where the Plight of Asian Americans largest Japanese American and Chinese American populations were, educated Asians had always found it difficult, if not impossible, to move into mainstream professions. Japanese American college graduates often found themselves working in family fruit stands. For those who found jobs in the industrial or service economy, employment was precarious; like blacks and Hispanics, Asians often lost jobs to white Americans desperate for work. Japanese farmworkers, like Chicano farmworkers, suffered from the increasing competition for even these low-paying jobs with white migrants from the Great Plains.

A
Chinese man carries a signboard through the streets of New York City’s Chinatown bearing the latest news of the war between China and Japan, which in 1938 was well under way. Chinese Americans had the duel challenge in the 1930s of dealing both with large-scale unemployment and with continuing news of catastrophe from China, where most still had family members. (© Hulton Archive/Getty Images) CHINATOWN, NEW YORK CITY 
CO NS IDER T HE S O URC E
MR. TARVER REMEMBERS THE GREAT DEPRESSION
 The Federal Writers’ Project (FWP) was a New Deal program that employed authors and researchers during the Great Depression. Participants produced tourist guidebooks, ethnographies, oral histories, and many other kinds of documents. In 1940, an FWP writer interviewed a bank employee named Mr. Tarver. Yes, I really went through the depression. [. . .] “There were thousands who went down during the panic—lost fortunes, homes, business, and in fact everything. Some have survived, and many never will. A great many were too old to begin building up again. In the kind of work I’m in I have been in position to know some of the devastating e­ ffects of it, and it certainly gets on your sympathy. “I guess you would say I am recovering from it. When I say that though, I’m not boasting, but I’m deeply grateful for the good fortunes that have came my way. Then, too, I feel under everlasting obligations to some of my friends who have helped me to get where I am. “I had not accumulated a great deal at the time of the panic, but I did have some savings and a good job. That was the trouble, my savings and my job went at the same time. Now that was real trouble. Nobody but my wife and I knew just what we did go through. [. . .] I was making a fine salary, had a growing savings account, and a host of friends, and no serious troubles to worry about. My wife is just the smartest, thriftiest person you have ever seen. To her I owe a lot of my successes. She is fine with her needle and crocheting, and you never saw her idle. She made all her spending money that way. Even now since we have been in Washington she keeps it up. And her fruit cake! People here rave about it. She cooks an enormous amount of it every Christmas and sells it for 572 •

 a big profit. She can’t fill all the orders she gets. She is very resourceful and right now, if I were to die and not leave her a thing, she would manage some way. One of my hobbies was gardening and it proved to be a profitable one too. This place we rented had a fine garden spot, the finest in Dublin, so every one said. I worked in it early every morning and in the afternoon after banking hours. I sold lots of vegetables, and realized a lot on them—especially the early variety that brought a good price.” [. . .] “One morning we three were at the breakfast table when the phone rang. It was one of the fellows who worked at the bank. “Tarver, he said, ‘have you heard the news?’ “‘What news? No, I haven’t heard any news,’ said I. What’s it all about?’ “Well,’ he said, “hurry on down and see.’ “If you will excuse the expression, when he said that, the seat of my britches almost dropped out. I felt like it meant trouble of some kind. I had had a terrible feeling of uneasiness over the bank for some time. Banks had been closing all over the country. There had been a run on our bank some time previous to that, but we tided that over, and since then it had seemed stronger than ever. “I hurried down and, sure enough, in front of the bank, there stood a crowd of employees, as blank expressions on their faces as I’ve ever seen. They were too dumbfounded to be excited even. “The bank was closed and a notice to that effect on the door. We stood there just looking at each other until finally one said, ‘Well, boys, guess we had better go on the inside and see if we can find out what it’s all about. I guess there goes our jobs.’ [. . .] “Just as I was getting in the dumps about a regular job, I was notified to report at once, to act as assistant receiver for a

 defunct bank in Florida. They were feeling the depression there even more than we were in Georgia, and banks were closing ­every day. [. . .] “Banks were still closing until it was hard to get enough receivers for them. Oh, we did work. Banks in neighboring towns were added to our work until we were liquidating six banks at one time, all in different places. I had to have another car then but was lucky to pick up a good used car almost at my own price. People had lost their cars as well as their homes, so it was no trouble to buy a good used one. Sometimes I would ride to all six of these banks in one day and when

 night came I would be completely given out. I couldn’t stop even then, for there was scarcely a night that we didn’t work.” UNDERSTAND, ANALYZE, & EVALUATE 1. Why was Mr. Tarver doubly affected

 by the banking crisis of the Great Depression? How did Mr. and Mrs. Tarver compensate for their losses in the job market? 2. How might the Great Depression have shaped the outlook of Mr. and Mrs. Tarver on work, leisure, and consumption for years, if not decades, to come?

Source: Mr. W. W. Tarver (White), Finance Officer in U.S. Treasury (Bank Conservator), 5001 Nebraska Ave.,
N.W.,
Washington, D.C., interviewed by Bradley. Library of Congress, American Life Histories: Manuscripts from the Federal Writers’ Project, 1936–1940. http://memory.loc.gov/cgi-bin/query/r?ammem/wpa:@field%28DOCID+@ lit%28wpa112060215%29%29. 
 Chinese Americans fared no better. The overwhelming majority worked, as they had for many years, in Chinese-owned laundries and restaurants. Those who moved outside the Asian community could rarely find jobs above the entry level. Chinese women, for example, might find work as stock girls in department stores but almost never as salesclerks. Educated Chinese men and women could hope for virtually no professional opportunities outside the world of the Chinatowns.

Women and Families in the Great Depression
 The economic crisis strengthened the widespread belief that a woman’s proper place was in the home. Many men and women believed that with employment so scarce, what work there was should go to men and that no woman whose husband was employed should accept a job. Indeed, from 1932 until 1937, it was illegal for more than one member of a family to hold a federal civil service job. But the widespread assumption that married women, at least, should not work outside the home did not stop them from doing so. Both single and married women worked in the 1930s because they or their families needed the money. Some women did small jobs at home or sold food or goods to make ends meet. (See “Consider the Source: Mr. Tarver Remembers the Great Depression.”) By the end of the Depression, 25 percent more women were working for wages than had been doing so at the beginning, despite considerable obstacles. Professional opportunities for women declined because unemployed men began moving into professions that had previously been considered women’s fields. Female industrial workers were more likely to be laid off or to Female Wage Earners ­experience wage reductions than their male counterparts. But white women also had certain advantages in the workplace. The nonprofessional jobs that women traditionally held—salesclerks, stenographers, and other service positions—were less likely to disappear than the predominantly male jobs in heavy industry. • 573

574 • CHAPTER 23


 Black women suffered massive unemployment, particularly in the South, because of a great reduction of domestic service jobs. As many as half of all black working women lost their jobs in the 1930s. Even so, at the end of the 1930s, 38 percent of black women were employed, as compared with 24 percent of white women. That was so because black women—both married and unmarried—had always been more likely to work than white women, less out of preference than out of economic necessity. The Depression also worked to erode the strength of many family units. There was a Declining Marriage Rate and Birthrate decline in the divorce rate, but largely because divorce was now too expensive for some. More common was the informal breakup of families, particularly the desertion of families by unemployed men trying to escape the humiliation of being unable to earn a living. The marriage rate and the birthrate both declined for the first time since the early nineteenth century.

THE DEPRESSION AND AMERICAN CULTURE
 The Great Depression was a traumatic experience for millions of Americans. Out of the crisis emerged probing criticisms of American life. But the Depression also produced powerful confirmations of more traditional values and reinforced many traditional goals. There was not one Depression culture, but many.

Depression Values
 Prosperity and industrial growth had done much to shape American values in the 1920s. Yet even when hard times came, American social values seemed to change relatively little in response to the Depression. Instead, many people responded to hard times by redoubling their commitment to familiar ideas and goals. The Depression did not destroy the success ethic. The survival of the ideals of work and individual responsibility was evident in many ways, not least in the reactions of those most traumatized by the Depression: people who suddenly found themselves without employment. Some expressed anger and struck out at the economic system. Many, however, seemed to blame themselves. At the same time, millions responded eagerly to reassurances that they could, through their own efforts, Dale Carnegie restore themselves to prosperity and success. Dale Carnegie’s How to Win Friends and Influence People (1936), a self-help manual preaching individual initiative, was one of the best-selling books of the decade. Yet the most popular cultural products of the 1930s diverted attention away from the Depression. And they came to Americans primarily through the two most powerful instruments of popular culture in the 1930s—radio and the movies. (For another powerful vehicle of escapist culture, see “Patterns of Popular Culture: The Golden Age of Comic Books.”)

Radio
 Almost every American family had a radio in the 1930s. In cities and towns, radio consoles were as familiar a part of the furnishing of homes as tables and chairs. Even in remote rural areas without access to electricity, many families purchased radios and hooked them up to car batteries when they wished to listen. Radio was often a community experience. Young people would place radios on their front porches and invite friends by to sit, talk, or dance. In poor urban neighborhoods,

THE GREAT DEPRESSION
• 575 

 people would gather on a street or in a backyard to listen to sporting events or concerts. Within families, the radio often drew parents and children together to listen to favorite programs. Although radio stations occasionally carried provocative programs, the staple of broadcasting was escapism, including comedies such as Amos ‘n’ Escapist Programming Andy (with its demeaning picture of urban blacks) and adventures such as Superman, Dick Tracy, and The Lone Ranger. Radio brought a new kind of comedy to a wide audience. Jack Benny, George Burns and Gracie Allen, and other masters of elaborately timed repartee began to develop broad followings. Enormously popular, especially among women who were alone in the house during the day, were soap operas (so named because they were generally sponsored by soap companies, whose advertising was ­targeted at women). Radio provided Americans with their first direct access to important public events. On-air coverage of news and sports expanded rapidly to meet the demand. Some of the most dramatic moments of the 1930s were a result of radio coverage of celebrated events: the World Series, the Academy Awards, political conventions. When the German dirigible Hindenburg crashed in flames in Lakehurst, New Jersey, in 1937, it The Hindenburg Crash produced an enormous national reaction largely because of the live radio account by a broadcaster, overcome with emotion, who cried out, as he watched the terrible crash, “Oh the humanity! Oh the humanity!” The actor-director Orson Welles created another memorable event on Halloween night, 1938, when he broadcast a radio play about aliens landing in central New Jersey who had set off toward New York armed with terrible weapons. The play took the form of a news broadcast, and it created panic among some people who believed for a while that the events it described were real.

The Movies
 In the first years of the Depression, movie attendance dropped significantly. By the mid-1930s, however, most Americans had resumed their moviegoing habits in part because the movies (now with sound and, by the end of the decade, color) were becoming more appealing. Hollywood continued to exercise tight control over its products in the 1930s through its resilient censor Will Hays, who ensured that most movies carried no sensational or controversial messages. The studio system—through which a few large movie companies exercised iron control over actors, writers, and directors—also worked to ensure that Hollywood films avoided controversy. Neither the censor nor the studio system, however, could (or wished to) completely prevent films from exploring social questions. There were many serious films that portrayed the problems of the Depression—for example, King Vidor’s Our Daily Bread (1932) and John Ford’s adaptation of The Grapes of Wrath (1940). Gangster movies such as Little Caesar (1930) and The Public Enemy (1931) portrayed a dark, gritty, violent world with which few Americans were familiar, but their desperate stories were popular nevertheless with those engaged in their own difficult struggles. But the most effective presentation of a social message came from the brilliant Italian-born director Frank Capra. Capra had a deep and somewhat ­romanticized love for his adopted country, and he translated that love into a vaguely populistic admiration for ordinary people. He contrasted the decency of small-town America Films of Frank Capra and the common man with what he considered the grasping opportunism of the

PATTERNS OF POPULAR CULTURE


The Golden Age of Comic Books
 In the troubled years of the Great Depression (and later, World War II), many Americans sought release from their anxieties in fantasy. Movies, plays, books, radio shows, and other diversions drew people out of their own lives and into a safer or more glamorous or more exciting world. Beginning in 1938, one of the most popular forms of escape for many young Americans was ­ the comic book. In February 1935, Malcolm WheelerNicholson founded the first comics ­magazine—what we now know as the “comic book”—titled New Fun. It was not successful, but Wheeler founded a new company, Detective Comics. He began in 1937 to design a new magazine called Action Comics. Wheeler ran out of money before he could publish anything, but the company continued without him. In 1938, the first issue of Action Comics appeared with a startling and controversial cover—a powerful man in a skintight suit ­lifting a car over his head. His name was Superman, and he became the most popular cartoon character of all time. Within a year, Superman had a comic book named after him, which was selling over 1.2 million copies each issue. By 1940, there was a popular Superman radio show— introduced by a breathless announcer crying, “It’s a bird! It’s a plane! It’s . . . Superman!” Soon, other publishers began developing new superheroes (a term invented by the creators of Superman) to capitalize on this growing popular appetite. In 1939, a s­ econd great comic book publisher appeared— Marvel Comics. By the early 1940s, Superman had been joined by other superheroes: the Human Torch, the Sub-Mariner, Batman, the Flash, 576 •

 and Wonder Woman, a character created in part to signal the importance of women to the war effort. It is not hard to imagine why super-­ heroes would be so appealing to Americans in the 1930s and 1940s—particularly to the teenage boys who were the largest single purchasers of comic books. Superman and other superheroes were idealized versions of the ideal boy—smart, good, “the perfect Boy Scout,” as one fan put it. But they were also all-powerful, capable of righting wrong and preventing catastrophe. Even as the ­national economy faltered, comic book heroes modeled patriotic pride, resilience, and optimism. They operated with moral certainty when so much was uncertain. At a time when suffering was an ever-present reality in the world, superheroes offered a comforting escape from anxiety. Many of the early comic book writers were young Jewish men, conscious of their outsider status in an American culture not yet wholly open to them. Almost all the characters they created had alter egos, identities they used while living within the normal world. Superman was Clark Kent, a “mild-mannered reporter.” Batman was Bruce Wayne, a wealthy heir. All were part of mainstream American society, and they expressed in part the outsider’s dream of ­assimilation. The superheroes themselves were outsiders too—but outsiders endowed with special powers and abilities unavailable to ordinary people. In the last years of the Depression, the comic superheroes began battling the Axis powers. Marvel’s Human Torch and SubMariner joined forces against the German

 navy. Superman fought spies and saboteurs at home. Captain America, a new character created in March 1941, was a frail young man rejected by the army who, after being given a secret serum by a military doctor, became extraordinarily powerful. The cover of the first issue of Captain America showed the title character punching Adolf Hitler in his headquarters in Germany. The end of the war was also the end of this first golden age of American comic books. New comic books emphasized ­romance, mild sexuality, and, over time, violence and cruelty. But comic books never surpassed the heights of popularity that the superhero comics attained during the Depression and World War II.

•


UNDERSTAND, ANALYZE, & EVALUATE
SUPERMAN
The most popular action figure in the history of comic books was Superman, whose superhuman powers were particularly appealing fantasies to Americans suffering through the Depression and, later, World War II. (© Hulton Archive/Getty Images) 
 1. What could comic books offer readers

 suffering through the crisis of the Great Depression? 2. How and why have comic book super­ heroes changed over time?

 city and the greedy capitalist marketplace. In Mr. Deeds Goes to Town (1936), a simple man from a small town inherits a large fortune, moves to the city, and—not liking the greed and dishonesty he finds there—gives the money away and moves back home. In Mr. Smith Goes to Washington (1939), a decent man from a western state is elected to the United States Senate, refuses to join in the self-interested politics of Washington, and dramatically exposes the corruption and selfishness of his colleagues. Capra’s films, incredibly popular in the 1930s, helped audiences find solace in a vision of an imagined American past—in the warmth and goodness of idealized small towns and the decency of ordinary people. More often, however, the commercial films of the 1930s, like most radio programs, were deliberately and explicitly escapist: lavish musicals such as Gold Diggers of 1933, “screwball” comedies such as Capra’s It Happened One Night, or the many films of the Marx Brothers—films designed to divert audiences from their troubles and, often, indulge their fantasies about quick and easy wealth. The 1930s were the first years of Walt Disney’s long reign as the champion of animation and children’s entertainment. After producing cartoon shorts for theaters in the late 1920s, many of them starring the newly created character Mickey Mouse, Disney began to produce feature-length animated films, starting in 1937 with Snow White. Other enormously popular films of the 1930s were adaptations of popular novels, such as The Wizard of Oz and Gone with the Wind, both released in 1939. • 577

578 • CHAPTER 23


 The antic comedy of the Marx Brothers provided a popular and welcome escape from the hardships of the Great Depression. The Marx Brothers, shown here in a poster for one of their most famous films, effectively lampooned dilemmas that many Americans faced in their ceaseless, and usually unsuccessful, efforts to find an easy route to wealth and comfort. (© Everett Collection) A NIGHT AT THE OPERA

 Hollywood did little to challenge the conventions of popular culture on issues of gender and race. Women in movies were portrayed overwhelmingly as wives and mothers, or if not, as sexually attractive flirts. Mae West portrayed herself in a series of successful Stereotypes in Film films as an overtly sexual woman manipulating men through her attractiveness. Few films included important African American characters. Most of the black men and women who did appear in movies were portrayed as servants or farmhands or entertainers.

Literature and Journalism
 Much literature and journalism in the 1930s dealt directly or indirectly with the tremendous disillusionment, and the increasing radicalism, of the time. Not all literature, of course, was challenging or controversial. The most popular books and magazines of the 1930s, in fact, were as escapist and romantic as many radio shows and movies. Two of the best-selling novels of the decade were romantic sagas set in earlier eras: Margaret Mitchell’s Gone with the Wind (1936) and Hervey Allen’s Anthony Adverse (1933). Leading magazines focused more on fashions, stunts, scenery, and the arts than on the social conditions of the nation. The new and enorLife Magazine mously popular photographic journal Life, first published in 1936, had the largest readership of any publication in the United States other than Reader’s Digest.

THE GREAT DEPRESSION
• 579 

 It devoted some attention to politics and to the economic conditions of the Depression, but it was best known for stunning ­photographs of sporting and theater events, natural landscapes, and impressive public projects. One of its most popular features was “Life Goes to a Party,” which took the chatty social columns of daily newspapers and turned them into glossy photographic glimpses of the rich and famous, but also ordinary people enjoying less lavish parties. Other Depression writing, however, was frankly and openly challenging to the dominant values of American popular culture. Some of the most Depression-Era Fiction significant literature offered corrosive portraits of the harshness and emptiness of American life: John Dos Passos’s U.S.A. trilogy (1930–1936), which attacked what he considered the materialistic madness of American culture; in Richard Wright’s Native Son (1940), the story of a young African American man broken by the system of racial oppression; Nathanael West’s Miss Lonelyhearts (1933), the story of an advice columnist overwhelmed by the sadness he encounters in the lives of those who consult him; Jack Conroy’s The Disinherited (1933), a harsh portrait of the lives of coal miners; and James T. Farrell’s Studs Lonigan (1932), a portrait of a lost, hardened working-class youth. Perhaps the best-known depiction of Depression-era life is John Steinbeck’s The Grapes of Wrath (1939). The novel’s main characters are the Joad family, migrants from the Dust Bowl to California who encounter an unending string of calamities and failures. Their story offers a critique of the exploitative features of agrarian life in the West, as well as a tribute to the fortitude and heart of the community the Joads represent.

The Popular Front and the Left
 The Communist Party, a relatively small organization in the early twentieth century, flourished during the Great Depression. It had long been a harsh and unrelenting critic of American capitalism, largely hidden from the public world. But with the capitalist system’s flaws exposed, the Depression brought the communists into the light. They created what came to be called the “Popular Front,” a broad coalition of Popular Front Alliances “antifascist” groups on the left. Not all members of the Popular Front considered themselves communists, but communism was its driving force. The Popular Front presented itself as an American organization, but it was in fact largely controlled by the Soviet Union. Over time, Stalin and the Communist Party softened their attitude toward President Franklin Roosevelt (elected in 1932), hoping that he would become an ally against Nazi Germany. To that end, the Popular Front formed loose alliances with “progressive groups,” and it praised even some strong anticommunists such as the labor leader John L. Lewis. In its heyday, the Popular Front did much to enhance the reputation and influence of the Communist Party. It also helped mobilize writers, artists, and intellectuals behind a critical, democratic sensibility. The Spanish Civil War of the mid-1930s showed how the left helped give meaning and purpose to individual lives. The war in Spain pitted the forces supporting Francisco Franco (who received aid from Hitler and Mussolini and was thus allied with fascism) against the existing republican government. A substantial group of young Americans— more than 3,000 in all—formed the Abraham Lincoln Brigade and trav- Lincoln Brigade eled to Spain to join in what they considered a fight against the fascists. The American Communist Party was instrumental in creating the Lincoln Brigade, and directed many of its activities.

580 • CHAPTER 23


 The party was active as well in organizing the unemployed in the early 1930s and staged a hunger march in Washington, D.C., in 1931. Party members were among the most effective union organizers in some industries. And the party was virtually alone among political organizations in taking a firm stand in favor of racial justice; its active defense of the Scottsboro defendants was but one example of its efforts to ally itself with the aspirations of African Americans. The American Communist Party was not, however, the open, patriotic organization it tried to appear. It was always under the close and rigid supervision of the Soviet Union. The subordination of the party leadership to the Soviet Union was most clearly demonstrated in 1939, when Stalin signed a nonaggression pact with Nazi Germany. Moscow sent orders to the American Communist Party to abandon the Popular Front and return to its old stance of harsh criticism of American liberals. Communist Party leaders in the United States immediately obeyed—although thousands of disillusioned members left the party as a result. The Socialist Party of America, under the leadership of Norman Thomas, also cited The Socialist Party Message the economic crisis as evidence of the failure of capitalism and sought vigorously to win public support for its own political program. Among other things, it attempted to mobilize support among the rural poor. The Southern Tenant Farmers Union (STFU), supported by the party and organized by a young socialist, H. L. Mitchell, attempted to create a biracial coalition of sharecroppers, tenant farmers, and others to demand economic reform. Neither the STFU nor the party itself, however, made any real progress toward establishing socialism as a major force in American politics. Antiradicalism was a powerful force in the 1930s. Hostility toward the Communist Party, in particular, was intense at many levels of government. Congressional committees chaired by Hamilton Fish of New York and Martin Dies of Texas investigated communist influence wherever they could find (or imagine) it. White southerners tried to drive communist organizers out of the countryside, just as growers in California and elsewhere tried (unsuccessfully) to keep communists from organizing Mexican American and other workers. At few times before (and few since) in American history did being part of the left seem Leftist Ideas in the Arts so respectable and even conventional among workers, intellectuals, and others. The 1930s witnessed an impressive, if temporary, widening of the ideological range of mainstream art and politics. The Roosevelt administration’s New Deal, for example, sponsored artistic work through the Works Projects Administration that was frankly challenging to the capitalist norms of the 1920s. The filmmaker Pare Lorentz, with funding from New Deal agencies, made two powerful documentaries—The Plow That Broke the Plains (1936) and The River (1937)—that combined a celebration of New Deal programs with a harsh critique of the exploitation of people and the environment that industrial capitalism had produced. Other New Deal–sponsored artists also sought to reveal the harshness of poverty and the human cost of social neglect. Notable among them were numerous documentary photographers, many of them employed by the Farm Security Administration, who traveled through rural areas recording the ravaged nature of agricultural life. They included some of the great photographers of their era—Dorothea Lange, Margaret Bourke-White, Arthur Rothstein, Russell Lee, Walker Evans, Ben Shahn, and others. Writers, too, devoted themselves to exposing social injustice, some of them working through the New Deal’s Federal Writers’ Project and Federal Art Project.

THE GREAT DEPRESSION
• 581 

MIGRANT FAMILY
This photograph by the Great Depression photographer Dorothea Lange portrays a family of migrants leaving Texas in search of work in California. It suggests the plight of hundreds of thousands of families who fled the regions affected by drought in the 1930s—a devastation that became known as the Dust Bowl. (© Granger, NYC—All Rights Reserved.) 
THE ORDEAL OF HERBERT HOOVER
 Herbert Hoover began his presidency in March 1929 believing, like most Americans, that the nation faced a bright and prosperous future. For the first six months of his administration, he attempted to expand the associational policies he had advocated during his eight years as secretary of commerce. The economic crisis that began before the year was out forced Hoover to deal with a new set of problems. But for most of the rest of his term, he continued to rely on the principles that had always governed his public life.

The Hoover Program
 Hoover first responded to the Depression by attempting to restore public confidence in the economy. “The fundamental business of this country, that is, production and distribution of commodities,” he said in 1930, “is on a sound and prosperous basis.” He then summoned leaders of business, labor, and agriculture to the White House and urged them to adopt a program of voluntary cooperation for recovery. He implored businessmen not to cut production or lay off workers; he talked labor leaders into forgoing demands for

582 • CHAPTER 23


 higher wages or better hours. But by mid-1931, economic conditions had deteriorated so much that the structure of voluntary cooperation had collapsed. Hoover also attempted to use government spending as a tool for fighting the Depression. The president proposed to Congress an increase of $423 million—a significant sum by the standards of the time—in federal public works programs, and he encouraged state and local governments to fund public construction. But the spending was not nearly enough in the face of such devastating problems. And when economic conditions worsened, he became less willing to increase spending, worrying instead about keeping the budget balanced. Even before the stock market crash, Hoover had begun to construct a program to assist the troubled agricultural economy. In April 1929, he proposed the Agricultural Marketing Agricultural Marketing Act Act, which established the first major government program to help farmers maintain prices. A federally sponsored Farm Board would make loans to national marketing cooperatives or establish corporations to buy surpluses and thus raise prices. At the same time, Hoover attempted to protect American farmers from international competition Hawley-Smoot Tariff by raising agricultural tariffs. The Hawley-Smoot Tariff of 1930 increased protection on seventy-five farm products. But neither the Agricultural Marketing Act nor the Hawley-Smoot Tariff ultimately helped American farmers significantly. Agricultural surpluses, combined with declining consumption, kept the farm economy in crisis. By the spring of 1931, Herbert Hoover’s political position had deteriorated considerably. In the 1930 congressional elections, Democrats won control of the House and made substantial inroads in the Senate. Many Americans blamed the president personally for the crisis and began calling the shantytowns that unemployed people established on the outskirts of cities “Hoovervilles.” Democrats urged the president to support “Hoovervilles” more vigorous programs of relief and public spending. Hoover, instead, seized on a slight improvement in economic conditions early in 1931 as proof that his policies were working. The international financial panic of the spring of 1931 destroyed that illusion. By the time Congress convened in December 1931, conditions had grown so desperate that Hoover supported a series of measures designed to keep endangered banks afloat and protect homeowners from foreclosure on their mortgages. Most important was a bill The RFC passed in January 1932 establishing the Reconstruction Finance Corporation (RFC), a government agency to provide federal loans to troubled banks, railroads, and other businesses. Unlike some earlier Hoover programs, the RFC operated on a large scale. In 1932, it had a budget of $1.5 billion for public works alone. Nevertheless, the new agency failed to deal directly or forcefully enough with the real problems of the economy to produce any significant recovery. The RFC lent funds only to financial institutions with sufficient collateral; much of its money went to large banks and corporations. At Hoover’s insistence, it helped finance only those public works projects that promised ultimately to pay for themselves (toll bridges, public housing, and others). Above all, the RFC did not have enough money to make any real impact on the Depression, and it did not even spend all the money it had.

Popular Protest
 For the first several years of the Depression, most Americans were either too stunned or too confused to raise much effective protest. By the middle of 1932, however, dissident voices began to be heard. In the summer of 1932, a group of unhappy farm owners gathered in Des Moines, Iowa, to establish a new organization: the Farmers’ Holiday Association, which endorsed

THE GREAT DEPRESSION
• 583 

 the withholding of farm products from the market—in effect a farmers’ strike. The strike began in August in western Iowa, spread briefly to a few neighboring areas, and succeeded in blockading several markets; but in the end, it dissolved in failure. A more celebrated protest movement emerged from American veterans. In 1924, Congress had approved the payment of a $1,000 bonus to all those who had served in World War I, the money to be paid beginning in 1945. By 1932, however, many veterans were demanding that the bonus be paid immediately. Hoover, concerned about balancing the budget, rejected their appeal. In June, more than 20,000 veterans, members of the self-proclaimed Bonus Expeditionary Force, or “Bonus Army,” marched The “Bonus Army” into Washington, built crude camps around the city, and promised to stay until Congress approved legislation to pay the bonus. Some of the veterans departed in July, after Congress had voted down their proposal. Many, however, remained in Washington.

 In July 1932, President Hoover ordered the Washington, D.C., police to evict the Bonus Marchers from some of the public buildings and land they had been occupying. After a series of skirmishes between police and the protesters, Hoover ordered the United States Army to complete the eviction. (© Bettmann/Corbis) CLEARING OUT THE BONUS MARCHERS

584 • CHAPTER 23


 Their continued presence in Washington embarrassed President Hoover. Finally, in mid-July, he ordered police to clear the marchers out of several abandoned federal buildings in which they had been staying. A few marchers threw rocks at the police, and someone opened fire; two veterans fell dead. Hoover called the incident evidence of uncontrolled violence and radicalism, and he ordered the United States Army to assist the police in clearing out the buildings. General Douglas MacArthur, the army chief of staff, carried out the mission himself and greatly exceeded the president’s orders. He led the Third Cavalry, two infantry regiments, a machine-gun detachment, and six tanks down Pennsylvania Avenue in pursuit Demise of the Bonus Army of the Bonus Army. The veterans fled in terror. MacArthur followed them across the Anacostia River, where he ordered the soldiers to burn their tent city to the ground. More than 100 marchers were injured. The incident dealt another serious blow to Hoover’s already battered political standing. The “Great Engineer,” the personification of the optimistic days of the 1920s, had become a symbol of the nation’s failure to deal effectively with its startling reversal of fortune.

The Election of 1932
 As the 1932 presidential election approached, few people doubted the outcome. The Republican Party dutifully renominated Herbert Hoover for a second term of office, but few delegates believed he could win. The Democrats, in the meantime, gathered jubilantly in Chicago to nominate the governor of New York, Franklin Delano Roosevelt. Roosevelt had been a well-known figure in the party for many years already. A Hudson Franklin Delano Roosevelt Valley aristocrat, a distant cousin of Theodore Roosevelt, and a handsome, charming young man, he progressed rapidly: from a seat in the New York State legislature to a position as assistant secretary of the navy during World War I to his party’s vice presidential nomination in 1920 on the ill-fated ticket with James M. Cox. Less than a year later, he was stricken with polio. Although he never regained use of his legs (and could walk only by using crutches and braces), he built up sufficient physical strength to return to politics in 1928. When Al Smith received the Democratic nomination for president that year, Roosevelt was elected to succeed him as governor. In 1930, he easily won reelection. Roosevelt worked no miracles in New York, but he did initiate enough programs of government assistance to be able to present himself as a more energetic and imaginative leader than Hoover. In national politics, he avoided divisive cultural issues “A New Deal” and emphasized the economic grievances that most Democrats shared. As a result, he was able to assemble a broad coalition within the party and win his party’s nomination. In a dramatic break with tradition, he flew to Chicago to address the Democratic National Convention in person and accept the nomination. In the course of his acceptance speech, Roosevelt aroused the delegates with his ringing promise: “I pledge you, I pledge myself, to a new deal for the American people.” Neither then nor in the subsequent campaign did Roosevelt give much indication of what that program would be. But Herbert Hoover’s unpopularity virtually ensured Roosevelt’s election. Roosevelt won by a landslide, receiving 57.4 percent of the popular vote to Hoover’s 39.7, and carried every state except Delaware, Pennsylvania, Connecticut, Vermont, New Hampshire, and Maine. Democrats won large majorities in both houses of

THE GREAT DEPRESSION
• 585 





































29 14 26










8 11














Candidate (Party)
Franklin D. Roosevelt
(Democratic)
Herbert Hoover
(Republican)
Norman Thomas
(Socialist)
 Other candidates (Communist, Prohibition, Socialist Labor, Liberty)

Electoral Vote
—
—


Popular Vote (%)
22,821,857
(57.4)
15,761,841
(39.7)
881,951
(2.2)
271,355


 56.9% of electorate voting THE ELECTION OF 1932 Like the election of 1928, the election of 1932 was exceptionally one-sided. But this time, the landslide favored the Democratic candidate, Franklin Roosevelt, who overwhelmed Herbert Hoover in all regions of the country except New England. Roosevelt obviously benefited primarily from popular disillusionment with Hoover’s response to the Great Depression. • But what characteristics of Roosevelt himself contributed to his victory?

 Congress. It was a convincing mandate, but it was not yet clear what Roosevelt intended to do with it.

The “Interregnum”
 The period between the election and the inauguration (which in the early 1930s lasted more than four months) was a season of growing economic crisis. Presidents-elect traditionally do not involve themselves directly in government. But in a series of brittle exchanges with Roosevelt, Hoover tried to exact a pledge from the president-elect to maintain policies of economic orthodoxy. Roosevelt genially refused. In February, only a month before the inauguration, a new crisis developed when the collapse of the American banking system suddenly and rapidly accelerated. Banking Collapse Depositors withdrew their money in panic; and one bank after another closed its doors and declared bankruptcy. Hoover again asked Roosevelt to give prompt public assurances that there would be no tinkering with the currency, no heavy borrowing, no unbalancing of the budget. Roosevelt again refused. March 4, 1933, was, therefore, a day of both economic crisis and considerable personal bitterness. On that morning, Herbert Hoover rode glumly down Pennsylvania Avenue with a beaming, buoyant Franklin Roosevelt, who would shortly be sworn in as the thirtysecond president of the United States.

586 • CHAPTER 23


CONCLUSION
 The Great Depression changed many things in American life. It created unemployment on a scale never before experienced in the nation’s history. It put enormous pressures on families, on communities, on state and local governments, and ultimately on Washington. The innovative but ultimately failed presidency of Herbert Hoover was unable to produce policies capable of dealing effectively with the crisis. In the nation’s politics and culture, there were strong currents of radicalism and protest; and many middle-class Americans came to fear that a revolution might be approaching. In reality, while the Great Depression shook much of American society and culture, it actually toppled very little. The capitalist system survived, damaged for a time but never truly threatened. The values of materialism and personal responsibility were shaken but never overturned. The American people in the 1930s were more receptive than they had been in the 1920s to evocations of community, generosity, and the dignity of common people. They were more open to experiments in government and business and even private lives than they had been in earlier years. But for most Americans, belief in the “American way of life” remained strong throughout the long years of economic despair.

KEY TERMS/PEOPLE/PLACES/EVENTS
Abraham Lincoln
Brigade 579
Agricultural Marketing
Act 582
Bonus Army 583
Dale Carnegie 574
Dust Bowl 569
Frank Capra 575


Franklin Delano
Roosevelt 584
Great Depression 565
Hawley-Smoot Tariff 582
Hindenburg 575
Hoovervilles 582
John Dos Passos 579
John Steinbeck 579


 Life magazine 578 Okies 569 Popular Front 579 Reconstruction Finance Corporation (RFC) 582 Richard Wright 579 Scottsboro case 570

RECALL AND REFLECT
 1. 	Was the 1929 stock market crash the cause of the Depression? Why or why not? 2. 	How did farmers fare during the Depression? What environmental conditions contributed

 to their plight? 3. 	How did popular entertainment and the arts respond to the needs of Depression-era

 audiences? 4. 	What popular protests arose in response to the Depression? How successful were

 these protests? 5. 	How did Hoover’s political beliefs affect his attempt to deal with the economic crisis of

 the Depression?



THE NEW DEAL
LAUNCHING THE NEW DEAL
THE NEW DEAL IN TRANSITION
THE NEW DEAL IN DISARRAY
LIMITS AND LEGACIES OF THE NEW DEAL


LOOKING AHEAD
 1. What emergency measures did Franklin Delano Roosevelt (FDR) take in his first hundred days as president? 2. Who were the major critics of FDR’s New Deal, and how did their criticisms influence FDR’s “Second New Deal”? 3. What were the principal achievements of the Second New Deal in 1935?

DURING HIS TWELVE YEARS IN
office, Franklin Roosevelt became more central to the life of the nation than any president had ever been. More important, his administration constructed a series of reforms that fundamentally altered the federal government and its relationship to society. By the end of the 1930s, the New Deal (as the Roosevelt administration’s program was called) had not ended the Great Depression; only World War II did that. But it had created many of the broad outlines of the political world we know today. 
• 587


LAUNCHING
THE NEW DEAL


TIME LINE
“First New Deal”
 legislation Prohibition ends



American Liberty
 League founded Long’s Share-OurWealth Society established

Restoring Confidence


Supreme Court
 invalidates NRA “Second New Deal” legislation, including Social Security and Wagner Acts Lewis breaks with AFL

Supreme Court
 invalidates Agricultural Adjustment Act CIO established Roosevelt reelected



 Sit-down strikes

 Roosevelt’s “Court-packing” plan Supreme Court upholds Wagner Act Severe recession

Fair Labor
Standards Act


588 •


 Roosevelt’s first task upon taking office was to alleviate the panic that was creating the chaos in the financial system. He did so in part by force of personality and in part by rapidly constructing an ambitious and diverse program of legislation.

 Much of Roosevelt’s early success was a result of his ebullient personality. He was the first president to make regular use of the radio; and his friendly “fireside chats,” d­ uring which he explained in simple terms his programs and plans to the people, helped build public confidence in the administration. But Roosevelt could not rely on image alone. On March 6, two days after taking office, he issued a proclamation closing all American banks for four days until Congress could meet in special session to consider banking reform legislation. So great was the panic about bank failures that the “bank holiday,” as the president euphemistically described it, created a general sense of relief and hope. Three days later, Roosevelt sent to Congress the Emergency Banking Act, a generally conservative bill designed primarily to protect the larger banks from being dragged down by the weakness of smaller ones. The bill provided for Treasury Department inspection of all banks before they would be allowed to reopen. It also provided federal assistance to some troubled institutions and a thorough reorganization of those banks in the greatest difficulty. Congress passed the bill within a few hours of its introduction. Whatever else the new law accomplished, it helped dispel the panic. Three-quarters of the banks in the Federal Reserve system reopened within the next three days, and $1 billion in hoarded currency and gold flowed back into them within a month. The immediate banking crisis was over.

THE NEW DEAL
• 589 

 On the morning after passage of the Emergency Banking Act, Roosevelt sent to Congress another measure—the Economy Act—designed to convince the public (and especially the business community) that the federal government was in safe, responsible hands. The act proposed to balance the federal budget by cutting the salaries of government employees and reducing pensions to veterans by as much as 15 percent. Like the banking bill, this one passed through Congress almost instantly, even though the cost cutting reduced the growth of the economy. Later that spring, Roosevelt signed the Glass-Steagall Act of June 1933, which gave the government authority to curb irresponsible speculation by banks. More important, perhaps, it established the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC), which guaranteed all bank deposits up to $2,500. Even if Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation a bank should fail, small depositors would be able to recover their money. To restore confidence in the stock market, Congress passed the so-called Truth in Securities Act of 1933, requiring corporations issuing new securities to provide full and accurate information about them to the public. In June 1934, another act established the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) to police the stock market. Roosevelt also Securities and Exchange Commission signed a bill to legalize the manufacture and sale of beer with a 3.2 percent alcohol content— an interim measure pending the repeal of prohibition, for which a constitutional amendment (the Twenty-First) was already in process. The amendment was ratified later in 1933.

Agricultural Adjustment
 These initial actions bought time for more comprehensive programs. The first was the Agricultural Adjustment Act, which Congress passed in May 1933. Under the provisions of the act, producers of seven basic commodities (wheat, cotton, corn, hogs, rice, tobacco,

THE NEW DEAL
Of the many resources at Roosevelt’s disposal was the impression of his sunny personality during dark times. It conveyed to many a sense of hope and optimism. In this political cartoon from about 1934, Roosevelt is seen steering the ship of state toward economic recovery. His detractors are shown grumbling under the cloud of depression. (© Granger, NYC—All Rights Reserved.) 
