680 • CHAPTER 28


 The national birthrate reversed a long pattern of decline with what is commonly called the Baby Boom, which began during World War II and peaked in 1957. The nation’s population rose almost 20 percent in the decade, from 150 million in 1950 to 179 million in 1960, which meant increased consumer demand and expanding economic growth. Rapid suburban expansion—a 47 percent increase in the 1950s—helped stimulate growth in several important sectors of the economy. The number of privately owned cars more than doubled in a decade. Demand for new homes helped sustain a vigorous housing industry. The construction of roads stimulated the economy as well. The combination of post–WWII economic growth, new standards of support from government spending, and a booming population led to a renewed American vitality for the next thirty years. And while that growth was far from equally distributed, the average American in 1960 had over 20 percent more purchasing power than in 1945 and more than twice as much as during the prosperous 1920s. The American people had achieved the highest standard of living of any society in the history of the world.

The Rise of the Modern West


 Births per thousand women 15–44 years old

 No region experienced more dramatic changes than the American West. Its population expanded dramatically; its cities boomed; its industrial economy flourished. By the 1960s, some parts of the West were among the most important (and populous) industrial and cultural centers of the nation. As during World War II, much of the growth of the West was a result of federal spending and investment—on the dams, power stations, highways, and other infrastructure projects that made additional economic development possible. Military contracts continued



















THE AMERICAN BIRTHRATE, 1940–1960
This chart shows how the American birthrate grew rapidly during and after 
 World War II (following a long period of decline in the 1930s) to produce what became known as the “Baby Boom.” At the peak of the Baby Boom, during the 1950s, the nation’s population grew by 20 percent. • What impact did the Baby Boom have on the nation’s economy?

THE AFFLUENT SOCIETY
• 681 

 to flow disproportionately to factories in California and Texas, many built with government funds during the war. The growing number of automobiles created new demands for petroleum and contributed to the rapid growth of oil fields in Texas and Colorado and of the metropolitan centers, among them Houston, Dallas, and Denver. State governments in the West invested heavily in their universities. The University of Texas and University of California systems, in particular, became among the nation’s largest and created important centers of research. They helped attract technology-intensive industries to the region. Climate also contributed to growth in the West. Southern California, Nevada, and Arizona, in particular, attracted many migrants from the East because of their warm, dry climates. The growth of Los Angeles after World War II was a remarkable phenomenon: more than 10 percent of all new businesses in the United States between 1945 and 1950 began in Los Angeles. Its population rose by over 50 percent between 1940 and 1960.

Capital and Labor


 Total represented by unions (in millions)

 Booming corporations were reluctant to allow strikes to interfere with their operations; and since the most important labor unions were now so large and entrenched that they could not easily be suppressed or intimidated, leaders of large businesses made important concessions to them. By the mid-1950s, factory wages in most industries had risen substantially, to an average of $80 per week. In December 1955, the American Federation of Labor and the Congress of Industrial Organizations ended their twenty-year rivalry AFL and CIO Merge and merged to create the AFL-CIO, under the leadership of George Meany. But success also bred stagnation and corruption in some union bureaucracies. In 1957, the powerful Teamsters Union became the subject of a congressional investigation, and its president, David Beck, was charged with the misappropriation of union funds.

AFL-CIO




 Tinted area represents total number of union employees



CIO
 Independent unions

AFL
















WORKERS REPRESENTED BY UNIONS, 1920–2001
This chart shows the number of workers represented by unions over an eighty-year period. Note the dramatic rise in the unionized workforce during the 1930s and 1940s, the slower but still significant rise in the 1960s and 1970s, and the steady decline that began in the 1980s. The chart, in fact, understates the decline of unionized labor in the postwar era, since it shows union membership in absolute numbers and not as a percentage of the rapidly growing workforce. • Why did unions cease recruiting new members successfully in the 1970s, and why did they begin actually losing members in the 1980s? 
682 • CHAPTER 28


 Beck ultimately stepped down to be replaced by Jimmy Hoffa, whom government investigators pursued for nearly a decade before finally winning a conviction against him in 1964 for jury tampering. The United Mine Workers, similarly, became tainted by violence and charges of corruption.

THE EXPLOSION OF SCIENCE
AND TECHNOLOGY
 In 1961, Time magazine selected as its “man of the year” not a specific person but “the American Scientist.” The choice was an indication of the widespread fascination with which Americans in the age of atomic power viewed science and technology.

Medical Breakthroughs
 The twentieth century saw greater progress in the development of medical science than had occurred in all the centuries before it. A very large proportion of that progress occurred during and after World War II. Particularly important was the development of new antibacterial drugs capable of fighting infections that had once been all but untreatable. To be sure, the development of antibiotics originated in the discoveries of Louis Pasteur and Jules-Francois Joubert. Working in France in the 1870s, they produced the first conclusive evidence that virulent bacterial infections could be defeated by other, more ordinary bacteria. Using their discoveries, the English physician Joseph Lister revealed the value of antiseptic solutions in preventing infection during surgery several years later. But the practical use of antibacterial agents to combat disease did not begin until many decades later. In the 1930s, scientists in Germany, France, and England demonstrated the power of so-called sulfa drugs—drugs derived from an antibacterial agent known as sulfanilamide—which could be used effectively to treat streptococcal blood infections. New sulfa drugs were soon being developed at an astonishing rate and were frequently improved; they were enormously successful in treating what had once been a major cause of death. In 1928, in the meantime, Alexander Fleming, an English medical researcher, accidentally discovered the antibacterial properties of an organism that he named penicillin. There was little progress in using penicillin to treat human illness, however, until a group of researchers at Oxford University, directed by Howard Florey and Ernest Chain, learned how to produce stable, potent penicillin in sizable enough quantities to make it a practical weapon against bacterial disease. The first human trials of the new drug, in 1941, were dramatically successful, but progress toward the mass availability of penicillin was stalled in England because of World War II. American laboratories further developed methods for the mass Treatments for Bacterial Infections production and commercial distribution of penicillin, which became widely available to doctors and hospitals around the world by 1948. Since then, a wide range of new antibiotics of highly specific character have been developed so that bacterial infections are now among the most successfully treated of all human illnesses. Immunization—the development of vaccines that can protect humans from contracting both bacterial and viral diseases—also progressed dramatically. The first great immunological triumph was the development of the smallpox vaccine by the English researcher Edward Jenner in the late eighteenth century. A vaccine effective against typhoid was

THE AFFLUENT SOCIETY
• 683 

 developed by an English bacteriologist, Almroth Wright, in 1897 and was in wide use by World War I. Vaccination against tetanus became widespread just before and during World War II. Medical scientists also developed a vaccine against another major killer, tuberculosis, in the 1920s; but controversy over its safety stalled its adoption, especially in the United States, for many years. It was not widely used in the United States until after World War II, when it largely eliminated tuberculosis until a limited recurrence began in the 1990s. Viruses are much more difficult to prevent and treat than bacterial infections, and progress toward vaccines against viral infections—except for smallpox—was relatively slow. Not until the 1930s, when scientists discovered how to grow viruses in tissue cultures, could researchers study them with any real effectiveness. Gradually, they discovered how to produce forms of a virus capable of triggering antibodies that would protect vaccinated people from contracting disease. An effective vaccine against yellow fever was developed in the late 1930s, and one against influenza—one of the great killers of the early twentieth century—appeared in 1945. A particularly dramatic postwar triumph was the development of a vaccine against polio. In 1954, the American scientist Jonas Salk introduced an effective Polio Vaccine ­vaccine against the disease that had killed or crippled thousands of children and adults (among them Franklin Roosevelt). It was provided free to the public by the federal ­government beginning in 1955. After 1960, an oral vaccine developed by Albert Sabin— usually administered in a sugar cube—made widespread vaccination even easier. By the early 1960s, these vaccines had virtually eliminated polio from American life and from much of the rest of the world. Advancements made in mass production and administration of resources expanded the use and availability of the previous decades’ discoveries. As a result, both infant mortality and the death rate among young children declined significantly in the first twenty-five years after the war (although not by as much as in Western Europe). Average life expectancy in that same period rose by five years, to seventy-one. These medical advances have saved millions, but overuse of antibacterial agents and time has led to genetic mutations in once controlled diseases. These “super bugs” resist traditional medical solutions, and their defeat represents the next great challenge of the medical field.

Pesticides
 Scientists also developed new kinds of chemical pesticides to protect crops from destruction by insects and to protect humans from such insect-carried diseases as typhus and DDT malaria. Perhaps the most famous of the new pesticides was dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane, generally known as DDT, a compound discovered in 1939 by the Swiss chemist Paul Muller. He had discovered that although DDT seemed harmless to human beings and other mammals, it was extremely toxic to insects. American scientists learned of Muller’s ­discovery in 1942, just as the army was grappling with the insect-borne tropical diseases— especially malaria and typhus—that threatened American soldiers. DDT was first used on a large scale in Italy in 1943–1944 during a typhus outbreak, which it quickly helped end. Soon DDT was being sprayed in mosquito-infested areas of Pacific islands where American troops were fighting the Japanese. The incidence of malaria dropped precipitously. DDT quickly gained a reputation as a miraculous tool for controlling insects, and it undoubtedly saved thousands of lives. Only later did it become evident that DDT had long-term toxic effects on animals and humans.

684 • CHAPTER 28


Postwar Electronic Research
 The 1940s and 1950s saw dramatic new developments in electronic technology. Researchers in the 1940s produced the first commercially viable televisions and created a technology that made it possible to broadcast programming over large areas. In the late 1950s, scientists at Radio Corporation of America, better known as RCA, developed color television, which first became widely available in the early 1960s. In 1948, Bell Labs, the research arm of AT&T, produced the first transistor, a solid-state device capable of amplifying electrical signals that was much smaller and more efficient than the cumbersome vacuum tubes that had powered most electronic equipment in the past. Transistors made possible the miniaturization of many devices (radios, televisions, audio equipment, hearing aids) and were also important in aviation, weaponry, and satellites. They contributed as well to another major breakthrough in electronics: the development of integrated circuitry in the late 1950s. Integrated circuits combined a number of once-separate electronic elements (transistors, resistors, diodes, and others) and embedded them into a single, microscopically small device. They made it possible to create increasingly complex electronic devices requiring complicated circuitry that would have been impractical to produce through other means. Most of all, integrated circuits helped advance the development of the computer.

Television


Postwar Computer Technology
 Prior to the 1950s, computers had been constructed mainly to perform complicated mathematical tasks, such as breaking military codes. In the 1950s, they began to perform commercial functions for the first time. The first significant computer of the 1950s was the Universal Automatic Computer (or UNIVAC), which was developed initially for the U.S. Bureau of the Census by the Remington Rand Company. It was able to handle both alphabetical and numerical information easily. It used tape storage and could perform calculations and other functions much faster than its predecessor, the Electronic Numerical Integrator and Computer. Searching for a larger market for its very expensive new device, Remington Rand arranged UNIVAC to use a UNIVAC to predict the results of the 1952 election for CBS television news. Analyzing early voting results, the UNIVAC accurately predicted an enormous landslide victory for Eisenhower over Stevenson. Few Americans had ever heard of a computer before that night, and the UNIVAC’s television debut became a critical breakthrough in public awareness of computer technology. Remington Rand had limited success in marketing the UNIVAC, but in the mid-1950s the International Business Machines Company (IBM) introduced its first major data-processing computers and marketed them among businesses in the United States and abroad. These early successes, combined with the enormous amount of money IBM invested in research and development, made the company the worldwide leader in computers for many years.

Bombs, Rockets, and Missiles
 In 1952, the United States successfully detonated the first hydrogen bomb. (The Soviet Union tested its first H-bomb a year later.) Unlike the plutonium and uranium bombs developed during World War II, the hydrogen bomb derives its vastly greater power not Nuclear Fusion from fission (the splitting of atoms) but fusion (the joining together of lighter atomic elements with heavier ones).

THE AFFLUENT SOCIETY
• 685 

 The hydrogen bomb gave considerable impetus to a stalled scientific project in both the United States and the Soviet Union: the effort to develop unmanned rockets and missiles capable of carrying the new weapons—not suitable for delivery by airplanes—to their targets. Both nations began to put tremendous resources into their development. The United States benefited from the emigration to America of some of the German scientists who had helped develop rocketry for Germany during World War II. In the United States, early missile research, conducted almost entirely by the air force, produced significant early successes in developing rockets capable of traveling several hundred miles. But American and Soviet leaders struggled to build longer-range missiles that were capable of traveling through space and across oceans and continents to reach distant targets: intercontinental ballistic missiles, or ICBMs. American scientists experimented ICBMs in the 1950s first with the Atlas and then the Titan ICBM. Despite some early successes, the difficulty of massing sufficient stable fuel to provide the tremendous power needed to launch missiles beyond the atmosphere stymied progress. By 1958, however, scientists had created a solid fuel to replace the volatile liquid fuels of the early missiles. They had also produced miniaturized guidance systems capable of ensuring that missiles could travel to reasonably precise destinations. Within a few years, a new generation of missile capable of traveling several thousand miles, known as the Minuteman, became the basis of the American atomic weapons arsenal. American scientists also developed a nuclear missile capable of being carried and fired by submarines—the Polaris, which is launched from below the ­surface of the ocean by compressed air and fires its engines only once it is above the surface. A Polaris was first successfully fired from underwater in 1960.

The Space Program
 In the beginning, the American space program was a by-product of the rivalry with the Soviet Union. Its origins can be traced most directly to a dramatic event in 1957, when the Soviet Union announced that it had launched an earth-orbiting satellite—Sputnik—into outer space. The United States had yet to perform any similar feats, and the Sputnik American government (and much of American society) reacted with alarm. Federal policy began encouraging (and funding) strenuous efforts to improve scientific education in the schools, to create more research laboratories, and, above all, to speed the development of America’s own exploration of outer space. The United States launched its own first satellite, Explorer I, in January 1958. The centerpiece of space exploration, however, soon became the manned space program, established in 1958 along with a new agency, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA). The first American space pilots, or “astronauts,” quickly became revered heroes. On May 5, 1961, Alan Shepard became the first American launched into space. But his short suborbital flight came several months after a Soviet “cosmonaut,” Yuri Gagarin, had made a flight in which he had actually orbited the earth. On February 2, 1962, John Glenn (later a United States senator) became the first American to orbit the globe. NASA later introduced the Gemini program, whose spacecraft could carry two astronauts at once. These early successes led to the creation of the Apollo program, whose purpose was to land astronauts on the moon. It suffered some catastrophic setbacks, most Apollo Program notably a fire in January 1967 that killed three astronauts during a training session. But on July 20, 1969, Neil Armstrong, Edwin “Buzz” Aldrin, and Michael Collins successfully traveled in a space capsule into orbit around the moon. Armstrong and Aldrin then

686 • CHAPTER 28


 Edwin (“Buzz”) Aldrin is photographed by his fellow astronaut Neil Armstrong in July 1969, when they became the first humans to set foot on the surface of the moon. (NASA) MOON WALK

 detached a smaller craft from the capsule, landed on the surface of the moon, and became the first humans to walk on a celestial body other than earth. Six more lunar missions followed, the last in 1972. Eventually, the space program became a relatively modest effort to make travel in near-space easier and more practical through the development of the “space shuttle,” an airplanelike device launched by a missile but capable of both navigating in space and landing on earth, much like a conventional aircraft. The first space shuttle was successfully launched in 1982. The explosion of one shuttle, Challenger, in January 1986 shortly after takeoff, killing all seven astronauts, stalled the program for two years. Missions resumed in the late 1980s, but problems remained, as illustrated by the explosion of the space shuttle Columbia during reentry in 2003. The space shuttle was used to launch and repair communications satellites and to insert the Hubble Space Telescope into orbit in 1990 (and to repair its flawed lens on several occasions, including in 2009). The space shuttle program officially ended in 2011.

PEOPLE OF PLENTY
 Among the most striking social developments of the postwar era was the rapid extension of a middle-class lifestyle and outlook to an expanding portion of the population. The historian David Potter published an influential examination of “economic abundance and American character” in 1954. He called it People of Plenty. For the American middle class in the 1950s, at least, it seemed an appropriate label.

THE AFFLUENT SOCIETY
• 687 

The Consumer Culture
 At the center of middle-class culture in the 1950s was a growing preoccupation with consumer goods—a result of increased prosperity, greater variety and availability of products, and the adeptness of advertisers in creating demand. It was also a result of the growth of consumer credit, which increased by 800 percent between 1945 and 1957 through the development of credit cards, revolving charge accounts, and easy-payment plans. Prosperity fueled a greater desire for such longtime consumer goods as the automobile, and Detroit responded to the boom with ever-flashier styling and accessories. Consumers also responded eagerly to such new products as dishwashers, garbage disposals, television, and stereos. Because consumer goods were so often marketed (and advertised) nationally, the 1950s were notable for the rapid spread of great national consumer crazes. For example, children, adolescents, and even some adults became entranced in the late 1950s with the hula hoop—a large plastic ring kept spinning around the waist. The popularity of the Walt Disney–produced children’s television show The Mickey Mouse Club created a national demand for Mickey Mouse watches and hats and also contributed to the stunning success of Disneyland, an amusement park near Los Angeles that re-created many of the characters and events of Disney entertainment programs.

The Suburban Nation
 A third of the nation’s population lived in suburbs by 1960—a result not only of increased affluence but of important innovations in home building, which made single-family houses affordable to millions of new people. The most famous of the suburban developers, William Levitt built low-cost, mass-produced houses in large suburban developments known as “Levittowns.” These types of relatively inexpensive developments Levittowns popped up in New York, New Jersey, and Pennsylvania but also soon appeared throughout the country. Why did so many Americans want to move to the suburbs? One reason was the enormous importance postwar Americans placed on family life after five years of war. Suburbs ­provided families with larger homes than they could find (or afford) in the cities and thus made it easier to raise larger numbers of children. The suburbs provided privacy and a sense of security from the noise and dangers of urban living. They offered space for new consumer goods—the appliances, cars, boats, outdoor furniture, and other products that many middleclass Americans craved. Another factor motivating white Americans to move to the suburbs was race. Most suburbs were restricted to white inhabitants—both because relatively few African Americans could afford to live in them and because formal and informal barriers kept even prosperous blacks out of all but a few. In an era when the black population of most cities was rapidly growing, many white families fled to the suburbs to escape the integration of urban neighborhoods and schools.

The Suburban Family
 For professional men (who tended to work in the city, at some distance from their homes), suburban life generally meant a rigid division between their working and personal worlds. For many middle-class women, it meant an increased isolation from the workplace. Many middle-class husbands considered it demeaning for their wives to be employed. And many

688 • CHAPTER 28


 women themselves shied away from the workplace when they could afford to, in part because of prevailing ideas about motherhood (popularized by such widely consulted books as Dr. Benjamin Spock’s Baby and Child Care, first published in 1946) that advised women to stay at home with their children. Stay-at-home mothers supposedly raised healthier, more disciplined children. Some women, however, had to balance these pressures against other, contradictory ones. As expectations of material comfort rose, many middle-class families needed a second income to maintain the standard of living they desired. As a result, the number of married women working outside the home actually increased in the postwar years. By 1960, nearly a third of all married women were part of the paid workforce.

The Birth of Television
 Television was the result of a series of scientific and technological discoveries, but its impact was largely social and cultural. It quickly became perhaps the most powerful medium of mass communication in history. Experiments in broadcasting pictures (along with sound) had begun as early as the 1920s, but commercial television began only shortly after World War II. Its growth was phenomenally rapid. In 1946, there were only 17,000 sets in the country; by 1957, there were 40 million—almost as many television sets as there were families. More people had television sets, according to one report, than had refrigerators. The television industry emerged directly out of the radio industry, and all three of the major networks—the National Broadcasting Company, the Columbia Broadcasting System, and the American Broadcasting Company—had started as radio companies. Advertising drove the television business. The need to attract advertisers determined most programming decisions; and in the early days of television, corporate sponsors often played a direct role in determining the content of programs. Many early television shows bore the names of the corporations that were paying for them: the General Electric Theater, the Chrysler Theatre, the Camel News Caravan, and others. Some daytime serials (known as “soap operas,” because their sponsors were almost always companies making household goods targeted at women) were actually written and produced by Procter & Gamble and other companies. By the late 1950s, television news had replaced newspapers, magazines, and radios as the nation’s most important vehicle of information. Television advertising helped create a vast market for new fashions and products. Televised athletic events made college and professional sports one of the most important sources of entertainment (and one of the biggest businesses) in America by the 1970s. Television entertainment programming—almost all of it controlled by the three national networks and their corporate sponsors—replaced movies and radio as the principal source of diversion for American families. Much of the programming of the 1950s and early 1960s created a common image of American life—an image that was predominantly white, middle class, and suburban. Television was epitomized by the popular situation comedies, featuring families in which, as the title of one of the most popular shows put it, Father Knows Best, and women were mothers and housewives striving to serve their children and please their husbands. Another top comedy, I Love Lucy, featured women in conventional roles but also tried to expand them, often in hilarious ways. I Love Lucy both idealized and poked fun at conventional domestic life.

THE AFFLUENT SOCIETY
• 689 

 Although the network worried that American viewers would not accept an ethnically mixed marriage (Desi was Cuban-born, Lucy was Anglo-American), I Love Lucy was a huge hit for CBS in the 1950s. “People identified with the Ricardos,” Lucille Ball once said, “because we had the same problems they had. We just took ordinary situations and exaggerated them.” (©CBS/Photofest) LUCY AND DESI

 Yet television also could create conditions that could accentuate social conflict. Even those unable to share in the affluence of the era could, through television, acquire a vivid picture of how the rest of their society lived. While television was celebrating the white middle class, it was also showing glimpses of the alienation and powerlessness of groups who felt excluded from the world it portrayed. And television news conveyed with unprecedented power the social upheavals that gradually spread beginning in the late 1950s.

Travel, Outdoor Recreation, and Environmentalism
 Although the idea of a paid vacation for American workers, and the connection of that idea with travel, had entered American culture beginning in the 1920s, it was not until the postwar years that vacation travel became truly widespread among middleincome Americans. The construction of the interstate highway system contributed dramatically to the growth of travel. (See Patterns of Popular Culture: “On the Road.”) So did the increasing affluence of workers. Even in the 1950s, there was a healthy market for vacation vehicles—trailers and small vans. That market grew steadily larger in subsequent decades. But the urge to travel was also an expression of some of the same impulses that produced suburbs: a desire to escape the crowding and stress of densely populated areas and find a place where it was possible to experience the natural world.

PATTERNS OF POPULAR CULTURE


On the Road
 People have traveled across the Americas for thousands of years, often with considerable difficulty. Indians had to make paths over rough terrain. Immigrants from England, Scotland, Mexico, and many other places began to move from town to town often on log roads. Later, they used stones and pebbles to create new byways. Wagons and carriages often rode on bumpy or muddy surfaces. Of course, many years later more-efficient, comfortable roads were built across the American continent, a development that changed American life dramatically. In the mid-twentieth century, automobiles traveled more slowly than they do ­today. But cars allowed travelers to discover interesting places and meet new people as they moved from town to town. Jack Kerouac, in his famous book On the Road (1957), was one of the first to capture in writing the new spirit of automobile travel. “It was drizzling and mysterious at the ­beginning of our journey,” Kerouac wrote as he got his battered car ready. “I could see that it was all going to be one big saga of the mist. . . . We were all delighted, when we all realized we were leaving confusion and nonsense behind and performing our one and noble function of the time, move. And we moved!” In the 1950s, Route 66 was one of the first highways to cross most of the United States, from the West Coast to Chicago. But Route 66 became more than a road; it became a popular symbol of a country on the move. Travelers could drive along the famous highway while listening to the hit song “(Get Your Kicks On) Route 66” on the radio. A television series called Route 66 690 •

 depicted characters becoming involved in all sorts of drama as they traveled the ­storied route. People traveling long distances, perhaps even across the continent, needed restaurants, motels, and shops, a development that encouraged the creation of fastfood chains, many of which began with drive-in restaurants where customers could be served and eat in their cars. The first drive-in restaurant, Royce Hailey’s Pig Stand, opened in Dallas in 1921, followed later in the decade by the White Tower. Ray Kroc’s McDonald’s opened its first

 The television show Route 66, starring George Maharis and Martin Milner, conveyed in popular culture the optimistic energy of a driving nation. (© CBS/Photofest) ROUTE 66

 outlets in Des Plaines, Illinois, and Southern California in 1955. Five years later, there were 228 outlets. In time, with thousands of restaurants, McDonald’s ­ became the most recognizable symbol of food in the world. Large supermarket chains—­catering to customers with automobiles—­replaced smaller, family-owned markets in town ­centers. Large centers and shopping malls moved the center of retailing out of cities and into separate, sprawling c­ omplexes surrounded by large parking lots. Eventually, with President Eisenhower’s encouragement, the Federal Highway Act of 1956 provided money to build the ­interstate highway system. This network

 of highways made it possible for people to travel long distances quickly and ­efficiently.

•


UNDERSTAND, ANALYZE, & EVALUATE
 1. How did television programs like Route

 66 of the mid-1950s reflect much older American myths about the American West? 2. In what other ways than those ­described in this feature did the ­interstate highway system help the American economy? 3. What military advantages did the ­highway system provide?

 Nowhere was this surge in travel and recreation more visible than in national parks, which underwent a long-term surge in attendance in the 1950s. People who traveled to national parks did so for many reasons—some to hike and camp, others to fish and hunt, and still others simply to see the extraordinary landscape. But whatever their motives, most visitors came in search of an experience in the wilderness. The importance of that search became clear in the early 1950s with the fight to preserve Echo Park. Echo Park is a spectacular valley in the Dinosaur National Monument, on the border between Utah and Colorado and near the southern border of Wyoming. In the early 1950s, the federal government’s Bureau of Reclamation—which encouraged irrigation, electric power, and water supplies—proposed building a dam across the Green River, which runs through Echo Valley, to create a lake for recreation and a source of Echo Park Controversy hydroelectric power. The American environmental movement had been relatively quiet since its searing defeat early in the century in its effort to stop a similar dam in the Hetch Hetchy Valley at Yosemite National Park. But the Echo Park proposal helped rouse it from its slumber. In 1950, Bernard DeVoto—a well-known writer and a great champion of the American West—published an essay in the Saturday Evening Post titled “Shall We Let Them Ruin Our National Parks?” It had a sensational impact, arousing opposition to the Echo Valley dam from many areas of the country. The Sierra Club, relatively obscure in previous decades, sprang into action. The controversy helped elevate a new and aggressive leader, David Brower, who eventually transformed the club into one of the nation’s leading environmental organizations. By the mid-1950s, a large coalition of environmentalists, naturalists, and wilderness vacationers had mobilized in opposition to the dam, and in 1956, Congress—bowing to public pressure—blocked the project and preserved Echo Park in its natural state. The controversy was a major victory for those who wished to preserve the sanctity of the national parks, and it was an important spur to the dawning environmental consciousness. • 691

692 • CHAPTER 28


Organized Society and Its Detractors
 Large-scale organizations and bureaucracies increased their influence over American life in the postwar era, as they had been doing for many decades before. White-collar workers came to outnumber blue-collar laborers for the first time, and an increasing proportion of them worked in corporate settings with rigid hierarchical structures. Industrial workers also confronted large bureaucracies both in the workplace and in their own unions. The debilitating impact of bureaucratic life on the individual became one of the central themes of popular and scholarly debate. William H. Whyte Jr. produced one of the most The Organization Man widely discussed books of the decade: The Organization Man (1956), which attempted to describe the special mentality of the worker in a large bureaucratic setting. Self-reliance, Whyte claimed, was losing place to conformity and the ability to “get along” and “work as a team.” The sociologist David Riesman made similar observations in The Lonely Crowd (1950), in which he argued that the traditional “inner-directed man,” who judged himself on the basis of his own values and the esteem of his family, was giving way to a new “other-directed man,” more concerned with winning the approval of the larger organization or community. Novelists, too, expressed misgivings in their work about the impersonality of modern society. Saul Bellow produced a series of novels—The Adventures of Augie March (1953), Seize the Day (1956), Herzog (1964), and many others—that chronicled the difficulties of American Jewish men in finding fulfillment in modern urban America. J. D. Salinger wrote in The Catcher in the Rye (1951) of a prep-school student, Holden Caulfield, who is unable to find any area of society—school, family, friends, city—in which he can feel secure or committed.

The Beats and the Restless Culture of Youth
 The most derisive critics of bureaucracy and middle-class society were a group of young poets, writers, and artists known as the “beats” and often called “beatniks” by disapproving critics. They wrote harsh critiques of what they considered the sterility and conformity of American life, the meaninglessness of American politics, and the banality of popular culture. Jack Kerouac produced the most popular document of the Beat Generation in his novel On the Road (1957), an account of a cross-country automobile trip that depicts the rootless, iconoclastic lifestyle of Kerouac and his friends. The beats were the most visible evidence of a widespread restiveness among young “Juvenile Delinquency” Americans in the 1950s. The phenomenon of “juvenile delinquency” attracted tremendous public attention, and in both politics and popular culture, dire warnings surfaced about the growing criminality of American youth. The 1955 film Blackboard Jungle, for example, was a frightening depiction of crime and violence in city schools. Scholarly studies, presidential commissions, and journalistic exposés all contributed to the sense of alarm about the spread of delinquency—although in fact, youth crime did not dramatically increase in the 1950s. The culture of alienation that the beats so vividly represented had counterparts even in ordinary middle-class behavior: teenage rebelliousness toward parents, youthful fascination with fast cars and motorcycles, and increasing sexual activity, assisted by the greater availability of birth-control devices. The popularity of James Dean, who starred in Rebel Without a Cause (1955), East of Eden (1955), and Giant (1956), was a particularly vivid sign of youth culture in the 1950s. Both in the roles he played (moody, alienated teenagers and young men with a streak of self-destructive violence) and in the way he lived Beat Writers

THE AFFLUENT SOCIETY
• 693 

 his own life (he died in 1955, at the age of 24, in an automobile accident), Dean became an icon of the unfocused rebelliousness of American youth in his time.

 Rock ’n’ Roll One of the most important cultural developments of the 1950s was the birth of rock ’n’ roll—and the enormous popularity of the greatest early rock star, Elvis Presley. Elvis Presley Presley became a symbol of a youthful determination to push at the borders of the conventional and the acceptable. His sultry good looks, his self-conscious effort to dress in the vaguely rebellious style of urban gangs (motorcycle jackets and slicked-back hair, even though Presley himself was a product of the conservative rural South), and, most of all, the open sexuality of his music and his public performances—all made him wildly popular among young Americans in the 1950s. His first great hit, “Heartbreak Hotel,” established him as a national phenomenon in 1956, and he remained a powerful figure in American popular culture well after his death in 1977. Presley’s music, like that of many early white rock musicians, drew heavily from black rhythm and blues traditions. Sam Phillips, a record promoter who had recorded some of the important black R&B musicians of his time, reportedly said in the early 1950s: “If I could find a white man with a Negro sound, I could make a billion dollars.” Soon after that, he found Presley. But there were others as well—among them Buddy Holly and Bill Haley (whose 1955 song “Rock Around the Clock,” used in the film Blackboard Jungle, announced the arrival of rock ’n’ roll to millions of young people)—who were closely connected to African American musical traditions. Rock drew from other sources, too: from country western music (another strong influence on Presley), from gospel music, even from jazz.

ELVIS
This photograph of the musician in performance is from very early in his career. (© Photo by Hulton Archive/Getty Images) 
694 • CHAPTER 28


 The 1950s also saw African American bands and singers grow in popularity among both black and white audiences. Chuck Berry, Little Richard, B. B. King, Chubby Checker, the Temptations, the Miracles, the Supremes, and others—many of them recorded by the Motown Records black producer Berry Gordy, the founder and president of Motown Records in Detroit—never rivaled Presley in their popularity among white youths but did develop significant multiracial audiences of their own. The rapid rise of rock owed a great deal to innovations in radio and television programming. By the 1950s, radio stations no longer felt obliged to present mostly live programming— especially once television took over many of the entertainment functions radio had once performed. Instead, many radio stations devoted themselves almost entirely to playing recorded music. Early in the 1950s, a new breed of radio announcers, known as “disk jockeys,” or “djs” for the records they played, began to create programming aimed ­specifically at young fans of rock music; and when those programs became wildly successful, other stations followed suit. American Bandstand, which began airing in 1957, was a televised showcase for rock ’n’ roll hits in which a live audience danced to recorded music. The program helped spread the popularity of rock—and made its host, Dick Clark, one of the best-known figures among young Americans. Radio and television were important to the recording industry, of course, because they encouraged the rapidly increasing sale of records in the mid- and late 1950s, especially in the inexpensive and popular 45 rpm format—small disks that contained one song on each side. Also important were jukeboxes, which played individual songs on 45s and which proliferated in soda fountains, diners, bars, and other places where young people congregated. Sales of records increased from $182 million to $521 million between 1954 and 1960. So eager were record promoters to get their songs on the air that they routinely made secret payments to station owners and disk jockeys to encourPayola Scandals age them to showcase their artists. These payments, which became known as “payola,” produced a briefly sensational series of scandals when they were exposed in the late 1950s and early 1960s.

THE OTHER AMERICA
 It was relatively easy for white middle-class Americans in the 1950s to believe that the world of economic growth, personal affluence, and cultural homogeneity was universal and that their values and assumptions were ones that most other Americans shared. But such beliefs were false. Large groups of Americans remained outside the circle of abundance and shared neither in the affluence of the middle class nor in many of its values.

On the Margins of the Affluent Society
 In 1962, the socialist writer Michael Harrington published a celebrated book called The Other America, which chronicled the continuing existence of poverty in the United States. The great economic expansion of the postwar years reduced poverty dramatically but The Other America did not eliminate it. In 1960, at any given moment, more than a fifth of all American families (over 30 million people) continued to live below what the government defined as the poverty line (down from a third of all families fifteen years before). Many millions more lived just above the official poverty line, but with incomes that gave them little comfort and no security.

THE AFFLUENT SOCIETY
• 695 

 Most of the poor—up to 80 percent—experienced poverty intermittently and temporarily. But approximately 20 percent were people for whom poverty was a continuous, often inescapable reality. That included approximately half the nation’s elderly population and a significant proportion of African Americans and Hispanics. Native Americans constituted the single poorest group in the country. This “hard-core” poverty rebuked the popular assumption that “a rising tide lifts all boats.” It was a poverty that the growing prosperity of the postwar era seemed to affect hardly at all, a poverty, as Harrington observed, that appeared “impervious to hope.”

Rural Poverty
 Among those on the margins of the affluent society were many rural Americans. In 1948, farmers had received 8.9 percent of the national income; in 1956, they received only 4.1 percent. In part, this decline reflected the steadily shrinking farm population; in 1956 alone, nearly 10 percent of the rural population moved into or was absorbed by cities. But it also reflected declining farm prices. Because of enormous surpluses in basic staples, prices fell 33 percent in those years, even though national income as a whole rose 50 percent at the same time. The surpluses were the result of higher yields per acre as well as increases in the amount of acreage under production, a function of the widespread use of tractors. Sharecroppers and tenant farmers (most of them African American) continued to live at or below subsistence levels throughout the rural South—in part because of the mechanization of cotton picking after 1944, in part because of the development of synthetic fibers that reduced demand for cotton. (Two-thirds of the cotton acreage went out of production between 1930 and 1960.) Migrant farmworkers, a group concentrated especially in the West and Southwest and containing many Mexican American and Asian American workers, lived in similarly dire circumstances. In rural areas without much commercial agriculture—such as the Appalachian region in the East, where the decline of the coal economy reduced the one significant source of support for the region—whole communities lived in desperate poverty, increasingly cut off from the market economy. All these groups were vulnerable to malnutrition and even starvation.

The Inner Cities
 As prospering white families moved from cities to suburbs in vast numbers, more and more inner-city neighborhoods became repositories for the poor, “ghettoes” Growth of “Ghettoes” from which there was no easy escape. The growth of these neighborhoods owed much to a vast migration of African Americans out of the countryside and into industrial cities. Not all these black migrants were poor, and many found in the city routes to economic progress similar to those of whites. But African Americans were substantially more likely to live in poverty than most other groups, in part because of the persistent patterns of discrimination that denied them any real opportunities. More than 3 million black men and women moved from the South to northern cities between 1940 and 1960. Chicago, Detroit, Cleveland, New York, and other eastern and midwestern industrial cities experienced a major expansion of their black populations while many whites were leaving cities at the same time. Similar migrations from Mexico and Puerto Rico expanded poor Hispanic neighborhoods in many American cities. Between 1940 and 1960, nearly a million Puerto Ricans moved into American cities, especially New York. Mexican workers crossed the borders

696 • CHAPTER 28


 into Texas and California and swelled the already substantial Latino communities of such cities as San Antonio, Houston, San Diego, and Los Angeles (which by 1960 had the largest Mexican American population of any city, approximately 500,000 people). Inner cities filled up with poor minority residents at the same time that the unskilled industrial jobs they sought diminished. Employers were moving factories and mills from old industrial cities to new locations in suburban and rural areas, smaller cities, and even abroad—places where the costs of labor were lower. Even in the factories that remained, Shrinking Job Opportunities automation reduced the number of unskilled jobs. The economic opportunities that had helped earlier immigrant groups to rise up from poverty were unavailable to many of the postwar migrants. Racial discrimination in hiring, education, and housing doomed many members of these communities to continuing poverty.

THE RISE OF THE CIVIL RIGHTS MOVEMENT
 After decades of skirmishes, an open battle began in the 1950s against racial segregation and discrimination, a battle that would prove to be one of the longest and most difficult social struggles of the twentieth century. White Americans ultimately played an important role in the civil rights movement. But pressure from African Americans themselves was the crucial element in raising the issue of race to prominence.

The Brown Decision and “Massive Resistance”
 On May 17, 1954, the Supreme Court announced its decision in the case of Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka. In considering the legal segregation of a Kansas public school system, the Court rejected its own 1896 Plessy v. Ferguson decision, which had ruled that communities could provide African Americans with separate facilities as long “Separate but Equal” Rejected as the facilities were equal to those of whites. The Brown decision declared that segregating public schools on the basis of race was unconstitutional. The justices argued that school segregation inflicted unacceptable damage on those it affected, regardless of the relative quality of the separate schools. Chief Justice Earl Warren explained the unanimous opinion of his colleagues: “We conclude that in the field of public education the doctrine of ‘separate but equal’ has no place. Separate educational facilities are inherently unequal.” The following year, the Court issued another decision (known as Brown II) to provide rules for implementing the 1954 order. It ruled that communities must work to desegregate their schools “with all deliberate speed,” but it set no timetable and left specific decisions up to lower courts. Some communities, such as Washington, D.C., complied relatively quickly and quietly. More often, however, strong local opposition (what came to be known in the South as “massive resistance”) produced long delays and bitter conflicts. More than 100 southern members of Congress signed a 1956 “manifesto” denouncing the Brown decision and urging their constituents to defy it. Southern governors, mayors, local school boards, and nongovernmental pressure groups (including hundreds of White Citizens’ Councils) all worked to obstruct desegregation. By the fall of 1957, only 684 of 3,000 affected school districts in the South had even begun to desegregate their schools. The Eisenhower administration was not eager to join the battle over desegregation. But in September 1957, it faced a case of direct state defiance of federal authority and felt compelled to act. Federal courts had ordered the desegregation of Central High

THE AFFLUENT SOCIETY
• 697 

 African American student Elizabeth Eckford passes by jeering whites on her way to Little Rock Central High School, newly integrated by federal court order. (© Everett Collection/SuperStock) LITTLE ROCK, 1957

 School in Little Rock, Arkansas. An angry white mob tried to stop implementation of the order by blockading the entrances to the school. Governor Little Rock’s Central High School Orval Faubus refused to do anything to stop the obstruction. President Eisenhower finally responded by sending federal troops to Little Rock to keep the peace and ensure that the court orders would be obeyed. Only then did Central High School admit its first black students.

The Expanding Movement
 The Brown decision helped spark a growing number of popular challenges to other forms of segregation in the South. On December 1, 1955, Rosa Parks, an African Rosa Parks American woman, was arrested in Montgomery, Alabama, when she refused to give up her seat on a Montgomery bus to a white passenger (as required by the Jim Crow laws throughout most of the South). The arrest of this admired woman and local civil rights leader produced outrage in the city’s African American community, which organized a boycott of the bus system to demand an end to segregated seating. The boycott was almost completely effective. It put economic pressure not only on the bus company but on many Montgomery merchants, because the boycotters found it difficult to get to downtown stores and shopped instead in their own neighborhoods. Even so, the boycott might well have failed had it not been for a Supreme Court decision late in 1956, Browder v. Gayle, that declared segregation in public transportation to be illegal. The buses in Montgomery abandoned their discriminatory seating policies, and the boycott came to a close.

698 • CHAPTER 28


 Among the most important accomplishments of the Montgomery boycott were the legitimization of a new form of racial protest and the elevation to prominence of a new figure in the civil rights movement. The man chosen to lead the boycott movement once it was launched Martin Luther King Jr. was a local Baptist pastor, Martin Luther King Jr., the son of a prominent Atlanta minister, a powerful orator, and a gifted leader. King’s approach to black protest was based on the doctrine of nonviolent resistance to injustice, even in the face of direct attack. And he produced an approach to racial struggle that captured the moral high ground for his supporters. For the next thirteen years—as leader of the Southern Christian Leadership Conference (SCLC), an interracial group he founded shortly after the boycott—he was the most influential and most widely admired black leader in the country. The popular movement he came to represent soon spread throughout the South and the country.

Causes of the Civil Rights Movement
 Several factors contributed to the rise of African American protest in these years. The legacy of World War II was one of the most important. Millions of black women and men had served in the military or worked in war plants during the war. They had fought to end totalitarianism and the suppression of freedom abroad and now demanded basic civil liberties at home. Another factor was the growth of an urban black middle class, which had been developing for decades but which began to flourish after the war. Much of the impetus for the civil rights movement came from the leaders of urban black communities—ministers, educators, professionals. Much of it came as well from students at black colleges and universities, which had expanded significantly in the previous decades. Men and women with education were often more aware of the obstacles to their advancement than poorer and more oppressed people. Television and other forms of popular culture also played a role in the rising consciousness of racism. More than any previous generation, postwar blacks had constant, vivid reminders of how the white majority lived—of the world from which they were effectively excluded. Television also conveyed the activities of demonstrators to a national audience, ensuring that activism in one community would inspire similar protests in others. Other forces mobilized many white Americans to support the movement once it began. The Cold War made racial injustice an embarrassment to Americans trying to present their nation as a model to the world. Political mobilization of northern blacks created a ­substantial voting bloc within the Democratic Party. Politicians from northern industrial states could not ignore their views. Labor unions with substantial black memberships also played an important part in supporting (and funding) the civil rights movement. This great social movement emerged as one of the most powerful forces for racial change in America.

EISENHOWER REPUBLICANISM
 Dwight D. Eisenhower was the least experienced politician to serve in the White House in the twentieth century. He was also among the most popular and politically successful presidents of the postwar era. At home, he pursued essentially moderate policies, avoiding most new initiatives but accepting the work of earlier reformers. Abroad, he continued and even intensified American commitments to oppose communism but also brought a measure of restraint that his successors did not always match.

THE AFFLUENT SOCIETY
• 699 

“What Was Good for . . . General Motors”
 The first Republican administration in twenty years staffed itself with men drawn from the same quarter as those who had staffed Republican administrations in the 1920s: the business community. But by the 1950s, many business leaders had acquired a social and political outlook very different from that of their predecessors. Above all, many of the nation’s leading business executives and financiers had reconciled themselves to at least the broad outlines of the Keynesian welfare state, named after the famed Great Depression economist John Maynard Keynes and launched during the New Deal. Indeed, some corporate leaders had come to see it as something that actually benefited them—by helping maintain social order, by increasing mass purchasing power, and by stabilizing labor relations. To his cabinet, Eisenhower appointed wealthy corporate lawyers and business executives who were unapologetic about their backgrounds. Charles Wilson, president of General Motors, assured senators considering his nomination for secretary of defense that “what was good for our country was good for General Motors, and vice versa.” Eisenhower encouraged private enterprise. He supported the private rather than public development of natural resources. To the chagrin of farmers, he lowered federal support for farm prices. He also removed the last limited wage and price controls maintained by the Truman administration, opposed the creation of new social service programs such as national health insurance, and strove constantly to reduce federal expenditures (even ­during the recession of 1958) and balance the budget. He ended 1960, his last full year in office, with a $1 billion budget surplus.

The Survival of the Welfare State
 While the president took few new initiatives in domestic policy, he steadily resisted conservative pressure to dismantle the welfare policies of the New Deal. Indeed, during his term, he agreed to extend the Social Security system to an additional 10 million people and unemployment compensation to an additional 4 million, and he approved an increase to the minimum hourly wage from 75 cents to $1. One of the most significant legislative accomplishments of the Eisenhower administration was the Federal Federal Highway Act of 1956 Highway Act of 1956, which authorized $25 billion for a ten-year project that built over 40,000 miles of interstate highways—the largest public works project in American history to that point. The program was funded through a highway “trust fund,” whose revenues would come from new taxes on the purchase of fuel, automobiles, trucks, and tires. In 1956, Eisenhower ran for a second term, even though he had suffered a serious heart attack the previous year. With Adlai Stevenson opposing him once again, he won by another, even greater landslide, receiving 57.6 percent of the popular vote and 457 electoral votes to Stevenson’s 73. Democrats retained control of both houses of Congress they had won back in 1954. In 1958—even during a serious recession—they increased that control by substantial margins.

 The Decline of McCarthyism The Eisenhower administration did little in its first years in office to discourage the anticommunist furor that had gripped the nation. By 1954, however, what came to be known as McCarthyism began to become increasingly unpopular. During the first year of the Eisenhower administration, McCarthy continued to operate with impunity. But in January 1954, he attacked Secretary of the Army Robert Stevens

700 • CHAPTER 28


 and the armed services in general, claiming that communists had intruded into the military. At that point, the administration and influential members of Congress organized a special Army–McCarthy Hearings investigation of the charges, the Army–McCarthy hearings, which were among the first congressional hearings to be nationally televised. Watching McCarthy in action—bullying witnesses, hurling groundless (and often cruel) accusations, evading issues—much of the public began to see him as a villain, and even a buffoon. In December 1954, the Senate voted 67 to 22 to condemn him for “conduct unbecoming a senator.” Three years later, he died—a victim, apparently, of complications arising from alcoholism. The Red Scare did not die with McCarthy, but its intensity soon began to decline.

EISENHOWER, DULLES, AND THE COLD WAR
 The threat of nuclear war created a sense of high anxiety in international relations in the 1950s. But the nuclear threat also encouraged both superpowers to edge away from direct confrontations. Indeed, the attention of both the United States and the Soviet Union began to turn instead to the rapidly growing instability in the Third World.

Dulles and “Massive Retaliation”
 Secretary of State John Foster Dulles was the most important figure in the Eisenhower administration next to the president himself. He was an aristocratic corporate lawyer with a stern moral revulsion to communism. He entered office denouncing the containment policies of the Truman years as excessively passive, arguing that the United States should pursue an active program of “liberation,” which would lead to a “rollback” of communist expansion. Once in power, however, he had to defer to the more moderate views of the president himself. The most prominent of Dulles’s innovations was the policy of “massive retaliation,” which he announced early in 1954. The United States would, he explained, respond to communist threats to its allies not by using conventional forces in local conflicts (a policy that he claimed had led to so much frustration in Korea) but by relying on “the deterrent of massive retaliatory power” (by which he clearly meant nuclear weapons). In part, the new doctrines reflected Dulles’s inclination for tense confrontations, an approach he once defined as brinksmanship—pushing the Soviet Union to the brink of war in order to exact concessions. But the real force behind the massive-retaliation policy was economics. With pressure growing both in and out of government for a reduction in American military expenditures, an increasing reliance on atomic weapons seemed to promise, as some advocates put it, “more bang for the buck.”

France, America, and Vietnam
 On July 27, 1953, negotiators at Panmunjom finally signed an agreement ending the hostilities in Korea. Each antagonist was to withdraw its troops a mile and a half from the existing battle line, which ran roughly along the 38th parallel—ironically, the prewar border between North and South Korea. A conference in Geneva was to consider means by which to reunite the nation peacefully—although in fact that 1954 meeting produced no agreement and left the cease-fire line in place as the apparently permanent border between the two countries into the twenty-first century.

THE AFFLUENT SOCIETY
• 701 

 Almost simultaneously, however, the United States was being drawn into a long, bitter struggle in Southeast Asia. Ever since 1945, France had been attempting to restore its authority over Vietnam, its one-time colony, which it had been forced to abandon to the Japanese toward the end of World War II. Opposing the French, however, were the powerful nationalist forces of Ho Chi Minh, determined to win independence Ho Chi Minh for their nation. Ho had hoped for American support in 1945, on the basis of the anticolonial rhetoric of the Atlantic Charter and Franklin Roosevelt’s speeches, and also because he had received support from American intelligence forces during World War II while fighting the Japanese. He was, however, not only a committed nationalist but a committed communist as well. The Truman administration ignored him and supported the French, one of America’s most important Cold War allies. By 1954, Ho was receiving aid from communist China and the Soviet Union. America, in the meantime, had been paying most of the costs of France’s ineffective military ­campaign in Vietnam since 1950. Early in 1954, 12,000 French troops became surrounded in a disastrous siege at the village of Dien Bien Phu. Only American intervention, it was clear, could prevent the total collapse of the French military effort. Yet despite the urgings of Secretary of State Dulles, Vice President Nixon, and others, Eisenhower refused to permit direct American military intervention in Vietnam, claiming that neither Congress nor America’s other allies would support such action. Without American aid, the French defense of Dien Bien Phu finally collapsed on May 7, 1954, and France quickly abandoned Vietnam. They agreed to a settlement of the conflict at the same international conference in Geneva that was considering the Korean settlement. The Geneva accords on Vietnam of July 1954, to a participant, established a supposedly temporary division of Vietnam along the 17th parallel. The north would be governed by Ho Chi Minh, the south by a pro-Western regime. Democratic elections would be the basis for uniting the nation in 1956. The agreement marked the end of the French commitment to Vietnam and the beginning of an expanded American presence there. The United U.S. Involvement in Vietnam States helped establish a pro-American government in the south, headed by Ngo Dinh Diem, a member of his country’s Roman Catholic minority. Because he enjoyed the full military backing of the American government, Diem acted ruthlessly at times, refusing, for example, to permit the 1956 popular elections when he realized he would lose.

Cold War Crises
 American foreign policy in the 1950s was challenged by both real and imagined crises in far-flung areas of the world. Among them were a series of crises in the Middle East, a region in which the United States had been little involved until after World War II. On May 14, 1948, after years of Zionist efforts and a decision by the new United Nations, the nation of Israel proclaimed its independence. President Truman recognized the new Jewish homeland the next day. But the creation of Israel, while resolving some conflicts, created others. Palestinian Arabs, unwilling to accept being displaced Israel Recognized from what they considered their own country, joined with Israel’s Arab neighbors and fought determinedly against the new state in 1948—the first of several Arab–Israeli wars. Committed as the American government was to Israel, it was also concerned about the stability and friendliness of the Arab regimes in the oil-rich Middle East, where American petroleum companies had major investments. Thus the United States reacted with alarm as it watched Mohammed Mossadegh, the nationalist prime minister of Iran, begin to resist the presence of Western corporations in his nation in the early 1950s. In 1953, the

702 • CHAPTER 28


 American CIA joined forces with conservative Iranian military leaders to engineer a coup that drove Mossadegh from office. To replace him, the CIA helped elevate the young shah of Iran, Mohammed Reza Pahlevi, from his position as token constitutional monarch to that of virtually absolute ruler. The shah remained closely tied to the United States for the next twenty-five years. The U.S. State Department was less effective in influencing the nationalist government of Egypt, under the leadership of General Gamal Abdel Nasser. He began to develop a trade relationship with the Soviet Union in the early 1950s. In 1956, to punish Nasser for his friendliness toward the communists, Dulles withdrew American offers to assist in building the great Aswan Dam across the Nile. A week later, Nasser retaliated by seizing control of the Suez Canal from the British, saying that he would use the income from it to build the dam himself. On October 29, 1956, Israeli forces attacked Egypt. The next day the British and French landed troops in the Suez to drive the Egyptians from the canal. Dulles and Eisenhower Suez Crisis feared that the Suez crisis would drive the Arab states toward the Soviet Union and precipitate a new world war. By refusing to support the invasion, and by joining in a United Nations denunciation of it, the United States helped pressure the French and British to withdraw and persuaded Israel to agree to a truce with Egypt. Cold War concerns affected American relations in Latin America as well. In 1954, the CIA in Guatemala Eisenhower administration ordered the CIA to help topple the new, leftist government of Jacobo Arbenz Guzmán in Guatemala, a regime that Dulles (responding in part to the requests of the United Fruit Company, a major investor in Guatemala) argued was potentially communist. No nation in the region had been more closely tied to America than Cuba. Its leader, Fulgencio Batista, had ruled as a military dictator since 1952, when American assistance Castro in Cuba helped him topple a more moderate government. Cuba’s relatively prosperous economy had become a virtual colony of American corporations, which controlled almost all the island’s natural resources and had cornered over half the vital sugar crop. American organized-crime syndicates controlled much of Havana’s lucrative hotel and nightlife business. In 1957, a popular movement of resistance to the Batista regime began to gather strength under the leadership of Fidel Castro. On January 1, 1959, as Batista fled to exile in Spain, Castro marched into Havana and established a new government. Castro soon began implementing drastic policies of land reform and expropriating foreign-owned businesses and resources. He established himself as a dictator by canceling promised elections and jailing or killing political rivals and critics. When Castro began accepting assistance from the Soviet Union in 1960, the United States cut back the “quota” by which Cuba could export sugar to America at a favored price. Early in 1961, as one of its last acts, the Eisenhower administration severed diplomatic relations with Castro. Isolated by the United States, Castro soon cemented an alliance with the Soviet Union. CIA-Backed Coup in Iran

The U-2 Crisis
 Although the problems of the Third World were moving slowly toward the center of American foreign policy, the direct relationship with the Soviet Union and the effort to resist communist expansion in Europe remained the principal foreign policy concerns of the Eisenhower administration. Relations between the Soviet Union and the West soured further in 1956 in response to the Hungarian Revolution. Hungarian dissidents had launched a popular uprising in November to demand democratic reforms. Before the month was out, Soviet tanks and troops rolled into Budapest to crush the uprising and restore an orthodox, pro-Soviet regime.

THE AFFLUENT SOCIETY
• 703 

THE CUBAN REVOLUTION
Fidel Castro (standing at center) is shown here in the Cuban jungle in 1957 with a small group of his staff and soldiers. Two years later, Castro’s forces toppled the U.S.-backed Batista government and elevated Castro to the nation’s leadership, where he remained for almost fifty years. (© Bettmann/Corbis) 
 In November 1958, Nikita Khrushchev, who had become Soviet premier and Communist Party chief earlier that year, renewed the demands of his predecessors that the NATO powers abandon West Berlin. When the United States and its allies predictably refused, Khrushchev suggested that he and Eisenhower discuss the issue personally, both in visits to each other’s countries and at a summit meeting in Paris in 1960. The United States agreed. Khrushchev’s 1959 visit to America produced a cool but polite public response. Plans proceeded for the summit conference and for Eisenhower’s visit to Moscow shortly thereafter. Only days before the Paris meeting, however, the Soviet Union announced that it had shot down an American U-2, a high-altitude spy plane, over Russian territory. Its pilot, Francis Gary Powers, was in captivity. Khrushchev lashed out angrily at the American incursion into Soviet airspace, breaking up the Paris summit almost before it could begin and withdrawing his invitation to Eisenhower to visit the Soviet Union. After eight years in office, Eisenhower had failed to eliminate, and in some respects had actually increased, the tensions between the United States and the Soviet Union. Yet Eisenhower had also brought to the Cold War his own sense of the limits of American power. He had resisted military intervention in Vietnam, but he could not find a solution to Vietnam’s likely slide into communism. And he had placed a measure of restraint on those who urged the creation of an enormous American military establishment. In “Military–Industrial Complex” his farewell address in January 1961, he warned of the “unwarranted influence” of a vast “military–industrial complex.” (See “Consider the Source: Eisenhower Warns of the MilitaryIndustrial Complex.”) His caution, in both domestic and international affairs, stood in marked contrast to the attitudes of his successors, who argued that the United States must act more boldly and aggressively on behalf of its goals at home and abroad.

CO NS IDER T HE S O URC E
EISENHOWER WARNS OF THE
MILITARY–INDUSTRIAL COMPLEX
 In the tradition of outgoing presidents, Eisenhower delivered a “farewell address” that offered a summary of his accomplishments and vision for the future of the country. He warned of a growing “military–industrial complex” that, if left unchecked, would drive the ­nation’s economy and politics. Good evening, my fellow Americans. [. . .] This evening I come to you with a message of leave-taking and farewell, and to share a few final thoughts with you, my countrymen. Like every other citizen, I wish the new President, and all who will labor with him, Godspeed. I pray that the coming years will be blessed with peace and prosperity for all. [. . .] America is today the strongest, the most influential, and most productive nation in the world. Understandably proud of this pre-eminence, we yet realize that America’s leadership and prestige depend, not merely upon our unmatched material progress, riches and military strength, but on how we use our power in the interests of world peace and human betterment. [. . .] A vital element in keeping the peace is our military establishment. Our arms must be mighty, ready for instant action, so that no potential aggressor may be tempted to risk his own destruction. Our military organization today bears little relation to that known by any of my predecessors in peacetime, or, indeed, by the fighting men of World War II or Korea. [. . .] Now this conjunction of an immense military establishment and a large arms industry is new in the American experience. The total influence—economic, ­political, even spiritual—is felt in every city, every Statehouse, every office of the Federal government. We recognize the imperative need for this development. Yet we must not fail to comprehend its 704 •

 grave implications. Our toil, resources, and livelihood are all involved. So is the very structure of our society. In the councils of government, we must guard against the acquisition of unwarranted influence, whether sought or ­unsought, by the military–industrial complex. The potential for the disastrous rise of misplaced power exists and will persist. We must never let the weight of this combination endanger our liberties or democratic processes. We should take nothing for granted. Only an alert and knowledgeable citizenry can compel the proper meshing of the huge industrial and military machinery of defense with our peaceful methods and goals, so that security and liberty may prosper together. Akin to, and largely responsible for the sweeping changes in our industrial-military posture, has been the technological revolution during recent decades. In this revolution, research has become central, it also becomes more formalized, complex, and costly. A steadily increasing share is conducted for, by, or at the direction of, the Federal government. Today, the solitary inventor, tinkering in his shop, has been overshadowed by task forces of scientists in laboratories and testing fields. In the same fashion, the free university, historically the fountainhead of free ideas and scientific discovery, has ­experienced a revolution in the conduct of research. Partly because of the huge costs involved, a government contract becomes virtually a substitute for intellectual curiosity. For every old blackboard there are now hundreds of new electronic computers. The prospect of domination of the nation’s scholars by Federal employment, project ­allocations, and the power of money is ever present—and is gravely to be regarded.

 Yet, in holding scientific research and discovery in respect, as we should, we must also be alert to the equal and opposite danger that public policy could itself become the captive of a scientific-technological elite. It is the task of statesmanship to mold, to balance, and to integrate these and other forces, new and old, within the principles of our democratic system—ever aiming toward the supreme goals of our free society. . . . As we peer into society’s future, we— you and I, and our government—must avoid the impulse to live only for today, plundering for our own ease and convenience the precious resources of tomorrow. We cannot mortgage the material assets of our grandchildren without risking the loss also of their political and spiritual heritage. We want ­democracy to survive for all generations to come, not to become the insolvent phantom of tomorrow. [. . . ] Disarmament, with mutual honor and confidence, is a continuing imperative. Together we must learn how to compose differences, not with arms, but with intellect and decent purpose. Because this need is so sharp and apparent, I confess that I lay down my official responsibilities in this field with a definite sense of disappointment. As one who has witnessed the horror and the

 lingering sadness of war, as one who knows that another war could utterly destroy this civilization which has been so slowly and painfully built over thousands of years, I wish I could say tonight that a lasting peace is in sight. [. . . ] You and I, my fellow citizens, need to be strong in our faith that all nations, under God, will reach the goal of peace with justice. May we be ever unswerving in devotion to principle, confident but humble with power, diligent in pursuit of the Nations’ great goals. [. . . ] Now, on Friday noon, I am to become a private citizen. I am proud to do so. I look forward to it. Thank you, and good night. UNDERSTAND, ANALYZE, & EVALUATE 1. What specifically was the military–­

 industrial complex, and how did it ­support American postwar prosperity? How did it change the relationship ­between knowledge, industrial ­production, and defense? 2. What dangers for American political traditions did Eisenhower foresee? What economic dangers did he envision for future generations of Americans?

 Source: Farewell address by President Dwight D. Eisenhower, January 17, 1961; Final TV Talk 1/17/61 (1), Box 38, Speech Series, Papers of Dwight D. Eisenhower as President, 1953–61, Eisenhower Library; National Archives and Records Administration [Public Domain].

CONCLUSION
 The booming economic growth of the 1950s—and the anxiety over the Cold War that formed a backdrop to it—shaped the politics and the culture of the decade. For most Americans, the 1950s were years of increasing personal prosperity. Sales of private homes increased dramatically; suburbs grew precipitously; young families had children at an astounding rate—creating what came to be known as the postwar “Baby Boom.” After the end of the divisive Korean War, the nation’s politics entered a period of relative calm, symbolized by the genial presence in the White House of Dwight D. Eisenhower, who provided moderate and undemanding leadership through most of the decade. • 705

706 • CHAPTER 28


 The nation’s culture, too, helped create a broad sense of stability and calm. Television, which emerged in the 1950s as the most powerful medium of mass culture, presented largely uncontroversial programming dominated by middle-class images and traditional values. Movies, theater, popular magazines, and newspapers all contributed to a broad sense of well-being. But the 1950s were not, in the end, as calm and contented as the politics and popular culture of the time suggested. A powerful youth culture emerged in these years, displaying a considerable level of restiveness and even disillusionment. African Americans began to escalate their protests against segregation and inequality. The continuing existence of widespread poverty among large groups of Americans attracted increasing attention as the decade progressed. These pulsing anxieties, combined with frustration over the continuing tensions of the Cold War, produced by the late 1950s a growing sense of impatience with the calm, placid public culture of the time. That was one reason for the growing desire for action and innovation as the 1960s began.

KEY TERMS/PEOPLE/PLACES/EVENTS
AFL-CIO 681
 Apollo program 685 Army–McCarthy hearings 700 Baby Boom 680 Beats 692 brinksmanship 700 Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka 696

DDT 683
Echo Park 691
Elvis Presley 693
Federal Highway Act
 of 1956 699 Fidel Castro 702 Ho Chi Minh 701 ICBMs 685 John Foster Dulles 700

 Levittown(s) 687 Martin Luther King Jr. 698 Rosa Parks 697 Sputnik 685 The Organization Man 692 The Other America 694 U-2 crisis 702 UNIVAC 684

RECALL AND REFLECT
 1. 	How did the economic boom of the postwar era change American lifestyles? 2. 	What were some of the significant scientific and technological breakthroughs, especially in

 medicine, chemistry, electronics, weaponry, and space exploration, of the 1950s and 1960s? How did these developments affect American life? 3. 	How did the increasing popularity of the automobile change the American landscape and American society? 4. 	How did the Cold War progress under Eisenhower?



THE TURBULENT
SIXTIES
EXPANDING THE LIBERAL STATE
THE BATTLE FOR RACIAL EQUALITY
RESPONSE” AND THE COLD WAR
THE AGONY OF VIETNAM
THE TRAUMAS OF 1968


LOOKING AHEAD
 1. What was the domestic reform agenda of Kennedy’s New Frontier, and how did Johnson’s Great Society programs continue and expand on that agenda? 2. Why did the civil rights movement become increasingly assertive and militant over the course of the 1960s? 3. How did U.S. involvement in Vietnam escalate through the 1960s? What were the political and social consequences of that escalation, in both Vietnam and the United States?

BY THE LATE 1950s,
a growing restlessness was bubbling beneath the apparently placid surface of American society. Ultimately, that restlessness would make the 1960s one of the most turbulent and divisive eras of the twentieth century. But at first, it contributed to a bold and confident effort by political leaders to attack social and international problems within the framework of conventional liberalism. 
• 707


EXPANDING THE
LIBERAL STATE


TIME LINE
 Kennedy elected president Freedom rides Cuban missile crisis

Bay of Pigs
 Berlin Wall erected

March on Washington


 Johnson launches war on poverty Civil Rights Act

 Kennedy assassinated; Johnson becomes president Civil rights demonstrations in Birmingham

Gulf of Tonkin
Resolution
 Johnson elected president

 Malcolm X assassinated Voting Rights Act U.S. troops in Vietnam



 Racial violence in Watts

 Antiwar movement grows Racial violence in Detroit

 Tet offensive Martin Luther King Jr. assassinated Robert Kennedy assassinated Nixon elected president

708 •


 Those who yearned for a more active government in the late 1950s, and who accused the Eisenhower administration of allowing the nation to “drift” in matters of social affairs, hoped for vigorous new leadership. The two men who served in the White House through most of the 1960s—John Kennedy and Lyndon Johnson—seemed for a time to embody these liberal hopes.

John Kennedy
 The campaign of 1960 produced two young candidates who claimed to offer the nation active leadership. The Republican nomination went almost uncontested to Vice President Richard Nixon, who promised moderate reform. The Democrats, in the meantime, emerged from a spirited primary campaign united, although somewhat uneasily, behind John Fitzgerald Kennedy, an attractive and articulate senator from Massachusetts who had narrowly missed being the party’s vice presidential candidate in 1956. John Kennedy was the young son of the wealthy, powerful, and highly controversial Joseph P. Kennedy, former American ambassador to Britain. He premised his campaign, he said, “on the single assumption that the American people are uneasy at the present drift in our national course.” But his appealing public image was at least as important as his political positions in attracting popular support. Kennedy regularly appeared on television talk shows before and during his run for president, and his appearances helped comfort the American people despite his perceived weaknesses as a presidential candidate. He overcame doubts about his youth (he turned forty-three in 1960) and religion (he was Catholic) to win with a tiny plurality of the popular vote (49.7 percent to Nixon’s 49.6 percent) and only a slightly more comfortable electoral majority (303 to 219).

THE TURBULENT SIXTIES
• 709 

































27 13 25


7 1












8 12
















Candidate (Party)
John F. Kennedy
(Democratic)
Richard M. Nixon
(Republican)
Harry F. Byrd
(Dixiecrat)
 Other candidates (Prohibition, Socialist Labor, Constitution, Socialist Workers, States’ Rights)

Electoral Vote


Popular Vote (%)




34,227,096
(49.7)
34,108,546
(49.6)
501,643
(0.7)


—


197,029




 64% of electorate voting THE ELECTION OF 1960 The election of 1960 was, in the popular vote at least, one of the closest in American history. John Kennedy’s margin over Richard Nixon was less than one-third of 1 percent of the total national vote, but greater in the electoral college. Note the distribution of electoral strength of the two candidates. Kennedy was strong in the industrial Northeast and the largest industrial states of the Midwest, and he retained at least a portion of his party’s traditional strength in the South and Southwest. But Nixon made significant inroads into the upper South, carried Florida, and swept most of the plains and mountain states. • What was the significance of this distribution of strength to the future of the two parties?

 Kennedy had campaigned promising a set of domestic reforms he described as the “New Frontier.” But his thin popular mandate and a Congress dominated by a coalition of Republicans and conservative Democrats frustrated many of his hopes. Kennedy did manage to win approval of tariff reductions his administration had negotiated, and he began to build a legislative agenda—including a call for a significant tax cut to promote economic growth. More than any other president of the century (except perhaps the two Roosevelts and, later, Ronald Reagan), Kennedy made his own personality an integral Kennedy Assassination part of his presidency and a central focus of national attention. Nothing illustrated that more clearly than the popular reaction to the tragedy of November 22, 1963. In Texas with his wife and Vice President Lyndon Johnson for a series of political appearances, as the presidential motorcade rode slowly through the streets of Dallas, shots rang out. Two bullets struck the president—one in the throat, the other in the head. He was sped to a nearby hospital, where minutes later he was pronounced dead. Lee Harvey Oswald—a young man who had spent time in the Soviet Union and, later, in Cuba—was arrested for

