548 • CHAPTER 22


 Henry Ford, for example, shortened the workweek, raised wages, and instituted paid vacations. By 1926, nearly 3 million industrial workers were eligible for at least modest pensions upon retirement. When labor grievances surfaced despite these efforts, workers could voice them through the so-called company unions that emerged in many industries—workers’ councils and shop committees, organized by the corporations themselves. But welfare capitalism, in the end, gave workers no real control over their own fates. Company unions were feeble vehicles. And welfare capitalism survived only as long as industry prospered. After 1929, with the economy in crisis, the entire system collapsed. Welfare capitalism affected only a relatively small number of firms in any case. Most laborers worked for employers who were interested primarily in keeping their labor costs low. Workers as a whole, therefore, received wage increases that were proportionately far below the growth of the economy. At the end of the decade, the average annual income of a worker remained below $1,500, when $1,800 was considered necessary to maintain a minimally decent standard of living. Only by relying on the combined earnings of several family members could many working-class ­families make ends meet. The New Era was a bleak time for labor organization, in part because many unions themselves were relatively conservative and failed to adapt to the realities of the modern economy. The American Federation of Labor (AFL), led after Samuel Gompers’s death by the cautious William Green, sought peaceful cooperation with employers and remained wedded to the concept of the craft union. In the meantime, the rapidly rising number of unskilled industrial workers received little attention from the craft unions. But whatever the unions’ weaknesses, the strength of the corporations was the principal reason for the absence of effective labor organization in the 1920s. After the turmoil of 1919, corporate leaders worked hard to spread the doctrine that a crucial element of democratic capitalism was the protection of the “open shop” (a shop in which no worker could be required to join a union). The crusade for the open shop, euphemistically titled “American Plan” the “American Plan,” became a pretext for a harsh campaign of unionbusting. As a result, union membership fell from more than 5 million in 1920 to under 3 million in 1929.

Women and Minorities in the Workforce
 A growing proportion of the workforce consisted of women, who were concentrated in what have since become known as “pink-collar” jobs—low-paying service occupations. Large numbers of women worked as secretaries, salesclerks, and telephone operators and in other nonmanual service capacities. Because technically such positions were not industrial jobs, the AFL and other labor organizations were uninterested in organizing these workers. Similarly, the half-million African Americans who had migrated from the rural South into the cities during the Great Migration after 1914 had few opportunities for union representation. The skilled crafts represented in the AFL usually excluded black workers. Partly as a result of that exclusion, most blacks worked in jobs in which the AFL took no interest at all—as janitors, dishwashers, garbage collectors, and domestics and in other service capacities. A. Philip Randolph’s Brotherhood of Sleeping Car Porters Brotherhood of Sleeping Car Porters was one of the few important unions dominated and led by African Americans.

THE NEW ERA
• 549 

 The frail union movement among African Americans in the 1920s, led by A. Philip Randolph and others, slowly built up a constituency within the black working class. Here, an aspiring dairy worker draws attention to the unjust treatment of African American men who had demonstrated their patriotism during the war. (© Photo by John Vachon/Anthony Potter Collection/Getty Images) AFRICAN AMERICAN WORKER PROTESTING

 In the West and the Southwest, the ranks of the unskilled included considerable numbers of Asians and Hispanics. In the wake of the Chinese Exclusion Acts, Japanese immigrants increasingly replaced the Chinese in menial jobs in California. They worked on railroads, construction sites, farms, and in many other low-paying workplaces. Some Japanese managed to escape the ranks of the unskilled by forming their own small businesses or setting themselves up as truck farmers; and many of the Issei (Japanese immigrants) and Issei and Nisei Nisei (their American-born children) enjoyed significant economic success—so much so that California passed laws in 1913 and 1920 to make it more difficult for them to buy land. Other Asians—most notably Filipinos—also swelled the unskilled workforce and generated considerable hostility. Anti-Filipino riots in California beginning in 1929 helped produce legislation in 1934 virtually eliminating immigration from the Philippines. Mexican immigrants formed a major part of the unskilled workforce throughout the Southwest and California. Nearly half a million Mexicans entered the United States in the 1920s. Most lived in California, Texas, Arizona, and New Mexico; and by 1930, most lived in cities. Large

550 • CHAPTER 22


Galena
Freeport


Rockford


Savanna


M
 issis sipp

Oregon
Rochelle


Dixon


.
 iR

Chicago


Galena
Rockford


Freeport
Mi
 ssi ss

R.
 pi ip

Savanna
Oregon


Chicago
Rochelle


Dixon


AREA REACHED IN:
 1 hour

 3 hours

 2 hours

 More than 3 hours

Railroads (1900)
 Paved roads (1930) Unpaved roads (1930)

BREAKING DOWN RURAL ISOLATION: THE EXPANSION OF TRAVEL HORIZONS IN OREGON, ILLINOIS


 This map uses the small town of Oregon, Illinois—west of Chicago—to illustrate the way in which first railroads and then automobiles reduced the isolation of rural areas in the early decades of the twentieth century. The gold and purple areas of the two maps show the territory that residents of Oregon could reach within two hours. Note how small that area was in 1900 and how much larger it was in 1930, by which time an area of over 100 square miles had become easily accessible to the town. Note, too, the significant network of paved roads in the region by 1930, few of which had existed in 1900. • Why did automobiles do so much more than railroads to expand the travel horizons of small towns?

 Mexican barrios grew up in Los Angeles, El Paso, San Antonio, Denver, and many other urban centers. Some of the residents found work locally in factories and shops; others traveled to mines or did migratory labor on farms but returned to the cities between jobs. Mexican workers, too, faced hostility and discrimination from the Anglo population of the region, but there were few efforts actually to exclude them. Employers in the relatively underpopulated West needed this ready pool of low-paid and unorganized workers.

Rising Mexican Immigration


THE NEW ERA
• 551 

Agricultural Technology and the Plight of the Farmer
 Like industry, American agriculture in the 1920s embraced new technologies. The number of tractors on American farms quadrupled during the 1920s, especially after they began to be powered by internal combustion engines (like automobiles) rather than by the cumbersome steam engines of the past. They helped open 35 million new acres to cultivation. Increasingly sophisticated combines and harvesters proliferated, making it possible to produce more crops with fewer workers. Agricultural researchers worked on other innovations: the invention of hybrid corn (made possible by advances in genetic research), which became available to farmers in 1921 but was not grown in great quantities for a decade or more; and the creation of chemical fertilizers and pesticides, which also had limited use in the 1920s but proliferated quickly in the 1930s and 1940s. The new technologies greatly increased agricultural productivity, but the demand for agricultural goods was not rising as fast as production. As a result, Declining Food Prices there were substantial surpluses, a disastrous decline in food prices, and a severe drop in farmers’ incomes beginning early in the 1920s. More than 3 million people left agriculture altogether in the course of the decade. Of those who remained, many lost ownership of their lands and had to rent instead from banks or other landlords. In response, some farmers began to demand relief in the form of government price supports. One price-raising scheme in particular came to dominate agrarian demands: the idea of “parity.” Parity was a complicated formula for setting an adequate price for Parity farm goods and ensuring that farmers would earn back at least their production costs no matter how the national or world agricultural market might fluctuate. Champions of ­parity urged high tariffs against foreign agricultural goods and a government commitment to buy surplus domestic crops at parity and sell them abroad. The legislative expression of the demand for parity was the McNary-Haugen Bill, which required the government to support prices at parity for grain, cotton, tobacco, and rice. It was introduced repeatedly between 1924 and 1928. In 1926 and again in 1928, Congress approved the bill. President Calvin Coolidge vetoed it both times.

THE NEW CULTURE
 The urban and consumer-oriented culture of the 1920s helped Americans in all regions live their lives and perceive their world in increasingly similar ways. That same culture exposed them to a new set of values. But different segments of American society experienced the new culture in different ways.

Consumerism and Communications
 The United States of the 1920s was a consumer society. More people than ever before could buy items not just because of need but also for convenience and pleasure. Middle-class families purchased electric refrigerators, washing machines, and vacuum cleaners. People wore wristwatches and smoked cigarettes. Women purchased cosmetics and mass-­produced fashions. Above all, Americans bought automobiles. By the end of the decade, there were more than 30 million cars on American roads. No group was more attuned to the emergence of consumerism (or more responsible for creating it) than the advertising industry. In the 1920s, partly as a Advertising Industry result of techniques pioneered by wartime propaganda, advertising came of age. Publicists

AMERICA IN THE WORLD


The Cinema
 There is probably no cultural or commercial product more closely identified with the United States than motion pictures— or, as they are known in much of the world, the cinema. Although the technology of cinema emerged from the work of inventors in England and France as well as the United States, the production and distribution of films has been dominated by Americans ­ almost from the start. The United States was the first nation to create a film “industry,” and it did so at a scale vaster than that of any other country. With 700 feature films a year in the 1920s, Hollywood produced ten times as many movies as any other ­nation; and even then, its films were dominating not only the huge American market but much of the world’s market as well. Seventy ­percent of the films seen in France, 80 percent of those seen in Latin America, and 95 percent of the movies viewed in Canada and Great Britain were produced in the United States in the 1920s. As early as the 1930s, the penetration of other ­nations by American movies was already troubling many governments. The Soviet Union responded to the popularity of Walt Disney’s Mickey Mouse cartoons by inventing a cartoon hero of its own—a porcupine, designed to e­ ntertain in a way consistent with socialist ­values and not the capitalist ones that they ­ believed Hollywood conveyed. During World War II, American films were banned in occupied France (prompting some antifascist dissidents to screen such American films as Frank Capra’s Mr. Smith Goes to Washington in protest). American dominance was a result in part of World War I and its aftermath, which debilitated European filmmaking just as ­ 552 •

 movies were vigorously growing in the United States. By 1915, the United States had gained complete control of its own vast market and had so saturated it with movie theaters that by the end of World War I, half the theaters of the world were in America. Two decades later, after an extraordinary expansion of theaters in other nations, the United States continued to have over 40 percent of the world’s cinemas. And while the spread of theaters through other areas of the world helped launch film industries in many other countries, it also increased the market (and the appetite) for American films and strengthened American supremacy in their production. “The sun, it now appears,” the Saturday Evening Post commented in the mid-1920s, “never sets on the British Empire and the American motion picture.” Movies were then, and perhaps remain still, America’s most influential cultural export. Even American popular music, which has enormous global reach, faces more significant local competition than American movies do in most parts of the world. Despite this American dominance, however, filmmaking has flourished— and continues to flourish—in many countries around the world. India’s fabled “Bollywood,” for example, produces an enormous number of movies for its domestic market—­almost as many as the American industry creates—although few of them are widely exported. This global cinema has had a significant impact on American filmmaking. The small British film industry had a strong early influence on American movies, partly because of the quality and originality of British films and partly because of the emigration of talented actors, directors, and screenwriters

VALENTINO
The popularity of the film star Rudolph Valentino among American women was one of the most striking cultural phenomena of the 1920s. Valentino was slight and delicate, not at all like the conventional image of “manliness.” But he developed an enormous following among women, in part—as this poster is obviously intended to suggest—by baring his body on screen. Valentino was Italian, which made him seem somehow strange and foreign to many older-stock Americans, and he was almost always cast in exotic roles, never as an American. His sudden death in 1926 (at the age of 31) created enormous outpourings of grief among many American women. (© United Artists/Photofest) 
 to the United States. The great Alfred Hitchcock, for example, made his first films in London before moving to Hollywood, where he spent the rest of his long career. After World War II, French “new wave” cinema helped spawn a new

 generation of highly individualistic directors in the United States. Asian cinema— especially the thriving film industry in Hong Kong with its gritty realism—helped lead to some of the powerfully violent American films of the 1980s and beyond, as well as the genre of martial-arts films that has become popular around the world. German, Italian, Swedish, Dutch, Japanese, Spanish, Australian, and Indian filmmakers also had enormous influence on Hollywood—and over time perhaps even greater influence on the large and growing “independent film” movement in the United States. In recent decades, as new technologies and new styles have transformed films around the world, the American movie ­industry has continued to dominate global cinema. But national boundaries no longer adequately describe moviemaking in the twenty-first century. It is becoming as truly global as other commercial ventures. “American” films today are often produced abroad, often have non-American directors and actors, and are often paid for with international financing. Hollywood still dominates worldwide filmmaking, but Hollywood itself is now an ­increasingly global community.

•


UNDERSTAND, ANALYZE, & EVALUATE
 1. Did American movies, as the Soviet

 Union claimed in the 1930s, promote capitalism? 2. Why has the American movie industry continued to dominate global cinema?

 no longer simply conveyed information; they sought to identify products with a particular lifestyle. They also encouraged the public to absorb the values of promotion and salesmanship and to admire those who were effective “boosters” and publicists. One of the most successful books of the 1920s was The Man Nobody Knows, by the advertising executive Bruce Barton. It portrayed Jesus as not only a religious prophet but also a “super salesman.” Barton’s message, one sensitive to the new spirit of the consumer culture, was that Jesus had been concerned with living a full and rewarding life in this world and that twentieth-century men and women should do the same. • 553

554 • CHAPTER 22


 The advertising industry made good use of new vehicles of communication. Newspapers were absorbed into national chains. Mass-circulation magazines attracted broad national audiences. Movies in the 1920s became an ever more popular and powerful form of mass communication. Over 100 million people saw films in 1930, as compared to 40 million in 1922. The addition of sound to motion pictures—beginning in 1927 with the first The Jazz Singer feature-length “talkie,” The Jazz Singer starring Al Jolson—greatly enhanced film’s appeal. A series of scandals in the early 1920s led to the creation of the new Motion Picture Association, which imposed much tighter controls over the content of films. The result was safer, more conventionally acceptable films, which may in fact have broadened the appeal of movies generally. (See “America in the World: The Cinema.”) An equally important communications vehicle was the radio. The first commercial radio station in America, KDKA in Pittsburgh, began broadcasting in 1920, and the first national radio network, the National Broadcasting Company, was formed in 1927. That same year, Congress passed the Radio Act, which created a Federal Radio Commission to regulate the public airwaves used by private companies. (In 1935, it became the Federal Communications Commission, which survives today.)

Women in the New Era
 College-educated women were no longer pioneers in the 1920s. There were now two and even three generations of graduates of women’s or coeducational colleges and universities, and some were making their presence felt in professional areas that in the past women had rarely penetrated. The “new professional woman” was a vivid and widely publicized figure in the 1920s. In reality, however, most employed women were still nonprofessional, lower-class workers. Middle-class women, in the meantime, remained largely in the home. Yet the 1920s constituted a new era for middle-class women nonetheless. In particular, the decade saw a redefinition of motherhood. Shortly after World War I, John B. Watson and other behavioralists began to challenge the long-held assumption that women had an Motherhood Redefined instinctive capacity for motherhood. Maternal affection was not, they claimed, sufficient preparation for child rearing. Instead, mothers should rely on the advice and assistance of experts and professionals: doctors, nurses, and trained educators. For many middle-class women, these changes devalued what had been an important and consuming activity. Many attempted to compensate through what are often called “companionate marriages,” which elevated the importance of compatibility and love between partners. Some women now openly considered their sexual relationships with their husbands not simply as a means of procreation, as earlier generations had been taught, but as important and pleasurable experiences in their own right, the culmination of romantic love. One result of the new era for women was growing interest in birth control. The pioneer Margaret Sanger of the American birth-control movement, Margaret Sanger, began her career as a promoter of the diaphragm and other birth-control devices out of a concern for workingclass women; she believed that large families contributed to poverty and distress in poor communities. By the 1920s, she was becoming more effective in persuading middle-class women to see the benefits of birth control. Nevertheless, some birth-control devices remained illegal in many states (and abortion remained illegal nearly everywhere). To the consternation of many longtime women reformers and progressive suffragists, some women concluded that in the New Era it was no longer necessary to maintain a rigid, Victorian female “respectability.” They could smoke, drink, dance, wear seductive

THE NEW ERA
• 555 

 By the mid-1920s, the flapper—the young woman who challenged traditional expectations—had become not only a social type but a movement in fashion as well. Here, Catherine Dear is shown posing in a “beach costume,” a fashion a long way from the rigid “respectability” of Victorian-age styles. (©Bettmann/Corbis) THE FLAPPER

 clothes and makeup, and attend lively parties. Those assumptions were reflected in the emergence of the “flapper”—the modern woman whose liberated lifestyle found “Flappers” expression in dress, hairstyle, speech, and behavior. The flapper lifestyle had a particular impact on urban lower-middle-class and working-class single women, who were filling new jobs in industry and the service sector. At night, such women flocked to clubs and dance halls in search of excitement and companionship. Many more affluent women soon began to copy the flapper style. Despite all the changes, most women remained highly dependent on men and relatively powerless when men exploited that dependence. The National Woman’s Party, under the leadership of Alice Paul, attempted to fight that powerlessness through its campaign for the Equal Rights Amendment, although it found little support in Congress. Responding to the suffrage victory, women organized the League of Women Voters and the women’s auxiliaries of both the Democratic and Republican Parties. Female-dominated consumer groups grew rapidly and increased the range and energy of their efforts. Women activists won a brief triumph in 1921 when they helped secure passage of the Sheppard-Towner Act, which provided federal funds to states to establish prenatal and child health-care programs. From the start, however, the act produced controversy. Alice Paul and her supporters opposed the measure, complaining that it classified all women as mothers. More important, the American Medical Association fought Sheppard-Towner, warning that it would introduce untrained outsiders into the health-care field. In 1929, no longer worried about women voting as a bloc, Congress terminated the program.

The Disenchanted
 The generation that lived through (and in many cases fought in) the Great War quickly came to see the conflict as a useless waste of lives lost for no purpose. For many young people in the 1920s, disenchantment with the war contributed to a growing disenchantment with the United States. The newly prosperous and consumer-driven era they encountered

556 • CHAPTER 22


 seemed meaningless and vulgar to many artists and intellectuals in particular. As a result, they came to view their own culture with contempt. Rather than trying to influence and reform their society, they isolated themselves from it and embarked on a restless search The “Lost Generation” for personal fulfillment. The American writer Gertrude Stein once referred to the young Americans emerging from World War I as a “Lost Generation.” Many artists and intellectuals coming of age in the 1920s experienced that fundamental disenchantment with modern America, reflected in a series of savage critiques of Modern Society Critiqued modern society by a wide range of writers, some of whom were known as the “debunkers.” Among them was the Baltimore journalist H. L. Mencken, who delighted in ridiculing religion, politics, the arts, even democracy itself. Sinclair Lewis published a series of savage novels—Main Street (1920), Babbitt (1922), Arrowsmith (1925), and others—in which he lashed out at one aspect of modern bourgeois society after another. Intellectuals of the 1920s claimed to reject the “success ethic” they believed dominated American life. The novelist F. Scott Fitzgerald, for example, attacked the American obsession with material success in The Great Gatsby (1925). The roster of important American writers active in the 1920s may have no equal in any other period. It included Fitzgerald, Lewis, Ernest Hemingway, Thomas Wolfe, John Dos Passos, Ezra Pound, T. S. Eliot, Gertrude Stein, Edna Ferber, William Faulkner, and Eugene O’Neill and a remarkable group of African American artists. In New York City, a new generation of black intellectuals created a flourishing artistic life widely described as the “Harlem “Harlem Renaissance” Renaissance.” The Harlem poets, novelists, and artists drew heavily from their African roots in an effort to prove the richness of their own racial heritage and assert resistance against white racism and stereotyping. The ethos was captured in a single sentence by the poet Langston Hughes: “I am a Negro—and beautiful.” Other black writers in Harlem and elsewhere—James Weldon Johnson, Countee Cullen, Zora Neale Hurston, Claude McKay, Alain Locke—as well as black artists and musicians helped establish a thriving and at times highly politicized culture.

A CONFLICT OF CULTURES
 The modern, secular culture of the 1920s did not go unchallenged. It grew up alongside an older, more traditional culture, with which it continually and often bitterly competed.

Prohibition
 When the prohibition of the sale and manufacture of alcohol went into effect in January 1920, it had the support of most members of the middle class and most of those who considered themselves progressives. Within a year, however, it had become clear that the Failure of Prohibition “noble experiment,” as its defenders called it, was not working well. At first, prohibition did substantially reduce drinking in most parts of the country. But it also produced conspicuous and growing violations. Before long, it was almost as easy to acquire illegal alcohol in many parts of the country as it had once been to acquire legal alcohol. And since an enormous, lucrative industry was now barred to legitimate businessmen, organized crime took it over. Many middle-class progressives who had originally supported prohibition soon soured on the experiment. But a large constituency of provincial, largely rural Protestant Americans continued vehemently to defend it. To them, prohibition represented the effort of an older

THE NEW ERA
• 557 

 America to protect traditional notions of morality. Drinking, which they associated with the modern city and Catholic immigrants, became a symbol of the new culture they believed was displacing them. As the decade proceeded, opponents of prohibition (or “wets”) gained steadily in influence. Not until 1933, however, when the Great Depression added weight to their appeals, were they finally able to challenge the “drys” effectively and win repeal of the Eighteenth Amendment.

Nativism and the Klan
 Agitation for a curb on foreign immigration had begun in the nineteenth century and, as with prohibition, had gathered strength in the years before the war largely because of the support of middle-class progressives. In the years immediately following the war, as immigration’s association with radicalism intensified and migration from Europe resumed, popular sentiment on behalf of restriction grew rapidly. In 1921, Congress passed an emergency immigration act, establishing a quota system by which annual immigration from any country could not exceed 3 percent of the number of persons of that nationality who had been in the United States in 1910. The new law cut immigration from 800,000 to 300,000 in any single year, but the nativists remained unsatisfied. The National Origins Act of 1924 banned immigration from National Origins Act of 1924 East Asia entirely and reduced the quota for Europeans from 3 to 2 percent. The quota would be based, moreover, not on the 1910 statistics but on the census of 1890, a year in which there had been far fewer southern and eastern Europeans in the country. What new immigration there was, in other words, would heavily favor northwestern Europeans. Five years later, a further restriction set a rigid limit of 150,000 immigrants a year. In the years that followed, immigration officials seldom permitted even half that number actually to enter the country. To defenders of an older, more provincial America, the growth of large communities of foreign peoples, alien in speech, habits, and values, came to seem a direct threat to their own embattled way of life. Among other things, this provincial nativism helped instigate the rebirth of the Ku Klux Klan as a major force in American society. The first Klan, founded during Reconstruction, had died in the 1870s. But in 1915, a new group of white southerners met on Stone Mountain near Atlanta and established Rise of the New Klan a modern ­version of the society. Nativist passions had swelled in Georgia and elsewhere in response to the case of Leo Frank, a Jewish factory manager in Atlanta convicted in 1914 (on very flimsy evidence) of murdering a female employee; a mob stormed Frank’s jail and lynched him. The premiere (also in Atlanta) of D. W. Griffith’s film The Birth of a Nation, which glorified the early Klan, also helped inspire white southerners to form a new one. At first the new Klan, like the old, was largely concerned with intimidating blacks. After World War I, however, concern about blacks gradually became secondary to concern about Catholics, Jews, and foreigners. At that point, membership in the Klan expanded rapidly and dramatically, not just in the small towns and rural areas of the South but in industrial cities in the North and Midwest as well. By 1924, there were reportedly 4 ­million members, including many women, organized in separate, parallel units. The largest state Klan was not in the South but in Indiana. Beginning in 1925, a series of scandals ­involving the organization’s leaders precipitated a slow but steady decline in the Klan’s influence.

558 • CHAPTER 22


 Most Klan units (or “klaverns”) tried to present their members as patriots and defenders of morality, and some did nothing more menacing than stage occasional parades and rallies. Often, however, the Klan also operated as a brutal, even violent, opponent of “alien” groups. Klansmen systematically terrorized blacks, Jews, Catholics, and foreigners. At times, they engaged in public whipping, tarring and feathering, arson, and lynching. What the Klan feared, however, was not simply “foreign” or “racially impure” groups, but anyone who posed a challenge to traditional values.

Religious Fundamentalism
 Another cultural controversy of the 1920s involved the place of religion in contemporary society. By 1921, American Protestantism was already divided into two warring camps. On one side stood the modernists: mostly urban, middle-class people who were attempting to adapt religion to the teachings of modern science and to the realities of their modern, secular society. Fundamentalists and Modernists On the other side stood the fundamentalists: provincial, largely (although far from exclusively) rural men and women fighting to preserve traditional faith and to maintain the centrality of religion in American life. The fundamentalists insisted the Bible was to be interpreted literally. Above all, they opposed the teachings of Charles Darwin, whose theory of evolution had openly challenged the biblical story of the Creation. By the mid-1920s, to the great alarm of modernists, fundamentalist demands to forbid the teaching of evolution in public schools were gaining political strength in some states. In Tennessee in March 1925, the legislature adopted a measure making it illegal for any public school teacher “to teach any theory that denies the story of the divine creation of man as taught in the Bible.” The Tennessee law caught the attention of the fledgling American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU), founded in 1917 to defend pacifists, radicals, and conscientious objectors during World War I. The ACLU offered free counsel to any Tennessee educator willing to defy the law and become the defendant in a test case. A twenty-four-year-old biology teacher Scopes Trial in the town of Dayton, John T. Scopes, agreed to have himself arrested. And when the ACLU decided to send the famous attorney Clarence Darrow to defend Scopes, the aging William Jennings Bryan (now an important fundamentalist spokesman) announced that he would travel to Dayton to assist the prosecution. Journalists from across the country flocked to Tennessee to cover the trial. Scopes had, of course, clearly and deliberately violated the law; and a verdict of guilty was a foregone conclusion, especially when the judge refused to permit “expert” testimony by evolution scholars. Scopes was fined $100, and the case was ultimately dismissed in a higher court because of a technicality. Nevertheless, Darrow scored an important victory for the modernists by calling Bryan himself to the stand to testify as an “expert on the Bible.” In the course of the crossexamination, which was broadcast by radio to much of the nation, Darrow made Bryan’s defense of biblical truths appear stubborn and foolish and finally maneuvered Bryan into admitting the possibility that not all religious dogma was subject to only one interpretation. The Scopes trial put fundamentalists on the defensive. It discouraged many of them from participating openly in politics. But it did not resolve the conflict between fundamentalists and modernists, which continued to smolder.

The Democrats’ Ordeal
 The anguish of provincial Americans attempting to defend an embattled way of life proved particularly troubling to the Democratic Party during the 1920s. More than the

THE NEW ERA
• 559 

 Republicans, the Democrats consisted of a diverse coalition of interest groups, including prohibitionists, Klansmen, and fundamentalists on one side and Catholics, urban workers, and immigrants on the other. At the 1924 Democratic National Convention in New York City, a bitter conflict broke out over the platform when the party’s urban wing attempted to win approval of planks calling for the repeal of prohibition and a denunciation of the Klan. Both planks narrowly failed. (The effort to condemn the Klan by name failed by one vote out of 1,085.) Even more damaging to the party was a deadlock in the balloting for a presidential candidate. Urban Democrats supported Alfred E. Smith, the Irish Catholic governor Divided Democrats of New York; rural Democrats backed William McAdoo, Woodrow Wilson’s Treasury secretary, who had skillfully positioned himself to win the support of southern and western delegates suspicious of modern urban life but whose reputation had been tarnished by a series of scandals resulting from his work as an attorney for an unsavory oil tycoon. For 103 ballots, the convention dragged on, with Smith supporters chanting “No oil on Al,” until finally both Smith and McAdoo withdrew. The party settled on a compromise: the corporate lawyer John W. Davis, who lost decisively to Calvin Coolidge. A similar schism plagued the Democrats again in 1928, when Al Smith finally secured his party’s nomination for president. He was not, however, able to unite his divided party— in part because of widespread anti-Catholic sentiment, especially in the South. He was the first Democrat since the Civil War not to carry the entire South. Elsewhere, he carried no states at all except Massachusetts and Rhode Island. Smith’s opponent, and the victor in the presidential election, was a man who perhaps more than any other personified the modern, prosperous, middle-class society of the New Era: Herbert Hoover.

REPUBLICAN GOVERNMENT
 For twelve years, beginning in 1921, both the presidency and the Congress rested in the hands of the Republican Party. For most of those years, the federal government enjoyed a warm and supportive relationship with the American business community. Yet the ­government of the New Era was more than the passive, pliant instrument that critics often described. It attempted to serve in many respects as an agent of economic change.

Harding and Coolidge
 Nothing seemed more clearly to illustrate the unadventurous nature of 1920s politics than the characters of the two men who served as president during most of the decade: Warren G. Harding and Calvin Coolidge. Harding, who was elected to the presidency in 1920, was an undistinguished senator from Ohio. He had received the Republican presidential nomination as a result of an agreement among leaders of his party, who considered him, as one noted, a “good second-rater.” Harding appointed distinguished men to some important Warren Harding cabinet offices, and he attempted to stabilize the nation’s troubled foreign policy. But he seemed baffled by his responsibilities, as if he recognized his own unfitness. “I am a man of limited talents from a small town,” he reportedly told friends on one occasion. “I don’t seem to grasp that I am President.” Harding’s intellectual limits were compounded by personal weaknesses: his penchant for gambling, illegal alcohol, and attractive women.

560 • CHAPTER 22


 Harding lacked the strength to abandon the party hacks who had helped create his political success. One of them, Ohio party boss Harry Daugherty, he appointed attorney general. Another, New Mexico senator Albert B. Fall, he made secretary of the interior. Members of the so-called Ohio Gang filled important offices throughout the administration. Unknown to the public, Daugherty, Fall, and others were engaged in fraud and corruption. Teapot Dome Scandal The most spectacular scandal involved the rich naval oil reserves at Teapot Dome, Wyoming, and Elk Hills, California. At the urging of Fall, Harding transferred control of those reserves from the Navy Department to the Interior Department. Fall then secretly leased them to two wealthy businessmen and received in return nearly half a million dollars in “loans” to ease his private financial troubles. Fall was ultimately convicted of bribery and sentenced to a year in prison; Harry Daugherty barely avoided a similar fate for his part in another scandal. In the summer of 1923, only months before Senate investigations and press revelations brought the scandals to light, a tired and depressed Harding left Washington for a speaking tour in the West. In Seattle late in July, he complained of severe pain, which his doctors wrongly diagnosed as food poisoning. A few days later, in San Francisco, he died. He had suffered two major heart attacks. In many ways, Calvin Coolidge, who succeeded Harding in the presidency, was utterly different from his predecessor. Where Harding was genial, garrulous, and debauched, Coolidge was dour, silent, even puritanical. In other ways, however, Harding and Coolidge were similar figures. Both took essentially passive approaches to their office. Elected governor of Massachusetts in 1919, Coolidge had won national attention with Calvin Coolidge his tough, if laconic, response to the Boston police strike that year. That was enough to make him his party’s vice presidential nominee in 1920. Three years later, after Harding’s death, he took the oath of office from his father, a justice of the peace, by the light of a kerosene lamp. If anything, Coolidge was even less active as president than Harding, partly as a result of his conviction that government should interfere as little as possible in the life of the nation. In 1924, he received his party’s presidential nomination virtually unopposed. Running against John W. Davis, he won a comfortable victory: 54 percent of the popular vote and 382 of the 531 electoral votes. Coolidge probably could have won renomination and reelection in 1928. Instead, in characteristically understated fashion, he walked into a press room one day and handed each reporter a slip of paper containing a single ­sentence: “I do not choose to run for president in 1928.”

Government and Business
 However passive the New Era presidents may have been, much of the federal government worked effectively and efficiently during the 1920s to adapt public policy to the widely accepted goal of the time: helping business and industry to operate with maximum efficiency and productivity. The close relationship between the private sector and the federal government forged during World War I continued. Secretary of the Treasury Andrew Mellon, a Sharp Tax Reductions wealthy steel and aluminum tycoon, worked to achieve substantial reductions in taxes on corporate profits, personal incomes, and inheritances. Largely because of his efforts, Congress cut them all by more than half. Mellon also worked closely with President Coolidge after 1924 on a series of measures to trim dramatically the already modest federal budget, even managing to retire half the nation’s World War I debt.

THE NEW ERA
• 561 

 The most prominent member of the cabinet was Commerce Secretary Herbert Hoover. During his eight years in the Commerce Department, Hoover constantly encouraged voluntary cooperation in the private sector as the best avenue to stability. But the idea of voluntarism did not require that the government remain passive; on the contrary, public institutions, Hoover believed, had a duty to play an active role in creating the new, cooperative order. Above all, Hoover became the champion of the concept of business “associationalism”—a concept that envisioned the creation of national organizations of businessmen in particular industries. Through these trade associations, “Associationalism” private entrepreneurs could, Hoover believed, study and stabilize their industries and promote efficiency in production and marketing. Many progressives derived encouragement from the election of Herbert Hoover to the presidency in 1928. Hoover easily defeated Al Smith, the Democratic Herbert Hoover candidate. And he entered office promising bold new efforts to solve the nation’s remaining economic problems. But Hoover had few opportunities to prove himself. Less than a year after his inauguration, the nation plunged into the severest and most prolonged economic crisis in its history—a crisis that brought many of the optimistic assumptions of the New Era crashing down and launched the nation into a period of unprecedented social innovation and reform.





































29 15 24








10 12


8 12














Candidate (Party)
Herbert Hoover
(Republican)
Alfred E. Smith
(Democratic)
Norman Thomas
(Socialist)
 Other parties (Socialist Workers, Prohibition)

Electoral Vote


—
—


Popular Vote (%)
21,391,381
(58.2)
15,016,443
(40.9)
267,835
(0.7)
62,890


 56.9% of electorate voting

THE ELECTION OF 1928
The election of 1928 was highly one-sided. Herbert Hoover won over 58 percent of the popular vote to Alfred Smith’s 41 percent. Smith carried only Massachusetts, Rhode Island, and some traditionally Democratic states in the South. • Why did Smith do so poorly even in some parts of the South? 
562 • CHAPTER 22


CONCLUSION
 The remarkable prosperity of the 1920s shaped much of what exuberant contemporaries liked to call the “New Era.” In the years after World War I, America built a vibrant and extensive national culture. Its middle class moved increasingly into the embrace of the growing consumer culture. Politics were reorganized around the needs of a booming, interdependent industrial economy—rejecting many of the reform crusades of the previous generation but also creating new institutions to help promote economic growth and stability. Beneath the glittering surface of the New Era, however, were great controversies and injustices. Although the prosperity of the 1920s was more widely spread than at any time in the nation’s industrial history, more than half the population failed to achieve any real benefits from the growth. A new, optimistic, secular culture attracted millions of urban middle-class people. But many other Americans looked at it with alarm and fought against it with great fervor. The unprepossessing conservative presidents of the era suggested a time of stability, but in fact few eras in modern American history have seen so much political and cultural conflict. The 1920s ended in a catastrophic economic crash that has colored the image of those years ever since. The crises of the 1930s should not obscure the real achievements of the New Era economy. Neither, however, should the prosperity of the 1920s obscure the inequity and instability in those years that helped produce the difficult years to come.

KEY TERMS/PEOPLE/PLACES/EVENTS
American Plan 548
Brotherhood of Sleeping
Car Porters 548
Calvin Coolidge 560
 flappers 555 Harlem Renaissance 556 Herbert Hoover 561

Issei 549
Ku Klux Klan 557
Langston Hughes 556
Lost Generation 556
Margaret Sanger 554
National Origins Act
 of 1924 557

Nisei 549
 parity 551 Scopes trial 558 Teapot Dome 560 The Jazz Singer 554 Warren Harding 559 welfare capitalism 547

RECALL AND REFLECT
 1. 	What was the impact of the automobile on American life? 2. 	How did labor fare during the 1920s? What particular problems did female, black, immigrant,

 and unskilled laborers face? 3. 	How did religion respond to the consumer culture of the 1920s? 4. 	What was the myth and what was the reality of the new professional woman of the 1920s? 5. 	What was the nature and extent of the nativism of the 1920s?



THE GREAT
DEPRESSION
THE COMING OF THE DEPRESSION
THE AMERICAN PEOPLE IN HARD TIMES
THE DEPRESSION AND AMERICAN CULTURE
THE ORDEAL OF HERBERT HOOVER


LOOKING AHEAD
 1. What were some of the causes of the Great Depression? What made it so severe, and why did it last so long? 2. What was the impact of the Depression on farmers, minorities, and women? 3. How did President Hoover and his administration try to deal with the Depression? What was the result of those efforts?

IN AMERICA TODAY,”
Herbert Hoover proclaimed in August 1928, “are nearer to the final triumph over poverty than ever before in the history of any land.” Only fifteen months later, those words would return to haunt him, as the nation plunged into the severest and most prolonged economic depression in its history—a depression that continued in one form or another for a full decade, not only in the United States but throughout much of the world. 
• 563


THE COMING OF THE
DEPRESSION


TIME LINE
 Stock market crash; Great Depression begins Agricultural Marketing Act



Hawley-Smoot Tariff
 Drought begins in Dust Bowl

 Scottsboro defendants arrested Reconstruction Finance Corporation established Southern Tenant Farmers Union organized

Bonus Army in
Washington
Franklin D. Roosevelt
 elected president





American Communist
 Party proclaims Popular Front

 Pare Lorentz’s The Plow That Broke the Plains

 Wright’s Native Son

564 •


 Steinbeck’s The Grapes of Wrath

 The sudden financial collapse in 1929 came as an especially severe shock because it ­followed so closely an era that appeared to offer economic miracles—miracles that seemed especially evident in the remarkable performance of the stock market. In February 1928, stock prices began a steady ascent that continued, with only a few temporary lapses, for a year and a half. Between May 1928 and September 1929, the average price of stocks rose over 40 percent. Trading mushroomed from 2 or 3 million shares a day to over 5 million, and at times to as many as 10 or 12 million. In short, a widespread speculative fever grew steadily more intense, particularly once brokerage firms began encouraging the mania by offering absurdly easy credit to those buying stocks.

The Great Crash
 In the autumn of 1929, the market began to fall apart. On October 29, “Black Tuesday,” after a week of growing instability, all efforts to save the market failed. Sixteen million shares of stock were traded; the industrial index dropped 43 points (or nearly 10 percent), wiping out all the gains of the previous year; stocks in many companies became virtually worthless. Within a month, stocks had lost half their September value, and despite occasional, short-lived rallies, they continued to decline for several years after that. Popular folklore has established the stock market crash as the beginning, and even the cause, of the Great Depression. Although October 1929 might have been the most visible early sign of the crisis, the Depression had earlier beginnings and other causes.

THE GREAT DEPRESSION
• 565 

Causes of the Depression
 Economists and historians have argued for decades about the causes of the Great Depression. But most agree on several things. They agree, first, that what is remarkable about the crisis is not that it occurred but that it was so severe and that it lasted so long, which most observers agree—even if they agree on little else—was the result of several factors. One was a lack of diversification in the American economy in the 1920s. Prosperity had depended excessively on a few basic industries, notably construction and automobiles, which in the late 1920s began to decline. Expenditures on Weaknesses in the U.S. Economy construction fell from $11 billion in 1926 to under $9 billion in 1929. Automobile sales fell by more than a third in the first nine months of 1929. Newer industries were emerging to take up the slack—among them petroleum, chemicals, electronics, and plastics—but none had yet developed enough strength to compensate for this decline. A second important factor was the maldistribution of purchasing power and, as a result, a weakness in consumer demand. As industrial and agricultural production increased, the proportion of the profits going to potential consumers was too small to create an adequate market for the goods the economy was producing. Even in 1929, after nearly a decade of economic growth, more than half the families in America lived on the edge of or below the minimum subsistence level. A third major problem was the credit structure of the economy. Farmers were deeply in debt, and crop prices were too low to allow them to pay off what they owed. Small banks were in constant trouble as their customers defaulted on loans; large banks were in trouble, too. Although most American bankers were very conservative, some of the nation’s biggest banks were investing recklessly in the stock market or making unwise loans. When the market crashed and the loans went bad, some banks failed and others made the crisis worse by contracting already scarce credit and calling in loans that borrowers could not pay. A fourth factor was America’s position in international trade. Late in the 1920s, European demand for American goods began to decline, partly because Global Factors European industry and agriculture were becoming more productive and partly because some European nations were having financial difficulties of their own. But it was also because the European economy was being destabilized by the international debt structure that had emerged in the aftermath of World War I. This debt structure, therefore, was a fifth factor contributing to the Depression. When the war came to an end in 1918, all the European nations that had been allied with the United States owed large sums of money to American banks, sums much too large to be repaid out of their shattered economies, which is partly why the Allies had insisted on reparation payments from Germany and Austria. Reparations, they believed, would provide them with a way to pay off their own debts. But Germany and Austria were no more able to pay the reparations than the Allies were able to pay their debts. The American government refused to forgive or reduce the debts. Instead, American banks began making large loans to European governments, which used them to pay off their earlier loans. Thus debts (and reparations) were being paid only by piling up new and greater debts. At the same time, American protective tariffs were making it difficult for Europeans to sell their goods in American markets. Without any source of foreign exchange with which to repay their loans, they began to default. The collapse of the international credit structure was one of the reasons the Depression spread to Europe after 1931. (See “America in the World: The Global Depression.”)

AMERICA IN THE WORLD


The Global Depression
 The Great Depression began in the United States. But it did not end there. The American economy was the largest in the world, and its collapse sent shock waves across the globe. By 1931, the American ­depression had ­become a world depression, with important implications for the course of global history. The origins of the worldwide depression lay in the pattern of debts that had emerged during and after World War I, when the United States loaned billions of dollars to European nations. In 1931, with American banks staggering and in many cases collapsing, large banks in New York began desperately calling in their loans from Germany and Austria. That precipitated the collapse of one of Austria’s largest banks, which in turn created panic through much of central Europe. The economic collapse in Germany and Austria meant that those nations could not continue paying reparations to Britain and France (required by the Treaty of Versailles of 1919), which meant in turn that Britain and France could not continue paying off their loans to the United States. This spreading financial crisis was accompanied by a ­dramatic contraction of international trade, precipitated in part by the Hawley-Smoot Tariff in the United States, which established the highest import duties in history and ­stifled much global commerce. Depressed ­agricultural prices—a result of worldwide overproduction—also contributed to the downturn. By 1932, worldwide industrial production had declined by more than one-third, and world trade had plummeted by nearly two-thirds. By 1933, 30 million people in industrial nations were unemployed, five times the number of four years before. But the Depression was not confined to industrial nations. Imperialism and 566 •

An
 unemployed London man wears a sign that seems designed to convince passersby that he is an educated, respectable person despite his present circumstances. (©Hulton Archive/Getty Images) LOOKING FOR WORK IN LONDON, 1935

 i­ndustrialization had drawn almost all ­regions of the world into the international industrial economy. Colonies and nations in Africa, Asia, and South America—critically dependent on exporting raw materials and agricultural goods to industrial countries— experienced a collapse in demand for their products and thus rising levels of poverty and unemployment. Some nations—among them the Soviet Union and China—­remained relatively unconnected to the global economy and suffered relatively little from the Great Depression. But in most parts of the world, the Depression caused tremendous social and economic hardship. It also created political turmoil. Among the countries hardest hit by the Depression

 was Germany, where industrial production declined by 50 percent and unemployment reached 35 percent in the early 1930s. The desperate economic conditions there contributed greatly to the rise of the Nazi Party and its leader, Adolf Hitler, who became chancellor in 1933. Japan suffered as well, dependent as it was on world trade to sustain its growing industrial economy and purchase essential commodities for its needs at home. And in Japan, as in Germany, economic troubles produced political turmoil and aided the rise of a new militaristic regime. In Italy, the fascist government of Benito Mussolini, which had first taken power in the 1920s, also saw militarization and territorial expansion as a way out of economic difficulties. In other nations, governments sought solutions to the Depression through reform of their domestic economies. The most prominent example was the New Deal in the United States. But there were important experiments in other nations as well. Among the most common responses to the Depression around the world was substantial government investment in public works, such as roads, bridges, dams, public buildings, and other large projects. Among the nations that adopted this approach—in addition to the United States—were Britain, France, Germany, Italy, and the Soviet Union. Another response was the expansion of government-funded relief for the unemployed. All the industrial countries of the world experimented with various forms of relief, often borrowing ideas from one another in the process. And the Depression helped create new approaches to economics,

 in the face of the apparent failure of classical models of economic behavior to explain, or provide solutions to, the crisis. The great British economist John Maynard Keynes revolutionized economic thought in much of the world. His 1936 book The General Theory of Employment, Interest, and Money, ­despite its bland title, created a sensation by arguing that the Depression was a result not of declining production but of inadequate consumer demand. Governments, he said, could stimulate their economies by ­increasing the money supply and creating investment—through a combination of lowering interest rates and public spending. Keynesianism, as Keynes’s theories became known, began to have an impact in the United States in 1938, and in much of the rest of the world in subsequent years. The Great Depression was an important turning point not only in American history but also in the history of the twentieth-­ century world. It transformed ideas of ­public policy and economics in many nations. It toppled old regimes and created new ones. And perhaps above all, it was a major factor in the coming of World War II.

•


UNDERSTAND, ANALYZE, & EVALUATE
1. How did the 1919 Treaty of Versailles


 and the Hawley-Smoot Tariff contribute to the global depression of the 1930s? 2. How did the governments of European nations respond to the Depression? 3. What effect did the global depression have on economic theory? Why was Keynes’s economic theory so ­revolutionary?

Progress of the Depression
 The stock market crash of 1929 did not so much cause the Depression, then, as help trigger a chain of events that exposed larger weaknesses in the American economy. During the next three years, the crisis grew steadily worse. The most serious problem at first was the collapse of much of the banking system. Between 1930 and 1933, over 9,000 American banks either went bankrupt or closed their doors to avoid bankruptcy. Partly as a result of these banking closures, the nation’s money

• 567


