430 • CHAPTER 18


Eastern
European 6%


Other Northwestern
European 4%


Italian
8%


German
28%


Other Central
European 10%
Scandinavian
11%


British
18%
Irish
15%


SOURCES OF IMMIGRATION FROM EUROPE, 1860–1900
This pie chart shows the sources of European immigration 
 in the late nineteenth century. The largest number of immigrants continued to come from traditional sources (Britain, Ireland, Germany, Scandinavia), but the beginnings of what in the early twentieth century would become a major influx of immigrants from new sources—southern and eastern Europe in particular—are already visible here. Immigration from other sources—Mexico, South and Central America, and Asia—was also significant during this period. • Why would these newer sources of European and other kinds of immigration create controversy among older-stock Americans?

 Detroit. Equally striking was the diversity of new immigrant populations. In other ­countries experiencing heavy immigration in this period, most of the new arrivals were coming from one or two sources. But in the United States, no single national group dominated. Most of the new arrivals were rural people, and for many of them the adjustment to city life was painful. To help ease the transition, some immigrant groups formed close-knit ethnic communities within the cities, in neighborhoods often called “immigrant g­ hettoes.” Ethnic neighborhoods offered newcomers much that was familiar, including newspapers and theaters in their native languages, stores selling their native foods, and church and fraternal organizations that provided links to their national pasts. Many immigrants also maintained close ties with their native countries. They stayed in touch with relatives who had remained behind, and perhaps as many as a third in the early years returned to their homelands after a relatively short time. Others helped bring the rest of their families to America. The cultural cohesiveness of the ethnic communities clearly eased the pain of separation from the immigrants’ native lands. What role it played in helping immigrants become absorbed into American economic life is a more difficult question to answer. Some ethnic groups (Jews and Germans, in particular) advanced economically more rapidly than others Importance of Ethnic Ties (for example, the Irish). One explanation is that by huddling together in ethnic neighborhoods, immigrant groups tended to reinforce the cultural values of their ­previous societies. When those values were particularly well suited to economic advancement—for example, the high value Jews placed on education—ethnic identification may have helped members of a group improve their lots. When other values predominated—maintaining community solidarity, strengthening family ties, preserving order—economic progress could be less rapid.

THE AGE OF THE CITY
• 431 

 But other factors were at least as important in determining how well immigrants fared. Immigrants who aroused strong racial prejudice among native-born whites found it very difficult to advance, whatever their talents. Those white immigrants who arrived with a valuable skill or with some capital did better than those who did not. And over time, those who lived in cities where people of their own nationality came to predominate—for ­example, the Irish in New York and Boston or the Germans in Milwaukee—gained an advantage as they learned to exert their political power.

Assimilation and Exclusion
 Despite the many differences among the various immigrant communities, virtually all groups had certain things in common. Most immigrants shared the experience of living in cities. Most were young; the majority of newcomers were between fifteen and forty-five years old. And in most communities of the foreign-born, ethnic ties had to compete against the desire for assimilation. Many of the new arrivals had come with romantic visions of the New World. And however disillusioning they might have found their first contact with the United States, they usually retained the dream of becoming true “Americans.” Second-generation immigrants were especially likely to attempt to break with the old ways. Young women, in particular, sometimes rebelled against parents who tried to arrange (or prevent) marriages or who opposed women entering the workplace. Old-stock Americans encouraged or demanded assimilation in countless ways. Public schools taught children in English, and employers often insisted that workers speak English on the job. Most nonethnic stores sold mainly American products, forcing immigrants to adapt their diets, clothing, and lifestyles to American norms. Church leaders were often native-born Americans or more assimilated immigrants Pressure to Assimilate who encouraged their parishioners to adopt American ways. Some even embraced reforms to make their religion more compatible with the norms of the new country. Reform Judaism, imported from Germany in the late nineteenth century, was an effort by American Jewish leaders (as it had been by German ones) to make their faith less “foreign” to the dominant culture. The vast numbers of new immigrants, and the way many of them created distinctive communities, provoked fear and resentment among some native-born Americans in much the same way that earlier arrivals had done. In 1887, Henry Bowers, a self-educated lawyer, founded the American Protective Association, a group committed to stopping immigration. By 1894, membership in the organization reportedly reached 500,000, with chapters throughout the Northeast and Midwest. That same year, five Harvard alumni in Boston founded a more genteel organization—the Immigration Attempts to Limit Immigration Restriction League. They proposed screening immigrants through literacy tests and other standards, to separate the “desirable” from the “undesirable.” The government responded to popular concern about immigration even earlier. In 1882, Congress excluded the Chinese, denied entry to “undesirables”—convicts, paupers, the mentally incompetent—and placed a tax of 50 cents on each person admitted. Later legislation of the 1890s enlarged the list of those barred from immigrating. But these laws kept out only a small number of aliens, and more ambitious restriction proposals made little progress in Congress, for immigration provided a cheap and plentiful labor supply to the rapidly growing economy. Many argued that America’s industrial (and indeed agricultural) development would be impossible without it.

AMERICA IN THE WORLD


Global Migrations
 The great waves of immigration that transformed American society in the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries were not unique to the United States. They were part of a great, global movement of peoples—­ unprecedented in history—that affected ­every continent in the world and that has continued to this day. These great migrations were the product of two related forces: population growth and industrialization. The population of Europe grew faster in the second half of the nineteenth century than ever before and ever since—almost doubling between 1850 and the beginning of World War I. The population growth was a result of growing economies able to support more people and of more efficient and productive agriculture that helped end debilitating famines. But the rapid growth nevertheless strained the resources of many parts of Europe and affected, in particular, rural people, who were now too numerous to live off the available land. Many decided to move to other parts of the world where land was more plentiful. At the same time, industrialization drew millions of people out of the countryside and into cities—sometimes into cities in their own countries but often to industrial cities in other, more economically advanced nations. Historians of migration speak of “push” factors (pressures on people to leave their homes) and “pull” factors (the lure of new lands) in explaining population movements. The “push” for many nineteenth-century m ­ igrants was poverty and inadequate land at home; for others it was political and religious oppression. The “pull” was the availability of land or industrial jobs in other regions or lands—and, for some, the prospect of greater freedom abroad. Faster, cheaper, 432 •

 and easier transportation—railroads, steamships, and much later, airplanes— also aided large-scale immigration. From 1800 to the start of World War I, 50 million Europeans migrated to new lands overseas—people from almost all areas of Europe, but in the later years of the century (when migration reached its peak) mostly from poor rural areas in southern and eastern Europe. Italy, Russia, and Poland were among the biggest sources of late-nineteenthcentury migrants. Almost two-thirds of these immigrants came to the United States. But nearly 20 million Europeans m ­ igrated to other lands. Migrants from England and

(Private Collection/© Peter Newark American
Pictures/Bridgeman Images)


 Ireland (among others) moved in large numbers to those areas of the British Empire with vast, seemingly open lands: Canada, Australia, New Zealand, and South Africa. Large numbers of Italians moved to Argentina and other parts of South America. Many ­migrants moved to open land in these countries and established themselves as farmers, using the new mechanical farming devices made possible by industrialization. In many places—Australia, New Zealand, Argentina, South Africa, and the United States—­ immigrants evicted the native residents of their territories and created societies of their own. Many others settled in the industrial cities that were growing up in all these regions and formed distinctive ethnic and national communities within them. But it was not only Europeans who were transplanting themselves in these years. Tremendous numbers of poor people left Asia, Africa, and the Pacific Islands in search of better lives. Most of them could not afford the journey abroad on their own. They moved instead as indentured servants (in much the same way many English migrants moved to America in the seventeenth century), agreeing to a term of servitude in their new land in exchange for food, shelter, and transportation. Recruiters of indentured servants fanned out across China, Japan, areas of Africa and the Pacific Islands, and above all, India. French and British recruiters brought hundreds of thousands of Indian migrants to work in plantations in their own Asian and African colonies. Chinese laborers were recruited to work on plantations in

 Cuba and Hawaii; mines in Malaya, Peru, South Africa, and Australia; and railroad projects in Canada, Peru, and the United States. African indentured servants moved in large numbers to the Caribbean, and Pacific Islanders tended to move to other islands or to Australia. The immigration of European peoples to new lands was largely voluntary and brought most migrants to the United States, where indentured servitude was ­illegal (although sometimes imposed on workers through labor contracts). But the migration of non-European peoples often involved an important element of coercion and brought relatively small numbers of people to the United States. This non-­European migration was a function of the growth of European empires, and it was made possible by the imperial system—by its labor recruiters, by its ­naval resources, by its law, and by its economic needs. Together, these various forms of migration produced one of the greatest population movements in the history of the world and transformed not just the United States but much of the globe.

•


UNDERSTAND, ANALYZE, & EVALUATE
 1. What were some of the “push” and

 “pull” factors that motivated the ­migration of both Europeans and ­non-Europeans? 2. Why did more Europeans than nonEuropeans migrate to the United States?

THE URBAN LANDSCAPE
 The city was a place of remarkable contrasts. It had homes of almost unimaginable size and grandeur and hovels of indescribable squalor. It had conveniences unknown to earlier generations and problems that seemed beyond the capacity of society to solve. • 433

434 • CHAPTER 18


The Creation of Public Space
 There were a few early American cities that were planned from the beginning—Philadelphia and Washington most prominently. By the mid-nineteenth century, reformers, planners, architects, and others began to call for more ordered visions of many other cities. Among the most important urban innovations of the mid-nineteenth century were great city parks, which reflected the desire of urban leaders to provide an antidote to the congestion of the city landscape. Parks, they argued, would allow city residents a healthy, restorative escape from the strains of urban life by reacquainting them with the natural world. This notion of the park as refuge was most effectively promoted by the landscape designers Frederick Law Olmsted and Calvert Vaux, who together in the late 1850s Central Park designed New York’s Central Park. They deliberately created a public space that would look as little like the city as possible. Instead of the ordered, formal spaces common in some European cities, they created a space that seemed entirely natural. Central Park was from the start one of the most popular and admired public spaces in the world. At the same time that cities were creating great parks, they were also creating great public buildings: libraries, art galleries, natural history museums, theaters, and concert and opera halls. New York’s Metropolitan Museum of Art was the largest and best known of many great museums taking shape in the late nineteenth century, but giant museums grew up quickly in Boston, Philadelphia, Chicago, and other places. In one city after another, new and lavish public libraries appeared, as if to confirm the city’s role as a center of learning and knowledge. Wealthy residents were the principal force behind the creation of the great art museums, concert halls, opera houses, and, at times, even parks. As their own material and social aspirations grew, they wanted the public life of the city to provide them with amenities to match their expectations. Becoming an important patron of a major cultural institution was an especially effective route to social distinction. As both the size and aspirations of great cities increased, urban leaders launched monumental projects to remake them. Some cities began to clear away older neighborhoods and streets and create grand, monumental avenues lined with new and more impressive buildings. A particularly important event in inspiring such efforts was the 1893 Columbian Exposition in Chicago, a world’s fair constructed to honor the 400th anniversary of Columbus’s first voyage to America. At the center of the wildly popular exposition was a cluster of neoclassical buildings—the “Great White City”—arranged symmetrically around a formal lagoon. “City Beautiful” Movement It became the inspiration for the “city beautiful” movement, led by the architect of the Great White City, Daniel Burnham. The movement strove to impose a similar order and symmetry on the disordered life of cities around the country. Only rarely, however, were planners able to overcome the obstacles of private landowners and complicated urban politics to realize more than a small portion of their dreams. The effort to remake the city did not focus only on redesigning existing landscapes. It occasionally led to the creation of entirely new ones. In one of the largest public works projects ever undertaken in America to that point, the city of Boston gradually filled in a large area of marshy tidal land in the late 1880s to create the neighborhood known as “Back “Back Bay” Bay.” Boston was not alone. Chicago reclaimed large areas from Lake Michigan and at one point raised the street level for the entire city to help avoid the problems the marshy land created. In New York and other cities, the response to limited space was not so much to create new land as to annex adjacent territory. A great wave of annexations expanded the boundaries of many American cities in the 1890s and beyond, most notably New York City’s 1898 annexation of Brooklyn, which was itself a large and important city.

THE AGE OF THE CITY
• 435 

 This woman, shown here with some of her children, was typical of many workingclass mothers who found income-producing activities they could pursue in the home (in this case, laundry). (© Bettmann/Corbis) A TENEMENT LAUNDRY

The Search for Housing
 One of the greatest urban problems was to provide housing for the thousands of new residents pouring into the cities every day. For the prosperous, housing was seldom a worry. The availability of cheap labor reduced the cost of building and permitted anyone with even a moderate income to afford a house. Some of the richest urban residents lived in palatial mansions located in exclusive neighborhoods in the heart of the city—Fifth Avenue in New York, Back Bay and Beacon Hill in Boston, Society Hill in Philadelphia, Lake Shore Drive in Chicago, Nob Hill in San Francisco, and many others. Many of the moderately well-to-do city dwellers took advantage of less expensive land on the edges of cities and settled in new suburbs, linked to the downtowns by New Suburbs trains or streetcars. Chicago in the 1870s, for example, connected nearly 100 residential suburbs to the downtown by railroad. Real estate developers worked to create suburban communities that would appeal to many city dwellers’ nostalgia for the countryside, ­promoting them with lawns, trees, and houses designed to look manorial. Most urban residents, however, could not afford either to own a house in the city or to move to the suburbs. Instead, they stayed in the city centers and rented. Landlords tried to squeeze as many rent-paying residents as possible into the smallest available space. In Manhattan, for example, the average population density in 1894 was 143 people per acre—a rate far higher than that of any other American or European city then or since. In the cities of the South—Charleston, New Orleans, Richmond—poor African Americans lived in crumbling former slave quarters. In Boston, immigrants moved into cheap three-story wooden

436 • CHAPTER 18


 houses (“triple-deckers”). In Baltimore and Philadelphia, the new arrivals crowded into narrow brick row houses. And in New York and many other cities, they lived in tenements. The word tenement had originally referred simply to a multiple-family rental building, Tenements but by the late nineteenth century it had become a term for slum dwellings only. The first tenements, built in 1850, had been hailed as a great improvement in housing for the poor. But most were, in fact, miserable places, with many windowless rooms and Jacob Riis little or no plumbing or heating. Jacob Riis, a Danish immigrant and New York newspaper photographer, shocked many middle-class Americans with his sensational (and, some claimed, sensationalized) descriptions and pictures of tenement life in his 1890 book How the Other Half Lives. But the solution reformers often adopted was simply to raze slum dwellings without building any new housing to replace them.

Urban Technologies: Transportation and Construction
 Urban growth posed monumental transportation challenges. Sheer numbers of people mandated the development of mass transportation. Streetcars drawn on tracks by horses had been introduced into some cities even before the Civil War. But the horsecars were not fast enough, so many communities developed new forms of mass transit. In 1870, New York opened its first elevated railway, whose noisy, steam-powered trains moved rapidly above the city streets on massive iron structures. New York, Chicago, San Francisco, Boston, and other cities also experimented with cable cars, towed by continuously moving underground cables. Richmond, Virginia, introduced the first electric trolley line in 1888, and in 1897, Boston opened the first American subway. At the same time, cities were developing new techniques of road and bridge building. One of the great technological marvels of the 1880s was the completion of the Brooklyn Bridge in New York—a dramatic steel-cable suspension span designed by John A. Roebling. Cities grew upward as well as outward. In Chicago, the 1884 construction of the first modern “skyscraper”—by later standards a relatively modest ten-story building—launched a new era in urban architecture. Critical to the creation of the skyscraper was a new technology of construction, which emerged as a result of several related developments. New kinds of steel girders could support much greater tension than the metals of the past. The invention and development of the passenger elevator made much taller buildings p­ ossible. And the search for ways to protect cities from the ravages of great fires, which caused such terrible destruction in wood-frame cities of the late nineteenth century, led to steel-frame construction that, among other things, made cities more fireproof. Once the technology existed to permit the construction of tall buildings, there were few obstacles to building taller and taller Skyscrapers structures. The early Chicago skyscrapers paved the way for some of the great construction achievements later in the twentieth century: the Chrysler Building and the Empire State Building in New York, the LaSalle Building in Chicago, and ultimately the vast numbers of steel and glass skyscrapers of post-1945 cities around the world.

STRAINS OF URBAN LIFE
 Increasing urban congestion and the absence of adequate public services produced serious hazards. Crime, fire, disease, and indigence all placed strains on the capacities of metropolitan institutions, and both governments and private agencies were for a time poorly equipped to respond.

THE AGE OF THE CITY
• 437 

Fire and Disease
 In one major city after another, fires destroyed large downtown areas. Chicago and Boston suffered “great fires” in 1871, and other cities experienced similar disasters. The terrible experience of the great fires encouraged the construction of fireproof buildings and the development of professional fire departments. They also forced ­cities to rebuild at a time when new technological and architectural innovations were available. Some of the high-rise downtowns of American cities arose out of the ­rubble of great fires. An even greater hazard than fire was disease, especially in poor neighborhoods with inadequate sanitation facilities. An epidemic that began in a poor neighborhood could (and often did) spread easily into other neighborhoods as well. Few municipal officials recognized the relationship of improper sewage disposal and water contamination to such epidemic diseases as typhoid fever and cholera; many cities lacked adequate systems for disposing of human waste until well into the twentieth century. Flush toilets and sewer systems began to appear in the 1870s, but they could not solve the problem as long as sewage continued to flow into open ditches or streams, polluting cities’ water supplies.

Environmental Degradation
 Modern notions of environmental science were unknown to most Americans in these years. But the environmental degradation of many American cities was a visible and disturbing fact of life. The frequency of great fires, the dangers of disease, the crowding of working-class neighborhoods—all exemplified the environmental costs of industrialization and rapid urbanization. Poor disposal of human and industrial waste was common in almost all large cities. The presence of domestic animals—horses, cows, pigs, and other animals—also contributed to the contamination of drinking water and other environmental problems. Air quality in many cities was poor as well. Few Americans had the severe problems that London experienced in the late nineteenth century with its seemingly perpetual “fogs” created by the burning of soft coal. But air pollution from factories and from stoves and furnaces in offices, homes, and other buildings was constant and at times severe. The incidence of respiratory infection and related diseases was much higher in cities than it was in rural areas, and it accelerated rapidly in the late nineteenth century. By the early twentieth century, reformers, actively crusading to improve the environmental conditions of cities, were beginning to achieve some notable successes. By 1910, most large American cities had constructed sewage disposal systems, often at great cost, to protect the drinking water of their inhabitants and to prevent the great bacterial plagues that impure water had helped create in the past—such as the yellow fever epidemic in Memphis that killed 5,000 people. In 1912, the federal government created the Public Health Service, which was charged with preventing such occupational diseases as tuberculosis, anemia, and Public Health Service carbon dioxide poisoning, which were common in the garment industry and other trades. It attempted to create common health standards for all factories; but since the agency had few powers of enforcement, it had limited impact. The creation of the Occupational Safety and Health Administration in 1970, which gave government the authority to require employers to create safe and healthy workplaces, was a legacy of the Public Health Service’s early work.

438 • CHAPTER 18


Urban Poverty, Crime, and Violence
 Above all, perhaps, urban expansion spawned widespread and often desperate poverty. Public agencies and private philanthropic organizations offered some relief. But they were generally poorly funded and, in any case, dominated by middle-class people who believed that too much assistance would breed dependency. Most tried to restrict aid to the “deserving poor”—those who truly could not help themselves. Charitable organizations conducted elaborate “investigations” to separate the “deserving” from the “undeserving.” Other charitable societies—for example, the Salvation Army, which began operating in America in 1879—concentrated more on religious revivalism than on relief of the homeless and hungry. Middle-class people grew particularly alarmed over the rising number of poor children in the cities, some of them orphans or runaways. They attracted greater attention from reformers than any other group—although that attention produced no lasting solutions to their problems. Poverty and crowding bred crime and violence. The American murder rate rose rapidly in the late nineteenth century, from 25 murders for every million people in 1880 to over 100 by the end of the century. That reflected in part a very high level of violence in some nonurban areas: the American South, where lynching and homicide were particularly high, and the West, where the rootlessness and instability of new communities (cow towns, mining camps, and the like) created much violence. But the big cities Factors in Rising Crime Rate contributed their share to the increase as well. Native-born Americans liked to believe that crime was a result of the violent proclivities of immigrant groups, and they cited the rise of gangs and criminal organizations in various ethnic communities. But native-born Americans in the cities were as likely to commit crimes as immigrants. The rising crime rates encouraged many cities to develop larger and more professional police forces. But police forces themselves could spawn corruption and brutality. Some members of the middle class, fearful of urban insurrections, felt the need for even more substantial forms of protection. Urban National Guard groups built imposing armories on the outskirts of affluent neighborhoods and stored large supplies of weapons and ammunition in preparation for uprisings that, in fact, virtually never occurred. The city was a place of strong allure and great excitement. Yet it was also a place of alienating impersonality and, to some, of degradation and exploitation. Theodore Dreiser’s Dreiser’s Urban Novel novel Sister Carrie (1900) exposed one troubling aspect of urban life: the plight of single women (like Dreiser’s heroine, Carrie) who found themselves without any means of support. Carrie first took an exhausting and ill-paying job in a Chicago shoe factory, then drifted into a life of “sin,” exploited by predatory men.

The Machine and the Boss
 Newly arrived immigrants were much in need of institutions to help them adjust to American urban life. For many residents of the inner cities, the principal source of assistance was the political “machine.” The urban machine owed its existence to the power vacuum that the chaotic growth of cities had created and to the potential voting power of large immigrant communities. Function of the “Urban Boss” Out of that combination emerged the “urban bosses.” The principal function of the political boss was simple: to win votes for his organization. That

THE AGE OF THE CITY
• 439 

 Puck was the first successful humor magazine published in the United States. Issues were published from 1871 to 1918. It offered political cartoons, caricatures, and satire on the issues of the day. This cover shows a beer and wine seller shuttering his store by order of the government. The Tammany man indicates that the merchant will be able to operate without penalty in exchange for his support. (The Library of Congress) PUCK MAGAZINE

 meant winning the loyalty of his constituents. To do so, a boss might provide them with occasional relief—a basket of groceries or a bag of coal. He might step in to save those arrested for petty crimes from jail. When he could, he found work for the unemployed. Above all, he rewarded many of his followers with patronage: with jobs in city government or in the police (which the machine’s elected officials often controlled); with jobs building or operating the new transit systems; and with opportunities to rise in the political organization itself. Machines were also vehicles for making money. Politicians enriched themselves and their allies through various forms of graft and corruption. A politician might discover in advance where a new road or streetcar line was to be built, buy land near it, and sell it at a profit when property values rose as a result of the construction. There was also covert graft. Officials received kickbacks from contractors in exchange for contracts to build public projects, and they sold franchises for the operation of public utilities. The most famously

440 • CHAPTER 18


 corrupt city boss was William M. Tweed, boss of New York City’s Tammany Hall in the 1860s and 1870s, whose extravagant use of public funds and kickbacks landed him in jail in 1872. The urban machine was not without competition. Reform groups frequently mobilized public outrage at the corruption of the bosses and often succeeded in driving machine politicians from office. But the reform organizations typically lacked the permanence of the machine.

“Boss” Tweed and Tammany Hall


THE RISE OF MASS CONSUMPTION
 In the last decades of the nineteenth century, a distinctive middle-class culture began to exert influence over the whole of American life. Other groups in society advanced less rapidly, or not at all, but the rise of the new urban consumer culture began to shape a new image of the nation.

Patterns of Income and Consumption
 Incomes rose for almost everyone in the industrial era, although highly unevenly. One result of the new economy was the creation of vast fortunes, but perhaps the most imporGrowth of Middle Class tant result for society as a whole was the growth and increasing prosperity of the middle class. Clerks, accountants, middle managers, and other “white-collar” workers saw their salaries rise by an average of a third between 1890 and 1910. Doctors, lawyers, and other professionals experienced a particularly dramatic increase in both the prestige and the profitability of their professions. Working-class incomes rose in those years as well, although from a much lower base and more slowly. The iron and steel industries saw workers’ hourly wages increase by a third between 1890 and 1910; but industries with large female workforces—shoes, textiles, and paper—saw more modest increases, as did almost all industries in the South. Wages for African Americans, Mexicans, and Asians also rose more slowly than those for white workers. Rising incomes created new markets for consumer goods, which were now available New Consumerism to a mass market for the first time, as a result of technological innovations and new merchandising techniques. An example of such changes was the emergence of ready-made clothing. In the early nineteenth century, most Americans had made their own clothing. The invention of the sewing machine and the Civil War demand for uniforms spurred the manufacture of clothing and helped create an enormous industry devoted to producing ready-made garments. By the end of the century, almost all Americans bought their clothing from stores. Partly as a result, much larger numbers of people became concerned with personal style. Interest in women’s fashion, for example, had once been a luxury reserved for the relatively affluent. Now middle-class and even working-class women could strive to develop a distinctive style of dress. Buying and preparing food also became a critical part of the new consumerism. The development and mass production of tin cans in the 1880s created a large new industry devoted to packaging and selling canned food and condensed milk. Refrigerated railroad cars made it possible for perishable foods to be transported over long distances without spoiling. Artificially frozen ice enabled many households to afford iceboxes. The changes brought improved diets and better health. Life expectancy rose six years in the first two decades of the twentieth century.

THE AGE OF THE CITY
• 441 

 Department stores often created “events” to help promote sales of their many wares. Here, Strawbridge and Clothier department store creates a stir on Market Street in Philadelphia in 1907. (© Corbis) DEPARTMENT STORES

Chain Stores, Mail-Order Houses, and Department Stores
 Changes in marketing also altered the way Americans bought goods. New “chain stores” could usually offer a wider array of goods at lower prices than the small local stores with which they competed. The Atlantic and Pacific Tea Company (the A&P) began a national network of grocery stores in the 1870s. F. W. Woolworth built a chain of dry goods stores. Sears and Roebuck established a large market for its mail-order merchandise by distributing an enormous catalog each year. In larger cities, the emergence of great department stores helped make shopping more alluring and glamorous. Marshall Field in Chicago created one of the first American department stores—a place deliberately designed to produce a sense of Department Stores wonder and excitement. Similar stores emerged in New York, Brooklyn, Boston, Philadelphia, and other cities. (For the philosophy of one of the leading department store ­innovators, see “Consider the Source: John Wanamaker, the Four Cardinal Points of the Department Store.”)

Women as Consumers
 The rise of mass consumption had particularly dramatic effects on American women. Women’s clothing styles changed much more rapidly than men’s, which encouraged more frequent purchases. Women generally bought and prepared food for their families, so the availability of new food products changed not only how people ate but also how women shopped and cooked. The consumer economy produced new employment opportunities for women as salesclerks and waitresses. And it spawned the creation of a new movement in which women

CO NS IDER T HE S O URC E
JOHN WANAMAKER, THE FOUR CARDINAL POINTS
OF THE DEPARTMENT STORE, 1874
 The Philadelphia merchant John Wanamaker was one of the most successful and innovative businessmen of his day. A pioneer of the department store, Wanamaker ran this advertisement explaining the policies and benefits for consumers of his new commercial venue. FOUR CARDINAL POINTS By which we will hereafter steer our craft FULL GUARANTEE

CASH PAYMENT


ONE PRICE


CASH RETURNED


Explanation and Elaboration of the New Plan
FIRST
POINT—“CASH”—Houses doing a credit business must provide for losses on bad debts, interest on long-standing accounts, capital locked up, etc. To bear such losses themselves would drive them out of business. Therefore a per cent is added to the price of each article sold to cover this leakage, and cash buyers, whether they know it or not, really pay the bad debts and the interest on the long credits of the other customers. Under the cash payment system one pays only for what he gets, and contributes nothing to a “Sinking Fund.” By this radical change we shall lose some of our customers, no doubt, but we will gain ten where we lose one, the advantages being so great to all who can avail themselves of them. So we say CASH THROUGHOUT. Bring money for Clothing and we will supply it at prices possible under no other plan. SECOND POINT—“ONE PRICE”—The fairness of this feature of our plan all will praise. It is simply treating all alike—exacting nothing from indisposition to bargain or ignorance, and, at the same time, conceding all that shrewdness on the shrewdest customer’s part could possibly extort, because the “One Price” 442 • 
 which we mark on our goods shall invariably be Not the “First” Price, but the Last and Lowest Price. Not the “Top” Price, but the Very Bottom Price. THIRD POINT—“FULL GUARANTEE”— A printed guarantee, bearing the signature of our firm will accompany each garment as a warrantee. This binds us in every sense, and will be honored as quickly as a good draft of the Government of the United States. This is a sample of the full guarantee, and tells its own story—Guarantee. WE HEREBY GUARANTEE First—That the prices of our goods shall be as low as the same quality of material and manufacture are sold anywhere in the United States. Second—That prices are precisely the same to everybody for same quality, on same day of purchase. Third—That the quality of goods is as represented on printed labels. Fourth—That the full amount of cash paid will be refunded, if customers find the articles unsatisfactory, and return them unworn and uninjured within ten days of date of purchase. FOURTH POINT—“CASH RETURNED”— This is simply a concession on our part to our customers, to secure them full confidence in dealing for goods they know very little about, and we thus prevent any occasion for dissatisfaction from any and every cause whatsoever. If the garment is not exactly what you thought, if your taste changes, if the “home folks” prefer another color or another shape, if you find you can buy the same material and style elsewhere

 for less money, if you conclude you don’t need it after you get home, if the season changes suddenly and you wish you had not bought it, bring it back unworn and uninjured, and the full amount of money you paid will be returned on the spot. What more can we do for our customers than this, when we make our clothing so that they can draw the money value with it equally as well as with a check on the banks? The ADVANTAGES incident to a system having for its cardinal points these which we have now explained, are simply innumerable. Saving of time and temper, perfect security, absence of all huckstering, etc., etc. But above all this . . . All of these “By-ways” lead direct to CHEAPNESS; and this without lowering the

 quality or style of our celebrated make of MEN’S AND BOY’S CLOTHING. UNDERSTAND, ANALYZE, & EVALUATE 1. What were the benefits of

 Wanamaker’s four cardinal points for consumers? What were the ­benefits for Wanamaker? Judging by Wanamaker’s new way of ­doing business, what must business practices and customer service have looked like before? 2. Why might these assurances have been particularly important for a large department store? Why might it have been essential for the urban consumer market?

Source: Golden Book of the Wanamaker Stores, Jubilee Year, 1861–1911 (Philadelphia: John Wanamaker, 1911), pp. 152–154.
 This advertisement was originally published in 1874. Located in Regina Lee Blaszczyk and Philip B. Scranton (eds.), Major Problems in American Business History (Boston: Houghton Mifflin Company, 2006), pp. 298–299.

 played a vital role: the consumer protection movement. The National Consumers League (NCL), formed in the 1890s under the leadership of Florence National Consumers League Kelley, attempted to mobilize the power of women as consumers to force retailers and manufacturers to improve wages and working conditions. The NCL encouraged women to buy only products with the League’s “white label,” which indicated that the product was made under fair working conditions.

LEISURE IN THE CONSUMER SOCIETY
 Closely related to the rise of consumption was a growing interest in leisure time. Members of the urban middle and professional classes had large blocks of time during which they were not at work—evenings, weekends, even paid vacations. Working hours in many factories declined, from an average of nearly seventy hours a week in 1860 to under sixty in 1900. Even farmers found that the mechanization of agriculture gave them more free time. As many people’s lives became more compartmentalized, with clear distinctions between work and leisure, many Americans began to search for new forms of recreation and entertainment.

Redefining Leisure
 In earlier eras, relatively few Americans had considered leisure a valuable thing. Many equated it with laziness. In the late nineteenth century, however, the beginnings of a redefinition of leisure appeared. The economist Simon Patten articulated this new view • 443

444 • CHAPTER 18


 of leisure in The Theory of Prosperity (1902), The New Basis of Civilization (1910), and other works. He challenged the centuries-old assumption that the normal condition of civilization was a scarcity of goods. In earlier times, Patten argued, fear of scarcity had caused people to place a high value on thrift, self-denial, and restraint. But in modern industrial societies, new economies could create enough wealth to satisfy not just the needs but also the desires of all. As Americans became more accustomed to leisure as a normal part of life, they began to look for new experiences and entertainments. Mass entertainment occasionally bridged differences of class, race, and gender. But it could also be sharply divided. Saloons and some sporting events tended to be male preserves. Shopping and going to tea rooms and luncheonettes were more characteristic of female leisure. Theaters, pubs, and clubs were often specific to particular ethnic communities or particular work groups. When the classes did meet in public spaces—as they did, for example, in city parks—there was often considerable conflict over what constituted appropriate public behavior. Elites in New York City, for example, tried to prohibit anything but quiet, “genteel” activities in Central Park, while working-class people wanted to use the public spaces for sports and entertainments.

Spectator Sports
 Among the most important responses to the search for entertainment was the rise of organized spectator sports, especially baseball. A game much like baseball— known as “rounders” and derived from cricket—had enjoyed limited popularity in Great Britain in the early nineteenth century. Versions of the game began to appear in America in the early 1830s. By the end of the Civil War, interest in the game had grown rapidly.

Baseball


THE AMERICAN NATIONAL GAME
Long before the modern major leagues began, local baseball clubs were active throughout much of the United States, establishing the game as the “national pastime.” This print of a “grand match for the championship” depicts an 1866 game at Elysian Fields, a popular park just across the river from New York City in Hoboken, New Jersey. (© Photo Reproduction by Transcendental Graphics/Getty Images) 
THE AGE OF THE CITY
• 445 

 More than 200 amateur or semiprofessional teams and clubs existed, many of which joined a national association and proclaimed a set of standard rules. As the game grew in popularity, it offered opportunities for profit. The first salaried team, the Cincinnati Red Stockings, was formed in 1869. Other cities fielded professional teams, and in 1876 the teams banded together in the National League. A rival league, the American Association, appeared and collapsed, but in 1901 the American League emerged to replace it. And in 1903, the first modern World Series was played, in which the American League’s Boston Red Sox beat the National League’s Pittsburgh Pirates. By then, baseball had become an important business and a national preoccupation. Baseball had great appeal to working-class males. The second most popular game, football, appealed at first to a more elite segment of the male population, in part because it originated in colleges and universities. The first intercollegiate football game in America occurred between Princeton and Rutgers in 1869. Early intercollegiate football bore only an indirect relation to the modern game; it was more similar to present-day rugby. By the late 1870s, however, the game was becoming standardized and was taking on the outlines of its modern form. Basketball was invented in 1891 in Springfield, Massachusetts, by Dr. James A. Naismith, a Canadian working as an athletic director for a local college. Basketball Invented Boxing, which had long been a disreputable activity concentrated primarily among the urban lower classes, became by the 1880s a more popular and, in some places, more reputable sport. Participation in the major sports was almost exclusively the province of men, but several sports emerged in which women became involved. Golf and tennis both attracted more and more relatively wealthy men and women. Bicycling and croquet also enjoyed widespread popularity in the 1890s among women as well as men. Women’s colleges introduced their students to more strenuous sports as well—track, crew, swimming, and (beginning in the late 1890s) basketball.

Music, Theater, and Movies
 Other forms of popular entertainment also developed in the cities. Many ethnic communities maintained their own theaters, which presented plays in the languages of the immigrant communities. Urban theaters in the heart of the cities attracted a much broader audience. They introduced new and distinctively American entertainment forms: the musical comedy, which evolved gradually from the comic operettas of Europe; and vaudeville, a Vaudeville form of theater adapted from French models, which remained the most popular urban entertainment into the first decades of the twentieth century. It consisted of a variety of acts (musicians, comedians, magicians, jugglers, and others) and was, at least in the beginning, inexpensive to produce. As the economic potential of vaudeville grew, some promoters— most prominently Florenz Ziegfeld of New York—staged much more elaborate spectacles. Vaudeville was also one of the few entertainment media open to black performers, who brought to it elements of the minstrel shows they had earlier developed for black audiences in the late nineteenth century. Some minstrel singers (including the most famous, Al Jolson) were white performers wearing heavy makeup (or “blackface”), but most were black. Entertainers of both races performed music based on the gospel and folk tunes of the plantation and on the jazz and ragtime of black urban communities. Performers of both races also tailored their acts to prevailing white prejudices, ridiculing African Americans by acting out demeaning stereotypes.

446 • CHAPTER 18


 American popular entertainment was transformed with the emergence of motion picture shows. Thomas Edison and others had created the technology underpinning the motion picture in the 1880s. Soon after that, short films became available to individual viewers watching peepshows in pool halls, penny arcades, and amusement parks. Soon, larger projectors made it possible to display the images on big screens, which permitted substantial audiences to see films in theaters. By 1900, Americans were becoming attracted Silent Films in large numbers to these early movies—usually plotless films of trains or waterfalls or other spectacles. The director D. W. Griffith carried the motion picture into a new era with his silent epics—The Birth of a Nation (1915), Intolerance (1916), and others—which introduced serious (if notoriously racist) plots and elaborate productions to filmmaking. Motion pictures were the first truly mass entertainment medium.

Patterns of Public and Private Leisure
 Particularly striking about popular entertainment in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries was its public quality. Many Americans spent their leisure time in places where they would find not only entertainment but also other people. Thousands of working-class New Yorkers spent evenings in dance halls, vaudeville houses, and concert halls. More affluent New Yorkers enjoyed afternoons in Central Park, where a principal attraction was seeing other people (and being seen by them). Moviegoers were attracted not just by the movies themselves but also by the energy of the audiences at lavish new “movie palaces,” just as sports fans were drawn by the crowds as well as by the games. Perhaps the most striking example of popular public entertainment in the early twenConey Island tieth century was Coney Island, the famous and self-consciously fabulous amusement park and resort on a popular beach in Brooklyn. Luna Park, the greatest of the Coney Island attractions, opened in 1903 and provided rides, stunts, and lavish reproductions of exotic places and spectacular adventures: Japanese gardens, Venetian canals with gondoliers, a Chinese theater, a simulated trip to the moon, and reenactments of such disasters as burning buildings and earthquakes. A year later, a competing company opened Dreamland, which tried to outdo even Luna Park with a 375-foot tower, a three-ring circus, chariot races, and a Lilliputian village from Gulliver’s Travels. The popularity of Coney Island in these years was phenomenal. Thousands of people flocked to the large resort hotels that lined the beaches. Many thousands more made day trips out from the city by train and (after 1920) subway. In 1904, the average daily attendance at Luna Park alone was 90,000 people. Most people found Coney Island appealing in part because it provided an escape from the genteel standards that governed so much of American life at the time. In the amusement parks of Coney Island, decorum was often forgotten, and people delighted in finding themselves in situations that in any other setting would have seemed embarrassing or improper: women’s skirts blown above their heads with hot air; people pummeled with water and rubber paddles by clowns; hints of sexual freedom as strangers were forced to come into physical contact with one another on rides and amusements. Not all popular entertainment, however, involved public events. Many Americans Dime Novels amused themselves privately by reading novels and poetry. The so-called dime novels, cheaply bound and widely circulated, became popular after the Civil War, with detective stories, tales of the Wild West, sagas of scientific adventure, and novels of “moral uplift.” Publishers also distributed sentimental novels of romance, which developed a large audience among women, as did books about animals and about young children

THE AGE OF THE CITY
• 447 

 growing up. Louisa May Alcott’s Little Women, most of whose readers were female, sold more than 2 million copies.

The Technologies of Mass Communication
 American journalism experienced dramatic change in the decades following the Civil War. Between 1870 and 1910, the circulation of daily newspapers increased nearly ninefold (from under 3 million to more than 24 million), a rate three times as great as the rate of population increase. And while standards varied widely from one paper to another, American journalism was developing the beginnings of a professional identity. Salaries of reporters increased; many newspapers began separating the reporting of news from the expression of opinion; and newspapers themselves became important businesses. This transformation was to a large degree a result of new technologies of communication. The emergence of national press services, for example, was a product of the telegraph, which made it possible to supply papers with news and features from around the nation and the world. By the turn of the century, important newspaper chains had emerged as well, linked together by their own internal wire services. The most powerful was owned by William Randolph Hearst, who by 1914 controlled William Randolph Hearst nine ­newspapers and two magazines. New printing technologies were making possible more elaborate layouts, the publication of color pictures, and, by the end of the century, the printing of photographs. These advances not only helped publishers make their own stories more vivid; they also made it possible for them to attract more advertisers.

The Telephone
 The most important new technology of communication in the late nineteenth century was the telephone, which Alexander Graham Bell had first demonstrated in 1876. In its first years, the telephone was a relatively impractical tool. Those who subscribed to telephone service had to have direct wire links to everyone else they wished to call. In 1878, the first “switchboard” opened in New Haven, Connecticut, opening the way for more practical uses of the telephone. Once there was a switchboard, a telephone subscriber needed only a line to the central telephone office from which connections could be made to any other subscriber. A new occupation—the “telephone operator”—was born. The Bell System, which controlled all American telephone service, hired young white women to work as operators, hoping that a pleasant female voice would make the experience of using the telephone (and the inconvenience of the frequent technological problems that accompanied it) less irritating to customers. Telephone signals were very weak at first, and callers could seldom reach anyone more than a few miles away. In an effort to increase the range of telephones, engineers created the “repeater,” which periodically strengthened the signal as it moved over distances. By 1914, the repeaters had improved to the point that it was now practical to envision a transcontinental line. In its early years, the telephone was an almost entirely commercial instrument. Of the nearly 7,400 telephone customers in the New York–New Jersey area in 1891, 6,000 were businesses and organizations. Even the residential telephones tended to belong to doctors or business managers. The growing reach of the telephone in the early years of the twentieth century made the Bell System (formally named American Telephone and Telegraph, or The Bell System AT&T) one of the most powerful corporations in America and a genuine monopoly.

448 • CHAPTER 18


 Central to its success was an early decision by executives that the company would exclusively build and own all telephone instruments and then lease them to subscribers. That made it possible for AT&T to control both the equipment and the telephone service itself, and to exclude any competitors in either field. It also gave AT&T effective control over the local telephone companies allied with it and made the nation’s telephone system into an effective cartel.

HIGH CULTURE IN THE URBAN AGE
 In addition to the important changes in popular culture that accompanied the rise of cities and industry, there were profound changes in the realm of “high culture.” The distinction between “highbrow” and “lowbrow” culture was largely new to the industrial era. In the early nineteenth century, most cultural activities had targeted people of all classes. By the late nineteenth century, however, elites were developing a cultural and intellectual life quite separate from the popular amusements of the urban masses.

Literature and Art in Urban America
 One of the strongest impulses in American literature was the effort to recreate urban social reality. This trend toward realism found an early voice in Stephen Crane, who—although perhaps best known for his novel of the Civil War, The Red Badge of Courage (1895)—created a sensation in 1893 when he published Maggie: A Girl of the Streets, a grim picture of urban poverty and slum life. Theodore Dreiser, Frank Norris, and Upton Sinclair were similarly drawn to social issues as themes. Kate Chopin, a southern writer who explored the oppressive features of traditional marriage, encountered widespread public abuse after the publication of her shocking 1899 novel, The Awakening, which described a young wife and mother who abandoned her family in search of personal fulfillment. William Dean Howells, in The Rise of Silas Lapham and other works, described what he considered the shallowness and corruption in ordinary American lifestyles. American art through most of the nineteenth century had been overshadowed by that of Europe. By 1900, however, a number of American artists broke from Old World traditions and experimented with new styles. Winslow Homer brought a distinctive approach to his paintings of New England maritime life and other American subjects. James McNeil Whistler was one of the first Western artists to introduce Asian themes into American and European art. By the first years of the new century, some American artists were turning decisively away from the traditional academic style (a style perhaps most identified in America by the brilliant portraitist John Singer Sargent). Members of the so-called Ashcan school Ashcan School produced work startling in its naturalism and stark in its portrayal of the social realities of the era. John Sloan portrayed the dreariness of American urban slums; George Bellows caught the vigor and violence of his time in paintings and drawings of prizefights; Edward Hopper explored the starkness and loneliness of the modern city. The Ashcan artists were also among the first Americans to appreciate expressionism and abstraction; and they showed their interest in new forms in 1913, when they helped stage Armory Show the famous “Armory Show” in New York City, which displayed works of the French postimpressionists and of some American moderns. Literary Realism

THE AGE OF THE CITY
• 449 

 The artist George Bellows began painting fight scenes in the first years of the twentieth century, when boxing appealed primarily to working-class audiences. By 1924, when he painted this moment from a famous prizefight, boxing had become one of the most popular sports in America. (© Whitney Museum of American Art, New York, USA/Bridgeman Images) DEMPSEY AND FIRPO

The Impact of Darwinism
 One of the most profound intellectual developments in the late nineteenth century was the widespread acceptance of the theory of evolution, associated most prominently with the English naturalist Charles Darwin. Darwin argued that the human species had evolved from earlier forms of life through a process of “natural selection.” History, Darwin suggested, was not the working out of a divine plan. It was a natural process dominated by the fiercest or luckiest competitors. The theory of evolution met widespread resistance at first from educators, theologians, and even many scientists. By the end of the century, however, the evolutionists had converted most members of the urban professional and educated classes. Even many middleclass Protestant religious leaders had accepted the doctrine, making significant alterations in theology to accommodate it. The rise of Darwinism, however, Divisions over Darwinism contributed to something unseen by most urban Americans at the time: a deep schism between the new, cosmopolitan culture of the city and the more traditional, provincial culture of some rural areas. Thus the late nineteenth century saw not only the rise of a liberal Protestantism in tune with new scientific discoveries but also the beginning of an organized Protestant fundamentalism. Darwinism helped spawn other new intellectual currents. There was the Social Darwinism of William Graham Sumner and others, which industrialists used so enthusiastically to justify their favored position in American life. But there were also more sophisticated philosophies, among them a doctrine that became known as “pragmatism.”

450 • CHAPTER 18


 William James, a Harvard psychologist (and brother of the novelist Henry James), was the most prominent publicist of the new theory, although earlier intellectuals such as Charles S. Peirce and later ones such as John Dewey were also important to its develop“Pragmatism” ment and dissemination. According to the pragmatists, modern society should rely for guidance not on inherited ideals and moral principles but on the test of scientific inquiry. No idea or institution (not even religious faith) was valid, they claimed, unless it “worked,” unless it stood the test of experience. A similar concern for scientific inquiry was influencing the social sciences. Sociologists such as Edward A. Ross and Lester Frank Ward urged applying the scientific method to the solution of social and political problems. Historians such as Frederick Jackson Turner and Charles Beard argued that economic factors more than spiritual ideals had been the governing force in historical development. John Dewey proposed a new approach to education that placed less emphasis on the rote learning of traditional knowledge and more on flexible, democratic schooling. The implications of Darwinism also promoted the growth of anthropology and encouraged some scholars to begin examining other cultures in new ways. Some white Americans began to look at Indian society, for example, as a coherent culture with its own norms and values that were worthy of respect and preservation, even though they were different from those of white society.

Toward Universal Schooling
 The growing demand for specialized skills and scientific knowledge naturally created a growing, and changing, demand for education. The late nineteenth century, therefore, was a time of rapid expansion and reform of American schools and universities. Free public primary and secondary education spread rapidly. By 1900, compulsory school attendance laws existed in thirty-one states and territories. Education was still far from universal. Rural areas lagged far behind urban-industrial ones in funding public education. In the South, many African Americans had no access to schools at all. But for many white men and women, educational opportunities were expanding rapidly. Educational reformers tried to extend educational opportunities to the Indian tribes as well, in an effort to “civilize” them and help them adapt to white society. In the 1870s, reformers recruited small groups of Indians to attend Hampton Institute (a primarily black college). In 1879, they organized the Carlisle Indian Industrial School in Pennsylvania. Like many black colleges, Carlisle emphasized practical “industrial” education. Ultimately, however, these reform efforts failed, in part because they were unpopular with their intended beneficiaries.

Universities and the Growth of Science and Technology
 Colleges and universities also proliferated rapidly in the late nineteenth century. The Morrill Land Grant Act of 1862, by which the federal government had donated public land to states for the establishment of colleges, led to the creation of sixty-nine “landgrant” institutions in the last decades of the century—among them the state university systems of California, Illinois, Minnesota, and Wisconsin. Other universities, including Chicago, Columbia, Harvard, Northwestern, Princeton, Syracuse, and Yale, benefited from millions of dollars contributed by business and financial titans such as Rockefeller and Carnegie. Other philanthropists founded new universities or reorganized older ones to

THE AGE OF THE CITY
• 451 

 perpetuate their family names—for example, Vanderbilt, Johns Hopkins, Cornell, Duke, Tulane, and Stanford. These and other universities played a vital role in the economic development of the United States in the late nineteenth century and beyond. The land-grant institutions were specifically mandated to advance knowledge in “agriculture Higher Education and the Economy and mechanics.” From the beginning, therefore, they were committed not just to abstract knowledge but to making discoveries that would be of practical use to farmers and manufacturers. As they evolved into great state universities, they retained that tradition and became the source of many of the great discoveries that helped American industry and commerce advance. Private universities emerged that served many of the same purposes: the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, founded in 1865, soon became the nation’s premier engineering school; Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore, founded in 1876, did much to advance medical scholarship, as did the Rockefeller Institute for Medical Research in New York (later Rockefeller University) and the Carnegie Institution. By the early twentieth century, older and more traditional universities were beginning to form relationships with the private sector and the government, doing research that did not just advance knowledge for its own sake but that was directly applicable to practical problems of the time.

Medical Science
 Both the culture of and the scientific basis for medical care were changing rapidly in the early twentieth century. Most doctors were beginning to accept the new medical assumption that there were underlying causes to particular symptoms—that a symptom was not itself a disease. They were also beginning to make use of new or improved technologies—the X-ray, improved microscopes, and other diagnostic devices—that made it possible to classify, and distinguish among, different diseases. Laboratory tests could now identify infections such as typhoid and dysentery. These technologies were a critical first step toward the effective treatment of diseases. At about the same time, pharmaceutical research began to produce some important new medicines. Aspirin was first synthesized in 1899. Other researchers experimented with chemicals that might destroy diseases in the blood, an effort that eventually led to the various forms of chemotherapy that are still widely used in treating cancer. In 1906, an American surgeon, G. W. Crile, became the first physician to use blood transfusion in treatment, which revolutionized surgery. In the past, patients often lost so much blood during operations that extensive surgery could be fatal for that reason alone. With transfusions, it became possible to conduct much longer and more elaborate operations. The widespread acceptance by the end of the nineteenth century of the germ theory of disease had important implications. Physicians quickly discovered that Germ Theory Accepted exposure to germs did not by itself necessarily cause disease, and they began looking for the other factors that determined who got sick and who did not. Among the factors they eventually discovered were general health, previous medical history, diet and nutrition, and eventually genetic predisposition. The awareness of the importance of infection in spreading disease also encouraged doctors to sterilize their instruments, use surgical gloves, and otherwise purify the medical environment. By the early twentieth century, American physicians and surgeons were generally recognized as among the best in the world, and American medical education Declining Mortality was beginning to attract students from many other countries. These improvements in medical knowledge and training, along with improvements in sanitation and public health, did much to reduce infection and mortality in most American communities.

452 • CHAPTER 18


Education for Women
 The post–Civil War era saw an important expansion of educational opportunities for women, although such opportunities continued to lag far behind those available to men and were almost entirely denied to black women. Most public high schools accepted women readily, but opportunities for higher education were fewer. At the end of the Civil War, only three American colleges were coeducational. After the war, many of the land-grant colleges and universities in the Midwest and such private universities as Cornell and Wesleyan began to admit women along with men. But coeducation was less crucial to women’s education in this period than was the creation of a network of women’s colleges. Mount Holyoke in central Massachusetts had begun its life in 1836 as a “seminary” for women; it became a full-fledged college in the 1880s, at about the same time that entirely new female institutions were emerging: Vassar, Wellesley, Smith, Bryn Mawr, Wells, and Goucher. A few of the larger private universities created separate colleges for women on their campuses (Barnard at Columbia and Radcliffe at Harvard, for example). The female college was part of an important phenomenon in the history of modern American women: the emergence of distinctive women’s communities outside the family. Most faculty members and many administrators were women (usually unmarried). And college life produced a spirit of sorority and commitment among educated women that had important effects in later years. Most female college graduates ultimately married, but they married at a more advanced age than their noncollege counterparts. A significant minority, perhaps over 25 percent, did not marry at all, but devoted themselves to careers. The growth of female higher education clearly became for some women a liberating experience, persuading them that they had roles other than those of wives and mothers to perform in their rapidly changing urban-industrial society.

CONCLUSION
 The extraordinary growth of American cities in the last decades of the nineteenth century led to both great achievements and enormous problems. Cities became centers of learning, art, and commerce and produced great advances in technology, transportation, architecture, and communications. They provided their residents—and their many visitors—with varied and dazzling experiences, so much so that people increasingly left the countryside to move to the city. But cities were also places of congestion, filth, disease, and corruption. With populations expanding too rapidly for services to keep up, most American cities in this era struggled with makeshift techniques to solve the basic problems of providing water, disposing of sewage, building roads, running public transportation, fighting fire, stopping crime, and preventing or curing disease. City governments, many of them dominated by political machines and ruled by party bosses, were often models of inefficiency and ­corruption—although in their informal way they also provided substantial services to the working-class and immigrant constituencies who needed them most. Yet they also managed to oversee great public projects: the building of parks, museums, opera houses, and theaters, usually in partnership with private developers. The city brought together races, ethnic groups, and classes of extraordinary variety— from the families of great wealth that the new industrial age was creating to the vast

THE AGE OF THE CITY
• 453 

 working class, much of it consisting of immigrants, who crowded into densely packed neighborhoods divided by nationality. The city also spawned temples of consumerism: shops, boutiques, and, above all, the great department stores. And it created forums for public recreation and entertainment: parks, theaters, athletic fields, amusement parks, and, later, movie palaces. Urban life created anxiety among those who lived within the cities and among those who observed them from afar. But in fact, American cities adapted reasonably successfully over time to the great demands their growth made of them and learned to govern themselves if not entirely honestly and efficiently, at least enough to allow them to survive and grow.

KEY TERMS/PEOPLE/PLACES/EVENTS
Armory Show 448
 Ashcan school 448 city beautiful movement 434 Coney Island 446 consumerism 440 Darwinism 449

Jacob Riis 436
Kate Chopin 448
National Consumers
League 443
Public Health Service 437
Tammany Hall 440
 tenements 436

Theodore Dreiser 438
 vaudeville 445 William James 450 William M. Tweed 440 William Randolph Hearst 447

RECALL AND REFLECT
 1. 	What groups of people were most likely to move to the cities of late-nineteenth-

 century America, and why? 2. 	What was the relationship between immigration and urbanization in the late

 nineteenth century? 3. 	How did the new consumer economy affect roles and expectations for women? 4. 	What was Darwinism, and what was its impact on American intellectual life?



FROM CRISIS TO
EMPIRE
THE POLITICS OF EQUILIBRIUM
THE AGRARIAN REVOLT
THE CRISIS OF THE 1890s STIRRINGS OF IMPERIALISM WAR WITH SPAIN THE REPUBLIC AS EMPIRE

LOOKING AHEAD
 1. What were the major social and economic problems that beset the United States in the late nineteenth century, and how did the two major political parties respond to these problems? 2. What was Populism, what were its goals, and to what degree were these goals achieved? 3. How did the United States become an imperial power?

THE UNITED STATES APPROACHED
the end of the nineteenth century as a fundamentally different nation from what it had been at the beginning of the Civil War. With rapid change came cascading social and political problems—problems that the weak and conservative governments of the time showed little inclination or ability to address. A catastrophic economic depression that began in 1893 created devastating hardship for millions of Americans. Farmers responded by creating an agrarian political movement known as Populism. American workers, facing massive unemployment, staged large and occasionally violent strikes. Not since the Civil War had American politics been so polarized and impassioned. The election of 1896, which pitted the agrarian hero William Jennings Bryan against the solid conservative William McKinley, was dramatic but anticlimactic. Supported by the mighty Republican Party and many eastern groups who looked with suspicion and unease at the agricultural demands coming from the West, McKinley easily triumphed. McKinley did little in his first term in office to resolve the problems and grievances of his time, but the economy revived nevertheless. Having largely ignored the depression, however, McKinley focused on another great national cause: the plight of Cuba in its war with Spain. In the spring of 1898, the United States declared war on Spain and entered the conflict in Cuba—a brief but bloody war that ended with an American victory four months later. 454 • 
 The conflict had begun as a way to support Cuban independence from the Spanish, but a group of fervent and influential imperialists worked to convert the war into an occasion for acquiring overseas possessions. Despite a powerful anti-imperialist movement, the acquisition of the former Spanish colonies proceeded—only to draw Americans into yet another imperial war, this one in the Philippines, where the Americans, not the Spanish, were the targets of local enmity.

THE POLITICS OF
EQUILIBRIUM
 The enormous social and economic changes of the late nineteenth century strained not only the nation’s traditional social arrangements but its political institutions as well. Searching for stability and social justice, Americans looked to the government for leadership. Yet that government during much of this period was ill equipped to confront these new challenges. As a result, problems and grievances festered and grew.

The Party System
 The most striking feature of late-nineteenthcentury politics was the stability of the party system. From the end of Reconstruction until the late 1890s, the electorate was divided almost evenly between the Republicans and the Democrats. Sixteen states were solidly and consistently Republican, and fourteen states (most in the South) were solidly and consistently Democratic. Only a handful of states were usually in doubt, and they generally decided the results of national elections, often on the basis of voter turnout. The Republican Party captured the presidency in all but two of the elections of the era, but in the five presidential elections beginning in 1876, the average popular-vote margin separating the Democratic and Republican candidates was 1.5 percent. The congressional

TIME LINE


 Hayes elected president



National Grange
 founded Garfield elected president

 Garfield assassinated; Arthur becomes president





 Cleveland elected president

Interstate Commerce
Act
 U.S. gains base at Pearl Harbor





Benjamin Harrison
 elected president

Sherman Antitrust Act
Sherman Silver
Purchase Act




 McKinley Tariff

 Cleveland elected president again



 People’s Party formed

Revolution in Hawaii
 Economic depression begins Sherman Silver Purchase Act repealed





 Coxey’s Army marches on Washington, D.C.

 McKinley elected president

 War with Spain Treaty of Paris

1898–1902
 Philippines revolt

 U.S. annexes Hawaii, Puerto Rico, Philippines Open Door notes

Boxer Rebellion
 McKinley reelected

Platt Amendment


• 455


