456 • CHAPTER 19


 balance was similarly stable, with the Republicans generally controlling the Senate and the Democrats generally controlling the House. Despite the relatively modest differences, most eligible Americans had strong loyalties High Voter Turnout to their chosen party. Voter turnout in presidential elections between 1860 and 1900 averaged over 78 percent of all eligible voters. Large groups of potential voters were disenfranchised in these years: women in most states and almost all blacks and many poor whites in the South. But for adult white males, there were few restrictions on voting. What explains this extraordinary loyalty to the two political parties? It was not that the parties took distinct positions on important public issues. They did so rarely. Reasons for Party Loyalties Party loyalties reflected other factors. Region was perhaps the most important. To white southerners, loyalty to the Democratic Party—the vehicle by which they had triumphed over Reconstruction and preserved white supremacy— was a matter of unquestioned faith. Republican loyalties were equally intense in the North. To many, the party of Lincoln remained a bulwark against slavery and treason. Religious and ethnic differences also shaped party loyalties. The Democratic Party attracted most of the Catholic voters, recent immigrants, and poorer workers. The Republican Party appealed to northern Protestants, citizens of old stock, and much of the middle class. Among the few substantive issues on which the parties took clearly different stands were immigration matters. Republicans tended to support immigration restriction and to favor temperance legislation, which many believed would help discipline immigrant communities. Catholics and immigrants viewed such proposals as assaults on them and their cultures, and the Democratic Party followed their lead. Party identification, then, was usually more a reflection of cultural inclinations than a calculation of economic interest. Individuals might affiliate with a party because their parents had done so or because it was the party of their region, their church, or their ethnic group.

The National Government
 One reason the parties avoided most substantive issues was that the federal government did relatively little. The government in Washington was responsible for delivering the mail, maintaining a military, conducting foreign policy, and collecting tariffs and taxes. It had few other responsibilities and few institutions capable of undertaking additional responsibilities even if it had chosen to do so. There was one significant exception. From the end of the Civil War to the early twentieth century, the federal government administered a system of annual pensions for retired Union Civil War veterans and their widows. At its peak, this pension system was making payments First Pension System to a majority of the male citizens (black and white) of the North and to many women as well. Some reformers hoped to make the system permanent and universal, others found it corrupt and expensive. When the Civil War generation died out, the ­pension system died with it. In most other respects, the United States in the late nineteenth century was a society without a modern national government. The most powerful institutions were the two political parties (and the bosses and machines that dominated them) and the federal courts.

FROM CRISIS TO EMPIRE
• 457 

Presidents and Patronage
 Presidents in the late nineteenth century had great symbolic importance, but they were unable to do very much except distribute government appointments. A new president and his tiny staff had to make almost 100,000 appointments. It sometimes proved impossible for a president to avoid factional conflict, as the presidency of Rutherford B. Hayes demonstrated. By the end of his term, two groups—the Stalwarts, led by Roscoe Conkling of New York, and the Half-Breeds, Stalwarts and Half-Breeds captained by James G. Blaine of Maine—were competing for control of the Republican Party. Rhetorically, the Stalwarts favored traditional, professional machine politics, while the HalfBreeds favored reform. In fact, both groups were mainly interested in a larger share of patronage. Hayes tried to satisfy both and ended up satisfying neither. The battle over patronage overshadowed all else during Hayes’s unhappy presidency. His one important, substantive initiative—an effort to create a civil service system— attracted no support from either party. And his early announcement that he would not seek reelection only weakened him further. The Republicans managed to retain the presidency in 1880 in part because they agreed on a ticket that included a Stalwart and a Half-Breed. They nominated James A. Garfield, a veteran congressman from Ohio and a Half-Breed, for president and Chester A. Arthur of New York, a Stalwart, for vice president. The Democrats nominated General Winfield Scott Hancock, a minor Civil War commander with no national following. Benefiting from the end of the recession of 1879, Garfield won a decisive electoral victory, although his popular-vote margin was thin.

PRESIDENT CHESTER A. ARTHUR
Although originally a Stalwart, Arthur attempted to reform the spoils system. In this Puck cartoon, he is catching heat from a variety of Republican factions, including the Stalwarts and Half-Breeds. (The Library of Congress) 
458 • CHAPTER 19


 Garfield began his presidency by defying the Stalwarts and supporting civil service reform. He soon found himself embroiled in an ugly public quarrel with Conkling and the Stalwarts. The dispute was never resolved. On July 2, 1881, only four months after Garfield Assassinated his inauguration, Garfield was shot twice while standing in the Washington railroad station by an apparently deranged gunman (and unsuccessful office seeker) who shouted, “I am a Stalwart and Arthur is president now!” Garfield lingered for nearly three months but finally died. Garfield’s successor, Chester A. Arthur, had spent his political lifetime as a devoted, skilled, and open spoilsman and a close ally of the New York political boss Roscoe Conkling. But on becoming president, he tried—like Hayes and Garfield before him—to follow an independent course and even to promote reform. To the dismay of the Stalwarts, Arthur kept most of Garfield’s appointees in office and supported civil service reform. In Pendleton Act 1883, Congress passed the first national civil service measure, the Pendleton Act, which required that some federal jobs be filled by competitive written examinations rather than by patronage. Relatively few offices fell under civil service at first, but its reach steadily widened.

Cleveland, Harrison, and the Tariff
 In the unsavory election of 1884, the Republican candidate for president was Senator James G. Blaine of Maine—known to his admirers as the “Plumed Knight” but to many others as a symbol of seamy party politics. A group of disgruntled “liberal Republicans,” known by their critics as the “mugwumps,” announced that they would bolt the party and support an honest Democrat. Rising to the bait, the Democrats nominated Grover Cleveland, the reform governor of New York. In a campaign filled with personal invective, what may have decided the election was the last-minute introduction of a religious controversy. Shortly before the election, a delegation of Protestant ministers called on Blaine in New York City; their spokesman, Dr. Samuel Burchard, referred to the Democrats as the party of “rum, Romanism, and rebellion.” Blaine was slow to repudiate Burchard’s indiscretion, and Democrats quickly Cleveland Elected spread the news that Blaine had tolerated a slander on the Catholic Church. Cleveland’s narrow victory probably resulted from an unusually heavy Catholic vote for the Democrats in New York. Grover Cleveland was respected, if not often liked, for his stern and righteous opposition to politicians, grafters, pressure groups, and Tammany Hall. He embodied an era in which few Americans believed the federal government could, or should, do very much. Cleveland had always doubted the wisdom of protective tariffs (taxes on imported goods designed to protect domestic producers). The existing high rates, he believed, were responsible for the annual surplus in federal revenues, which was tempting Congress to pass “reckless” and “extravagant” legislation, which he frequently vetoed. In December 1887, therefore, he asked Congress to reduce the tariff rates. Democrats in the House approved a tariff reduction, but Senate Republicans defiantly passed a bill of their own, actually raising the rates. The resulting deadlock made the tariff an issue in the election of 1888. The Democrats renominated Cleveland and supported tariff reductions. Endorsing protection, Republicans settled on former senator Benjamin Harrison of Indiana, who was obscure but respectable (and the grandson of President William Henry Harrison). It was Harrison Elected one of the most corrupt elections in American history. Cleveland won the popular vote by 100,000, but Harrison won an electoral majority of 233 to 168.

FROM CRISIS TO EMPIRE
• 459 

New Public Issues
 Benjamin Harrison’s record as president was little more substantial than that of his grandfather, who had died a month after taking office. Harrison had few visible convictions, and he made no effort to influence Congress. And yet during Harrison’s passive administration, public opinion was beginning to force the government to confront some of the pressing social and economic issues of the day, most notably the power of trusts. By the mid-1880s, fifteen western and southern states had adopted laws prohibiting combinations that restrained competition. But corporations found it easy to escape limitations by incorporating in states, such as New Jersey and Delaware, that offered them special privileges. If antitrust legislation was to be effective, its supporters believed, it would have to come from the national government. In July 1890, both houses of Congress passed the Sherman Antitrust Act, almost without dissent. For over a Sherman Antitrust Act decade after its passage, the Sherman Act—indifferently enforced and steadily weakened by the courts—had no impact. As of 1901, the Justice Department had instituted many antitrust suits against unions, but only fourteen against business combinations. The Republicans were more interested in the issue they believed had won them the 1888 election: the tariff. Representative William McKinley of Ohio and Senator Nelson W. Aldrich of Rhode Island drafted the highest protective measure ever proposed to Congress. Known as the McKinley Tariff, it became law in October 1890. But Republican leaders McKinley Tariff apparently misinterpreted public sentiment. Many voters saw the high tariff as a way to enrich producers and starve consumers. The party suffered a stunning reversal in the 1890 congressional election. The Republicans’ substantial Senate majority was slashed to 8; in the House, the party retained only 86 of the 332 seats, losing its majority in that chamber. Nor were the Republicans able to recover over the next two years. In the presidential election of 1892, Benjamin Harrison once again supported protection; Grover Cleveland, renominated by the Democrats, once again opposed it. A new third party, the People’s Party, with James B. Weaver as its candidate, advocated substantial economic reform. Cleveland won 277 electoral votes to Harrison’s 145 and had a popular margin of 380,000. Weaver ran far behind. The policies of Cleveland’s second term were much like those of his first. Again, he supported a tariff reduction, which the House approved but the Senate weakened. Cleveland denounced the result but allowed it to become law as the Wilson-Gorman Tariff. Public pressure had been growing since the 1880s for other reforms, among them regulation of the railroads. Farm organizations in the Midwest (most notably the Grangers) had persuaded several state legislatures to pass regulatory legislation in the early 1870s. But in 1886, the Supreme Court—in Wabash, St. Louis, and Pacific Railway Co. v. Illinois, known as the Wabash case—ruled one of the Granger Laws in Illinois unconstitutional. According to the Court, the law was an attempt to control interstate commerce and thus infringed on the exclusive power of Congress. Later, the courts limited the powers of the states to regulate commerce even within their own boundaries. Effective railroad regulation, it was now clear, could come only from the federal government. Congress responded to public pressure in 1887 with the Interstate Commerce Act Interstate Commerce Act, which banned discrimination in rates between long and short hauls, required that railroads publish their rate schedules and file them with the government, and declared that all interstate rail rates must be “reasonable and just.” A fiveperson agency, the Interstate Commerce Commission (ICC) was to administer the act. But it had to rely on the courts to enforce its rulings. For almost twenty years after its passage, the Interstate Commerce Act—which was, like the Sherman Act, haphazardly enforced and narrowly interpreted by the courts—had little practical effect.

460 • CHAPTER 19


THE AGRARIAN REVOLT
 No group watched the performance of the federal government in the 1880s with greater dismay than American farmers. They helped produce the Populist upheaval—one of the most powerful movements of political protest in American history.

The Grangers
 Farmers had been making efforts to organize politically for several decades before the 1880s. The first major farm organization was the National Grange of the Patrons of Husbandry, founded in 1867. From it emerged a network of local organizations that tried to teach new scientific agricultural techniques to their members. When the depression of 1873 caused a sharp decline in farm prices, membership rapidly increased and the direction of the organization changed. Granges in the Midwest began to organize marketing cooperatives and to promote political action to curb monopolistic practices by railroads and warehouses. At their peak, Grange supporters controlled the legislatures in most of the midwestern states. The result was the Granger Laws of the early 1870s, by which many states imposed strict regulations on railroad rates and practices. But the destruction of the new regulations by the courts, combined with the political inexperience of many Grange leaders and the return of prosperity in the late 1870s, produced a dramatic decline in the power of the association.

The Farmers’ Alliances
 As early as 1875, farmers in parts of the South were banding together in so-called Farmers’ Alliances just as the Granges were weakening. By 1880, the Southern Alliance had more than 4 million members; a comparable Northwestern Alliance was taking root in the plains states and the Midwest, largely replacing the Grange. Like the Granges, the Alliances formed cooperatives and other marketing mechanisms. They established stores, banks, processing plants, and other facilities to free their members from dependence on the hated “furnishing merchants” who kept so many farmers in debt. Some Alliance leaders, however, saw the movement in larger terms: as an effort to build a society in which economic competition might give way to cooperation. Alliance lecturers traveled throughout rural areas, lambasting the concentrated power of great corporations and financial institutions. Although the Alliances quickly became far more widespread than the Granges had ever been, they suffered from similar problems. Their cooperatives did not always work well, partly because of mismanagement and partly because of the strength of opposing market forces. These economic frustrations helped push the movement into a new phase at the end of the 1880s: the creation of a national political organization. In 1889, the Southern and Northwestern Alliances agreed to a loose merger. The next year the Alliances held a national convention at Ocala, Florida, and issued the so-called Ocala Demands Ocala Demands, which were, in effect, a party platform. In the 1890 off-year elections, candidates supported by the Alliances won partial or complete control of the legislatures in twelve states. They also won six governorships, three seats in the U.S. Senate, and approximately fifty in the U.S. House of Representatives. Many of the successful Alliance candidates were Democrats who had benefited—often passively—from

FROM CRISIS TO EMPIRE
• 461 

 The fiery Populist orator Mary E. Lease was a fixture on the Alliance lecture circuit in the 1890s. She made some 160 speeches in 1890 alone. Her critics called her the “Kansas Pythoness,” but she was popular among farmers with her denunciations of banks, railroads, and “middlemen,” and her famous advice to “raise less corn and more hell.” (© Corbis) MARY E. LEASE

 Alliance endorsements. But dissident farmers drew enough encouragement from the results to contemplate further political action. Alliance leaders discussed plans for a third party at meetings in Cincinnati in May 1891 and St. Louis in February 1892. Then, in July 1892, 1,300 exultant delegates poured into Omaha, Nebraska, to proclaim the creation of the new party, approve an official set of principles, and nominate candidates for the presidency and vice People’s Party Established presidency. The new organization’s official name was the People’s Party, but the movement was more commonly referred to as Populism. The election of 1892 demonstrated the potential power of the new movement. The Populist presidential candidate—James B. Weaver of Iowa, a former Greenbacker—polled more than 1 million votes. Nearly 1,500 Populist candidates won election to seats in state legislatures. The party elected three governors, five senators, and ten congressmen. It could also claim the support of many Republicans and Democrats in Congress who had been elected by appealing to Populist sentiment.

462 • CHAPTER 19


The Populist Constituency
 Already, however, there were signs of the limits of Populist strength. Populism had great appeal to farmers, particularly to small farmers with little long-range economic security. But Populism failed to move much beyond that group. Its leaders made energetic efforts to include labor within the coalition by courting the Knights of Labor and adding a labor plank to its platform. But Populism never attracted significant labor support, in part because the economic interests of labor and the interests of farmers were often at odds. In the South, white Populists struggled with the question of whether to accept African Americans into the party. There was an important black component to the movement—a network of “Colored Alliances” that by 1890 numbered over 1.25 million members. But most white Populists accepted the assistance of African Americans only as long as it was clear that whites would remain indisputably in control. When southern conservatives began to attack the Populists for undermining white supremacy, the interracial character of the movement quickly faded.

Populist Ideas
 The Populists spelled out their program first in the Ocala Demands of 1890 and then, more clearly, in the Omaha platform of 1892. They proposed a system of “subtreasuries,” a network of government-owned warehouses where farmers could deposit their crops, to allow them to borrow money from the government at low rates of interest until the price The Populists’ Reform Program of their goods went up. In addition, the Populists called for the abolition of national banks (which they believed were dangerous institutions of concentrated power), the end of absentee ownership of land, the direct election of United States senators (which would weaken the power of conservative state legislatures), and other devices to improve the ability of the people to influence the political process. They called as well for regulation and (after 1892) government ownership of railroads, telephones, and telegraphs. And they demanded a system of government-operated postal savings banks, a graduated income tax, the inflation of the currency, and, later, the remonetization of silver. Some Populists were anti-Semitic, anti-intellectual, anti-eastern, and antiurban. But bigotry was not the dominant force behind Populism. It was, rather, a serious and usually responsible effort to find solutions to real problems. Populists emphatically rejected the laissez-faire orthodoxies of their time, including the idea that the rights of ownership are absolute, and in fact called on the federal government to promote a dramatic redistribution of wealth and power. In short, the Populists raised one of the most overt and powerful challenges of the era to the direction in which American industrial capitalism was moving.

THE CRISIS OF THE 1890s
The agrarian protest was only one of many indications of the national political crisis emerging in the 1890s. There was a severe depression, widespread labor unrest and violence, and the continuing failure of either major party to respond to the growing distress. Grover Cleveland, who took office for the second time just as the economy was collapsing, remained convinced that any government action would be a violation of principle. 
FROM CRISIS TO EMPIRE
• 463 

The Panic of 1893
 The Panic of 1893 launched the most severe depression the nation had ever experienced. It began in March 1893, when the Philadelphia and Reading Railroad, unable to meet payments on loans, declared bankruptcy. Two months later, the National Cordage Company failed as well. Together, these two corporate failures triggered a stock market collapse. And since many of the major New York banks were heavy investors in the market, a wave of bank failures soon began. That caused a contraction of credit, which meant that many of the new, aggressive, and loan-dependent businesses soon went bankrupt. The depression reflected, among other things, the degree to which all parts of the American economy were now interconnected. And it showed how dependent the economy was on the health of the railroads, which remained the nation’s most powerful corporate and financial institutions. When the railroads suffered, as they did beginning in 1893, everyone suffered. Once the panic began, it spread with startling speed. Within six months, more than 8,000 businesses, 156 railroads, and 400 banks failed. Already low agricultural prices tumbled further. Up to 1 million workers, 20 percent of the labor force, lost their jobs. The depression was unprecedented not only in its severity but also in its persistence. Although conditions improved slightly beginning in 1895, prosperity did not fully return until 1901. The depression produced widespread social unrest, especially among the enormous numbers of unemployed workers. In 1894, Jacob S. Coxey, an Ohio businessman and Populist, began advocating a massive public works program to create jobs for the unemployed.

 Jacob S. Coxey leads his “army” of unemployed men through the town of Allegheny, Pennsylvania, in 1894, en route to Washington, where he hoped to pressure Congress to approve his plans for a massive public works program to put people back to work. (© Photo by Fotosearch/Getty Images) COXEY’S ARMY

464 • CHAPTER 19


 When it became clear that Congress was ignoring his proposals, Coxey organized a march of the unemployed (known as “Coxey’s Army”) to Washington, D.C., to present his demands to the government. Congress continued to ignore them. To many middle-class Americans, the labor turmoil of the time—the Homestead and Pullman strikes, for example (see Chapter 17)—was a sign of a dangerous instability, even perhaps a revolution. Labor radicalism—some of it real, more of it imagined by the frightened middle class—heightened the general sense of crisis among the public.

 “Coxey’s Army”

The Silver Question
 The financial panic weakened the government’s monetary system. President Cleveland believed that the instability of the currency was the primary cause of the depression. The “money question,” therefore, became one of the burning issues of the era. The debate centered on what would form the basis of the dollar, what would lie behind it and give it value. Today, the value of the dollar rests on little more than public confidence in the government. But in the nineteenth century, many people believed that currency was worthless if there was not something concrete behind it—precious metal (specie), which holders of paper money could collect if they presented their currency to a bank or to the Treasury. During most of its existence as a nation, the United States had recognized two metals— gold and silver—as a basis for the dollar, a system known as “bimetallism.” In the 1870s, however, that had changed. The official ratio of the value of silver to the value of gold for purposes of creating currency (the “mint ratio”) was 16 to 1: sixteen ounces of silver equaled one ounce of gold. But the actual commercial value of silver (the “market ratio”) was much higher than that. Owners of silver could get more by selling it for manufacture into jewelry and other objects than they could by taking it to the mint for conversion into coins. So they stopped taking it to the mint, and the mint stopped coining silver. In 1873, Congress passed a law that seemed simply to recognize the existing situation by officially discontinuing silver coinage. Few objected at the time. But later in the 1870s, the market value of silver fell well below the official mint ratio of 16 to 1. Silver was suddenly available for coinage again, and it soon became clear that Congress had foreclosed a potential method of expanding the currency. Before long, many Americans concluded that a conspiracy of big bankers had been responsible for the “demonetization” of silver and referred to the law as the “Crime of ’73.” Two groups of Americans were especially determined to undo the Crime of ’73. One consisted of the silver-mine owners, now understandably eager to have the government take their surplus silver and pay them much more than the market price. The other group consisted of discontented farmers, who wanted an increase in the quantity of money—an inflation of the currency—as a means of raising the prices of farm products and easing payment of the farmers’ debts. The inflationists demanded that the government return at once to the “free and “Free Silver” Advocates unlimited coinage of silver” at the old ratio of 16 to 1. Congress responded weakly to these demands with the Sherman Silver Purchase Act of 1890, which required the government to purchase silver and pay for it in gold. But the government allowed only existing silver coinage. It did not allow any newly minted silver money. At the same time, the nation’s gold reserves were steadily dropping. President Cleveland believed that the chief cause of the weakening gold reserves was the Sherman Silver Purchase Act. Early in his second administration, therefore, Congress responded to his request and repealed the Sherman Act—although only after a bitter and divisive battle that helped create a split in the Democratic Party.

FROM CRISIS TO EMPIRE
• 465 

“A Cross of Gold”
 Republicans, watching the failure of the Democrats to deal effectively with the depression, were confident of success in 1896. Party leaders, led by the Ohio boss Marcus A. Hanna, settled on former congressman William McKinley, author of the 1890 McKinley Nominated tariff act and now governor of Ohio, as the party’s presidential candidate. The tariff, they believed, should be the key issue in the campaign. But they also opposed the free coinage of silver, except by agreement with the leading commercial nations (which everyone realized was unlikely). Thirty-four delegates from the mountain and plains states walked out of the convention in protest and joined the Democratic Party.

 The cartoonist Grant Hamilton created this image of William Jennings Bryan shortly after he made his famous “Cross of Gold” speech at the Democratic National Convention, which subsequently nominated him for president. The cartoon highlights two of the most powerful images in Bryan’s speech—a “crown of thorns” and a “cross of gold,” both biblical references and both designed to represent the oppression that the gold standard imposed on working people. (© Granger, NYC—All Rights Reserved.) BEARING THE CROSS OF GOLD

466 • CHAPTER 19


 The Democratic Convention of 1896 was unusually tumultuous. Southern and western delegates, eager for a way to compete with the Populists, were determined to seize control of the party from conservative easterners, incorporate some Populist demands—among them free silver—into the Democratic platform, and nominate a pro-silver candidate. Defenders of the gold standard seemed to dominate the debate, until William Jennings Bryan, a handsome, thirty-six-year-old congressman from Nebraska, mounted the podium to address the convention. His great voice echoed through the hall as he delivered what became one of the Bryan’s “Cross of Gold” Speech most famous political speeches in American history. The closing passage sent his audience into something close to a frenzy: “Having behind us the producing masses of this nation and the world, supported by the commercial interests, the laboring interests and the toilers everywhere, we will answer their demand for a gold standard by saying to them: ‘You shall not press down upon the brow of labor this crown of thorns; you shall not crucify mankind upon a cross of gold.’” It became known as the “Cross of Gold” speech. In the glow of Bryan’s speech, the convention voted to adopt a pro-silver platform. And the following day, Bryan (as he had eagerly and not entirely secretly hoped) was nominated for president on the fifth ballot. The choice of Bryan and the Democratic platform created a quandary for the Populists. They had expected both major parties to adopt conservative programs and nominate conservative candidates, leaving the Populists to represent the growing forces of protest. But now the Democrats had stolen much of their thunder. The Populists faced the choice of naming their own candidate and splitting the protest vote or endorsing Bryan and losing their identity as a party. Many Populists argued that “fusion” with the Democrats would destroy their party. But the majority concluded that there was no viable alternative. Amid considerable acrimony, the convention voted to nominate Bryan as the Populist candidate.

The Conservative Victory
 The campaign of 1896 produced panic among conservatives. The business and financial community, frightened beyond reason at the prospect of a Bryan victory, contributed lavishly to the Republican campaign. From his home in Canton, Ohio, McKinley conducted a traditional “front-porch” campaign by receiving pilgrimages of the Republican faithful, organized and paid for by Hanna. Bryan showed no such restraint. He became the first presidential candidate in American history to stump every section of the country systematically. He traveled 18,000 miles and addressed an estimated 5 million people. On election day, McKinley polled 271 electoral votes to Bryan’s 176 and received 51.1 percent of the popular vote to Bryan’s 47.7. Bryan carried the areas of the South and West where miners or struggling staple farmers predominated. The Democratic ­program, like that of the Populists, had been too narrow to win a national election. For the Populists and their allies, the election results were a disaster. They had gambled End of the People’s Party everything on their fusion with the Democratic Party and lost. Within months of the election, the People’s Party began to dissolve.

 McKinley and Recovery The administration of William McKinley saw a return to relative calm. One reason was the exhaustion of dissent. Another reason was the shrewd character of the McKinley administration itself, committed as it was to reassuring stability. Most important, however, was the gradual easing of the economic crisis, a development that undercut many of those who were agitating for change.

FROM CRISIS TO EMPIRE
• 467 





























24 15 23
















6 12














Candidate (Party)


Electoral Vote


Popular Vote (%)


 William McKinley (Republican)



7,104,779
(51.1)


William Jennings Bryan
(Democratic)




6,502,925
(47.7)


 79.3% of electorate voting THE ELECTION OF 1896 The results of the presidential election of 1896 are, as this map shows, striking for the regional differentiation they reveal. William McKinley won the election by a comfortable if not enormous margin, but his victory was not broad-based. He carried all the states of the Northeast and the industrial Midwest, along with California and Oregon, but virtually nothing else. Bryan carried the entire South and almost all of the agrarian West. • What campaign issues in 1896 helped account for the regional character of the results?

 McKinley and his allies committed themselves fully to only one issue: the need for higher tariff rates. Within weeks of his inauguration, the administration won approval of the Dingley Tariff, raising duties to the highest point in American history. The administration dealt more gingerly with the explosive silver question (an issue that McKinley himself had never considered very important). He sent a commission to Europe to explore the possibility of a silver agreement with Great Britain and France. As he and everyone else anticipated, the effort produced nothing. The Republicans then enacted the Currency, or Gold Standard Act Gold Standard, Act of 1900, which confirmed the nation’s commitment to the gold standard. And so the “battle of the standards” ended in victory for the forces of conservatism. Economic developments at the time seemed to vindicate the Republicans. Prosperity began to return in 1898. Foreign crop failures drove farm prices upward, and American business entered another cycle of expansion. Prosperity and the gold standard, it seemed, were closely allied. But while the free-silver movement had failed, it had raised an important question for the American economy. In the quarter century before 1900, the countries of the Western world had experienced a spectacular growth in productive facilities and population. Yet the supply of money had not kept pace with economic progress. Had it not been for a dramatic increase in the gold supply in the late 1890s (a result of new techniques for extracting gold from low-content ores and the discovery of huge new gold deposits in Alaska, South Africa, and Australia), Populist predictions of financial disaster might in fact have proved correct. In 1898, two and a half times as much gold was produced as in 1890, and the currency supply was soon inflated far beyond anything Bryan and the free-silver forces had anticipated.

468 • CHAPTER 19


 By then, however, Bryan—like many other Americans—was becoming engaged with another major issue: the nation’s growing involvement in world affairs and its increasing flirtation with imperialism.

STIRRINGS OF IMPERIALISM
 As the nineteenth century drew to a close, many Americans hoped to translate the era’s great industrial feats into global economic, political, and military power. The depression of 1893 further pushed observers to call for greater overseas trade to stimulate the economy. These expansionists—some called them “jingoes”—hoped to resume the course of Manifest Destiny.

The New Manifest Destiny
 In addition to their economic and political motivations, jingoes believed that domestic tensions in the country might be resolved by a more robust foreign policy and stronger American nationalistic spirit—or even by war. It had been a generation since the Civil War, and some jingoes felt the nation’s masculinity had withered in the meantime. Mass industrial wage labor, the same line of reasoning went, had turned American workers from independent producers into faceless cogs in a machine. Some critics of woman suffrage thought it threatened to feminize and weaken the traditional male preserve of politics. Waves of immigration and wars of labor had divided the country. A more stout assertion of power abroad, jingoes hoped, might restore American vitality and unity. Expansionists were also driven by competitive impulses. Americans were well aware of the imperialist fever that was raging through Europe, leading the major powers to partition much of Africa among themselves and to turn eager eyes on the Far East and the Chinese Empire. (See “America in the World: Imperialism.”) Some Americans feared that their nation would soon be left out of all these potential markets. Scholars and others found a philosophic justification for expansionism in Charles Darwin’s theories. They contended that nations or “races,” like biological species, struggled constantly for existence and that only the fittest could survive. For strong nations to dominate weak ones was, therefore, in accordance with the laws of nature. The most effective apostle of imperialism was Alfred Thayer Mahan, a captain and, later, admiral in the United States Navy. Mahan’s thesis, presented in The Influence of Sea Power upon History (1890) and other works, was simple: counSea Power and Colonies tries with sea power were the great nations of history. Effective sea power required, among other things, colonies. Mahan believed that the United States should, at the least, acquire defensive bases in the Caribbean and the Pacific and take possession of Hawaii and other Pacific islands. He feared that the United States did not have a large enough navy to play the great role he envisioned. But during the 1870s and 1880s, the government launched a shipbuilding program that by 1898 had moved the United States to fifth place among the world’s naval powers, and by 1900 to third place.

Hawaii and Samoa
 The islands of Hawaii in the mid-Pacific had been an important way station for American ships in the China trade since the early nineteenth century. By the 1880s, officers of the expanding United States Navy were looking covetously at Pearl Harbor on the island of

FROM CRISIS TO EMPIRE
• 469 

 Oahu as a possible permanent base for U.S. ships. The growing number of Americans who had taken up residence on the islands also pressed for an increased American presence in Hawaii. Settled by Polynesian people beginning in about 1500 b.c., Hawaii had developed an agricultural and fishing society in which different islands (and different communities on the same islands), each with its own chieftain, lived more or less self-sufficiently. When the first Americans arrived in Hawaii in the 1790s on merchant ships from New England, there were perhaps half a million people living there. Battles among rival communities were frequent, as ambitious chieftains tried to consolidate power over their neighbors. First Sugar Plantation In 1810, after a series of such battles, King Kamehameha I established his dominance, ­welcomed American traders, and helped them develop a thriving trade between Hawaii and China. But Americans soon wanted more than trade. Missionaries began settling there in the early nineteenth century; and in the 1830s, William Hooper, a Boston trader, became the first of many Americans to buy land and establish a sugar plantation on the islands. The arrival of these merchants, missionaries, and planters was devastating to traditional Hawaiian society. The newcomers inadvertently brought infectious diseases to which the Hawaiians, like the American Indians before them, were tragically vulnerable. By the mid-nineteenth century, more than half the native population had died. The Americans brought other incursions as well. Missionaries worked to replace native religion with Christianity. Other white settlers introduced liquor, firearms, and a commercial economy, all of which eroded the traditional character of Hawaiian society. By the 1840s, American planters had spread throughout the islands; and an American settler, G. P. Judd, had become prime minister of Hawaii under King Kamehameha III, who had agreed to establish a constitutional monarchy. Judd governed Hawaii for over a decade. In 1887, the United States negotiated a treaty with Hawaii that permitted it to open a naval base at Pearl Harbor. By then, growing sugar for export to America had become the basis of the Hawaiian economy—as a result of an 1875 agreement allowing Hawaiian sugar to enter the United States duty-free. The American-dominated sugar plantation system displaced native Hawaiians from their lands and relied heavily on Asian immigrants, whom the Americans considered more reliable and more docile than the natives. Native Hawaiians did not accept their subordination without protest. In 1891, they elevated a powerful nationalist to the throne: Queen Liliuokalani, who Queen Liliuokalani set out to challenge the growing American control of the islands. But she remained in power only two years. In 1890, the United States had eliminated the exemption from American tariffs in Hawaiian sugar trade. The result was devastating to the economy of the islands, and American planters concluded that the only way for them to recover was to become part of the United States (and, hence, exempt from its tariffs). In 1893, they staged a revolution and called on the United States for protection. After the American minister ordered marines from a warship in Honolulu harbor to go ashore to aid the American rebels, the queen yielded her authority. A provisional government, dominated by Americans, immediately sent a delegation to Washington to negotiate a treaty of annexation. Debate over the treaty Hawaii Annexed continued until 1898, when Congress finally approved the agreement. Three thousand miles south of Hawaii, the Samoan islands had also long served as a way station for American ships in the Pacific trade. As American commerce with Asia increased, business groups in the United States regarded Samoa with new interest, and the American navy began eyeing the Samoan harbor at Pago Pago. In 1878, the Hayes administration extracted a treaty from Samoan leaders for an American naval station at Pago Pago.

AMERICA IN THE WORLD


Imperialism
 Empires were not, of course, new to the nineteenth century, when the United States acquired its first overseas colonies. They had existed since the early moments of recorded history, and they have continued into our own time. But in the second half of the nineteenth century, the construction of empires took on a new form, and the word imperialism emerged for the first time to describe it. In many places, European powers now created colonies not by sending large numbers of ­migrants to settle and populate new lands, but instead by creating military, political, and business structures that allowed them to dominate and profit from the existing populations. This new imperialism changed the character of the colonizing nations, ­ enriching them greatly and producing new classes of people whose lives were shaped by the demands of imperial business and ­administration. It changed the character of colonized societies even more, drawing them into the vast nexus of global industrial capitalism and introducing Western customs, institutions, and technologies to the subject peoples. As the popularity of empire grew in the West, efforts to justify it grew as well. Champions of imperialism argued that the acquisition of colonies was essential for the health, even the survival, of their own industrializing nations. Colonies were sources of raw materials vital to industrial production; they were markets for manufactured goods; and they were suppliers of cheap labor. Defenders of empire also argued that imperialism was good for the colonized people. Many saw colonization as an opportunity to export Christianity to “heathen” lands, and new missionary movements emerged in Europe and America in response. More ­secular apologists argued that imperialism 470 •

 helped bring colonized people into the ­modern world. The invention of steamships, railroads, telegraphs, and other modern vehicles of transportation and communication; the ­construction of canals (particularly the Suez Canal, completed in 1869, and the Panama Canal, completed in 1914); the creation of new military technologies (repeating rifles, machine guns, and modern artillery)—all contributed to the ability of Western ­nations to reach, conquer, and control distant lands. The greatest imperial power of the nineteenth century was Great Britain. By 1800, despite its recent loss of the colonies that ­became the United States, it ­already possessed vast territory in North America, the Caribbean, and the Pacific. In the second half of the nineteenth century, Britain greatly ­expanded its empire. Its most important acquisition was India, one of the largest and most populous countries in the world and a nation in which Great Britain had long exerted informal authority. In 1857, when native Indians revolted against British influence, British ­ forces brutally crushed the rebellion and ­established formal colonial control over India. British officials, backed by substantial military power, now governed India through a large civil service staffed mostly by people from England and Scotland but with some Indians serving in minor positions. The British invested heavily in railroads, telegraphs, canals, harbors, and agricultural improvements, to enhance the economic opportunities available to them. They created schools for Indian children in an effort to draw them into British culture and make them supporters of the imperial system. The British also extended their empire into Africa and other parts of Asia. The great imperial champion Cecil Rhodes ­expanded a small existing British colony at

SIEGE OF DELHI
The Indian Mutiny, which lasted from 1857 to 1859, was a major uprising against the rule of the British East India Company, with Indians fighting on both sides. The uprising ended over a century of indirect rule by the Company and resulted in the British Crown taking direct control over India. Administration of the British Empire in India became known as the “raj,” from the Indian word for “rule.” (©Ingram Publishing) 
 Capetown into a substantial colony that included much of what is now South Africa. In 1895, he added new British territories to the north, which he named Rhodesia (and which today are Zimbabwe and Zambia). Others spread British authority into Kenya, Uganda, Nigeria, and much of Egypt. British imperialists also extended the empire into East Asia, with the acquisition of Singapore, Hong Kong, Burma, and Malaya; and they built a substantial presence—although not formal colonial rule—in China. Other European states, watching the vast expansion of the British Empire, quickly jumped into the race for colonies. France created colonies in Indochina (Vietnam and Laos), Algeria, west Africa, and Madagascar. Belgium moved into the Congo in west Africa. Germany established colonies in the Cameroons, Tanganyika, and other parts of Africa, and in the Pacific islands north of Australia. Dutch, Italian, Portuguese, Spanish, Russian, and Japanese imperialists created colonies as well in Africa, Asia, and the Pacific—driven both by a calculation of

 their own commercial interests and by the frenzied competition that had developed among rival imperial powers. In 1898, the United States was drawn into the imperial race, in part inadvertently as an unanticipated result of the Spanish-American War. But the drive to acquire colonies resulted as well from the deliberate efforts of home-grown proponents of empire (among them Theodore Roosevelt), who believed that in the modern industrial-imperial world, a nation without colonies would have difficulty remaining, or becoming, a true great power.

•


UNDERSTAND, ANALYZE, & EVALUATE
 1. What motivated the European nations’

 drive for empire in the late nineteenth century? 2. Why was Great Britain so successful in acquiring its vast empire? 3. How do the imperial efforts and ambitions of the United States at the end of the nineteenth century compare with those of European powers? • 471

472 • CHAPTER 19


 Great Britain and Germany were also interested in the islands, and they, too, secured treaty rights from the native princes. For the next ten years, the three powers jockeyed for Samoa Divided dominance in Samoa, finally agreeing to create a tripartite protectorate over Samoa, with the native chiefs exercising only nominal authority. The three-way arrangement failed to halt the rivalries of its members, and in 1899, the United States and Germany divided the islands between them, compensating Britain with territories elsewhere in the Pacific. The United States retained the harbor at Pago Pago.

WAR WITH SPAIN
 Imperial ambitions had thus begun to stir within the United States well before the late 1890s. But a war with Spain in 1898 turned those stirrings into overt expansionism.

 Controversy over Cuba Spain’s once-formidable empire had grown rickety, but still included two prized island possessions: Cuba, ninety miles off the shores of Florida, and the Philippines, in Asia. As in many imperial holdings, the native peoples in these regions objected to the presence of European colonizers and occasionally waged insurrections. One rebellion in Cuba had ended in 1878 with Spanish rule intact. Nominal Cuban control over the economy followed, but the depression of the 1890s led Spain to withdraw even that privilege. In 1895 Cuban Revolt Cuban revolutionaries mounted a new insurrection, led by the revolutionary poet José Martí and military heroes of the earlier wars of liberation. The rebellion soon attracted the sympathies of people in the United States. Popular newspapers reported horrific atrocities committed by the Spanish against Cuban rebels and civilians. The Spanish governor since 1896, General Valeriano Weyler, was rounding up Cubans in detention camps to isolate rebels in the countryside, and then destroying agriculture to starve them out. These policies of “the Butcher” led to the deaths of tens of thousands of Cuban civilians. The conflict also imperiled the American-owned sugar plantations in Cuba and regional commerce more broadly. And ever since the articulation of the Monroe Doctrine in 1823, Americans had dreamed of ridding North and South America of European colonizers. Some hoped to replace the Spanish with a heavy American presence in the region, while others, including William Jennings Bryan and other prominent Democrats and members of Congress, wished only to liberate Cuba and leave it to the Cubans. The conflict in Cuba came at a particularly opportune moment for the publishers of some American newspapers: Joseph Pulitzer with his New York World and William Randolph Hearst with his New York Journal. In the 1890s, Hearst and Pulitzer were engaged in a ruthless circulation war, and they both sent batteries of reporters and illustrators to Cuba with orders to provide accounts of Spanish atrocities. This sort of sensationalist reporting was known as yellow journalism. (See “Patterns of Popular Culture: Yellow Journalism.”) Although President Cleveland worried about the potential disruptions of American trade, he did not intervene. Nor, at first, did his successor, William McKinley. Both men shared the commercial and humanitarian concerns, but sought to avoid war with a European power. An irritated Theodore Roosevelt, the assistant secretary of the navy, excoriated President McKinley for his un-masculine weakness, charging that he had “no more backbone than a chocolate éclair.”

FROM CRISIS TO EMPIRE
• 473 

 The situation changed in early 1898. In January pro-Spanish Cubans rioted in Havana against the idea of a free Cuba, or Cuba libre, which the two American political parties had at least rhetorically supported even as successive U.S. administrations remained neutral. Thus the riots carried anti-American undertones, and President McKinley, under pressure from the popular media after unfulfilled promises from Spain, sent the U.S.S. Maine to Havana harbor to protect American citizens. On February 15, 1898, The Maine the ship exploded, killing 266 Americans. Although later investigations revealed it likely an accident, most Americans, egged on by the jingoistic press, blamed the Spanish. For all the earlier arguments about humanity, commerce, and geopolitical strategy, the destruction of the Maine challenged American honor. A Democrat in the House voted for war “to defend the honor and maintain the dignity of this republic”; a Republican sought “peace with honor.” On April 25, Congress passed a resolution calling for war against the Spanish. It included the Teller Amendment, named for Democratic senator Teller Amendment Henry T. Teller from Colorado, which swore off any intentions to occupy, possess, or control Cuba after a future victory against the Spanish.

“A Splendid Little War”
 The American ambassador to England, John Hay, called the ensuing Spanish-American conflict “a splendid little war,” an opinion that most Americans—with the exception of many of the enlisted men who fought in it—seemed to share. Declared in April, it was over in August, in part because Cuban rebels had already greatly weakened the Spanish resistance, making the American intervention in many respects little more than a ­“mopping-up” exercise. Only 460 Americans were killed in battle or died of wounds, although some 5,200 others perished of disease: malaria, dysentery, and typhoid, among others. Casualties among Cuban insurgents, who continued to bear the brunt of the fighting, were much higher. The American war effort was not without difficulties. United States soldiers faced serious supply problems: a shortage of modern rifles and ammunition, uniforms too heavy for the warm Caribbean weather, inadequate medical services, and skimpy, almost indigestible food. The regular army numbered only 28,000 troops and officers, most of whom had experience in quelling Indian outbreaks but none in larger-scale warfare. That meant that, as in the Civil War, the United States had to rely heavily on National Guard units, organized by local communities and commanded for the most part by local leaders ­without military experience. A significant proportion of the American invasion force consisted of black soldiers. Some were volunteer troops put together by African American communities. Others were members of the four black regiments in the regular army, who had been stationed on the frontier to defend white settlements against Indians and were now transferred east to fight in Cuba. As the black soldiers traveled through the South toward the training camps, some resisted the rigid segregation to which they were subjected. African American soldiers in Georgia deliberately made use of a “whites only” park; in Florida, they beat a soda-fountain operator for refusing to Racial Tensions in the Military serve them; in Tampa, white provocations and black retaliation led to a nightlong riot that left thirty wounded. Racial tensions continued in Cuba. African Americans played crucial roles in some of the important battles of the war (including the famous charge at San Juan Hill) and won many medals. Nearly half the Cuban insurgents fighting with the Americans were themselves black,

PATTERNS OF POPULAR CULTURE


Yellow Journalism
 Joseph Pulitzer was a successful newspaper publisher in St. Louis, Missouri, when he traveled to New York City in 1883 to buy a struggling paper, the New York World. “There is room in this great and growing city,” he wrote in one of his first editorials, “for a journal that is not only cheap, but bright, not only bright but large, not only large but truly democratic . . . that will serve and battle for the people with earnest sincerity.” Within a year, the World’s daily circulation had soared from 10,000 to over 60,000. By 1886, it had reached 250,000 and was making enormous profits. The success of Pulitzer’s World marked the birth of what came to be known as “yellow journalism,” a phrase that reportedly derived from a character in one of the World ’s comic strips: “the Yellow Kid.” Color printing in newspapers was relatively new, and yellow was the most difficult color to print; so in the ­beginning, the term yellow journalism was a comment on the new technological possibilities that Pulitzer was so eagerly embracing. Eventually, however, it came to refer to a sensationalist style of reporting and writing that spread quickly through ­urban America and changed the character of newspapers forever. Sensationalism was not new to journalism in the late nineteenth century, of course. Political scandal sheets had been publishing lurid stories since before the American Revolution. But the yellow journalism of the 1880s and 1890s took the search for a mass audience to new levels. The World created one of the first Sunday editions, with lavishly colored special sections, comics, and illustrated features. It expanded coverage of sports, fashion, 474 •

 l­iterature, and theater. It pioneered large, glaring, overheated headlines that captured the eyes of people who were passing newsstands. It published exposés of political corruption. It made considerable efforts to bring drama and energy to its coverage of crime. It tried to involve readers directly in its stories (as when a World campaign helped raise $300,000 to build a base for the Statue of Liberty, with much of the money coming in donations of five or ten cents from working-class readers). And it introduced a self-­consciously populist style of writing that appealed to working-class readers. “The American people want something terse, forcible, picturesque, striking,” Pulitzer said. His reporters wrote short, forceful sentences. They did not shy away from expressing sympathy or outrage. And they were not always constrained by the truth. Pulitzer very quickly produced imitators, the most important of them the California publisher William Randolph Hearst, who in 1895 bought the New York Journal, cut its price to one cent (Pulitzer quickly followed suit), copied many of the World’s techniques, and within a year raised its circulation to 400,000. Hearst soon made the Journal the largest-circulation paper in the country— selling more than a million copies a day. Pulitzer, whose own circulation was not far behind, accused him of “pandering to the worst tastes of the prurient and the horrorloving” and “dealing in bogus news.” But the World wasted no time before imitating the Journal. The competition between these two great “yellow” journals soon drove both to new levels of sensationalism. Their success drove newspapers in other cities around the nation to copy their techniques.

 The civil war in Cuba in the 1890s gave both papers their best opportunities yet for combining sensational reporting with shameless appeals to patriotism and moral outrage. They avidly published ­exaggerated reports of Spanish atrocities toward the Cuban rebels, fanning popular anger toward Spain. When the American battleship Maine mysteriously exploded in Havana harbor in 1898, both papers (without any evidence) immediately blamed Spanish authorities. The Journal offered a $50,000 reward for information leading to the conviction of those responsible for the explosion, and it crowded all other stories off its front page (“There is no other news,” Hearst told his editors) to make room for such screaming headlines as THE WHOLE COUNTRY THRILLS WITH WAR FEVER and HAVANA POPULACE INSULTS THE MEMORY OF THE MAINE VICTIMS. In the three days following the Maine explosion, the Journal sold more than 3 million copies, a new world’s ­record for newspaper circulation. In the aftermath of the Maine episode, the more conservative press launched a spirited attack on yellow journalism. That was partly in response to Hearst’s boast

 that the conflict in Cuba was “the Journal’s war.” He sent a cable to one of his reporters in Cuba saying: “You furnish the pictures, and I’ll furnish the war.” Growing numbers of critics tried to discourage yellow journalism, which “respectable” editors both ­deplored and feared. Some schools, libraries, and clubs began to banish the papers from their premises. But the techniques the “yellow” press pioneered in the 1890s helped map the way for a tradition of colorful, popular journalism—later embodied in “tabloids,” some elements of which eventually found their way into television news—that has ­endured into the present day.

•


UNDERSTAND, ANALYZE, & EVALUATE
 1. Did Pulitzer’s World, Hearst’s Journal,

 and their imitators report the news or manufacture it? 2. How did the “yellow” press influence the public’s perception of the SpanishAmerican War? 3. How does television news continue the tradition of “yellow” journalism? In what other mass media do you see the style and techniques pioneered by the ­“yellow” press?

AFRICAN AMERICAN CAVALRY
Substantial numbers of African Americans fought in the United States Army during the Spanish-American War. Although confined to all-black units, they engaged in combat alongside white units and fought bravely and effectively. This photograph shows a troop of African American cavalry in formation in Cuba. It is meant to be viewed through a stereoscope, which would create a single three-dimensional image. (© Corbis) 
• 475


476 • CHAPTER 19


 including one of the leading insurgent generals, Antonio Maceo. The sight of black Cuban soldiers fighting alongside whites as equals gave African Americans a stronger sense of the injustice of their own position.

Seizing the Philippines
 By an accident of history, the assistant secretary of the navy during the Cuban revolution was Theodore Roosevelt, an ardent Anglophile eager to see the United States join the British and other nations as imperial powers. Roosevelt was, in fact, a relatively minor figure in the Navy Department, but he was determined to expand his power. British friends had persuaded him that the war in Cuba gave the United States a rare opportunity to expand the American empire. Roosevelt responded by sending the Navy’s Pacific fleet to the Philippines, with orders to attack as soon as America declared war. On May 1, 1898, Commodore George Dewey led the fleet into Manila harbor, quickly destroyed the aging Spanish fleet, and forced the Spanish government to surrender Manila with hardly a shot fired. He became the first American hero of the war.

The Battle for Cuba
 Cuba remained the principal focus of American military efforts. At first, the American commanders planned a long period of training before actually sending troops into combat. But when a Spanish fleet under Admiral Pascual Cervera slipped past the American navy into Santiago harbor on the southern coast of Cuba, plans changed quickly. The American Atlantic fleet quickly bottled Cervera up in the harbor. And the U.S. Army’s commanding general, Nelson A. Miles, hastily altered his strategy and left Tampa in June with a force of 17,000 to attack Santiago. General William R. Shafter, the American commander, moved toward Santiago, which he planned to surround and capture. On the way he met and defeated Spanish forces at Las Guasimos and, a week later, in two simultaneous battles, El Caney and San Juan Hill. At the center of the fighting (and on the front pages of the newspapers) during many of The Rough Riders these engagements was a cavalry unit known as the Rough Riders. Nominally commanded by General Leonard Wood, its real leader was Colonel Theodore Roosevelt, who had resigned from the Navy Department to get into the war and who had struggled with an almost desperate fury to get his regiment into the fighting. His passion to join the war undoubtedly reflected the decision of his beloved father, Theodore Roosevelt Sr., not to fight in the Civil War, a source of private shame within the family that his son sought to erase. Roosevelt rapidly emerged as a hero of the conflict. His fame rested in large part on his role in leading a bold, if perhaps reckless, charge up Kettle Hill (a minor part of the larger battle for the adjacent San Juan Hill) directly into the face of Spanish guns. Roosevelt himself emerged unscathed, but nearly a hundred of his soldiers were killed or wounded. He remembered the battle as “the great day of my life.” Although Shafter was now in position to assault Santiago, his army was so weakened by sickness that he feared he might have to abandon his position. But unknown to the Americans, the Spanish government had by now decided that Santiago was lost and had ordered Cervera to evacuate. On July 3, Cervera tried to escape the harbor. The waiting American squadron destroyed his entire fleet. On July 16, the commander of Spanish ground forces in Santiago surrendered. At about the same time, an American army landed

FROM CRISIS TO EMPIRE
• 477 

VA.




Norfolk
TENN.


400 mi




NORTH
CAROLINA


800 km


SOUTH
CAROLINA


 Spanish forces

GEORGIA


 U.S. forces U.S. blockade

FLORIDA


Tampa


Ba
 a lo its rid of a

Havana


 r.

(B


 r St F

AT L A N T I C
OCEAN


 as

U.S.S.
Maine sunk February 1898 
 m

Key
West


 ha

SHAFTER


Gulf of
Mexico


 U.S. victories

S AMP


SON


)


BL O


CK


AD
E
Santiago
 (see detail map) SCH LEY BLOC KAD E

CUBA


CE


ER
A


C a r i b b e a n




Hispaniola


RV


Jamaica
(Br.)


San
Juan


HAITI DOMINICAN
REPUBLIC


Puerto Rico
 (ceded to U.S.)

S e a


2 mi






4 km


El Caney
July 1, 1898


Santiago
Kettle Hill
July 1, 1898




5 mi


Las Guasimos
June 24, 1898


Blockhouse


10 km


San Juan Hill
July 1, 1898


THE SPANISH-AMERICAN WAR IN CUBA, 1898
The military conflict between the United States and Spain in Cuba was a brief affair. The Cuban rebels and an American naval blockade had already brought the Spanish to the brink of defeat. The arrival of American troops was simply the final blow. In the space of about a week, U.S. troops won four decisive battles in the area around Santiago in southeast Cuba—one of them (the Battle of Kettle Hill) the scene of Theodore Roosevelt’s famous charge up the adjacent San Juan Hill. This map shows the extent of the American naval blockade, the path of American troops from Florida to Cuba, and the location of the actual fighting. • What were the implications of the war in Cuba for Puerto Rico? 
478 • CHAPTER 19


 in Puerto Rico and occupied it against virtually no opposition. On August 12, an armistice ended the war. Under the terms of the armistice, Spain recognized the independence of Puerto Rico Occupied Cuba, ceded Puerto Rico and the Pacific island of Guam to the United States, and accepted continued American occupation of Manila pending the final disposition of the Philippines.

Puerto Rico and the United States
 The island of Puerto Rico had been a part of the Spanish Empire since 1508. By the early seventeenth century, the native people of the island, the Arawaks, had largely disappeared as a result of infectious diseases, Spanish brutality, and poverty. Puerto Rican society developed, therefore, with a Spanish ruling class and a large African workforce for the coffee and sugar plantations that came to dominate its economy. Puerto Rican resistance to Spanish rule began to emerge in the nineteenth century. The resistance prompted some reforms: the abolition of slavery in 1873, representation in the Spanish parliament, and other changes. Demands for independence continued to grow, and in 1898, Spain granted the island a degree of independence. But before the changes had any chance to take effect, control of Puerto Rico shifted to the United States. American military forces occupied the island during the Spanish-American War, and they remained Foraker Act in control until 1900, when the Foraker Act ended military rule and established a formal colonial government. Agitation for independence continued, and in 1917, Congress passed the Jones Act, which declared Puerto Rico to be United States territory and made all Puerto Ricans American citizens. The Puerto Rican sugar industry flourished as it took advantage of the American market that was now open to it without tariffs. As in Hawaii, Americans from the mainland began establishing large sugar plantations on the island and hired natives to work them. The growing emphasis on sugar as a cash crop, and the transformation of many Puerto Rican farmers into paid laborers, led to a reduction in the growing of food for the island and greater reliance on imported goods. When international sugar prices were high, Puerto Rico did well. When they dropped, the island’s economy sagged, pushing the many plantation workers—already poor—into destitution.

 The Debate over the Philippines Although the annexation of Puerto Rico produced relatively little controversy, the annexation of the Philippines created an impassioned debate. Controlling a nearby Caribbean island fit reasonably comfortably into the United States’ sense of itself as the dominant power in the Western Hemisphere. But to many Americans, controlling a large and densely populated territory thousands of miles away seemed very different and more ominous. McKinley claimed to be reluctant to support annexation. But, according to his own accounts, he came to believe there were no acceptable alternatives. Returning the The Philippines Question Philippines to Spain would be “cowardly and dishonorable,” he claimed. Turning them over to another imperialist power (France, Germany, or Britain) would be “bad business and discreditable.” Granting them independence would be irresponsible because the Filipinos were “unfit for self government.” The only solution was “to take them all and to educate the Filipinos, and uplift and Christianize them, and by God’s grace do the very best we could by them.”

FROM CRISIS TO EMPIRE
• 479 

 In this Puck cartoon, President McKinley is favorably depicted as a tailor, meaning his client for a suit is large enough to accommodate the new possessions the United States obtained in the aftermath of the Spanish-American War. The stripes on Uncle Sam’s pants bear the names of earlier, less controversial acquisitions, such as the Louisiana Purchase. (The Library of Congress) MEASURING UNCLE SAM FOR A NEW SUIT

 The Treaty of Paris, signed in December 1898, confirmed the terms of the armistice and brought a formal end to the war. American negotiators had startled the Spanish by demanding that they also cede the Philippines to the United States, but an American offer of $20 million for the islands softened their resistance. They accepted all the American terms. In the United States Senate, however, resistance was fierce. During debate over ratification of the treaty, a powerful anti-imperialist movement arose to oppose acquisition of the Philippines. The anti-imperialists included some of the Anti-Imperialist League nation’s wealthiest and most powerful figures: Andrew Carnegie, Mark Twain, Samuel Gompers, Senator John Sherman, and others. Some anti-imperialists believed that imperialism was immoral, a repudiation of America’s commitment to human freedom. Others feared “polluting” the American population by introducing “inferior” Asian races into it. Industrial workers feared being undercut by a flood of cheap laborers from the new colonies. Conservatives worried about the large standing army and entangling foreign alliances that they believed imperialism would require and that they feared would threaten American liberties. Sugar growers and other anti-imperialists feared unwelcome competition from the new territories. The Anti-Imperialist League, established late in 1898 by upper-class Bostonians, New Yorkers, and others to fight against annexation, waged a vigorous campaign against ratification of the Paris treaty (See “Consider the Source: Platform of the Anti-Imperialist League.”). But favoring ratification was an equally varied group. There were the exuberant imperialists such as Theodore Roosevelt, who saw the acquisition of empire as a way to reinvigorate the nation. Some businessmen saw opportunities to dominate the Asian trade. Most Republicans saw partisan advantages in acquiring valuable new territories through a war fought and won by a Republican administration. Perhaps the Arguments for Annexation strongest argument in favor of annexation, however, was that the United States already possessed the islands.

CO NS IDER T HE S O URC E
PLATFORM OF THE AMERICAN ANTI-IMPERIALIST
LEAGUE, 1899
 As part of their campaign against the annexation of the Philippines by the United States, members of the Anti-Imperialist League circulated this party platform. Here they argue that American political ideals are not compatible with imperialist actions. We hold that the policy known as imperialism is hostile to liberty and tends toward militarism, an evil from which it has been our glory to be free. We regret that it has become ­necessary in the land of Washington and Lincoln to reaffirm that all men, of whatever race or color, are entitled to life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness. We maintain that governments derive their just powers from the consent of the governed. We insist that the subjugation of any people is “criminal a­ggression” and open disloyalty to the ­distinctive principles of our Government. We earnestly condemn the policy of the present National Administration in the Philippines. It seeks to extinguish the spirit of 1776 in those islands. We deplore the sacrifice of our soldiers and sailors, whose bravery deserves admiration even in an ­unjust war. We denounce the slaughter of the Filipinos as a needless horror. We protest against the extension of American ­sovereignty by Spanish methods. We demand the immediate cessation of the war against liberty, begun by Spain and continued by us. We urge that Congress be promptly convened to announce to the Filipinos our purpose to concede to them the independence for which they have so long fought and which of right is theirs. The United States have always protested against the doctrine of international law which permits the subjugation of the weak by the strong. A self-governing state cannot 480 •

 accept sovereignty over an unwilling people. The United States cannot act upon the ­ancient heresy that might makes right. Imperialists assume that with the destruction of self-government in the Philippines by American hands, all opposition here will cease. This is a grievous error. Much as we ­abhor the war of “criminal aggression” in the Philippines, greatly as we regret that the blood of the Filipinos is on American hands, we more deeply resent the betrayal of American institutions at home. The real firing line is not in the suburbs of Manila. The foe is of our own household. The attempt of 1861 was to divide the country. That of 1899 is to destroy its ­fundamental principles and ­noblest ideals. Whether the ruthless slaughter of the Filipinos shall end next month or next year is but an incident in a contest that must go on until the Declaration of Independence and the Constitution of the United States are rescued from the hands of their betrayers. Those who dispute about standards of value while the Republic is undermined will be listened to as little as those who would wrangle about the small economies of the household while the house is on fire. The training of a great people for a century, the aspiration for liberty of a vast immigration are forces that will hurl aside those who in the delirium of conquest seek to ­destroy the character of our institutions. We deny that the obligation of all citizens to support their Government in times of grave national peril applies to the present situation. If an Administration may with impunity ignore the issues upon which it was chosen, deliberately create a condition of war anywhere on the face of the globe, d ­ ebauch the civil service for spoils to promote the adventure, organize a truth-suppressing censorship and demand of all citizens a suspension of judgment and their unanimous support while it chooses to

 continue the fighting, representative government itself is imperiled. We propose to contribute to the defeat of any person or party that stands for the forcible subjugation of any people. We shall ­oppose for reelection all who in the White House or in Congress betray American liberty in pursuit of un-American gains. We still hope that both of our great political parties will support and defend the Declaration of Independence in the closing campaign of the century.

UNDERSTAND, ANALYZE, & EVALUATE
 1. On what grounds did the Anti-Imperialist

 League oppose U.S. expansion, and where were these principles ratified? 2. What were the costs of imperial­ ­expansion for the United States and what losses were Filipinos to incur? 3. How did the prospect of an American empire affect the nation’s democratic principles?

 Source: “Platform of the American Anti-lmperialist League,” in Speeches, Correspondence, ard Political Papers of Carl Schurz, vol. 6, ed. Frederick Bancroft (New York: G.P. Putnam’s Sons, 1913), p. 77, note 1.

 When anti-imperialists warned of the danger of acquiring heavily populated territories whose people might have to become citizens, the jingoes had a ready answer: the nation’s long-standing policies toward Indians—treating them as dependents rather than as citizens— had created a precedent for annexing land without absorbing people. The fate of the treaty remained in doubt for weeks, until it received the unexpected support of William Jennings Bryan, a fervent anti-imperialist. He backed ratification because he hoped to move the issue out of the Senate and make it the subject of a national referendum in 1900, when he expected to be the Democratic presidential candidate again. Bryan persuaded a number of anti-imperialist Democrats to support the treaty so as to set up the 1900 debate. The Senate ratified it finally on February 6, 1899. But Bryan miscalculated. If the election of 1900 was in fact a referendum on the Philippines, as Bryan expected, it proved beyond a doubt that the nation Election of 1900 had decided in favor of imperialism. Once again Bryan ran against McKinley; and once again McKinley won—even more decisively than in 1896. It was not only the issue of the colonies, however, that ensured McKinley’s victory. The Republicans benefited from growing prosperity—and also from the colorful personality of their vice presidential ­candidate, Theodore Roosevelt, the hero of San Juan Hill.

THE REPUBLIC AS EMPIRE
 The new American empire was small by the standards of the great imperial powers of Europe. But it embroiled the United States in the politics of both Europe and the Far East in ways the nation had always tried to avoid in the past. It also drew Americans into a brutal war in the Philippines.

Governing the Colonies
 Three American dependencies—Hawaii, Alaska, and Puerto Rico—presented relatively few problems. They received territorial status (and their residents American citizenship) relatively quickly: Hawaii in 1900, Alaska in 1912, and Puerto Rico in 1917. The navy took control of the Pacific islands of Guam and Tutuila. The United States simply left • 481

482 • CHAPTER 19


 alone some of the smallest, least populated Pacific islands now under its control. Cuba was a thornier problem. American military forces, commanded by General Leonard Wood, remained there until 1902 to prepare the island for independence. Americans built roads, schools, and hospitals; reorganized the legal, financial, and administrative systems; and introduced medical and sanitation reforms. But the United States also laid the basis for years of American economic domination of the island. When Cuba drew up a constitution that made no reference to the United States, Platt Amendment Congress responded by passing the Platt Amendment in 1901 and pressuring Cuba into incorporating its terms into its constitution. The Platt Amendment barred Cuba from making treaties with other nations; gave the United States the right to intervene in Cuba to preserve independence, life, and property; and required Cuba to permit American naval stations on its territory. The amendment left Cuba with only nominal political independence. American capital made the new nation an American economic appendage as well. American investors poured into Cuba, buying up plantations, factories, railroads, and refineries. Resistance to “Yankee imperialism” produced intermittent revolts against the Cuban government—revolts that at times prompted U.S. military intervention. American troops occupied the island from 1906 to 1909 after one such rebellion; they returned again in 1912 to suppress a revolt by black plantation workers. As in Puerto Rico and Hawaii, sugar production—spurred by access to the American market—increasingly dominated the island’s economy and subjected it to the same cycle of booms and busts that plagued other sugar-producing appendages of the United States economy.

The Philippine War
 Like other imperial powers, the United States soon discovered that subjugating another people was not an easy task. The American experience in the Philippines began with a long and bloody war. The conflict in the Philippines is the least remembered of all American wars. It was also one of the longest. It lasted from 1898 to 1902, and it was one of the most vicious. It involved 200,000 American troops and resulted in 4,300 American deaths. The number of Filipinos killed in the conflict has long been a matter of dispute, but it seems likely that at least 50,000 natives (and perhaps many more) died. The American occupiers faced brutal guerrilla tactics in the Philippines, and they soon found themselves drawn into the same pattern of brutality that had outraged so many Americans when Weyler had used them in the Caribbean. The Filipinos had rebelled against Spanish rule before 1898, and as soon as they realized the Americans had come to stay, they rebelled against them as well. Ably led by Emilio Aguinaldo Emilio Aguinaldo, who claimed to head the legitimate government of the nation, Filipinos harried the American army of occupation from island to island for more than three years. At first, American commanders believed the rebels had only a small popular following. But by early 1900, General Arthur MacArthur, an American commander in the islands (and father of General Douglas MacArthur), was writing: “I have been reluctantly compelled to believe that the Filipino masses are loyal to Aguinaldo and the government which he heads.” To MacArthur and others, that realization was not a reason to moderate American tactics or conciliate the rebels, but rather to adopt much more severe measures. Gradually, the American military effort became more systematically vicious and brutal. Captured Filipino

FROM CRISIS TO EMPIRE
• 483 

East
China
Sea


CHINA




1000 mi




Hong
Kong




(Japan)


DE


EY


(Annexed 1898)


W


Luzon


Philippine
Sea


MARIANA IS.


South
China
S e a Visaya Is.
Salu
Sea


(Ceded by Spain,
1898)
Mindanao


GUAM


MARSHALL IS.


(German)


CAROLINE IS.


(1898)


P A C I F I C


(Br.)


ES


HOWLAND I.
(1857) JARVIS I.


BAKER I.
(1859) 

 AUSTRALIA (Br.)

(German)
(Br.)


(German)


Equator


(1857)


NEW GUINEA


PORTUGUESE TIMOR
INDIAN
OCEAN


O C E A N
GILBERT IS.


TCH EAST INDI


PALMYRA I.


(German)


PALAU


(Annexed 1898)


JOHNSTON I.


(1898)


BORNEO


DU


HAWAIIAN IS.


(1898)


(Ceded by Spain,
1898)


(German)


Celebes
Sea


WAKE I.


(German)


 Manilla PHILIPPINES

(Br.)


MIDWAY IS.


2000 km


FORMOSA


(Br.)


SOLOMON
IS.


(Br.)
NEW
HEBRIDES


Coral
Sea


(Br./Fr.)


GERMAN
SAMOA
FIJI IS.
(Br.) 
AMERICAN
SAMOA


(1899)


NEW
CALEDONIA


(Fr.)


 U.S. forces, 1898 U.S. possessions, 1900 Area of PhilippineAmerican War, 1899–1906

THE AMERICAN SOUTH PACIFIC EMPIRE, 1900
Except for Puerto Rico, all of the colonial acquisitions of the United States in the wake of the Spanish-American War occurred in the Pacific. The new attraction of imperialism persuaded the United States to annex Hawaii in 1898. The war itself gave America control of the Philippines, Guam, and other, smaller Spanish possessions in the Pacific. When added to the small, scattered islands that the United States had acquired as naval bases earlier in the nineteenth century, these new possessions gave the nation a far-flung Pacific empire, even if one whose total territory and population remained small by the standards of the other great empires of the age. • What was the reaction in the United States to the acquisition of this new empire? 
 guerrillas were treated not as prisoners of war but as murderers. Many were summarily executed. On some islands, entire communities were evacuated—the residents forced into concentration camps while American troops destroyed their villages. A spirit of savagery grew among some American soldiers, who came to view the Filipinos as almost subhuman and, at times, seemed to take pleasure in arbitrarily killing them. The racial undertones of the war—American soldiers called the Filipinos “niggers”— were particularly grating for African American troops serving in segregated units. They were hardly unaware that at home, southern states and lynch mobs were in the process of disenfranchising and terrorizing black people. Some noticed a resemblance between the attitude of the American military and government toward the Filipino natives and popular attitudes toward African Americans and Native Americans. By 1902, reports of the brutality and of the American casualties had soured the American public on the war. But by then, the rebellion had largely exhausted itself and the occupiers had established control over most of the islands. The key to their victory was the March 1901 capture of Aguinaldo, who later signed a document urging his followers to stop fighting and declared his own allegiance to the United States. Fighting continued intermittently until as late as 1906, but American possession of the Philippines was now secure. In the summer of 1901, the military transferred authority over the islands

484 • CHAPTER 19


 to William Howard Taft, who became their first civilian governor and gave the Filipinos broad local autonomy. The Americans also built roads, schools, bridges, and sewers; instituted major administrative and financial reforms; and established a public health sysGradual Shift to Self-Rule tem. Filipino self-rule gradually increased, and on July 4, 1946, the islands finally gained their independence.

The Open Door
 The American acquisition of the Philippines increased the already strong U.S. interest in Asia. Americans were particularly concerned about the future of China, which provided a tempting target for exploitation by stronger countries. By 1900, England, France, Germany, Russia, and Japan were beginning to carve up China among themselves, pressuring the Chinese government for “concessions” that gave them effective control over various regions of China. In some cases, they simply seized Chinese territory and claimed it as their own. Many Americans feared that the process would soon cut them out of the China trade altogether. Eager for a way to advance American interests in China without risking war, McKinley issued a statement in September 1898 saying the United States wanted access to China but no special advantages there. “Asking only the open door for ourselves, we are ready to accord the open door to others.” The next year, Secretary of State John Hay translated those words into policy when he addressed identical messages—which Hay’s “Open Door Notes” became known as the “Open Door notes”—to England, Germany, Russia, France, Japan, and Italy. He asked that each nation with a “sphere of influence” in China allow other nations to trade freely and equally in its sphere. The principles Hay outlined would allow the United States to trade freely with China without fear of interference. Europe and Japan received the Open Door proposals coolly. Russia openly rejected them; the other powers claimed to accept them in principle but to be unable to act unless all the other powers agreed. Hay refused to consider this a rebuff. He boldly announced that all the powers had accepted the principles of the Open Door in “final and definitive” form and that the United States expected them to observe those principles. No sooner had the diplomatic maneuvering over the Open Door ended than the Boxers, a secret Chinese martial-arts society with highly nationalist convictions (and a somewhat mystical vision of their invulnerability to bullets), launched a revolt against foreigners in Boxer Rebellion China. The Boxer Rebellion spread widely across eastern China, attacking Westerners wherever they could find them—including many Christian missionaries. But the climax of the revolt was a siege of the entire Western foreign diplomatic corps, which took refuge in the British embassy in Peking. The imperial powers (including the United States) sent an international expeditionary force into China to rescue the diplomats. In August 1900, it fought its way into the city and broke the siege. The Boxer Rebellion became an important event for the role of the United States in China. McKinley and Hay had agreed to American participation in quelling the Boxer Rebellion in order to secure a voice in the settlement of the uprising and prevent the partition of China by the European powers. Hay now won support for his Open Door approach from England and Germany and induced the other participating powers to accept compensation from the Chinese for the damages the Boxer Rebellion had caused. Chinese territorial integrity survived at least in name, and the United States retained access to its lucrative China trade.

FROM CRISIS TO EMPIRE
• 485 

A
Modern Military System  The war with Spain had revealed glaring deficiencies in the American military system. Had the United States been fighting a more powerful foe, disaster might have resulted. After the war, McKinley appointed Elihu Root, an able corporate lawyer in New York, as secretary of war to supervise a major overhaul of the armed forces. Root’s reforms enlarged the regular army from 25,000 to a maximum of 100,000. They established federal army standards for the National Guard, ensuring that never again would the nation fight a war with volunteer regiments trained and equipped differently than those in the regular army. They sparked the creation of a system of officer training schools, including the Army Staff College (later the Command and General Staff School) at Fort Leavenworth, Kansas, and the Army War College in Washington. And in 1903, a general staff (named the Joint Chiefs of Staff ) was established to act as military advisers to the secretary of war. As a result of the new reforms, the United States entered the twentieth century with something resembling a modern military system.

CONCLUSION
 For nearly three decades after the end of Reconstruction, American politics remained locked in a rigid stalemate. The electorate was almost evenly divided, and the two major parties differed on only a few issues. A series of unimposing if respectable presidents presided over this political system as unwitting symbols of its stability and passivity. Beneath the calm surface of national politics, however, social issues were creating deep tensions: battles between employers and workers, growing resentment among American farmers facing declining prosperity, outrage at what many voters considered corruption in government and excessive power in the hands of corporate titans. When a great depression began in 1893, these social tensions exploded. The most visible sign of the challenge to the political stalemate was the Populist movement, an uprising of American farmers demanding far-reaching changes in politics and the economy. In 1892, they created their own political party, the People’s Party, which for a few years showed impressive strength. But in the climactic election of 1896, in which the Populist hero William Jennings Bryan became the presidential nominee of both the Democratic Party and the People’s Party, the Republicans won a substantial victory— and, in the process, helped create a great electoral realignment that left the Republicans with a clear majority for the next three decades. The crises of the 1890s helped spur the United States’ growing involvement in the world. In 1898, the United States intervened in a colonial war between Spain and Cuba, won a quick and easy military victory, and signed a treaty with Spain that ceded significant territory to the Americans. A vigorous anti-imperialist movement failed to stop the imperial drive. But taking the colonies proved easier than holding them. In the Philippines, American forces became bogged down in a brutal four-year war with Filipino rebels. The conflict soured much of the American public, and the annexation of colonies in 1898 proved to be both the beginning and the end of American territorial expansion.

486 • CHAPTER 19


KEY TERMS/PEOPLE/PLACES/EVENTS
Benjamin Harrison 458
Boxer Rebellion 484
Chester A. Arthur 457
 Coxey’s Army 464 Farmers’ Alliances 460 Free silver 464 Grangers 460 Grover Cleveland 458 Half-Breeds 457

 imperialism 468 Interstate Commerce Act 459 James A. Garfield 457 jingoes 468 Open Door 484 Panic of 1893 463 Populism 461 Puerto Rico 484

Queen Liliuokalani 469
Rutherford B. Hayes 457
Sherman Antitrust Act 459
Spanish-American
War 478
Stalwarts 457
William Jennings Bryan 481
 William McKinley 459 yellow journalism 472

RECALL AND REFLECT
 1. How and why did the federal government attempt to regulate interstate commerce in the

 late nineteenth century? 2. What efforts did farmers undertake to deal with the economic problems they faced in the

 late nineteenth century? 3. What was the “silver question”? Why was it so important to so many Americans? How did

 the major political parties deal with this question? 4. How did the Spanish-American War change America’s relationship to the rest of the world? 5. What were the main arguments of those who supported U.S. imperialism and those who

 ­opposed the nation’s imperial ambitions and efforts?



THE
PROGRESSIVES
THE PROGRESSIVE IMPULSE
WOMEN AND REFORM
THE ASSAULT ON THE PARTIES
SOURCES OF PROGRESSIVE REFORM
CRUSADES FOR SOCIAL ORDER AND REFORM
THEODORE ROOSEVELT AND THE MODERN
PRESIDENCY
THE TROUBLED SUCCESSION
WOODROW WILSON AND THE NEW FREEDOM


LOOKING AHEAD
 1. What role did women and women’s organizations play in the reforms of the progressive era? How did progressive era reforms affect women? 2. What changes to politics and government did progressive reformers advocate at the local, state, and federal levels? How did government change as a result of their reform efforts? 3. How did Woodrow Wilson’s progressivism differ from that of Theodore Roosevelt? In what ways was it similar to Roosevelt’s?

WELL BEFORE THE END OF
the nineteenth century, many Americans had become convinced that rapid industrialization and urbanization had created a growing crisis. The nation’s most pressing need, they claimed, was to impose order and justice on a society that seemed to be approaching chaos. By the early years of the twentieth century, this outlook had acquired a name: progressivism. Not even those who called themselves progressives could agree on what the term meant, for it was a phenomenon of great scope and diversity. But despite or perhaps because of its great diversity, the progressive movement generated a remarkable wave of political and social innovation. From the late nineteenth century until at least the end of World War I, progressive reformers brought into public debate such issues as the role of women in society, racial equality, the rights of labor, and the impact of immigration and cultural diversity. Progressivism began as a series of local movements and encompassed many different efforts to improve the working of society. Slowly but steadily, these efforts became national • 487 
TIME LINE
 Women’s Christian Temperance Union (WCTU) founded





 Jane Addams opens Hull House in Chicago

Anti-Saloon League
 founded



 McKinley assassinated; Theodore Roosevelt becomes president

Galveston, Texas,
 establishes commission government Northern Securities antitrust case

Hepburn Railroad
Regulation Act
Meat Inspection Act


 Taft elected president

 Financial panic and recession NAACP formed

Triangle Shirtwaist
 Company fire

Sixteenth Amendment
 (income tax)

Pinchot-Ballinger
 dispute Roosevelt forms Progressive Party Woodrow Wilson elected president

Seventeenth
 Amendment (direct popular election of U.S. senators) Federal Reserve Act

Federal Trade
Commission Act




Clayton Antitrust Act


Eighteenth Amendment
 (prohibition) Nineteenth Amendment (woman suffrage)

488 •


 efforts. Ultimately it was the presidency, not the Congress, that became the most important vehicle of national reform—first under the dynamic leadership of Theodore Roosevelt and then under the disciplined, moralistic guidance of Woodrow Wilson. By the time America entered World War I in 1917, the federal government—which had exercised limited powers prior to the twentieth century—had greatly expanded its role in American life.

THE PROGRESSIVE
IMPULSE
 Progressives believed, as their name implies, in the idea of progress. They were optimistic that society was capable of improvement and that continued growth and advancement were the nation’s destiny. But progressives believed, too, that growth and progress could not continue to occur recklessly, as they had in the late nineteenth century. The “natural laws” of the marketplace, and the doctrines of laissez-faire and Social Darwinism that dominated those laws, were not sufficient. Direct, purposeful human intervention was essential to ordering and bettering society. These ideas percolated in the United States as well as many other industrializing parts of the world. (See “America in the World: Social Democracy.”) Progressives did not always agree on the form their interventions should take, and the result was a variety of reform impulses. One powerful impulse was the spirit of “antimonopoly,” the fear of concentrated power and the urge to limit and disperse authority and wealth. Another progressive impulse was a belief in the importance of social cohesion: the belief that individuals are part of a great web of social relationships, that each person’s welfare is dependent on the welfare of society as a whole. Still another impulse was a deep faith in

THE PROGRESSIVES
• 489 

 knowledge—in the possibilities of applying to society the principles of natural and social sciences. Most progressives believed, too, that a modernized government could—and must—play an important role in the process of improving and stabilizing society.

The Muckrakers and the Social Gospel
 Among the first people to articulate the new spirit of national reform were crusading journalists who began to direct public attention toward social, economic, and political injustices. Known as the muckrakers, after Theodore Roosevelt accused them of raking up muck through their writings, they were committed to exposing scandal, corruption, and injustice. Their first major targets were the trusts and, particularly, the railroads, which the muckrakers considered powerful and deeply corrupt. Exposés of the great corporate organizations began to appear as early as the 1860s, when Charles Francis Adams Jr. and others uncovered corruption among the railroad barons. Decades later, journalist Ida Tarbell produced a scorching study of the Standard Oil trust. By the turn of the century, many muckrakers were turning their attention to government and particularly to the urban political machines. Among the most influential was Lincoln Steffens, a reporter for McClure’s magazine. His portraits of “machine government” and “boss rule” in cities, written in a tone of studied moral outrage, helped arouse sentiment for urban political reform. By presenting social problems to the public with indignation and moral fervor, they helped inspire other Americans to take action. Growing outrage at social and economic injustice committed many reformers to the pursuit of social justice. (Social justice is a term widely used around the world to promote a kind of justice that goes beyond the individual but, instead, seeks justice for whole

 Keppler was a popular political cartoonist of the late nineteenth century who shared the growing concern about the power of the trusts—portrayed here as bloated, almost reptilian figures standing menacingly over the members of the U.S. Senate, to whose chamber the “people’s entrance” is “closed.” (© Granger, NYC—All Rights Reserved.) THE BOSSES OF THE SENATE (1889), BY JOSEPH KEPPLER

AMERICA IN THE WORLD


Social Democracy
 Enormous energy, enthusiasm, and organization drove the reform efforts in America in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, much of it a result of social crises and political movements in the United States. But the “age of reform,” as some have called it, was not an American phenomenon alone. It was part of a wave of ­social experimentation that was occurring throughout much of the industrial world. “Progressivism” in other countries influenced the social movements in the United States. American reform, in turn, had significant influence elsewhere as well. Several industrializing nations adopted the term progressivism for their efforts—not only the United States, but also England, Germany, and France. But the term that most broadly defined the new reform energies was social democracy. Social democrats in many countries shared a belief in the betterment of society through the accumulation of knowledge. They favored improving the social condition of all people through reforms of the economy and government programs of social protection. And they believed that these goals could be achieved through peaceful political change, rather than through radicalism or revolution. Political parties committed to these goals emerged in several countries: the Labour Party in Britain, social democratic parties in various European nations, and the short-lived Progressive ­ Party in the United States. Intellectuals, academics, and government officials across the world shared the knowledge they were accumulating and observed one another’s social programs. American reformers at the turn of the century spent much time visiting Germany, France, Britain, Belgium, and the Netherlands, observing the reforms in progress there; and Europeans, in turn, visited 490 •

 the United States. Reformers from both America and Europe were also fascinated by the advanced social experiments in Australia and, especially, New Zealand—which the American reformer Henry Demarest Lloyd once called “the political brain of the modern world.” But New Zealand’s dramatic experiments in factory regulation, woman suffrage, old-age pensions, progressive taxation, and labor arbitration gradually found counterparts in many other nations as well. William Allen White, a progressive journalist from Kansas, said of this time: “We were parts of one another, in the United States and Europe. Something was welding us into one

THE PARIS EXPO, A PROGRESSIVE SYMBOL
The Paris Expositions of 1889 and 1900, symbolized by the Eiffel Tower and enormous globe, drew progressive experts as well as tourists with the vision of progress through industrial innovation. During the Expos, an international group of progressives held meetings to share ideas for bettering society. (© Archives Charmet/Bridgeman Images) 
 social and economic whole with local political variations . . . [all] fighting a common cause.” Social democracy—or, as it was sometimes called in the United States and elsewhere, social justice or the social gospel— was responsible for many public programs. Germany began a system of social insurance for its citizens in the 1880s while simultaneously undertaking a massive ­ study of society that produced over 140 volumes of “social investigation” of almost every aspect of the nation’s life. French ­reformers pressed in the 1890s for factory regulation, assistance to the elderly, and progressive taxation. Britain pioneered the settlement houses in working-class areas of London—a movement that soon spread to the United States—and, like the United States, witnessed growing challenges to the power of monopolies at both the local and national levels. In many countries, social democrats felt pressure from the rising worldwide labor movement and from the rise of socialist parties in many industrial countries as well. Strikes, sometimes violent, were common in France, Germany, Britain, and the United States in the late nineteenth century. The

 more militant workers became, the more unions seemed to grow. Social democrats did not always welcome the rise of militant labor movements, but they took them seriously and used them to support their own efforts at reform. The politics of social democracy represented a great shift in the character of public life all over the industrial world. Instead of battles over the privileges of aristocrats or the power of monarchs, reformers now focused on the social problems of ordinary people and attempted to improve their lot. “The politics of the future are social politics,” the British reformer Joseph Chamberlain said in the 1880s, referring to efforts to deal with the problems of ordinary citizens. That belief was fueling progressive efforts across the world in the years that Americans have come to call the “progressive era.”

•


UNDERSTAND, ANALYZE, & EVALUATE
 1. What is social democracy? How does it

 differ from socialism? 2. What progressive era reforms in

 American social and political life can be seen in other nations as well?

 groups or even societies. Advocates of social justice are likely to believe in a more egalitarian society.) That impulse helped create the rise of what became known as the “Social Gospel,” the effort to make faith into a tool of social reform. The Social Gospel movement was chiefly concerned with redeeming the nation’s cities. The Salvation Army, which began in England but soon spread to the United States, was one example of the fusion of religion with reform. A Christian social welfare organization with a vaguely military structure, it had recruited 3,000 “officers” and 20,000 “privates” by 1900 and was offering both material aid and spiritual service to the urban poor. In addition, many ministers, priests, and rabbis left traditional parish work to serve in the troubled cities. Charles Sheldon’s book In His Steps (1898), the story of a young minister who abandoned a comfortable post to work among the needy, sold more than 15 million copies. The Social Gospel was never the dominant element in the movement for urban reform. But the engagement of religion with reform helped bring to progressivism a powerful moral commitment to redeem the lives of even the least favored citizens.

The Settlement House Movement
 An element of much progressive thought was the belief in the influence of the environment on individual development. Nothing produced greater distress, many urban r­ eformers • 491

