204 • CHAPTER 9


 One of the most striking political trends of the early nineteenth century was the change in the method of choosing presidential electors. In 1800, the legislatures had chosen the presidential electors in ten states; the electors were chosen by the people in only six states. By 1828, electors were chosen by popular vote in every state but South Carolina. In the presidential election of 1824, fewer than 27 percent of adult white males had voted. Only four years later, the figure was 58 percent; and in 1840, 80 percent.

Tocqueville and Democracy in America
 The rapid growth of the electorate—and the emergence of political parties—was among the most striking events of the early nineteenth century. As the right to vote spread widely in these years, it came to be the mark of freedom and democracy. One of the most important commentaries on this extraordinary moment in American life was a book by the French aristocrat Alexis de Tocqueville. (See “Consider the Source: Alexis de Tocqueville, Concerning the People’s Choices and the Instinctive Preferences of American Democracy.”) He spent two years in the United States in the 1830s watching the dramatic political changes in the age of Andrew Jackson. The French government had requested that he make a study of American prisons, which were thought to be more humane and effective institutions than those in Europe. But Tocqueville quickly went far beyond the study of prisons and wrote a classic study of American life, titled Democracy in America. Tocqueville examined not just the politics of the United States, but also the daily lives of many groups of Americans and their cultures, their associations, and their visions of democracy. In France in the early decades of the nineteenth century, the fruits of democracy were largely restricted to landowners and aristocrats. But Tocqueville recognized that traditional aristocracies were rapidly fading in America and that new elites could rise and fall no matter what their backgrounds. Tocqueville also realized that the rising democracy of America had many limits. Democracy was a powerful, visible force in the lives of most white men. Few women could vote, although some shared the democratic ethos through their families. For many other Americans, democracy was a distant hope. Tocqueville wrote of the limits of equality and democracy: he first who attracts the eye, the first in enlightenment, in power and in happiness, is the white man, the European, man par excellence; below him appear the Negro and the Indian. These two unfortunate races have neither birth, nor face, nor language, nor mores in common; only their misfortunes look alike. Both occupy an equally inferior position in the country that they inhabit; both experience the effects of tyranny; and if their miseries are different, they can accuse the same author for them.

 Tocqueville’s book helped spread the idea of American democracy into France and other European nations. Only later did it become widely read and studied in the United States as a remarkable portrait of the emerging democracy of the United States.

The Legitimization of Party
 The high level of voter participation was only partly the result of an expanded electorate. It resulted as well from growing interest in politics, a strengthening of party organization, and increasing party loyalty. Although party competition had been part of American politics almost from the beginning, acceptance of the idea of party had not. For more than thirty years, most Americans who had opinions about the nature of government considered parties evils to be avoided and thought the nation should seek a broad consensus without permanent factional lines. But in the 1820s and 1830s, those assumptions gave way to a

JACKSONIAN AMERICA
• 205 

 new view that permanent, institutionalized parties were a desirable part of the political process, that they were indeed essential to democracy. The elevation of party occurred first at the state level, most prominently in New York. There, after the War of 1812, Martin Van Buren led a dissident political faction (known as the “Bucktails”) that challenged the established political elite led by the aristocratic governor, DeWitt Clinton. The Bucktails argued that Clinton’s closed circle made genuine democracy impossible. They advocated institutionalized political parties in its place, based on the support of a broad public constituency. A party would need a permanent opposition, they insisted, because competition would force it to remain sensitive to the will of the people. Parties would check and balance one another in much the same way as the different branches of government did. By the late 1820s, this new idea of party had spread beyond New York. The election of Jackson in 1828, the result of a popular movement that stood apart from the usual political elites, seemed further to legitimize it. In the 1830s, finally, a fully formed twoparty system began to operate at the national level. The anti-Jackson The Two-Party System forces began to call themselves the Whigs. Jackson’s followers called themselves Democrats, thus giving a permanent name to what is now the nation’s oldest political party.

President of the Common People
 Unlike Thomas Jefferson, Jackson was no democratic philosopher. The Democratic Party, much less than the old Jeffersonian Republicans, embraced no clear or uniform

 This portrait suggests something of the fierce determination that characterized Andrew Jackson’s military and political careers. Shattered by the death of his wife a few weeks after his election as president—a death he blamed (not entirely without reason) on the attacks his political opponents had leveled at her—he entered office with a steely determination to live by his own principles and give no quarter to his adversaries. (© Bettmann/Corbis)

ANDREW JACKSON


CO NS IDER T HE S O URC E
ALEXIS DE TOCQUEVILLE, CONCERNING THE
PEOPLE’S CHOICES AND THE INSTINCTIVE
PREFERENCES OF AMERICAN DEMOCRACY
 In the 1830s, the French political thinker and historian Alexis de Tocqueville devoted two years in the United States to studying the country’s institutions and political culture. The result was his book Democracy in America. In this excerpt, Tocqueville considers the correlation between social class and political ­engagement. Many people in Europe believe but do not say, or say but do not believe, that one of the great advantages of universal suffrage is that it brings men worthy of public trust into positions of leadership. The people, it is argued, may not know how to govern themselves, but they always sincerely want what is good for the state, and their instinct is unlikely to overlook men animated by the same desire and eminently capable of wielding power. For my part, I must say that what I saw in America gives me no reason to believe that this is the case. On arriving in the United States, I was surprised to discover how common talent was among the governed and how rare in government. There is no escaping the fact that in the United States today the most outstanding men are seldom called to public office, and one is forced to acknowledge that this situation arose as democracy developed beyond all former bounds. It is clear that over the past half century the race of American statesmen has singularly shrunk in stature. Several causes of this phenomenon may be adduced. Whatever one does, there are limits to the degree to which people can be enlightened. Try as one might to make knowledge more accessible, improve teaching ­methods, and reduce the cost of acquiring 206 •

 learning, there is no way for people to educate themselves and develop their ­ ­intelligence unless they can devote time to the effort. How easy or hard it is for people to live without working therefore sets a necessary limit to their intellectual progress. In some countries that limit is a long way from being reached; in others not so far off. But in order for there to be no limit, the people would need to be freed of worries about their material needs, in which case they would no longer be the people. Hence it is as difficult to conceive of a society in which everyone is highly enlightened as of a state in which every citizen is wealthy; the two difficulties are related. I am perfectly willing to concede that most citizens very sincerely want what is good for their country. Taking this one step further, I would go so far as to add that in general the lower classes of society seem to me less likely than the upper classes to adulterate this desire with considerations of personal interest. What the lower classes invariably lack to one degree or another, however, is the art of judging the means to the end they sincerely wish to achieve. What a lengthy period of study and variety of ideas are necessary to form an exact idea of the character of a single man! The greatest geniuses fail at this, yet the multitude is supposed to succeed! The people never have enough time or resources to devote to the effort. They must always judge hastily and seize on whatever is most ­v isible. That is why charlatans of every stripe are so clever at pleasing them, while more often than not their true friends fail.

 What democracy lacks, moreover, is not always the capacity to choose men of merit but the desire and taste to do so. We must not blind ourselves to the fact that democratic institutions develop the sentiment of envy in the human heart to a very high degree. This is not so much because such institutions give everyone the means to equal everyone else as because those means continually prove unavailing to those who employ them. Democratic institutions awaken and flatter the passion for equality without ever being able to satisfy it to the full. No sooner does full equality seem within the people’s reach than it flies from their grasp, and its flight, as Pascal said, is eternal. The people passionately seek a good that is all the more precious because it is close enough to be familiar yet far enough away that it cannot be savored.

 The chance of success spurs them on; the uncertainty of success vexes them. They struggle, they tire, they grow bitter. Anything that is beyond them in any quarter then seems an obstacle to their desires, and no form of superiority is so legitimate that the sight of it is not wearisome to their eyes. UNDERSTAND, ANALYZE, & EVALUATE 1. What general assumption about univer-

 sal suffrage did Alexis de Tocqueville want to counter? 2. What change did Tocqueville observe among American politicians since the Revolution, and how did he explain this change? 3. What relationship between social class and political understanding did Tocqueville see among Americans?

 Source: Democracy in America by Alexis de Tocqueville, translated by Arthur Goldhammer, The Library of America, pp. 225–226. Translation copyright 2004 by Library Classics of the United States, Inc., New York.

 ideological position. But Jackson himself did embrace a distinct and simple theory of democracy. Government, he said, should offer “equal protection and equal benefits” to all its white male citizens and favor no one region or class over another. In practice, that meant launching an assault on what Jackson considered the citadels of the eastern aristocracy and extending opportunities to the rising classes of the West and the South. (For historians’ changing assessments of Jackson, see “Debating the Past: Jacksonian Democracy.”) Jackson’s first target was the entrenched officeholders in the federal government, whom he bitterly denounced. Offices, he said, belonged to the people, not to a selfserving bureaucracy. Equally important, a large turnover in the bureaucracy would allow him to reward his own supporters with offices. One of Jackson’s allies, William L. Marcy of New York, once explained, “To the victors belong the spoils”; and patronage, the process of giving out jobs as political rewards, became known as the spoils system. Although Jackson removed no more than one-fifth The Spoils System of existing federal officeholders, his embrace of the spoils system helped cement its place in party politics. Jackson’s supporters also worked to transform the process by which presidential candidates were selected. In 1832, the president’s followers staged a national convention to renominate him. Through the convention, its founders believed, power in the party would arise directly from the people rather than from such elite political institutions as the ­congressional caucus. • 207

DEBATING THE PAST


Jacksonian Democracy
 To many Americans in the 1820s and 1830s, Andrew Jackson was a champion of democracy, a symbol of the spirit of antielitism and egalitarianism that was sweeping American life. Historians, however, have disagreed sharply not only in their assessments of Jackson himself but in their portrayal of American society in his era. The “progressive” historians of the early twentieth century tended to see Jacksonian politics as a forebear of their own battles against economic privilege and political corruption. Frederick Jackson Turner ­encouraged scholars to see Jacksonianism as a protest by the frontier against the conservative aristocracy of the East. Jackson represented those who wanted to make government responsive to the will of the people rather than to the power of special interests. The culmination of this progressive interpretation of Jacksonianism was Arthur M. Schlesinger’s The Age of Jackson (1945). Less interested in the regional basis of Jacksonianism than the disciples of Turner had been, Schlesinger ­argued that Jacksonian democracy was an ­effort “to control the power of the capitalist groups, mainly Eastern, for the benefit of non-­capitalist groups, farmers and laboring men, East, West, and South.” He portrayed Jacksonianism as an early version of m ­ odern reform efforts to “restrain the power of the business community.” Richard Hofstadter, in an influential 1948 essay, sharply disagreed. Jackson, he argued, was the spokesman of rising entrepreneurs—aspiring businessmen who saw the road to opportunity blocked by the monopolistic power of eastern aristocrats. The Jacksonian leaders were less sympathetic to the aspirations of those below them than 208 •

 they were to the destruction of obstacles to their own success. Bray Hammond, writing in 1957, argued similarly that the Jacksonian cause was “one of enterpriser against capitalist.” Other historians saw Jacksonianism less as a democratic reform movement than as a nostalgic effort to restore a lost past. Marvin Meyers’s The Jacksonian Persuasion (1957) argued that Jackson and his followers looked with misgivings on the new industrial society emerging around them and yearned instead for a restoration of the agrarian, republican virtues of an earlier time. In the 1960s, historians began taking less interest in Jackson and his supporters and more in the social and cultural bases of American politics in the time of Jackson. Lee Benson’s The Concept of Jacksonian Democracy (1961) used quantitative techniques to demonstrate the role of religion and ethnicity in shaping party divisions. Edward Pessen’s Jacksonian America (1969) portrayed America in the Jacksonian era as an increasingly stratified society. This inclination to look more closely at society than at formal “Jacksonianism” continued into the late twentieth and early twenty-first centuries. Sean Wilentz, in Chants Democratic (1984) and in The Rise of American Democracy (2005), examined the rise of powerful movements among ordinary citizens who were attracted less to Jackson himself than to the notion of popular democracy. Gradually, this attention to the nature of society has led to reassessments of Jackson himself and the nature of his regime. In Fathers and Children (1975), Michael Rogin portrays Jackson as a leader determined to secure the supremacy of white men in the United States. Alexander Saxton, in The

Rise and Fall of the White Republic (1990),
 makes the related argument that “Jacksonian Democracy” was explicitly a white man’s ­democracy that rested on the subjugation of slaves, women, and Native Americans. But the portrayal of Jackson as a champion of the common people has not vanished from scholarship entirely. The most renowned postwar biographer of Jackson, Robert V. Remini, argues that, ­despite the flaws in his democratic vision, he was a genuine “man of the people.”

•


UNDERSTAND, ANALYZE, & EVALUATE
 1. What was Jacksonian democracy? Was

 it a reform movement against conservative special interests? Was it a regional movement designed to shift power to the West? Or was it a classbased movement to elevate workers and farmers? 2. Jackson was known as a “man of the people.” Which people were attracted to him?

FEDERAL UNION”
 Jackson’s commitment to extending power beyond entrenched elites led him to want to reduce the functions of the federal government. A concentration of power in Washington would, he believed, restrict opportunity to people with political connections. But Jackson was also strongly committed to the preservation of the Union. Thus, at the same time as he was promoting an economic program to reduce the power of the national government, he was asserting the supremacy of the Union in the face of a potent challenge. For no sooner had he entered office than his own vice president—John C. Calhoun—began to champion a controversial constitutional theory: nullification.

Calhoun and Nullification
 Once an outspoken protectionist, Calhoun had strongly supported the tariff of 1816. But by the late 1820s, he had come to believe that the tariff was responsible for the stagnation of South Carolina’s economy—even though the exhaustion of the state’s farmland was the real reason for the decline. Some exasperated Carolinians were ready to consider a drastic remedy—secession. With his future political hopes resting on how he met this challenge in his home state, Calhoun developed the theory of nullification. Drawing from the ideas of Madison and Jefferson and citing the Tenth Amendment to the Constitution, Calhoun argued that since the federal government was a creation of the states, the states—not the courts or Congress— were the final arbiters of the constitutionality of federal laws. If a state concluded that Congress had passed an unconstitutional law, then it could hold a special convention and declare the federal law null and void within the state. The nullification doctrine—and the idea of using it to nullify the 1828 tariff—quickly attracted broad support in South Carolina. But it did nothing to help Calhoun’s standing within the new Jackson administration, in part because he had a powerful rival in Martin Van Buren.

The Rise of Van Buren
 Van Buren had served briefly as governor of New York before becoming Jackson’s secretary of state in 1829. He soon established himself as a member both of the official • 209

210 • CHAPTER 9


 cabinet and of the president’s unofficial circle of political allies, known as the “Kitchen Cabinet.” And Van Buren’s influence with the president grew stronger still as a result of a quarrel over etiquette that drove a wedge between Jackson and Calhoun. Peggy O’Neale was the attractive daughter of a Washington tavernkeeper with whom both Andrew Jackson and his friend John H. Eaton had taken lodgings while serving as senators from Tennessee. O’Neale was married, but rumors circulated in Washington in the mid-1820s that she and Senator Eaton were having an affair. O’Neale’s husband died in 1828, and she and Eaton were soon married. A few weeks later, Jackson named Eaton secretary of war and thus made the new Mrs. Eaton a cabinet wife. The rest of the administration wives, led by Mrs. Calhoun, refused to receive her. Jackson, who blamed slanderous gossip for the death of his own wife, was furious, and demanded that the members of the cabinet accept her into their social world. Calhoun, under pressure from his wife, refused. Van Buren, a widower, befriended the Eatons and thus ingratiated himself with Jackson. By 1831, Jackson had tapped Van Buren as his preferred successor in the White House, apparently ending Calhoun’s dreams of the presidency.

The “Kitchen Cabinet”


The Webster-Hayne Debate
 In January 1830, in the midst of a routine debate over federal policy toward western lands, a senator from Connecticut suggested that all land sales and surveys be temporarily discontinued. Robert Y. Hayne, a young senator from South Carolina, charged that slowing down the growth of the West was simply a way for the East to retain its political and economic power. Daniel Webster, now a senator from Massachusetts, attacked Hayne (and through him Calhoun) for what he considered an attack on the integrity of the Union—in effect, challenging Hayne to a debate not on the issues of public lands and the tariff but on the issue States’ Rights versus National Power of states’ rights versus national power. Hayne responded with a defense of nullification. Webster then spent two full afternoons delivering what became known as his “Second Reply to Hayne.” He concluded with the ringing appeal: “Liberty and Union, now and for ever, one and inseparable!” Both sides waited to hear what President Jackson thought of the argument. That became clear at the annual Democratic Party banquet in honor of Thomas Jefferson. After dinner, guests delivered a series of toasts. The president arrived with a written text in which he had underscored certain words: “Our Federal Union—It must be preserved.” While he spoke, he looked directly at Calhoun. The diminutive Van Buren, who stood on his chair to see better, thought he saw Calhoun’s hand shake and a trickle of wine run down his glass as he responded to the president’s toast with his own: “The Union, next to our liberty most dear.”

The Nullification Crisis
 In 1832, the controversy over nullification finally produced a crisis when South Carolinians responded angrily to a congressional tariff bill that offered them no relief from the 1828 tariff of abominations. Almost immediately, the legislature summoned a state convention, which voted to nullify the tariffs of 1828 and 1832 and to forbid the collection of duties within the state. At the same time, South Carolina elected Hayne to serve as governor and Calhoun to replace Hayne as senator.

JACKSONIAN AMERICA
• 211 

 Jackson insisted that nullification was treason. He strengthened the federal forts in South Carolina and ordered a warship to Charleston. When Congress convened early in 1833, Jackson proposed a force bill authorizing the president to use the military to see that acts of Congress were obeyed. Violence seemed a real possibility. Calhoun faced a predicament as he took his place in the Senate. Not a single state had come to South Carolina’s support. But the timely intervention of Henry Clay, also newly elected to the Senate, averted a crisis. Clay devised a compromise by Clay’s Compromise which the tariff would be lowered gradually so that by 1842 it would reach approximately the same level as in 1816. The compromise and the force bill were passed on the same day, March 1, 1833. Jackson signed them both. In South Carolina, the convention reassembled and repealed its nullification of the tariffs. But unwilling to allow Congress to have the last word, the convention nullified the force act—a purely symbolic act, since the tariff had already been amended. Calhoun and his followers claimed a victory for nullification, which had, they insisted, forced the revision of the tariff. But the episode taught Calhoun and his allies that no state could defy the federal government alone.

THE REMOVAL OF THE INDIANS
 There had never been any doubt about Andrew Jackson’s attitude toward the Indian tribes whose lands were now encircled by the eastern states and territories of the United States. He wanted them to move west. Since his early military expeditions in Florida, Jackson had harbored a deep hostility toward the Indians. In this he was little different from most white Americans.

 White Attitudes toward the Tribes In the eighteenth century, many whites had shared Thomas Jefferson’s view of the Indians as “noble savages,” with an inherent dignity that made civilization possible among them if they would only mimic white social, cultural, political, and economic practices. Yet by the first decades of the nineteenth century, many whites were coming to view Native Americans simply as “savages” who should be removed from all the lands east of the Mississippi. White westerners also favored removal to put an end to violence and conflict in the western areas of white settlement. Most of all, they wanted valuable land that the tribes still possessed. Events in the Northwest added urgency to the issue of removal. In Illinois, an alliance of Sauk (or Sac) and Fox Indians under Black Hawk fought white settlers in 1831–1832 in an effort to overturn what Black Hawk considered an illegal cession of tribal lands to the United States. The Black Hawk War was notable for its viciousness. The Black Hawk War White forces attacked the Indians even when they attempted to surrender, pursued them as they retreated, and slaughtered many of them. The brutal war only reinforced the determination of whites to remove all the tribes to the West.

The “Five Civilized Tribes”
 Even more troubling to the government in the 1830s were the remaining Indian tribes of the South, who possessed lands southerners coveted for their growing cotton empire. In western Georgia, Alabama, Mississippi, and Florida lived what were known as the “Five

212 • CHAPTER 9


BLACK HAWK AND WHIRLING THUNDER
After his defeat by white settlers in Illinois in 1832, the famed Sauk warrior Black Hawk and his son, Whirling Thunder, were captured and sent on a tour by Andrew Jackson, displayed to the public as trophies of war. They showed such dignity through the ordeal that much of the white public quickly began to sympathize with them. This portrait, by John Wesley Jarvis, was painted on the tour’s final stop, in New York City. Black Hawk wears the European-style suit, while Whirling Thunder wears native costume to emphasize his commitment to his tribal roots. Soon thereafter, Black Hawk returned to his tribe, wrote a celebrated autobiography, and died in 1838. (© Granger, NYC—All Rights Reserved.) 
 Civilized Tribes”—the Cherokee, Creek, Seminole, Chickasaw, and Choctaw. These groups had adopted various Euro-American institutions and practices, including literacy, organized government, laws, agricultural economies, and even slavery. In 1830, both the federal government and several southern states were accelerating efforts to remove the tribes to the West. That year Congress passed the Indian Removal Act, which authorized the financing of federal negotiations to relocate the southern tribes to the West. Some Indians believed removal the least disagreeable option—better, perhaps, than the prospect of destitution, white encroachment, and violence. Others fought back. The Cherokee tried to stop Georgia from taking their lands through an appeal in the Supreme Court, and the Court’s rulings in Cherokee Nation v. Georgia and Worcester v. Georgia supCherokee Legal Resistance ported the tribe’s contention that the state had no authority to negotiate with tribal representatives. But Jackson repudiated the decisions, reportedly responding to news of the rulings with the contemptuous statement: “John Marshall has made his decision. Now let him enforce it.” Then, in 1835, the United States government extracted a treaty from a minority faction of the Cherokee that ceded to Georgia the tribe’s land in that state in return for $5 million and a reservation west of the Mississippi. With removal inevitable, this Cherokee “Treaty Party” reasoned, a deal for cash and land to the west was the best alternative available. But the great majority of the 17,000 Cherokee did not recognize the treaty as legitimate. Jackson sent an army of 7,000 under General Winfield Scott to round them up and drive them westward.

Trail of Tears
 About 1,000 Cherokee fled to North Carolina, where eventually the federal government provided them with a small reservation in the Smoky Mountains that survives today. But

JACKSONIAN AMERICA
• 213 

OHIO


UNORGANIZED
TERRITORY


ILLINOIS


MISSOURI


INDIANA
MD.
VIRGINIA


KENTUCKY
CHEROKEE


Springfield


Nashville


M
SE


IN CREEK
O LE


 Ft. Gibson CHEROKEE Ft. Coffee CHOCTAW

Ft. Smith


New Echota
CHICKASAW


Little
Rock


CREEK


Ft.
Towson


NORTH CAROLINA
CHEROKEE RES.


TENNESSEE


Memphis


CR
EE
K


CHICKASAW


CHEROKEE
OF TEARS”


CHEROKEE


ARKANSAS


CHEROKEE


C H O C TA W


CREEK
CHOCTAW
Montgomery


MISSISSIPPI


SOUTH
CAROLINA


GEORGIA
Ft. Mitchell


A TL A NTI C
O C EA N


ALABAMA
FLORIDA TERRITORY


LOUISIANA
New
Orleans


SEM
INOL
E
SEMINOLE


 Tribal lands (date ceded) Reservations Removal routes CREEK Native tribe

 G ulf o f M exico

200 mi


200 km


THE EXPULSION OF THE TRIBES, 1830–1835
Well before he became president, Andrew Jackson was famous for his military exploits against the tribes. Once in the White House, he ensured that few Indians would remain in the southern states of the nation, now that white settlement was increasing there. The result was a series of dramatic “removals” of Indian tribes out of their traditional lands and into new territories west of the Mississippi—mostly in Oklahoma. Note the very long distance many of these tribes had to travel. • Why was the route of the Cherokee, shown in the upper portion of the map, known as the “Trail of Tears” ? 
 most of the rest made a long, forced trek to “Indian Territory,” what later became Oklahoma, beginning in the winter of 1838. Thousands, perhaps a quarter or more Removal of the émigrés, perished before reaching their unwanted destination. In the harsh new reservations, the survivors remembered the terrible journey as “The Trail Where They Cried,” the Trail of Tears. Between 1830 and 1838, virtually all the Five Civilized Tribes were forced to travel to Indian Territory. The Choctaw of Mississippi and western Alabama were the first to make the trek, beginning in 1830. The army moved out the Creek of eastern Alabama and western Georgia in 1836. A year later, the Chickasaw in northern Mississippi began their long march westward and the Cherokee, finally, a year after that. The Seminole in Florida were able to resist removal, but even their success was limited. Like other tribes, the Seminole had agreed under pressure to a settlement by which they ceded their lands to the United States and agreed to move to Indian Territory within three years. Most did move west, but a substantial minority, under the leadership of the chieftain Osceola, balked and staged an uprising beginning in 1835 to defend their Seminole Wars lands. (Joining the Indians in their struggle was a group of runaway black slaves, who had been living with the tribe.) Jackson sent troops to Florida, but the Seminole and their black allies were masters of guerrilla warfare in the junglelike Everglades. Finally, in 1842, the government abandoned the war. By then, many of the Seminole had been either killed or forced westward.

214 • CHAPTER 9


The Meaning of Removal
 By the end of the 1830s, most of the Indian societies east of the Mississippi had been removed to the West. The tribes had ceded over 100 million acres to the federal government and had received in return about $68 million and 32 million acres in the far less hospitable lands west of the Mississippi—territory that already had established native populations. There they lived, divided by tribe into a series of separate reservations, in a territory surrounded by a string of United States forts and in a region whose climate and topography bore little relation to anything they had known before. What, if any, were the alternatives to the removal of the Indians? There was probably never any realistic possibility that the government could stop white expansion westward. Alternatives to Removal But there were, in theory at least, alternatives to the brutal removal policy. The West was filled with examples of white settlers and native tribes living side by side. In the pueblos of New Mexico, in the fur trading posts of the Pacific Northwest, and in parts of Texas and California, Indians and the newcomers from Mexico, Canada, and the United States had created societies in which the various groups mingled intimately. Sometimes close contact between whites and Indians was beneficial to both sides; often it was cruel and exploitative. But the early multiracial societies of the West did not separate whites and Indians. They demonstrated ways in which the two cultures could interact, each shaping the other. By the mid-nineteenth century, however, white Americans had adopted a different model. Much as the early British settlers along the Atlantic Coast had established “plantations,” from which natives were, in theory, to be excluded, so the western whites of later years believed that Indians could not be partners in the creation of new societies in the West. They were obstacles to be removed and, as far as possible, isolated.

JACKSON AND THE BANK WAR
 Jackson was quite willing to manipulate the Indian tribes. But in other contexts, he was very reluctant to use federal authority, as shown by his 1830 veto of a congressional measure providing a subsidy to the proposed Maysville Road in Kentucky. The bill was unconstitutional, Jackson argued, because the road in question lay entirely within Kentucky and was not, therefore, a part of “interstate commerce.” Jackson also thought the bill unwise because it committed the government to what he considered extravagant expenditures. A similar resistance to federal power lay behind Jackson’s war against the Bank of the United States.

 Biddle’s Institution The Bank of the United States held a monopoly on federal deposits, provided credit to growing enterprises, issued banknotes that served as a dependable medium of exchange, and exercised a restraining effect on the less well-managed state banks. Nicholas Biddle, Nicholas Biddle who ran the Bank from 1823 on, had done much to put the institution on a sound and prosperous basis. Nevertheless, many Americans—among them Andrew Jackson—were determined to destroy it. Opposition to the Bank came from two very different groups: the “soft-money” and “Soft Money” versus “Hard Money” “hard-money” factions. Advocates of soft money consisted

JACKSONIAN AMERICA
• 215 

 largely of state bankers and their allies. They objected to the Bank because it restrained state banks from issuing notes freely. The hard-money faction believed that coin was the only safe currency, and they condemned all banks that issued banknotes, state or federal. The soft-money advocates believed in rapid economic growth and speculation; the hardmoney forces embraced older ideas of “public virtue” and looked with suspicion on expansion and speculation. Jackson himself supported the hard-money position, and he made clear that he would not favor renewing the charter of the Bank of the United States, which was due to expire in 1836. A Philadelphia aristocrat unaccustomed to politics, Biddle nevertheless began granting banking favors to influential men. In particular, he relied on Daniel Webster, whom he named the Bank’s legal counsel and director of the Boston branch. Webster Bank War helped Biddle enlist the support of Henry Clay as well. Clay, Webster, and other advisers persuaded Biddle to apply to Congress for a recharter bill in 1832, four years ahead of the expiration date. Congress passed the recharter bill; Jackson vetoed it; and the Bank’s supporters in Congress failed to override the veto. The Bank question then emerged as the paramount issue of the 1832 election, just as Clay had hoped. In 1832, Clay ran for president as the unanimous choice of the Whigs. But the “Bank War” failed to provide Clay with the winning issue he had hoped for. Jackson, with Van Buren as his running mate, won an overwhelming victory with 55 percent of the popular vote and 219 electoral votes.

The “Monster” Destroyed
 Jackson was now more determined than ever to destroy the “monster.” He could not legally abolish the Bank before the expiration of its charter. But he weakened it by removing the government’s deposits from it. When his secretary of the treasury, believing that such an action would destabilize the financial system, refused to give the order, Jackson fired him and appointed a replacement. When the new secretary similarly procrastinated, Jackson fired him, too, and named a third: Roger B. Taney, the attorney general, a close friend and loyal ally of the president. Taney soon began taking the government’s deposits out of the Bank of the United States and putting them in a number of state banks. In response, Biddle called in loans and raised interest rates, explaining that without the government Government Deposits Removed deposits the Bank’s resources were stretched too thin. His actions precipitated a short recession. As financial conditions worsened in the winter of 1833–1834, supporters of the Bank sent petitions to Washington urging its rechartering. But the Jacksonians blamed the recession on Biddle and refused. When the banker finally carried his contraction of credit too far and had to reverse himself to appease the business community, his hopes of winning a recharter of the Bank died in the process. Jackson had won a Jackson’s Political Victory considerable political victory. But when the Bank of the United States expired in 1836, the country was left with a fragmented and chronically unstable banking system that would plague the economy for many years.

The Taney Court
 In the aftermath of the Bank War, Jackson moved against the most powerful remaining institution of economic nationalism: the Supreme Court. In 1835, when John Marshall

216 • CHAPTER 9


 died, the president appointed as the new chief justice his trusted ally Roger B. Taney. Taney did not bring a sharp break in constitutional interpretation, but he did help modify Marshall’s vigorous nationalism. Perhaps the clearest indication of the new judicial climate was the celebrated case of Charles River Bridge v. Warren Bridge Charles River Bridge v. Warren Bridge of 1837. The case involved a dispute between two Massachusetts companies over the right to build a bridge across the Charles River between Boston and Cambridge. One company had a longstanding charter from the state to operate a toll bridge, a charter that the firm claimed guaranteed it a monopoly of the bridge traffic. Another company had applied to the legislature for authorization to construct a second, competing bridge that would—since it would be toll-free—greatly reduce the value of the first company’s charter. The first company contended that in granting the second charter, the legislature was engaging in a breach of contract; and it noted that the Marshall Court, in the Dartmouth College case and other decisions, had ruled that states had no right to abrogate contracts. But now Taney supported the right of Massachusetts to award the second charter. The object of government, Taney maintained, was to promote the general happiness, an object that took precedence over the rights of property. A state, therefore, had the right to amend or abrogate a contract if such action was necessary to advance the well-being of the community. The decision reflected one of the cornerstones of the Jacksonian idea: that the key to democracy was an expansion of economic opportunity, which would not occur if older corporations could maintain monopolies.

THE CHANGING FACE OF AMERICAN POLITICS
 Jackson’s forceful—some people claimed tyrannical—tactics in crushing first the nullification movement and then the Bank of the United States helped galvanize a growing opposition coalition. It began as a gathering of national political leaders opposed to Jackson’s use of power. Denouncing the president as “King Andrew I,” they began to refer to themselves as Whigs, after the party in England that traditionally worked to limit the power of the king. With the emergence of the Whigs, the nation once again had two competing political parties. What scholars now call the “second party system” had begun its relatively brief life.

Democrats and Whigs
 The philosophy of the Democratic Party in the 1830s bore the stamp of Andrew Jackson. The federal government, the Democrats believed, should be limited in power, except to the degree that it worked to eliminate social and economic arrangements that entrenched privilege and stifled opportunity. The rights of states should be protected except to the extent that state governments interfered with social and economic mobility. Jacksonian Jacksonian Democrats Democrats celebrated “honest workers,” “simple farmers,” and “forthright businessmen” and contrasted them to the corrupt, monopolistic, aristocratic forces of established wealth. Democrats were more likely than Whigs to support territorial expansion, which would, they believed, widen opportunities for aspiring Americans. Among the most radical members of the party—the so-called Locofocos, mainly workingmen, small businessmen, and professionals in the Northeast—sentiment was strong for a vigorous, perhaps even violent, assault on monopoly and privilege.

JACKSONIAN AMERICA
• 217 

 In contrast, the political philosophy that became known as Whiggery favored the e­ xpansion of federal power and industrial and commercial development. Whigs Whiggery were cautious about westward expansion, fearful that rapid territorial growth would produce instability. And although Whigs insisted that their vision would result in increasing opportunities for all Americans, they tended to attribute particular value to the entrepreneurs and institutions that most effectively promoted economic growth. The Whigs were strongest among the more substantial merchants and manufacturers of the Northeast, the wealthier planters of the South, and the ambitious farmers and rising commercial class of the West. The Democrats drew more support from smaller merchants and the workingmen of the Northeast; from southern planters suspicious of industrial growth; and from westerners who favored a predominantly agrarian economy. Whigs tended to be wealthier, to have more aristocratic backgrounds, and to be more commercially ambitious than the Democrats. But Whigs and Democrats alike were more interested in winning elections than in maintaining philosophical purity. And both parties made adjustments from region to region to attract the largest possible number of voters. In New York, for example, the Whigs developed a popular following through a movement known as Anti-Masonry. The Anti-Mason Party had emerged in the Anti-Masonry 1820s in response to widespread resentment against the secret and exclusive, hence supposedly undemocratic, Society of Freemasons. Such resentment increased in 1826 when a former Mason, William Morgan, mysteriously disappeared from his home in Batavia, New York, shortly before he was scheduled to publish a book that would allegedly expose the secrets of Freemasonry. With help from a widespread assumption that Morgan had been abducted and murdered by vengeful Masons, Whigs seized on the Anti-Mason frenzy to launch spirited attacks on Jackson and Van Buren (both Freemasons), implying that the Democrats were connected with the antidemocratic conspiracy. Religious and ethnic divisions also played an important role in determining the constituencies of the two parties. Irish and German Catholics tended to support the Democrats, who appeared to share their own vague aversion to commercial development and who seemed to respect their cultural values. Evangelical Protestants gravitated toward the Whigs because they associated the party with constant development and improvement. They envisioned a society progressing steadily toward unity and order, and they looked on the new immigrant communities as groups that needed to be disciplined and taught “American” ways. The Whig Party was more successful at defining its positions and attracting a constituency than it was at uniting behind a national leader. No one person was ever able to command the loyalties of the party in the way Jackson commanded those of the Democrats. Instead, Whigs tended to divide their allegiance among the “Great Triumvirate” of Henry Clay, Daniel Webster, and John C. Calhoun. Clay won support from many who favored internal improvements and economic development with what he called the American System. But Clay’s image The American System as a devious political operator and his identification with the West were a liability. He ran for president three times and never won. Daniel Webster won broad support among the Whigs with his passionate speeches in defense of the Constitution and the Union; but his close connection with the Bank of the United States and the protective tariff, his reliance on rich men for financial support, and his excessive fondness for brandy prevented him from developing enough of a national constituency to win him his desired office. John C. Calhoun never considered himself a true Whig, and his identification with the nullification controversy in effect disqualified him from national leadership in any case.

218 • CHAPTER 9


 Yet he sided with Clay and Webster on the issue of the national bank, and he shared with them a strong animosity toward Andrew Jackson. The Whigs competed relatively evenly with the Democrats in congressional, state, and local races, but they managed to win only two presidential elections in the more than twenty years of their history. Their problems became particularly clear in 1836. While the Democrats united behind Andrew Jackson’s personal choice for president, Martin Van Van Buren Elected Buren, the Whigs could not even agree on a single candidate. Instead, they ran several candidates in different regions, hoping they might separately draw enough votes from Van Buren to throw the election to the House of Representatives, where the Whigs might be better able to elect one of their candidates. In the end, however, Van Buren won easily, with 170 electoral votes to 124 for all his opponents combined.

POLITICS AFTER JACKSON
 Andrew Jackson retired from public life in 1837, the most beloved political figure of his age. Martin Van Buren was less fortunate. He could not match Jackson’s personal magnetism, and his administration suffered from economic difficulties that hurt both him and his party.

Van Buren and the Panic of 1837
 Van Buren’s success in the 1836 election was a result in part of a nationwide economic boom. Canal and railroad builders operated at a peak of activity. Prices were rising, credit was plentiful, and the land business, in particular, was booming. Between 1835 and 1837, the government sold nearly 40 million acres of public land,

 This savage caricature of the economic troubles besetting the United States in 1837 illustrates, among other things, popular resentment of the hard-money orthodoxies of the time. A sign on the Custom House reads: “All bonds must be paid in Specie.” Next door, the bank announces: “No specie payments made here.” (© Museum of the City of New York, USA/Bridgeman Images) “THE TIMES,” 1837

JACKSONIAN AMERICA
• 219 

 nearly three-fourths of it to speculators. These land sales, along with revenues the government received from the tariff of 1833, created a series of substantial federal budget surpluses and made possible a steady reduction of the national debt. From 1835 to 1837, the government for the first and only time in its history was out of debt, with a substantial surplus in the Treasury. Congress and the administration now faced the question of what to do with the Treasury surplus. Support soon grew for returning the federal surplus to the states. An 1836 “distribution” act required the federal government to pay its surplus funds to the states each year in four quarterly installments as interest-free, unsecured loans. No one expected the “loans” to be repaid. The states spent the money quickly, mainly to promote the construction of highways, railroads, and canals. The distribution of the surplus thus gave further stimulus to the economic boom. At the same time, the withdrawal of federal funds strained the state banks in which they had been deposited by the government; the banks had to call in their own loans to make the transfer of funds to the state governments. Congress did nothing to check the speculative fever. But Jackson feared that the government was selling land for state banknotes of questionable value. In 1836, he issued an executive order, the “specie circular.” It provided that in payment for public Specie Circular lands, the government would accept only gold or silver coins or currency backed by gold or silver. The specie circular produced a financial panic that began in the first months of Van Buren’s presidency. Banks and businesses failed; unemployment grew; bread riots shook some of the larger cities; and prices fell, especially the price of land. Many railroad and canal projects failed; several of the debt-burdened state governments ceased to pay interest on their bonds, and a few repudiated their debts, at least temporarily. The worst depression in American history to that point, it lasted for five years, and it was a political catastrophe for Van Buren and the Democrats. The Van Buren administration did little to fight the depression. In fact, some of the steps it took—borrowing money to pay government debts and accepting only specie for payment of taxes—may have made things worse. Other efforts failed in Congress: a “preemption” bill that would have given settlers the right to buy government land near them before it was opened for public sale, and another bill that would have lowered the price of land. Van Buren did succeed in establishing a ten-hour workday on all federal projects via a presidential order, but he had few legislative achievements. The most important and controversial measure in the president’s program was a proposal for a new financial system. Under Van Buren’s plan, known as the “independent treasury” or “subtreasury” system, government funds would be “Independent Treasury” System placed in an independent treasury in Washington and in subtreasuries in other cities. No private banks would have the government’s money or name to use as a basis for speculation. Van Buren called a special session of Congress in 1837 to consider the proposal, but it failed in the House. In 1840, however, the administration finally succeeded in driving the measure through both houses of Congress.

The Log Cabin Campaign
 As the campaign of 1840 approached, the Whigs realized that they would have to settle on one candidate for president. In December 1839, they held their first nominating convention. Passing over Henry Clay, they chose William Henry William Henry Harrison Harrison, a renowned soldier and a popular national figure. The Democrats again nominated Van Buren.

PATTERNS OF POPULAR CULTURE


The Penny Press
 On September 3, 1833, a small newspaper appeared in New York City for the first time: the Sun, published by a young former apprentice from Massachusetts named Benjamin Day. Four pages long, it contained mostly trivial local news, with particular emphasis on sex, crime, and violence. It sold for a penny, launching a new age in the history of American journalism, the age of the “penny press.” Before the advent of the penny press, newspapers in America were far too expensive for most ordinary citizens to buy. But several important changes in both the ­business of journalism and the character of

 American society paved the way for Benjamin Day and others to challenge the established press. New technologies—the steam-powered cylinder printing press, new machines for making paper, railroads and canals for distributing issues to a larger ­market—made it possible to publish newspapers inexpensively and to sell them widely. A rising popular literacy rate, a r­esult, in part, of the spread of public ­education, created a bigger reading public. The penny press was also a response to the changing culture of the 1820s and 1830s. The spread of an urban market economy

 This 1834 front page of the Sun, which had begun publication a year earlier, contains advertisements, human interest stories, a description of a slave auction in Charleston, South Carolina, and homespun advice: “Life is short. The poor pittance of several years is not worth being a villain for.” (Collection of the New-York Historical Society) THE SUN

220 •


 c­ ontributed to the growth of the penny press by drawing a large population of workers, ­­artisans, and clerks into large cities, where they became an important market for the new papers. The spirit of democracy—symbolized by the popularity of Andrew Jackson and the rising numbers of white male voters across the country—helped create an appetite for journalism that spoke to and for “the people.” The Sun and other papers like it were committed to feeding the appetites of the people of modest means, who constituted most of their readership. “Human interest stories” helped solidify their hold on the working public. Within six months of its first issue, the Sun had the largest circulation in New York—8,000 readers, more than twice the number of its nearest competitors. James Gordon Bennett’s New York Herald, which began publication in 1835, soon surpassed the Sun in popularity, with its lively combination of sensationalism and local gossip and its aggressive pursuit of national and international stories. The Herald pioneered a “letters to the editor” column, was the first paper to have regular reviews of books and the arts, and launched the first daily sports section. By 1860, its c­ irculation of more than 77,000 was the ­largest of any daily newspaper in the world. Not all the new penny papers were as sensationalistic as the Sun and the Herald. The New-York Tribune, founded in 1841 by Horace Greeley, prided itself on serious ­reporting and commentary. As serious as the Tribune, but

 more sober and self-consciously “objective” in its reportage, was the New York Times, which Henry Raymond founded in 1851. “We do not mean to write as if we were in a passion—­ unless that shall really be the case,” the Times huffily proclaimed in its first issue, in an obvious reference to Greeley and his impassioned reportage, “and we shall make it a point to get into a passion as rarely as possible.” The newspapers of the penny press initiated the process of turning journalism into a profession. They were the first papers to pay their reporters, and they were also the first to rely heavily on advertisements, often devoting up to half their space to paid ­advertising. They tended to be sensationalistic and opinionated, but they were also ­usually aggressive in uncovering serious and important news—in police stations, courts, jails, streets, and private homes as well as in city halls, state capitals, Washington, and the world.

•


UNDERSTAND, ANALYZE, & EVALUATE
 1. How were the penny press newspapers a

 product of the Jacksonian era? 2. Before the advent of the penny press,

 newspapers in America were aimed at a much narrower audience. Some published mainly business news, and others worked to advance the aims of a political party. What nationally circulated newspapers and other media today ­continue this tradition?

 The 1840 campaign was the first in which the new and popular “penny press” carried news of the candidates to large audiences (See “Patterns of Popular Culture: The Penny Press.”). Such newspapers were deliberately livelier and more sensationalist than the newspapers of the past, which had been almost entirely directed at the upper classes. The Sun, the first of the new breed, began publishing in 1833 and was from the beginning self-consciously egalitarian. It soon had the largest circulation in New York. Other, similar papers soon began appearing in other cities—reinforcing the increasingly democratic character of political culture and encouraging the inclination of both parties to try to appeal to ordinary voters as they planned their campaigns. The campaign of 1840 also illustrated how fully the spirit of party competition had established itself in America. The Whigs—who had emerged as a party largely because • 221

222 • CHAPTER 9


HARRISON AND REFORM
This hand-colored engraving was made for a brass brooch during the 1840 presidential campaign and served the same purposes that modern campaign buttons do. It conveys Harrison’s presumably humble beginnings in a log cabin. In reality, Harrison was a wealthy, aristocratic man; but the unpopularity of the aristocratic airs of his opponent, President Martin Van Buren, persuaded the Whig Party that it would be good political strategy to portray Harrison as a humble “man of the people.” (© David J. & Janice L. Frent Collection/Corbis) 
 of their opposition to Andrew Jackson’s common-people democracy—presented themselves in 1840 as the party of the common people. So, of course, did the Democrats. With both parties using the same techniques of mass voter appeal, what mattered was not the philosophical purity of the party but its ability to win votes. The Whig campaign was particularly effective in portraying William Henry Harrison, a wealthy member of the frontier elite with a considerable estate, as a simple man of the people who loved log cabins and hard cider. The Democrats, already weakened by the depression, had no effective defense against such tactics. Harrison won the election with 234 electoral votes to 60 for Van Buren and with a popular majority of 53 percent.

The Frustration of the Whigs
 Despite their decisive victory, the Whigs found the four years after their resounding ­victory frustrating and divisive. The trouble began when their appealing new president died of pneumonia just one month after taking office. Vice President John Tyler of Virginia succeeded him.

JACKSONIAN AMERICA
• 223 

 Tyler was a former Democrat who had left the party in reaction to what he considered Jackson’s excessively egalitarian program; Tyler’s approach to public policy still showed signs of his Democratic past. The president did agree to bills abolishing Van Buren’s independenttreasury system and raising tariff rates. But he refused to support Clay’s attempt to recharter the Bank of the United States, and he vetoed several internal improvement bills sponsored by Clay and other congressional Whigs. Finally, a conference of congressional Whigs voted Tyler out of the party. Every cabinet member but Webster, who was serving as secretary of state, resigned; five former Democrats took their places. When Webster, too, left the cabinet, Tyler appointed Calhoun, who had rejoined the Democratic Party, to replace him. A new political alignment was taking shape. Tyler and a small band of conservative southern Whigs were preparing to rejoin the Democrats. Into the common Changes to Democratic Party people’s party of Jackson and Van Buren was arriving a faction with decidedly aristocratic political ideas, men who thought that government had an obligation to protect and even expand the institution of slavery and who believed in states’ rights with almost fanatical devotion.

Whig Diplomacy
 In the midst of these domestic controversies, anti-British factions in Canada launched an unsuccessful rebellion against the colonial government there in 1837. When the insurrection failed, some of the rebels took refuge near the United States border and chartered an American steamship, the Caroline, to ship them supplies across the Caroline Affair and Aroostook War Niagara River from New York. British authorities in Canada seized the Caroline and burned it, killing one American in the process. Resentment in the United States grew rapidly. At the same time, tensions flared over the boundary between Canada and Maine, which had been in dispute since the treaty of 1783. In 1838, rival groups of Americans and Canadians, mostly lumberjacks, began moving into the Aroostook River region in the disputed area, precipitating a violent brawl that became known as the “Aroostook War.” Several years later, in 1841, an American ship, the Creole, sailed from Virginia for New Orleans with more than 100 slaves aboard. En route the slaves mutinied, seized possession of the ship, and took it to the Bahamas. British officials there declared the slaves free, and the English government refused to overrule them. Many Americans, especially southerners, were furious. At this critical juncture, a new government eager to reduce tensions with the United States came to power in Great Britain. It sent Lord Ashburton, an admirer of America, to negotiate an agreement on the Maine boundary and other matters. The result was the Webster-Ashburton Treaty of 1842, under which the United States Webster-Ashburton Treaty received slightly more than half the disputed area and agreed to a northern boundary as far west as the Rocky Mountains. Ashburton also eased the memory of the Caroline and Creole affairs by expressing regret and promising no future “officious interference” with American ships. Anglo-American relations improved significantly. During the Tyler administration, the United States established its first diplomatic relations with China. In the 1844 Treaty of Wang Hya, American diplomats Trade with China secured the same trading privileges as the English. In the next ten years, American trade with China steadily increased. In their diplomatic efforts, at least, the Whigs were able to secure some important successes. But by the end of the Tyler administration, the party could look back on few other victories. And in the election of 1844, the Whigs lost the White House to James K. Polk, a Democrat with an explicit agenda of westward expansion.

224 • CHAPTER 9


CONCLUSION
 The election of Andrew Jackson in 1828 reflected the emergence of a new political world. Throughout the American nation, the laws governing political participation were loosening, and the number of people permitted to vote (which eventually included most white males, but almost no one else) was increasing. Along with this expansion of the electorate was emerging a new spirit of party politics. Jackson set out as president to entrench his party, the Democrats, in power. A fierce defender of the West and a sharp critic of what he considered the stranglehold of the aristocratic East on the nation’s economic life, he sought to limit the role of the federal government in economic affairs and worked to destroy the Bank of the United States, which he considered a corrupt vehicle of aristocratic influence. And he confronted the greatest challenge yet to American unity—the nullification crisis of 1832–1833—with a strong assertion of the power and importance of the Union. These positions won him broad popularity and ensured his reelection in 1832 and the election of his designated successor, Martin Van Buren, in 1836. But a new coalition of anti-Jacksonians, who called themselves the Whigs, launched a powerful new party that used much of the same anti-elitist rhetoric to win support for their own, much more nationalist program. Their emergence culminated in the campaign of 1840 with the election of William Henry Harrison, the first Whig president. When his death led to the accidental presidency of John Tyler, however, further realignments were set in motion.

KEY TERMS/PEOPLE/PLACES/EVENTS
Alexis de Tocqueville 204
Andrew Jackson 202
Anti-Masonry 217
Aroostook War 223
Bank War 215
Black Hawk War 211
 Caroline affair 223 Daniel Webster 210 Dorr Rebellion 203 “Five Civilized Tribes” 211

Indian Removal
Act 212
Indian Territory 213
John C. Calhoun 209
John Tyler 222
Martin Van Buren 209
Nicholas Biddle 214
 nullification 209 Panic of 1837 218 Roger B. Taney 216

Seminole Wars 213
 specie circular 219 spoils system 207 Trail of Tears 213 Webster-Ashburton Treaty 223 Webster-Hayne debate 210 Whigs 216 William Henry Harrison 219

RECALL AND REFLECT
 1. What was Andrew Jackson’s political philosophy, and how was it reflected in the policies and

 actions of his administration? Who benefited under Jacksonian democracy? Who suffered? How did Andrew Jackson change the office of the presidency? Who supported and who opposed the Bank of the United States, and why? Who was right? How and why did white attitudes toward Native Americans change, and how did these changes lead to the Indian Removal Act and the Trail of Tears? 6. How did Native Americans in the Southeast respond to white efforts to seize their land and remove them to the West?

2.
3.
4.
5.




AMERICA’S
ECONOMIC
REVOLUTION
THE CHANGING AMERICAN POPULATION
TRANSPORTATION AND COMMUNICATIONS
REVOLUTIONS
COMMERCE AND INDUSTRY
MEN AND WOMEN AT WORK
PATTERNS OF SOCIETY
THE AGRICULTURAL NORTH


LOOKING AHEAD
 1. What were the factors sparking the U.S. economic revolution of the ­ mid-nineteenth century? 2. How did the U.S. population change between 1820 and 1840, and how did the population change affect the nation’s economy, society, and politics? 3. Why did America’s Industrial Revolution affect the northern economy and society differently than it did the southern economy and society?

WHEN THE UNITED STATES ENTERED
the War of 1812, it was still an essentially agrarian nation. There were, to be sure, some substantial cities in America and also modest but growing manufacturing, mainly in the Northeast. But the overwhelming majority of Americans were farmers and tradespeople. By the time the Civil War began in 1861, the United States had transformed itself. Most Americans were still rural people. But even most farmers were now part of a national, and even international, market economy. Equally important, the United States was beginning to challenge the industrial nations of Europe for supremacy in manufacturing. The nation had experienced the beginning of its Industrial Revolution. 
• 225


TIME LINE


THE CHANGING
AMERICAN
POPULATION


1817–1825
 Erie Canal constructed

 1830s Immigration from Ireland and Germany begins

Baltimore and Ohio
 Railroad begins operation

 Lowell Mills women strike

Native American
 Association fights immigration

 McCormick patents mechanical reaper

 Morse sends first telegraph message Native American Party formed Rotary press invented John Deere manufactures steel plows

American Party
(Know-Nothings)
 formed

226 •


The American Industrial Revolution was a
 result of many factors: advances in transportation and communications, the growth of manufacturing technology, the development of new systems of business organization, and perhaps above all, population growth.

Population Trends
 Three trends characterized the American population during the antebellum period: rapid population increase, movement westward, and the growth of towns and cities where demand for work was expanding. The American population, 4 million in 1790, had reached 10 million by 1820 and 17 million by 1840. Improvements in public health played a role in this growth. Epidemics declined in both frequency and intensity, and the death rate as a whole dipped. But the population increase was also a result of a high birthrate. In 1840, white women bore an average of 6.14 children each. The African American population increased more slowly than the white population. After 1808, when the importation of slaves became illegal, the proportion of blacks to whites in the nation as a whole steadily declined. The slower increase of the black population was also a result of its comparatively high death rate. Slave mothers had large families, but life was shorter for both slaves and free blacks than for whites—a result of the enforced poverty and harsh working conditions in which virtually all African Americans lived. Immigration, choked off by wars in Europe and economic crises in America, contributed little to the American population in the first three decades of the nineteenth century. Of the total 1830 population of nearly 13 million, the foreign-born ­numbered fewer than 500,000. Soon, however, immigration

AMERICA’S ECONOMIC REVOLUTION
• 227 

 began to grow once again. Reduced transportation costs and increasing economic opportunities helped stimulate the immigration boom, as did deteriorating economic conditions in some areas of Europe. Much of this new European immigration flowed into the rapidly growing cities of the Northeast. But urban growth was a result of substantial internal migration as well. As agriculture in New England and other areas grew less profitable, more and more people picked up stakes and moved—some to promising agricultural regions in the West, but many to eastern cities.

Immigration and Urban Growth, 1840–1860
 The growth of cities accelerated dramatically between 1840 and 1860. The population of New York, for example, rose from 312,000 to 805,000, making it the Rapid Urbanization nation’s largest and most commercially important city. Philadelphia’s population grew over the same twenty-year period from 220,000 to 565,000; Boston’s, from 93,000 to 177,000. By 1860, 26 percent of the population of the free states was living in towns (places of 2,500 people or more) or cities, up from 14 percent in 1840. The urban population of the South, by contrast, increased from 6 percent in 1840 to only 10 percent in 1860. The booming agricultural economy of the West produced significant urban growth as well. Between 1820 and 1840, communities that had once been small villages or trading posts became major cities: St. Louis, Pittsburgh, Cincinnati, Louisville. All became centers of the growing carrying trade that connected the farmers of the Midwest with New Orleans and, through it, the cities of the Northeast. After 1830, however, an increasing proportion of this trade moved from the Mississippi River to the Great Lakes, creating such important new port cities as Buffalo, Detroit, Milwaukee, and Chicago, which gradually overtook the river ports. Immigration from Europe swelled. Between 1840 and 1850, more than 1.5 million Europeans moved to America. In the 1850s, the number rose to 2.5 million. Almost half the residents of New York City in the 1850s were recent immigrants. In St. Louis, Chicago, and Milwaukee, the foreign-born outnumbered those of native birth. Few immigrants settled in the South. The newcomers came from many different countries, but the overwhelming majority came from Ireland and Germany. By 1860, there were more than Irish and German Immigrants 1.5 million Irish-born and approximately 1 million German-born people in the United States. Most of the Irish stayed in the eastern cities where they landed and became part of the unskilled labor force. The largest single group of Irish immigrants comprised young, single women, who worked in factories or in domestic service. Germans, who—unlike the Irish—usually arrived with at least some money and often came in family groups, generally moved on to the Northwest, where they became farmers or small businessmen.

The Rise of Nativism
 Many politicians, particularly Democrats, eagerly courted the support of the new arrivals. Other older citizens, however, viewed the growing foreign population with alarm. Some people argued that the immigrants were racially inferior or that they corrupted politics by selling their votes. Others complained that they were stealing jobs from the native workforce. Protestants worried that the growing Irish population would increase the power of the Catholic Church in America. Older-stock Americans feared that immigrants would become a radical force in politics. Out of these fears and prejudices emerged a number of secret societies to combat the “alien menace.”

