630 • CHAPTER 26


 terrible losses, regained control of the central Pacific. The United States destroyed four Japanese aircraft carriers without losing one of its own. The Americans took the offensive several months later in the southern Solomon Islands, to the east of New Guinea. In August 1942, American forces assaulted three of the islands: Gavutu, Guadalcanal Tulagi, and Guadalcanal. A struggle of terrible ferocity continued at Guadalcanal for six months, inflicting heavy losses on both sides. In the end, however, the Japanese were forced to abandon the island—and with it their last chance of launching an effective offensive to the south. The Americans, with aid from the Australians and the New Zealanders, now began the slow, arduous process of moving toward the Philippines and Japan itself.

Holding Off the Germans
 In the European war, the United States fought in cooperation with, among others, Britain and the exiled “Free French” forces in the west, and tried also to conciliate its new ally, the Soviet Union, which was now fighting Hitler in the east. The army chief of staff, General George C. Marshall, supported a plan for a major Allied invasion of France across the English Channel in the spring of 1943, and he placed a previously little-known general, Dwight Eisenhower Dwight D. Eisenhower, in charge of planning the operation. The Soviet Union, which was absorbing the brunt of the German war effort, wanted the Allied invasion

BEL.


 Farthest extent of Axis conquest

Paris


Vichy France


FRANCE


 Allied occupied territory

Vienna


Budapest


AUSTRIA


SWITZ.


HUNGARY


Vichy


 Allied forces

YUGOSLAVIA


ITALY
Marseille
St. Tropez


Madrid


Sardinia


SPAIN


Safi
Nov. 8,
1942 MOROCCO


Tunisia


ALGERIA


PAT


Athens


GREECE


Sicily Messina


N


BULGARIA


TURKEY


Salerno
Sept. 10, 1943
Palermo


Invasion of Sicily
July 10, 1943


Rhodes


Malta


M


Port Lyautey
Nov. 8, 1942
Casablanca
Nov. 8, 1942


Monte Cassino
May 11–18, 1943
Taranto
Sept. 9,
1943 ALB.


K
Rome
June 4, 1944
Anzio
Jan. 22,


Bone
Tunis
Nov. 12, May 7,
Algiers Bougie
Nov. 8, Nov. 11,
Oran
Nov. 10,
Kasserine
Pass
Feb.14–22,


CL
AR


TO


Gibraltar
(British)


ROMANIA
Bucharest


Battles


PORTUGAL


SOVIET UNION


CZECH.


LUX.


 Neutral countries

Lisbon


POLAND


Prague


GERMANY


Mareth
Mar. 20–26,


ON


TG


E
OM


RY


 Medi terranean Sea

Tripoli
Jan. 23, 1943


MO


N TG


Benghazi
Nov. 20,


Tobruk
Nov. 13, 1942


BRITISH
FORCES


O M E RY


LIBYA


Cyprus


Crete


El Alamein
Oct. 23–
Nov. 4, 1942


Alexandria
Cairo


EGYPT


WORLD WAR II IN NORTH AFRICA AND ITALY: THE ALLIED COUNTEROFFENSIVE, 1942–1943
The United States and Great Britain understood from the beginning that an invasion of France across the English Channel would eventually be necessary for a victory in the European war. In the meantime, however, they began a campaign against Axis forces in North Africa, and in the spring of 1943 they began an invasion across the Mediterranean into Italy. This map shows the points along the coast of North Africa where Allied forces landed in 1942—with American forces moving east from Morocco and Algeria and British forces moving west from Egypt. The two armies met in Tunisia and moved into Italy from there. • Why were America and Britain reluctant to launch the cross-channel invasion in 1942 or 1943? 
AMERICA IN A WORLD AT WAR
• 631 

 to begin at the earliest possible moment. But the British wanted first to launch a series of Allied offensives around the edges of the Nazi empire—in northern Africa and southern Europe—before undertaking the invasion of France. Roosevelt ultimately decided to support the British plan—in part because he was eager to get American forces into combat quickly and knew that a cross-channel invasion would take a long time to prepare. At the end of October 1942, the British opened a counter­ offensive against General Erwin Rommel and the Nazi forces in northern Africa who were threatening the Suez Canal. In a major battle at El Alamein, they forced the Germans to retreat from Egypt. In early November, Anglo-American forces landed at Oran and Algiers in Algeria and at Casablanca in Morocco—areas under the Nazi-controlled French government at Vichy—and began moving east toward Rommel. The Germans threw the full weight of their forces in Africa against the inexperienced Americans and inflicted a serious defeat on them at the Kasserine Pass in Tunisia. General George S. Patton, however, regrouped and began an effective counteroffensive. With the help of Allied air and naval power and of British forces attacking from the east under Field Marshall Bernard Montgomery (the hero of El Alamein), the American offensive finally drove the last Germans from Africa in May 1943. The North African campaign had tied up a large proportion of Allied resources, postponing the planned May 1943 cross-channel invasion of France, despite Battle of Stalingrad angry complaints from the Soviet Union. By now, however, the threat of a Soviet collapse seemed much diminished, for during the winter of 1942–1943, the Red Army had successfully held off a major German assault at Stalingrad in southern Russia. Hitler had committed such enormous forces to the battle, and had suffered such appalling losses, that he could not continue his eastern offensive. The Soviet successes persuaded Roosevelt to agree, in a January 1943 meeting with Churchill in Casablanca, to a British plan for an Allied invasion of Sicily. Churchill argued that the operation in Sicily might knock Italy out of the war and tie up German divisions that would otherwise be stationed in France. On the night of July 9–10, 1943, American and British armies landed in southeastern Sicily; thirtyeight days later, they had conquered the island and were moving onto the Italian mainland. In the face of these setbacks, Mussolini’s government collapsed Italy Invaded and the dictator himself fled north toward Germany. (He was later captured by Italian insurgents and hanged.) Mussolini’s successor, Pietro Badoglio, quickly committed Italy to the Allies. Germany moved eight ­divisions into Italy and established a powerful defensive line south of Rome. The Allied offensive, which began on September 3, 1943, got bogged down at that line. Not until May 1944 did the Allies break through the German defenses to resume their northward advance. On June 4, 1944, they captured Rome. The invasion of Italy delayed the invasion of France by as much as a year, deeply embittering Stalin but also giving the Soviets time to begin moving toward the countries of eastern Europe.

America and the Holocaust
 In the midst of this intensive fighting, the leaders of the American government confronted one of history’s great tragedies: the Nazi campaign to exterminate the Jews of Europe, which became known as the Holocaust. As early as 1942, high officials in Washington had incontrovertible evidence that Hitler’s forces were rounding up Jews and others

632 • CHAPTER 26


 Many people consider the fate of the German liner St. Louis to be a powerful symbol of the indifference of the United States and other nations to the fate of European Jews during the Holocaust, even though its forlorn journey preceded both the beginning of World War II and the beginning of systematic extermination of Jews by the Nazi regime. The St. Louis carried a group of over 900 Jews fleeing from Germany in 1939, carrying exit visas of dubious legality cynically sold to them by members of Hitler’s Gestapo. It became a ship without a port as it sailed from country to country—Mexico, Paraguay, Argentina, Costa Rica, and Cuba—where its passengers were refused entry time and again. Most of the passengers were hoping for a haven in the United States, but the American State Department refused to allow the ship even to dock as it sailed up the American eastern seaboard. Eventually, the St. Louis returned to Europe and distributed its passengers among Britain, France, Holland, and Belgium (where this photograph was taken, showing refugees smiling and waving as they prepared to disembark in Antwerp in June 1939). Less than a year later, all those nations except Britain fell under Nazi control. (©Bettmann/Getty Images) THE ST. LOUIS

 (including Poles, homosexuals, and communists) from all over Europe, transporting them to concentration camps in eastern Germany and Poland, and systematically murdering them. (The death toll would ultimately reach 6 million Jews and at least 4 million others.) News of the atrocities soon reached the public as well, and pressure began to build for an Allied effort to end the killing or at least to rescue some of the surviving Jews. The American government consistently resisted almost all such demands. Although by U.S. Inaction mid-1944 Allied bombers were flying missions within a few miles of the most notorious death camp, at Auschwitz in Poland, the War Department argued that sending planes to destroy the crematoria was unfeasible. American officials also refused to destroy railroad lines leading to the camp. And the United States resisted pleas that it admit large numbers of Jewish refugees attempting to escape Europe. More forceful action by the United States (and Britain, which was even less amenable to Jewish requests for assistance) might have saved at least some lives. That they did not take such action, it seems clear in retrospect, constituted a considerable moral failure. But policymakers justified their inaction by insisting that they needed to focus exclusively on the larger goal of winning the war. Any diversion of energy and attention to other purposes, they believed, would distract them from the overriding goal of victory.

AMERICA IN A WORLD AT WAR
• 633 

THE AMERICAN ECONOMY IN WARTIME
 Not since the Civil War had the United States been involved in so prolonged and consuming a military experience as World War II. American armed forces engaged in combat around the globe for nearly four years. American society, in the meantime, experienced changes that reached into every corner of the nation.

Prosperity and the Rights of Labor
 World War II had a profound impact on American domestic life by ending the Great Depression. By the middle of 1941, the economic problems of the 1930s—unemployment, deflation, industrial sluggishness—had vanished before the great wave of wartime industrial expansion. The most important catalyst of the new prosperity was government spending, which after 1939 was pumping more money into the economy each year than Massive Government Spending had all the New Deal relief agencies combined. In 1939, the federal budget had been $9 billion, the highest in American peacetime history. By 1945, it had risen to $100 billion. Largely as a result, the gross national product soared: from $91 billion in 1939 to $166 billion in 1945. Personal incomes in some regions grew by as much as 100 ­percent or more. The West Coast, naturally, became the launching point for the war against Japan, and the government created large manufacturing facilities in California and elsewhere to serve the needs of the military. Altogether, the government made almost $40 billion worth of wartime capital investments (factories, military and transportation facilities, highways, power plants) in the West, more than in any other region. By the end of the war, the Pacific Coast had become the center of a growing American aircraft industry and an important shipbuilding center. Los Angeles, formerly a medium-sized city notable chiefly for its film industry, now became a major industrial center as well. The war created a serious labor shortage. The armed forces took more than 16 million men and women out of the civilian workforce at the same time that the demand for labor was rising rapidly. Nevertheless, the supply of workers increased by almost 20 percent during the war—largely through the employment of many people previously considered inappropriate for the workforce: individuals who were very young or elderly, minorities, and, most important, several million women. The war gave a substantial boost to union membership, which rose from about 10.5 million in 1941 to over 13 million in 1945. That was in part a result of labor’s ­“maintenance-of-membership” agreement with the government, Union Membership Boosted which ensured that the thousands of new workers pouring into unionized defense plants would be automatically enrolled in the unions. But the government also managed to win two important concessions from union leaders. One was the “no-strike” pledge, by which unions agreed not to stop production in wartime. Another was the so-called Little Steel formula, which set a 15 percent limit on wage increases. Despite the no-strike pledge, nearly 15,000 work stoppages took place during the war, mostly wildcat strikes (strikes not authorized by the union leadership). When the United Mine Workers defied the government by striking in May 1943, Congress reacted by passing, over Roosevelt’s veto, the Smith-Connally Act (the War Labor Disputes Act), which required that unions wait thirty days before striking and which empowered the president to seize a struck war plant. In the meantime, public animosity toward labor rose rapidly, and some states passed laws to limit union power.

634 • CHAPTER 26


Stabilizing the Boom and Mobilizing Production
 The fear of deflation, the central concern of the 1930s, gave way during the war to a fear of inflation, particularly after prices rose 25 percent in the two years before Pearl Harbor. The Office of Price Administration Fighting inflation was the task of the Office of Price Administration (OPA), which helped moderate what had been a serious problem during World War I. Even so, the agency was never popular. Black-marketing and overcharging grew in proportions far beyond OPA’s policing capacity. From 1941 to 1945, the federal government spent a total of $321 billion—twice as much as it had spent in the entire 150 years of its existence as a nation to that point, and ten times as much as the cost of World War I. The national debt rose from $49 billion in 1941 to $259 billion in 1945. The government borrowed about half the revenues it needed by selling $100 billion worth of bonds. Much of the rest it raised by radically increasing income-tax rates, through the Revenue Act of 1942. To simplify collection, Congress enacted a withholding system of payroll deductions in 1943. In January 1942, to mobilize the wartime economy, the president created the War Production Board (WPB). Throughout its troubled history, the WPB was never able to win complete control over military purchases; the army and navy often circumvented the board. Nor was it able to satisfy the complaints of small business, which charged (correctly) that most contracts went to large corporations. Gradually, the president transferred much of the WPB’s authority to a new office located within the White House: the Office of War Mobilization (OWM). But the OWM was only slightly more successful than the WPB. Despite the administrative problems, however, the war economy managed to meet almost all of the nation’s critical war needs. By the beginning of 1944, American factories were, in fact, producing more than the government needed. Their output was twice that of all the Axis countries combined.

Wartime Science and Technology
 More than any previous American war, World War II was a watershed for technological and scientific innovation. That was so partly because the American government poured substantial funds into research and development beginning in 1940. In that year, Government Financing of Research the ­ government created the National Defense Research Committee (which later became the Office of Scientific Research and Development). By the end of the war, the new agency had spent more than $100 million on research, more than four times the amount spent by the government on military research and development in the previous forty years. In the first years of the war, all the technological advantages seemed to lie with the Germans and Japanese. Germany had made great advances in tanks and other mechanized armor in the 1930s, particularly during the Spanish Civil War, when it had helped arm Franco’s forces. German submarine technology surpassed British and American capabilities in 1940. Japan had developed extraordinary capacity in its naval–air technology, as indicated by the successful raid on Pearl Harbor. But Britain and America had advantages of their own. American techniques of mass production—the great automotive assembly lines in particular—were converted efficiently to military production in 1941 and 1942 and soon began producing airplanes, ships, tanks, and other armaments in much greater numbers than could the Germans and Japanese. Allied scientists and engineers moved quickly as well to improve Anglo-American aviation and naval technology, particularly submarines and tanks. By late 1942, Allied

AMERICA IN A WORLD AT WAR
• 635 

 ­ eaponry was at least as advanced as, and more plentiful than, that of the enemy. The w Allies likewise enjoyed superiority in radar technology and developed effective naval mine detection systems. Anglo-American antiaircraft technology—both on land and on sea—also improved, but never to the point where it could defeat bombing raids altogether. Germany made substantial advances in the development of rocket technology in the early years of the war and managed to launch some rocket-propelled bombs (the V1s and V2s) across the English Channel, aimed at London. The psychological effects of the rockets on the British people were considerable. But the Germans were never able to create a production technology capable of building enough such rockets to make a real difference in the balance of military power. Beginning in 1942, British and American forces seized the advantage in the air war by producing new and powerful four-engine bombers in great numbers. At higher altitudes and with new navigation systems, they were able to conduct extensive bombing missions over Germany (and, later, Japan) with much less danger of being shot down. Long-Range Bombing The Allies also benefited from a radio device that sent a sonic message to airplanes to tell them when they were within 20 yards of their targets, first introduced in December 1942. The area in which the Allies had perhaps the greatest advantage was the gathering of intelligence, much of it through Britain’s top-secret Ultra project. Some of the advantages the Allies enjoyed came from the capture of German and Japanese intelligence devices. More important, however, were the efforts of cryptologists, or code breakers. Much of Germany’s coded communication made use of the so-called Enigma machine, which constantly changed the coding systems it used. In the first months of the war, Polish intelligence had developed an electromechanical computer. It was called the “Bombe,” and it could decipher some Enigma messages. After the fall of Poland, British scientists, led by the brilliant computer pioneer Alan Turing, took the Bombe and greatly improved it. On April 15, 1940, the new, improved high-speed Bombe deciphered a series of German messages within hours (not days, as had previously been the case). A few weeks later, it began decrypting German messages at the rate of 1,000 a day, providing the British (and, later, the Americans) with a constant flow of information about enemy operations throughout the war. British scientists working for the intelligence services, meanwhile, built the first real programmable, digital computer—the Colossus II, which became The Colossus II operational less than a week before the beginning of the Normandy invasion and which could decipher an enormous number of intercepted German messages almost instantly. The United States similarly developed the ability to crack a Japanese coding system.

RACE AND ETHNICITY IN WARTIME AMERICA
 The war loosened many traditional barriers that had restricted the lives of minorities and women. There was so much demand for fighting men, so much demand for labor, and so much fluidity and mobility that the social and cultural barriers could not survive intact.

African Americans and the War
 In the summer of 1941, A. Philip Randolph, president of the mostly African American Brotherhood of Sleeping Car Porters Union, began to insist that the A. Philip Randolph government require companies receiving defense contracts to integrate their workforces.

636 • CHAPTER 26


 To mobilize support for the demand, Randolph planned a massive march on Washington. The threat led Roosevelt to promise to establish what became the Fair Employment Practices Commission (FEPC) to investigate discrimination against African Americans in war industries. The need for labor in war plants greatly increased the migration of African Americans from the rural South into industrial cities. The migration improved the economic conditions Wartime Race Riots of many African Americans. But it also created urban tensions and occasional violence. A terrible race riot in Detroit in 1943 killed thirty-four people, twenty-five of them black. Despite such tensions, leading black organizations redoubled their efforts to challenge segregation. The Congress of Racial Equality (CORE), organized in 1942, mobilized mass popular resistance to discrimination in a way that the older, more conservative organizations had never done. Randolph, Bayard Rustin, James Farmer, and other, younger African American leaders helped organize sit-ins and demonstrations in segregated theaters and CORE restaurants. CORE also organized “Freedom Rides” to desegregate buses and bus terminals. Though often unsuccessful, these efforts strengthened a culture of civil rights activism in the black community. Pressure for change also grew within the military. The armed forces maintained their traditional practice of limiting African Americans to the most menial assignments, keeping them in segregated training camps and units, and barring them entirely from the Marine Corps and the Army Air Force. But there were signs of change. By the end of the war, the number of black servicemen had increased sevenfold, to 700,000; some training camps were being at least partially integrated. African Americans were allowed to serve on ships with white sailors, and more black units were sent into combat. The changes did not come easily. In some of the partially integrated army bases—Fort Dix, New Jersey, for example—riots broke out when black soldiers protested mistreatment and segregation.

Native Americans and the War
 Approximately 25,000 Indians served in the military during World War II. Many Native Americans saw combat. Others (mostly Navajo) became military “code talkers,” speakNavajo “Code Talkers” ing their own language (which enemy forces would be unlikely to understand) over the radio and the telephones. The war had important effects on the Indians who served in the military. It brought them into intimate contact (often for the first time) with white society, and it awakened among some of them a taste for the material benefits of life in capitalist America that they would retain after the war. Some never returned to the reservations but chose to remain in the non-Indian world and assimilate to its ways. The war had important effects, too, on the Native Americans who stayed on the reservations. Little war work reached the tribes. Government subsidies dwindled. Talented young people left the reservations to serve in the military or work in war production, creating workforce shortages in some tribes. The wartime emphasis on national unity undermined support for the revitalization of tribal autonomy that the Indian Reorganization Act of 1934 had launched. New pressures emerged to eliminate the reservation system and to require the tribes to assimilate into white society. The pressures were so severe that John Collier, the energetic director of the Bureau of Indian Affairs who had done so much to promote the reinvigoration of the reservations, resigned in 1945.

AMERICA IN A WORLD AT WAR
• 637 

Mexican American War Workers
 Large numbers of Mexican workers entered the United States in response to wartime labor shortages on the Pacific Coast and in the Southwest. The American and Mexican governments agreed in 1942 to a program by which braceros (contract laborers) Braceros Program would be admitted to the United States for a limited time. Some worked as migrant farm laborers, but many Mexicans were able for the first time to find factory jobs. They formed the second-largest group of migrants (after African Americans) to U.S. cities in the 1940s. They concentrated mainly in the West but established significant Mexican communities in Chicago, Detroit, and other industrial cities. The sudden expansion of Mexican American neighborhoods created tensions and occasional conflict. Anglo residents of Los Angeles became alarmed at the activities of Mexican American teenagers, many of whom joined street gangs (pachucos). The Mexican American youths were particularly distinctive because of their style of dress. At a time when fabric had been rationed for the war effort, they wore long, loose jackets with padded shoulders, baggy pants tied at the ankles, long watch chains, broad-brimmed hats, and greased, ducktail hairstyles. The outfit was known as a “zoot suit.” In June 1943, Zoot Suits animosity toward the “zoot-suiters”—driven partly by ethnic prejudice and partly by the apparent disregard of rationing—produced a four-day riot in Los Angeles. Anglo sailors in Long Beach invaded Mexican American communities and attacked zoot-suiters. The police did little to restrain the sailors, who grabbed Hispanic teenagers, tore off and burned their clothes, cut off their ducktails, and beat them. When Mexicans tried to fight back, the police moved in and arrested them. In the aftermath of the “zoot-suit riots,” Los Angeles passed a law prohibiting zoot suits.

The Internment of Japanese Americans
 World War II produced considerable animosity toward the Japanese. After the attack on Pearl Harbor, government propaganda and popular culture combined to create an image of the Japanese as a devious, malign, and savage people. (See “Consider the Source: The Face of the Enemy.”) This racial animosity soon extended to Americans of Japanese descent. There were not many Japanese Americans in the United States—about 127,000, most of them concentrated in a few areas in California. About one-third were unnaturalized first-generation immigrants (Issei); two-thirds were naturalized or native-born citizens of the United States (Nisei). Because they generally kept to themselves and preserved traditional Japanese cultural patterns, it was easy for Anglo Americans to imagine (wrongly) that the Japanese Americans were engaged in conspiracies on behalf of their ancestral homeland. In February 1942, in response to pressure from military officials and political leaders on the West Coast (including California attorney general Earl Warren) and recommendations from the War Department, the president authorized the army to “intern” the Japanese Americans. More than 100,000 people (Issei and Nisei alike) were rounded up, told to dispose of their property however they could (which often meant simply abandoning it), and taken to what the government euphemistically called “relocation “Relocation Centers” centers.” In fact, they were facilities little different from prisons, many of them located in the western mountains and desert. A group of innocent people (many of them citizens of the United States) were forced to spend up to three years in grim, debilitating isolation, barred from lucrative employment, provided with only minimal medical care, and deprived of decent schools for their children. The Supreme Court upheld the evacuation in the 1944

CO NS IDER T HE S O URC E
THE FACE OF THE ENEMY
 During World War II, illustrators used caricature, symbolism, exaggeration, and juxtaposition to mobilize public opinion and behavior. The Japanese were frequent objects of such representation. Early in the war, an artist working under the auspices of the Work Projects Administration (WPA, formerly the Works Progress Administration) produced the poster, “Salvage Scrap to Blast the Jap.” The second image, Arthur Szyk’s cover for ­ epicts Collier’s magazine in December 1942, d the Japanese prime minister Hideki Tojo.

UNDERSTAND, ANALYZE, & EVALUATE


U.S. NAVY POSTER “SALVAGE SCRAP TO BLAST
THE JAP”
(The Library of Congress) 
ARTHUR SZYK, COLLIER’S COVER, DECEMBER 12,
1942 (© Private Collection/Peter Newark Military


638 •


 1. The Americans and Japanese are repre-

 sented by different animals in the WPA poster. What do those choices suggest about how people in the United States viewed the character of the two ­nations? 2. What event is artist Arthur Szyk ­depicting in the cartoon on the Collier’s cover? What evidence can you find in the cartoon to support your choice?

 Pictures/Bridgeman Images/Reproduced with the cooperation of The Arthur Szyk Society, Burlingame, CA; www.syzk.org)

AMERICA IN A WORLD AT WAR
• 639 

 Korematsu ­decision; and although most of the Japanese Americans were released later that year, they were unable to win any significant compensation for their Korematsu v. U.S. losses until Congress finally acted in the late 1980s.

Chinese Americans and the War
 At the same time that the war undermined the position of Japanese Americans, the American alliance with China during World War II significantly enhanced both the legal and social status of Chinese Americans. In 1943, partly to improve relations with the government of China, Congress repealed the Chinese Exclusion Act, which had barred almost all Chinese immigration since its renewal in 1892. The new quota for Chinese immigrants was minuscule (105 a year), but a substantial number of Chinese women managed to gain entry into the country through other provisions covering war brides and fiancées. Over 4,000 Chinese women entered the United States in the first three years after the war. Permanent residents of Chinese descent were finally permitted to become citizens. Racial animosity toward the Chinese did not disappear, but it did decline—in part because government propaganda and popular culture both began presenting positive images of the Chinese (in some measure to contrast them with the Japanese) and in part because Chinese Americans (like African Americans and other previously marginal groups) began taking jobs in war plants and other booming areas suffering from labor shortages. A higher proportion of Chinese Americans (22 percent of all adult males) was drafted than that of any other national group, and the entire Chinese community in most cities worked hard and conspicuously for the war effort.

ANXIETY AND AFFLUENCE IN WARTIME CULTURE
 The war created considerable anxiety in American lives. Families worried about loved ones at the front, and as the war continued, many mourned relatives who had died in combat. Women struggled to support families in the absence of husbands and fathers. Businesses and communities struggled with shortages of goods and labor. People living on the two coasts, in particular, worried about enemy invasions and sabotage. But the abundance of the war years also created a striking buoyancy in American life. Suddenly people had money to spend again and—despite the many shortages—at least some things to spend it on. In fact, consumerism became, as it had in Consumerism Reborn the 1920s, one of the most powerful forces in American culture.

Home-Front Life and Culture
 As part of the consumerist resurgence of the war years, Americans spent millions of dollars and hours on entertainment and leisure. Audiences equal to about half the nation’s population attended movies each week. Radio ownership increased, and pictorial magazines such as Life flourished. Dance halls were packed with young people drawn to the seductive music of bands. Soldiers and sailors home on leave, or awaiting shipment abroad, were special fans of the dances, which became to many of them a symbol of the life they were leaving and fighting to protect. The most popular music was the relatively new jazz form known as swing, which had emerged from the African American musical imagination. Bandleaders such as Benny Goodman and Duke Ellington were among the

640 • CHAPTER 26


 most recognized figures in American popular culture, rivaling movie stars, and they sometimes hired black musicians to join their groups. Much of what Americans read, heard, and saw during the war was managed by the government and military. At the center of the government’s propaganda effort was the The Office of War Information Office of War Information (OWI). The OWI issued posters, ran magazine advertisements, and produced films. These materials urged ordinary Americans to do their part—buy war bonds, conserve household resources, keep quiet about troop movements. Government and military officials, meanwhile, censored the reports that journalists filed from the war zone. Correspondents happily refrained from printing anything that might compromise military strategy or effectiveness—they wanted the United States to win too, after all. But Roosevelt and others also believed that gory or depressing war news would sap the public’s will, especially in the first two years of the war. It wasn’t until September 1943 that officials allowed an image of American dead to appear in print. Federal officials had changed their minds, deciding that slightly more graphic war coverage would awaken a public growing complacent about the sacrifices being made on its behalf. Hollywood films about the war—and there were hundreds of them—offered a relatively The Celluloid War sanitized picture of the conflict. Whether of their own volition or in ­consultation with military officials, movie producers usually offered a picture of the soldier in line with journalistic reports and government propaganda. In many “platoon films,” death came quickly and without blood and guts. Soldiers behaved courageously, missed home, and found maturity (rather than breakdown) through combat. Blacks didn’t typically appear in these platoons—true to the reality of a Jim Crow army—but many other white ethnic groups did. In fact, a central point of many wartime pictures, as well as OWI propaganda posters, was that Jews, Polish Americans, Italian Americans, and other groups largely barred by the 1924 immigration restriction had become assimilated contributors to the American military machine. The upshot of all this was a wartime popular culture saturated with combat imagery but which kept some of the worst realities of war obscured. This frustrated one of the central figures in the project of wartime information management. The beloved war correspondent Ernie Pyle, a popular and honest chronicler of the American GI before an audience of millions, believed that no one at home had really seen the war. After a Japanese sniper killed Pyle in April 1945, American soldiers found an unfinished column in his pocket. “You didn’t see him lying so grotesque and pasty beside the gravel road in France,” he wrote of the generic dead soldier. “We saw him, saw him by the multiple thousands. That’s the difference.”

Love, Family, and Sexuality in Wartime
 For men at the front, the image of home both served as a motivational symbol and helped soften the rigors of combat. Letters and mementos from loved ones sustained the morale of millions of service members. They dreamed of music, food, movies, and other material comforts. Many also dreamed of women—wives and girlfriends, but also movie stars and entertainers, who became the source of one of the most popular icons of the front: the pinup. Sailors pasted pinups inside their lockers. Infantrymen carried them (along with pictures of wives, mothers, and girlfriends) in their knapsacks. Fighter pilots gave their planes female names and painted bathing beauties on their nose cones.

AMERICA IN A WORLD AT WAR
• 641 

 For the servicemen who remained in America, and for soldiers and sailors in cities far from home in particular, the company of friendly, “wholesome” women was, the military believed, critical to sustaining morale. The branches of the United Service Organization (known as USOs) recruited thousands of young women to serve as Importance of USOs ­hostesses in their clubs. They were expected to dress nicely, dance well, and chat happily with lonely men. Other women joined “dance brigades,” traveling by bus to military bases for social evenings with servicemen. The “USO girls” and the members of the dance brigades were forbidden to have any contact with men except at parties at the clubs or during dances. Clearly, such regulations were often violated. The military took elaborate measures to root out gay men and lesbians from their ranks—vigilantly searching for evidence of homosexuality and unceremoniously dismissing gay people with undesirable discharges. The services quietly tolerated illicit heterosexual relationships, which they believed were temporary, natural, and, for many men, necessary. Wartime families also experienced change. The number of women in the workforce increased by nearly 60 percent during the war, as many women replaced male industrial workers serving in the military. These new wage-earning women were likely to be married and were, on the whole, older than most who had entered the workforce in the past. Many factory owners continued to categorize jobs by gender, reserving the most lucrative positions for men. (Female work, like male work, was also categorized by race: black women

WOMEN AT WAR
Many American women enlisted in the army and navy women’s corps during World War II, but an equally important contribution to the war effort was their work in factories and offices—often in jobs that would have been considered inappropriate for them in peacetime but that they were now encouraged to assume because of the absence of so many men. (The Library of Congress) 
642 • CHAPTER 26


 were usually assigned more menial tasks, and paid at a lower rate, than their white counterparts.) But some women began to take on heavy industrial jobs that had long been considered “Rosie the Riveter” “men’s work.” The famous wartime image of “Rosie the Riveter” symbolized the new importance of the female industrial worker. Women joined unions in substantial numbers and helped erode at least some of the prejudice, including the prejudice against mothers working, that had previously kept many of them from paid employment. Most women workers during the war, however, were employed not in factories but in service-sector jobs. Above all, they worked for the government, whose bureaucratic needs expanded dramatically alongside its military and industrial needs. Even within the miliWAACs and WAVEs tary, which enlisted substantial numbers of women as WAACs (army) and WAVEs (navy), most female work was clerical. Many mothers whose husbands were in the military had to combine work with child care. The scarcity of child-care facilities or other community services meant that some women had no choice but to leave young children at home alone (or sometimes locked in cars in factory parking lots) or with relatives or neighbors while they worked. Perhaps in part because of the family dislocations of the war, juvenile crime rose markedly. Young boys were arrested at increasing rates for car theft, burglary, vandalism, and vagrancy. For many children, however, the distinctive experience of the war years was not crime but work. More than a third of all teenagers between the ages of fourteen and eighteen were employed during the last years of the war, causing some reduction in high school enrollments. The return of prosperity helped increase the marriage rate and lower the age at which people married, but many marriages were unable to survive the pressures of wartime separation. The divorce rate rose rapidly. Even so, the rise in the birthrate that accompanied the increase in marriages was the first sign of what would become the great postwar “baby boom.”

The Growth of Wartime Conservatism
 Late in 1943, Franklin Roosevelt publicly suggested that “Dr. New Deal,” as he called it, had served its purpose and should now give way to “Dr. Win-the-War.” The statement reflected the president’s own genuine shift in concern: victory was now more important than reform. But it reflected, too, the political reality that had emerged during the first two years of war. The greatest assault on New Deal reforms came from conservatives in Congress, who seized on the war as a reason to do what many had wanted to do in peacetime: dismantle many of Conservative Assault on the New Deal the achievements of the New Deal. They were assisted by the end of mass unemployment, which decreased the need for such relief programs as the Civilian Conservation Corps and the Works Progress Administration (both of which Congress abolished). They were assisted, too, by their own increasing numbers. In the congressional elections of 1942, Republicans gained 47 seats in the House and 10 in the Senate. Republicans approached the 1944 election determined to exploit what they believed was resentment of wartime regimentation and unhappiness with Democratic reform. They Democrats Drop Wallace nominated as their candidate the young and vigorous governor of New York, Thomas E. Dewey. Roosevelt was unopposed within his party, but Democratic leaders pressured him to abandon Vice President Henry Wallace, an advanced New Dealer and hero of the CIO. Roosevelt agreed to replace him with a more moderate figure, Senator Harry S. Truman of Missouri. Truman had won acclaim as chairman of the Senate War Investigating Committee (known as the Truman Committee), which compiled an impressive record uncovering waste and corruption in wartime production.

AMERICA IN A WORLD AT WAR
• 643 

 The election revolved around domestic economic issues and, indirectly, the president’s health. He was, in fact, gravely ill, suffering from, among other things, advanced arteriosclerosis. But the campaign seemed momentarily to revive him. Roosevelt made several strenuous public appearances late in October, which dispelled popular doubts about his health and ensured his reelection. He captured 53.5 percent of the p­ opular Roosevelt Reelected vote to Dewey’s 46 percent, and 432 electoral votes to Dewey’s 99. Democrats lost 1 seat in the Senate, gained 20 in the House, and maintained control of both.

THE DEFEAT OF THE AXIS
 By the middle of 1943, America and its allies had succeeded in stopping the Axis advance in both Europe and the Pacific. In the next two years, the Allies themselves seized the offensive and launched a series of powerful drives that led the way to victory.

ICELAND


 Allied offensives

Norwegian
Sea


 Allies and Allied-controlled areas Neutral nations Axis powers

Faeroe Is.
(Den.)


SWEDEN


Shetland Is.
(Br.)


FINLAND


NORWAY


GREAT
BRITAIN


 a Se

Ba


LATVIA


 l t LITHUANIA EAST PRUSSIA

Moscow




 sp

Yalta
Black Sea


Se


 a



Ca


 n





Tehran


(It.)


TURKEY
IRAN


Sicily




ALGERIA
(Fr.)


Stalingrad
August 1942–February 1943




GREECE




MOROCCO
(Fr.)


SOVIET UNION


 ia



Algiers


Battles








Sardinia
(It.)


Oran


 Vichy France (controlled by Axis prior to Allied invasion, 1942–1944)

 ic

DENMARK


Y


Casablanca




POR
TU
GA
L


North
Sea


London
GERMANY
 1944 Calais NETH. 1945 D-Day Berlin Warsaw BELG. June 1944 Battle of the Bulge POLAND December 1944 C ZE Paris CHOS Dresden LUX. LOVAK IA FRANCE AUSTRIA ARY 1944 SWITZ. Vichy NG U H ROMANIA U G O SL ITALY AV A RI IA Corsica SPAIN GA Rome (Fr.) BUL 1 ALBANIA

MOROCCO
(Sp.)


 Farthest Axis control



Leningrad
ESTONIA


IRELAND






AT L A N T I C
OCEAN


Dodecanese Cyprus
(It.)
(Br.)


Kasserine Pass
February 1943
TUNISIA
(Fr.)


Me
Crete
 dit erra n ea n S e a





LIBYA
(It.)


SYRIA
(Fr.)


IRAQ
(Br.)


LEBANON
(Fr.)
PALESTINE
 (Br.) TRANSJORDAN (Br.)

Suez
El Alamein Canal
October–November 1942
EGYPT


SAUDI ARABIA


WORLD WAR II IN EUROPE: THE ALLIED COUNTEROFFENSIVE, 1943–1945
This map illustrates the final, climactic movements in the war in Europe—the two great offensives against Germany that began in 1943 and culminated in 1945. From the east, the armies of the Soviet Union, having halted the Germans at Stalingrad and Moscow, swept across eastern Europe toward Germany. From the west and the south, American, British, and other Allied forces moved toward Germany through Italy and—after the Normandy invasion in June 1944—through France. The two offensives met in Berlin in May 1945. Note, too, the northern routes that America and Britain used to supply the Soviet Union during the war. • What problems did the position of the Allied forces at the end of the war help produce? 
644 • CHAPTER 26


The European Offensive
 By early 1944, American and British bombers were attacking German industrial installations and other targets almost around the clock, drastically cutting production and impeding transportation. A February 1945 incendiary raid on Dresden created a great firestorm that destroyed three-fourths of the previously undamaged city and killed approximately 135,000 people, almost all civilians. An enormous offensive force had been gathering in England for two years before the spring of 1944: almost 3 million troops and perhaps the greatest array of naval vessels and armaments ever assembled in one place. On the morning of June 6, 1944 (D-Day), D-Day this vast invasion force moved into action. The landing came not at the narrowest part of the English Channel, where the Germans had expected and prepared for it, but along sixty miles of the Cotentin Peninsula on the coast of Normandy. While airplanes and battleships offshore bombarded the Nazi defenses, 4,000 vessels landed American, British, Canadian, and other troops and supplies on the beaches. (Three divisions of paratroopers had been dropped chaotically behind the German lines the night before.) Fighting was intense along the beach, but the superior manpower and equipment of the Allied forces gradually prevailed. Within a week, the German forces had been dislodged from virtually the entire Normandy coast. For the next month, further progress remained slow. But in late July, in the Battle of Saint-Lô, General Omar Bradley’s First Army smashed through the German lines. George S. Patton’s Third Army, spearheaded by heavy tank attacks, then moved through the hole Bradley had created and began a drive into the heart of France. On August 25, Free French forces arrived in Paris and liberated the city from four years of German occupation. By mid-September the Allied armies had driven the Germans almost entirely out of France and Belgium.

THE NORMANDY INVASION
This photograph, taken from a landing craft, shows American troops wading ashore and onto the Normandy beaches, where one of the decisive battles of World War II was taking shape. The invasion was launched despite threatening weather and rough seas. (© Popperfoto/Getty Images) 
AMERICA IN A WORLD AT WAR
• 645 

 The great Allied drive came to a halt, however, at the Rhine River against a firm line of Nazi defenses. In mid-December, German forces struck in desperation along fifty miles of front in the Ardennes Forest. In the Battle of the Bulge (named for a Battle of the Bulge large bulge that appeared in the American lines as the Germans pressed forward), they drove fifty-five miles toward Antwerp before they were finally stopped at Bastogne. It was the last major battle on the western front. While the western Allies fought their way through France, Soviet forces swept westward into central Europe and the Balkans. In late January 1945, the Russians launched a great offensive toward the Oder River, inside Germany. By early Germany Invaded

 This photograph, taken near the end of World War II, shows a group of imprisoned children behind a barbed wire fence in one of the most notorious Nazi concentration camps. By the time this picture was taken, the Nazis had been driven out of Auschwitz and were under the control of Allied soldiers. (© Keystone/Getty Images) AUSCHWITZ, DECEMBER 1944

646 • CHAPTER 26


 spring, they were ready to launch a final assault against Berlin. General Omar Bradley, in the meantime, was pushing toward the Rhine from the west. Early in March, Bradley’s forces captured the city of Cologne, on the river’s west bank. The next day, they discovered and seized an undamaged bridge over the river at Remagen; Allied troops were soon pouring across the Rhine. In the following weeks, the British commander Montgomery, with a million troops, pushed into Germany in the north while Bradley’s army, sweeping through central Germany, completed the encirclement of 300,000 German soldiers in the Ruhr. The German resistance was now broken on both fronts. American forces were moving eastward faster than they had anticipated and could have beaten the Russians to Berlin and Prague. The American and British high commands decided, instead, to halt the advance along the Elbe River in central Germany to await the Russians. That decision enabled the Soviets to occupy eastern Germany and Czechoslovakia. On April 30, with Soviet forces on the outskirts of Berlin, Adolf Hitler killed himself in his bunker in the capital. And on May 8, 1945, the remaining German forces surrendered unconditionally.

The Pacific Offensive
 In February 1944, American naval forces under Admiral Chester Nimitz won a series of victories in the Marshall Islands and cracked the outer perimeter of the Japanese Empire. Within a month, the navy had destroyed other vital Japanese bastions. American submarines, in the meantime, were decimating Japanese shipping and crippling Japan’s domestic economy. America’s principal ally in Asia was China. To assist the Chinese forces, the army sent General Joseph W. Stilwell to help provide critical supplies to China by a land route through India and across the Himalayas. It was a brutal task, but in the fall of 1944, Stilwell’s forces succeeded in constructing a road and pipelines across the mountains into China. More dangerously, the Japanese were also threatening the wartime capital of China in Chungking. Chiang Kai-shek, the Chinese premier, was reluctant to use his troops against the Japanese and seemed more concerned with attacking Chinese communists, who were also fighting the Japanese. After Stilwell left China, his successors continued to have trouble prodding Chiang to confront the Japanese. The decisive battles of the Pacific war occurred not in China but at sea. In mid-June 1944, an enormous American armada struck the heavily fortified Mariana Islands and, after some of the bloodiest operations of the war, captured Tinian, Guam, and Saipan. On October 20, General MacArthur’s troops landed on Leyte Island in the Philippines. The Japanese now employed virtually their entire fleet against the Allied invaders in three major encounters—which together constituted the decisive Battle of Leyte Gulf, the largBattles of Leyte Gulf and Iwo Jima est naval engagement in history. American forces held off the Japanese onslaught and sank four Japanese carriers, all but destroying Japan’s capacity to continue a serious naval war. In February 1945, American marines seized the tiny volcanic island of Iwo Jima, just 750 miles from Tokyo, but only after the costliest battle in the history of the Marine Corps. The battle for Okinawa, an island only 370 miles south of Japan, gave evidence of the Okinawa strength of the Japanese resistance in these last desperate days. Week after week, the Japanese sent kamikaze (suicide) planes against American and British ships, sacrificing

AMERICA IN A WORLD AT WAR
• 647 

SOVIET UNION


Sakhalin
Island


.)
Attu
U. S
A l e Kiska
 s ( utian Island

 s

 nd sla lI

MONGOLIA


MANCHURIA
Harbin
Vladivostok


Peking
KOREA
C H I NA
TIBET


Nanking


Chungking


Shanghai


BHUTAN


Formosa


INDIA
(Br.)


 ri Ku

Canton


JAPAN
Tokyo


Hiroshima
August 6, 1945
PACIFIC
Nagasaki
OCEAN
August 9, 1945
Okinawa
Iwo Jima
April–June 1945
February–March 1945
Mariana
Wake Island
Islands
December 23, 1941
Tinian
July 24, 1944


Hong
Kong


BURMA


 Rangoon THAILAND FRENCH INDOCHINA Bangkok

PHILIPPINES
Manila
Leyte Gulf
October 24–26, 1944


MALAYA
Singapore


Su
 tra ma

Borneo
Borneo May–August 1945
DUTCH EAST INDIES


Java


INDIAN
OCEAN


New


Java Sea
February–March 1942


Lombok Strait
February 18–19, 1942


Haw


 a ii a

 n Is l an

 ds

Pearl Harbor
December 7,
(U


.S.


)


Eniwetok
February 17, 1944


Guam
July 21, 1944
C a r o l i n e I s l a n d s Marshall
Islands
Palau
September 15, 1944


Saigon


Midway
June 3–6, 1942


Guin
 ea

Kwajalein
January 31, 1944


Tarawa
November 20, 1943
Gilbert
Islands
Solomon
Islands


Port Moresby
Coral Sea
May 7–8, 1942


Guadalcanal
August 1942–February 1943


Coral
Sea


 Allied-controlled areas Areas under Japanese control Farthest extent of Japanese control Neutral nations Atomic bomb Allied victories

AUSTRALIA


 Japanese victories Allied forces Japanese forces

WORLD WAR II IN THE PACIFIC
This map illustrates the changing fortunes of the two combatants in the Pacific phase of World War II. The long red line stretching from Burma around to Manchuria represents the eastern boundary of the vast areas of the Pacific that had fallen under Japanese control by the summer of 1942. The blue lines illustrate the advance of American forces back into the Pacific beginning in May 1942 and accelerating in 1943 and after, which drove back the Japanese forces. The American advance was a result of two separate offensives—one in the central Pacific, under the command of Chester Nimitz, which moved west from Hawaii; and the other, under the command of Douglas MacArthur, which moved north from Australia. By the summer of 1945, American forces were approaching the Japanese mainland and were bombing Tokyo itself. The dropping of two American atomic bombs, on Hiroshima and Nagasaki, finally brought the war to an end. • Why did the Soviet Union enter the Pacific war in August 1945, as shown in the upper-left corner of the map? 
 3,500 of them while inflicting great damage. Japanese troops on shore launched ­desperate nighttime attacks on the American lines. The United States and its allies suffered nearly 50,000 casualties before finally capturing Okinawa in late June 1945. Over 100,000 Japanese died in the siege. It seemed likely that the same kind of bitter fighting would await the Americans when they invaded Japan. But there were also some signs early in 1945 that such an invasion might not be necessary. The Japanese had almost no ships or planes left with which to fight. The firebombing of Tokyo in March, in which American bombers Tokyo Firebombed dropped napalm on the city and created a firestorm in which over 80,000 people died,

DEBATING THE PAST


The Decision to Drop
 the Atomic Bomb There has been continuing disagreement since 1945 among historians—and many others—about how to explain and evaluate President Truman’s decision to use the atomic bomb against Japan.

 Truman himself, both at the time and in his 1955 memoirs, insisted that the decision was a simple and straightforward one. The alternative to using atomic weapons, he claimed, was an American invasion of

A
Japanese woman and child look grimly at a photographer as they hold pieces of bread in the aftermath of the dropping of the second American atomic bomb—this one on Nagasaki. (© Bettmann/Corbis) NAGASAKI SURVIVORS 
648 •


 ­ ainland Japan that might have cost as m many as a million American lives. That view has ­ received considerable support from ­historians. Herbert Feis argued in The Atomic Bomb and the End of World War II (1966) that Truman made his decision on purely military grounds—to ensure a speedy American ­victory. David McCullough, the author of a popular biography of Truman published in 1992, also accepted Truman’s own account of his actions largely uncritically, as did Alonzo L. Hamby in Man of the People (1995), an important scholarly study of Truman. “One consideration weighed most heavily on Truman,” Hamby concluded. “The longer the war lasted, the more Americans killed.” Others have strongly disagreed. As early as 1948, British physicist P. M. S. Blackett wrote in Fear, War, and the Bomb that the ­destruction of Hiroshima and Nagasaki was “not so much the last military act of the ­second World War as the first major operation of the cold diplomatic war with Russia.” The most important critic of Truman’s decision is the historian Gar Alperovitz, the author of two influential books on the ­subject: Atomic Diplomacy: Hiroshima and Potsdam (1965) and The Decision to Use the Atomic Bomb (1995). Alperovitz dismissed the ­argument that the bomb was used to shorten the war and save lives. Japan was likely to have surrendered soon even if the bomb had not been used, he claimed. Instead, he argued, the United States used

 the bomb less to influence Japan than to intimidate the Soviet Union, “to make Russia more manageable in Europe.” John W. Dower’s War Without Mercy (1986) contributed, by implication at least, to another controversial explanation of the American decision: racism. The Japanese, many Americans came to believe during the war, were almost a subhuman species. Even many of Truman’s harshest critics, however, note that it is, as Alperovitz has written, “all but impossible to find specific evidence that racism was an ­important factor in the decision to attack Hiroshima and Nagasaki.” The debate over the decision to drop the atomic bomb is an unusually emotional one, and it has inspired bitter professional and personal attacks on advocates of almost e­ very position. It illustrates clearly how history has often been, and remains, a powerful force in the way societies define themselves.

•


UNDERSTAND, ANALYZE, & EVALUATE
 1. The United States dropped two atomic

 bombs on Japan, one on Hiroshima and the other on Nagasaki. Was dropping the bomb on Hiroshima necessary? Was it justifiable? Do the reasons for dropping the bomb on Hiroshima apply equally to the bombing of Nagasaki? 2. How might the war in the Pacific have been different if the United States had decided not to drop the bombs?

 further weakened the Japanese will to resist. Moderate Japanese leaders, who had long since concluded the war was lost, were looking to end the fighting. But they continued to face powerful opposition from military leaders. Whether the moderates could ultimately have prevailed is a question historians continue to debate. In any case, their efforts became superfluous in August 1945, when the United States made use of a terrible new weapon it had been developing throughout the war.

The Manhattan Project and Atomic Warfare
 Reports had reached the United States in 1939 that Nazi scientists had taken the first step toward the creation of an atomic bomb, a weapon more powerful than any previously devised. The United States and Britain immediately began a race to develop the weapon before the Germans did. • 649

650 • CHAPTER 26


 The search for the new weapon emerged from theories developed by atomic physicists, beginning early in the century, and particularly from some of the founding ideas of modern physics developed by Albert Einstein. Einstein’s famous theory of relativity had revealed that matter could be converted into a tremendous force of energy. Einstein himself, who by then had left his native Germany and was living in the United States, warned Franklin Roosevelt of German interest in atomic weapons. By the late 1930s and early 1940s, scientists at American universities were working to catch up with the Germans. Soon after the United States entered the war, the army took over the research and named it the Manhattan Project, because it was devised in the Manhattan Engineer District Office of the Army Corps of Engineers. Over the next three years, the government secretly poured nearly $2 billion into a massive scientific and technological effort conducted at hidden laboratories in Oak Ridge, Tennessee; Los Alamos, New Mexico; Hanford, Washington; and other sites. Scientists in Oak Ridge, who were charged with finding a way to create a nuclear chain reaction that could be feasibly replicated within the confined space of a bomb, began experimenting with plutonium—a derivative of uranium first discovered by scientists at University of California–Berkeley. Plutonium proved capable of providing a practical fuel for the weapon. Scientists in Los Alamos, under the direction of J. Robert Oppenheimer, were charged with the construction of the actual atomic bomb. By 1944, despite many unforeseen problems, the Manhattan Project scientists pushed ahead much faster than anyone had predicted. Even so, the war in Europe ended before they were ready to test the first weapon. Just before dawn on July 16, 1945, in the desert Atomic Test in New Mexico near Alamogordo, New Mexico, the scientists gathered to witness the first atomic explosion in history: the detonation of a plutonium-fueled bomb that scientists had named Trinity. The explosion—a blinding flash of light, perhaps brighter than any ever before seen on earth, followed by a huge, billowing mushroom cloud—­ created a vast crater in the barren desert. Watching the test, Oppenheimer was reminded of a passage from a Hindu scripture: “I am become death, the destroyer of worlds.” News of the explosion reached President Harry S. Truman (who had taken office in April on the death of Roosevelt) in Potsdam, Germany, where he was attending a conference of Allied leaders. He issued an ultimatum to the Japanese (signed jointly by the British), demanding that they surrender by August 3 or face utter devastation. When the Japanese failed to meet the deadline, Truman ordered the air force to use the new atomic weapons against Japan. Controversy has continued for decades over whether Truman’s decision to use the bombs was justified and what his motives were. Some have argued that the atomic attack was unnecessary—that had the United States agreed to the survival of the emperor before the bombs were used (which it ultimately did agree to after the bombings), or had it waited only a few more weeks, the Japanese would have surrendered. Others argue that nothing less than the atomic bombs could have persuaded the Japanese to surrender without a costly American invasion. (See “Debating the Past: The Decision to Drop the Atomic Bomb.”) Most of the nation’s military and political leaders, however, seemed little concerned about such matters. Truman, who had not even known of the existence of the Manhattan Project until he became president, made what he apparently believed to be a simple military decision. A weapon was available that would end the war quickly; he could see no reason not to use it. On August 6, 1945, an American B-29, the Enola Gay, dropped an atomic weapon on Hiroshima Destroyed the Japanese industrial center at Hiroshima. With a single bomb, the United States completely incinerated a four-square-mile area at the center of the previously undamaged city. More than 80,000 civilians died, according to later American estimates.

AMERICA IN A WORLD AT WAR
• 651 

 Many more suffered the crippling effects of radioactive fallout or passed those effects on to their children in the form of birth defects. The Japanese government, stunned by the attack, was at first unable to agree on a response. Two days later, on August 8, the Soviet Union declared war on Japan. And the following day, another American plane dropped another atomic weapon—this time on the city of Nagasaki—inflicting 100,000 deaths and terrible damage on yet another unfortunate community. Finally, the emperor intervened to break the Second Bomb and Surrender stalemate in the cabinet, and on August 14 the government announced that it was ready to give up. On September 2, 1945, on board the American battleship Missouri, anchored in Tokyo Bay, Japanese officials signed the articles of surrender. The most destructive war in human history had come to an end, and the United States had emerged from it not only victorious but also in a position of unprecedented power, influence, and prestige. It was a victory, however, that few could greet with unambiguous joy. Fourteen million combatants had died in the struggle. As many as 50 million or more civilians may have perished, making World War II by far the deadliest war in history. The United States had suffered only light casualties in comparison with some other nations (and particularly in comparison with Russia and Germany), but the cost had still been high: more than 400,000 dead, almost 700,000 injured. And the world continued to face an uncertain future, menaced by the threat of nuclear warfare and by an emerging antagonism between the world’s two strongest nations—the United States and the Soviet Union—that would darken the peace for many decades to come.

CONCLUSION
 The United States played a critical, indeed decisive, role in the war against Germany and Italy. It defeated Imperial Japan in the Pacific largely alone. But America’s contributions to and sacrifices in the war paled next to those of its most important allies. Britain, France, and, above all, the Soviet Union paid a staggering price—in lives, treasure, and social unity—that had no counterpart in the United States. Most American citizens in the United States experienced a booming prosperity and only modest privations during the four years of American involvement in the conflict. There were, of course, jarring social changes during the war that even prosperity could not entirely offset: shortages, restrictions, regulations, family dislocations, and, perhaps most of all, the absence of millions of men and considerable numbers of women, who went overseas to fight. American fighting men and women, of course, had very different experiences from those of the people who remained at home. They endured tremendous hardships, substantial casualties, and much fear and loneliness. They fought effectively and bravely. They helped liberate North Africa and Italy from German occupation. And in June 1944, finally, they joined British, French, and other forces in a great and successful invasion of France. It led less than a year later to the destruction of the Nazi regime and the end of the European war. In the Pacific, Americans turned back the Japanese offensive through a series of difficult naval and land battles. Ultimately, however, it was not the American army and navy that brought the war against Japan to a close. It was the unleashing of the most destructive weapon ever created—the atomic bomb—on the people of Japan that finally persuaded the leaders of that nation to surrender.

652 • CHAPTER 26


KEY TERMS/PEOPLE/PLACES/EVENTS
A.
Philip Randolph 635 Battle of the Bulge 645
 braceros 637 Colossus II 635 Congress of Racial Equality (CORE) 636 D-Day 644 Dwight D. Eisenhower 630

Guadalcanal 630
Harry S. Truman 650
Hiroshima 650
Holocaust 631
Korematsu v. U.S. 639
Manhattan Project 650
Office of Price Administration
(OPA) 634


Office of War Information
(OWI) 640
Okinawa 646
 relocation centers 637 Rosie the Riveter 642 United Service Organization (USO) 641 zoot suits 637

RECALL AND REFLECT
 1. 	List some of the measures that the federal government took to mobilize the nation

 for the war effort. 2. 	How did advances in technology affect the course of the military conflict? 3. 	How did the United States contribute to the Allied victory in Europe? How important

 were America’s allies? Which allies were most important? 4. 	How did the war affect U.S. society—women, workers, African Americans, Japanese

 Americans, and immigrants? 5. 	Why did the United States bomb civilians in Japan and Europe in the last years of the war?



THE COLD WAR
ORIGINS OF THE COLD WAR
THE COLLAPSE OF THE PEACE
AMERICA AFTER THE WAR
THE KOREAN WAR
THE CRUSADE AGAINST SUBVERSION


LOOKING AHEAD
 1. What made the growing tension between the United States and the Soviet Union evolve into the Cold War? 2. What is the theory of containment, and how did it drive U.S. foreign policy and foreign interventions in the postwar era? 3. Why did the U.S. government and the American people believe that there was a threat of internal communist subversion?

EVEN BEFORE WORLD WAR II ENDED,
there were signs of tension between the United States and the Soviet Union. Once the fighting was over, those tensions grew to create what became known as the “Cold War”—a long and dangerous rivalry between the two former allies that would cast its shadow over international affairs and American domestic life for more than four decades. The Cold War took shape gradually over a five-year period, during which the relationship between the United States and the Soviet Union deteriorated and the United States crafted a new structure for American foreign policy—known as “containment”—that sought to keep communism from expanding. 
• 653


ORIGINS OF
THE COLD WAR


TIME LINE
Yalta and Potsdam
Conferences
 United Nations founded



Atomic Energy
Commission
 established

Truman Doctrine
 Marshall Plan proposed National Security Act Taft-Hartley Act

 NATO established

 Berlin blockade Truman elected president Hiss case begins

 Soviet Union explodes A-bomb



 Mao victorious in China

NSC-68
 Korean War begins

 Truman fires MacArthur

 McCarthy’s anticommunism campaign begins American occupation of Japan ends Eisenhower elected president

654 •


 Few issues in twentieth-century American history have aroused more debate than the origins of the Cold War. Some have claimed that Soviet duplicity and expansionism created the international tensions; others, that American provocations and global ambitions were at least equally to blame. (See “Debating the Past: The Cold War.”)

Sources of Soviet–American
Tension
 At the heart of the rivalry between the United States and the Soviet Union in the 1940s—in addition to the basic ideological, economic, and political distinctions between the two societies—was a f­ undamental difference in the ways the great powers ­ envisioned the postwar world. One vision, first openly outlined in the Atlantic Charter in 1941, was a world in which nations abandoned their traditional beliefs in ­ ­military alliances and spheres of influence and ­ governed their relations with one another through democratic processes, with an international organization serving as the arbiter of disputes and the protector of every nation’s right of self-determination. At least in theory, that vision appealed to many Americans, including Franklin Roosevelt. The other vision was that of the Soviet Union and, to some extent, Great Britain. Both Josef Stalin and Winston Churchill had signed the Atlantic Charter. But Churchill had always been uneasy about the implications of self-determination for Britain’s own enormous empire. And the Soviet Union was determined to create a secure sphere for itself in Central and Eastern Europe as protection against possible future aggression from the West. Both Churchill and Stalin, therefore, tended to envision a postwar structure vaguely similar

THE COLD WAR
• 655 

 to the traditional European balance of power, in which the great powers would control areas of strategic interest to them. The United States, for its part, soon labored to establish and protect its own spheres of interest around the globe. When the two sides competed for influence and power in this way, the Cold War began.

Wartime Diplomacy
 Serious strains began to develop in the alliance with the Soviet Union in January 1943, when Roosevelt and Churchill met in Casablanca, Morocco, to discuss Allied strategy. The two leaders could not accept Stalin’s most important demand—the immediate opening of a second front in Western Europe. But they tried to reassure Stalin by announcing that they would accept nothing less than the unconditional surrender of the Axis powers. They would not negotiate a separate peace with Hitler and leave the Soviets to fight on alone. In November 1943, Roosevelt and Churchill traveled to Tehran, Iran, for their first meeting with Stalin. By now, however, Roosevelt’s most effective bargaining tool— Stalin’s need for American assistance against Germany—had been largely removed. The German advance against Russia had been halted; Soviet forces were now launching their own westward offensive. Nevertheless, the Tehran Conference seemed in Tehran Conference most respects a success. Stalin agreed to an American request that the Soviet Union enter the war in the Pacific soon after the end of hostilities in Europe. Roosevelt, in turn, promised that an Anglo-American second front would be established within six months. On other matters, however, the origins of future disagreements were already visible. Most important was the question of Poland. Roosevelt and Churchill were willing to agree to a movement of the Soviet border westward, allowing Stalin to annex some historically Polish territory. But they differed sharply on the nature of the postwar government in the portion of Poland that would remain independent. Roosevelt and Churchill supported the claims of the Polish government-in-exile that had been functioning in London since 1940; Stalin wished to install another, pro-communist exiled government that had spent the war in Lublin, in the Soviet Union. The three leaders left the Tehran Conference with the issue unresolved.

Yalta
 More than a year later, in February 1945, Roosevelt joined Churchill and Stalin again, for a peace conference in the Soviet city of Yalta. In return for Stalin’s renewed promise to enter the Pacific war, Roosevelt agreed that the Soviet Union should receive some of the Pacific territory that Russia had lost in the 1904–1905 Russo-Japanese War. The negotiators also agreed to a plan for a new international organization, one that had been hammered out during the previous summer at a conference in Washington, D.C. The new United Nations would contain a General Assembly, in which United Nations Established every member would be represented, and a Security Council, with permanent representatives of the five major powers (the United States, Britain, France, the Soviet Union, and China), each of which would have veto power. The Security Council would also have temporary delegates from several other nations. These agreements became the basis of the United Nations charter, drafted at a conference of fifty nations beginning April 25, 1945, in San Francisco. In sharp contrast to the American rejection of the League of Nations a generation before, the United States Senate ratified the charter in July by a vote of 80 to 2. (It was, many internationalists believed, a “second chance” to create a stable world order.)

DEBATING THE PAST


The Cold War
 For more than a decade after the beginning of the Cold War, few historians saw any reason to challenge the official American interpretation of its origins. The breakdown of relations between the United States and the Soviet Union was, most agreed, a direct result of Soviet expansionism and of Stalin’s violation of the wartime agreements forged at Yalta and Potsdam. The Soviet imposition of communist regimes in Eastern Europe was part of a larger ideological design to spread communism throughout the world. American policy was the logical and necessary ­response: a firm commitment to oppose Soviet expansionism and to keep American forces in a continual state of readiness. Disillusionment with the official justifications for the Cold War began to find ­expression even in the late 1950s, when anticommunist sentiment in America remained strong and pervasive. William Appleman Williams’s The Tragedy of American Diplomacy (1959) insisted that the Cold War was simply the most recent version of a consistent American effort in the twentieth century to preserve an “open door” for American trade in world markets. The confrontation with the Soviet Union, he argued, was less a response to Soviet aggressive designs than an expression of the American belief in the necessity of capitalist expansion. As the Vietnam War grew larger and more unpopular in the 1960s, the scholarly critique of the Cold War quickly gained intensity. Walter LaFeber’s America, Russia, and the Cold War, first published in 1967, maintained that America’s supposedly idealistic internationalism at the close of the war was in reality an effort to ensure a postwar order shaped in the American image—with 656 •

 every nation open to American influence (and to American trade). That was why the United States was so apt to misinterpret Soviet policy, much of which r­ eflected a perfectly reasonable commitment to ensure the security of the Soviet Union itself, as part of a larger aggressive design. The revisionist interpretations of the Cold War ultimately produced a reaction of their own: what has come to be known as “postrevisionist” scholarship. The most ­important work in this school attempted to strike a balance between orthodoxy and revisionism and to identify areas of blame and patterns of misconceptions on both sides of the conflict. An important early statement of this approach was John Lewis Gaddis’s The United States and the Cold War, 1941–1947 (1972), which argued that “neither side can bear sole responsibility for the onset of the Cold War.” Both sides had limited options, given their own political constraints and their own preconceptions. Other postrevisionist works—by Thomas G. Paterson, Melvyn Leffler, William Taubman, and others—have elaborated on ways in which the United States and the Soviet Union acted in response to genuine, if not necessarily ­accurate, beliefs about the intentions of the other. “The United States and the Soviet Union were doomed to be antagonists,” Ernest May wrote in 1984. “There probably was never any real possibility that the post-1945 relationship could be ­anything but hostility verging on conflict.” Since the fall of the Soviet Union in 1991, scholars have had access to newly r­ eleased Russian archives that have ­enriched— although not fundamentally ­altered—the way historians view the Cold War. John Lewis

Gaddis, in We Now Know: Rethinking Cold War
History (1998) and The Cold War (2005),
 portrays a Cold War somewhat more dangerous than his own earlier studies, and those of many other scholars, had portrayed; and he argues that the strong anticommunist positions of Margaret Thatcher, Ronald Reagan, and Pope John Paul II had a larger impact on the weakening of the Soviet Union than was previously understood. Similarly assisted by newly released archives, Odd Arne Westad, in The Global Cold War

 (2005), roots the origins of the dangerous instability in the so-called Third World in the frequent interventions of both the Soviet Union and the United States in the Cold War era.

•


UNDERSTAND, ANALYZE, & EVALUATE
 1. What are the orthodox, revisionist, and

 postrevisionist arguments concerning the origins of the Cold War? 2. Was the Cold War inevitable?

 On other issues, however, the Yalta Conference produced no real accord. Basic disagreement remained about the postwar Polish government. Stalin, whose armies now occupied Poland, had already installed a government composed of the pro-communist Dispute over Poland “Lublin” Poles. Roosevelt and Churchill insisted that the pro-Western “London” Poles must be allowed a place in the Warsaw regime. Roosevelt envisioned a government based on free, democratic elections—which both he and Stalin recognized the pro-Western forces would win. Stalin agreed only to a vague compromise by which an unspecified number of pro-Western Poles would be granted a place in the government. He said he would hold “free and unfettered elections” in Poland on an unspecified future date. They did not happen until 1989. Nor was there agreement about Germany. Roosevelt seemed to want a reconstructed and reunited Germany. Stalin wanted to impose heavy reparations on Germany and to ensure a permanent dismemberment of the nation. The final agreement was, like the Polish accord, vague and unstable. The decision on reparations would be referred to a future commission. The United States, Great Britain, France, and the Soviet Union would each control its own “zone of occupation” in Germany—the zones to be determined by the position of troops at the end of the war. Berlin, the German capital, was

 Churchill (left) and Stalin (right) were shocked at the physical appearance of Franklin Roosevelt (center) when he arrived for their critical meeting at Yalta. Roosevelt had enough energy to perform capably at the conference, but he was in fact gravely ill. Two months later, not long after he gave Congress what turned out to be an unrealistically optimistic report of the prospects for postwar peace, he died. (© Bettmann/Corbis) YALTA, 1945

• 657


