492 • CHAPTER 20


 believed, than crowded immigrant neighborhoods. One response to the problems of such communities, borrowed from England, was the “settlement house.” The most famous was Jane Addams and Hull House Hull House, which opened in 1889 in Chicago as a result of the efforts of the social worker Jane Addams. It became a model for more than 400 similar institutions throughout the nation. Staffed by members of the educated middle class, settlement houses sought to help immigrant families adapt to the language and customs of their new country. Young college women (mostly unmarried) were important participants in the settlement house movement. Working in a settlement house, a protected site that served mostly women, was consistent with the widespread assumption that women needed to be sheltered from difficult environments. The clean and well-tended buildings that settlement houses created were not only a model for immigrant women, but an appropriate site for elite women as well. The settlement houses also helped create another important institution of reform: the profession of social work. A growing number of programs for the professional training of social workers began to appear in the nation’s leading universities, partly in response to the activities of the settlement houses.

The Allure of Expertise
 As the emergence of the social work profession suggests, progressives involved in humanitarian efforts placed a high value on knowledge and expertise. Even nonscientific problems, they believed, could be analyzed and solved scientifically. Many reformers came to believe that only enlightened experts and well-designed bureaucracies could create the stability and order America needed. Some even spoke of the creation of a new civilization, in which the expertise of scientists and engineers could be brought to bear on the problems of the economy and society. The social scientist Thorstein Veblen, for example, proposed a new economic system in which power would reside in the hands of highly trained engineers. Only they, he argued, could fully understand the “machine process” by which modern society must be governed.

The Professions
 The late nineteenth century saw a dramatic expansion in the number of Americans engaged in administrative and professional tasks. Industries needed managers, technicians, and accountants as well as workers. Cities required commercial, medical, legal, and educational services. New technology required scientists and engineers, who, in turn, required institutions and instructors to train them. By the turn of the century, those performing these services had come to constitute a distinct social group—what some historians have called a “new middle class.” By the early twentieth century, millions within this new middle class were building organizations and establishing standards to secure their position in society. Most of all, they created the modern, organized professions. The idea of professionalism had been a frail one in America even as late as 1880, but as the demand for professional services increased, so did the pressures for reform. Among the first to respond was the medical profession. In 1901, doctors who considAmerican Medical Association ered themselves trained professionals reorganized the American Medical Association (AMA) into a national professional society. By 1920, nearly ­two-thirds

THE PROGRESSIVES
• 493 

 of all American doctors were members. The AMA quickly called for strict, scientific standards for admission to the practice of medicine. State governments responded by passing new laws requiring the licensing of all physicians. By 1900, medical education at a few medical schools—notably Johns Hopkins in Baltimore (founded in 1893)—­compared favorably with those in the leading institutions of Europe. By 1916, lawyers in all forty-eight states had established professional bar associations. The nation’s law schools accordingly expanded greatly. Businessmen supported the creation of schools of business administration and set up their own national organizations: the National Association of Manufacturers in 1895 and National Association of Manufacturers the United States Chamber of Commerce in 1912. Farmers responded to the new order by forming, through the National Farm Bureau Federation, a network of agricultural organizations designed to spread scientific farming methods. The professions removed the untrained and incompetent. But the admission requirements also protected those already in the professions from excessive competition and lent prestige and status to the professional level. Some professions used their entrance requirements to exclude African Americans, women, immigrants, and other “undesirables” from their ranks. Others used them simply to keep the numbers down, to ensure that demand would remain high.

Women and the Professions
 American women found themselves excluded from most of the emerging professions. But a substantial number of middle-class women—particularly those emerging from the new women’s colleges and from the coeducational state universities—entered professional careers nevertheless. A few women managed to establish themselves as physicians, lawyers, engineers, ­scientists, and corporate managers. Most, however, turned by necessity to those professional outlets that society considered suitable for women: settlement houses, social work, and, most important, teaching. Indeed, in the late nineteenth century, perhaps 90 percent of all professional women were teachers. For educated black women, in particular, the existence of segregated schools in the South created a substantial market for African American teachers. Women also dominated other professional activities. Nursing had become primarily a women’s field during and after the Civil War. By the early twentieth century, it was adopting professional standards. And many women entered academia—often earning advanced degrees at such predominantly male institutions as the University of Chicago, MIT, or Columbia, and then finding professional opportunities in the new and expanding women’s colleges.

WOMEN AND REFORM
 The prominence of women in reform movements is one of the most striking features of progressivism. In many states in the early twentieth century, women could not vote. They almost never held public office. They had footholds in only a few (and usually primarily female) professions and lived in a culture in which most people, male and female, believed that women were not suited for the public world. What, then, explains the prominent role so many women played in the reform activities of the period?

494 • CHAPTER 20


The “New Woman”
 The phenomenon of the “new woman” was a product of social and economic changes in both the private and public spheres. By the end of the nineteenth century, almost all income-producing activity had moved out of the home and into the factory or the office. At the same time, many women were having fewer children, and their children were beginning school at earlier ages and spending more time there. For wives and mothers who did not work for wages, the home was less of an all-consuming place. Hence, more and more women began looking for activities outside the home. Some educated women shunned marriage entirely, believing that only by remaining single could they play the roles they envisioned in the public world. Single women were among the most prominent reformers of the time. Some of these women lived alone. Others lived with other women, often in long-term relationships—some of them secretly romantic—that were known at the time as “Boston marriages.” The divorce rate also rose rapidly in the late nineteenth century, from one divorce for every twenty-one marriages in 1880 to one in nine by 1916; women initiated the majority of divorces.

The Clubwomen
 Among the most visible signs of the increasing public roles of women in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries were women’s clubs, which proliferated rapidly beginning in the 1880s and 1890s and became the vanguard of many important reforms. The women’s clubs began largely as cultural organizations to provide middle- and upper-class women with an outlet for their intellectual energies. In 1892, when women formed the General Federation of Women’s Clubs, there were more than 100,000 members in nearly 500 clubs. By 1917, there were over 1 million members. Much of what the clubs did was uncontroversial: planting trees; supporting schools, libraries, and settlement houses; building hospitals and parks. But clubwomen were also an important force in winning passage of state (and ultimately federal) laws that regulated the conditions of woman and child labor. They pushed government to inspect workplaces, regulate the food and drug industries, reform policies toward the Indian tribes, apply new standards to urban housing, and, perhaps most notably, outlaw the manufacture and sale Clubwomen’s Causes of alcohol. Women’s clubs were instrumental in pressuring state legislatures in most states to provide “mothers’ pensions” to widowed or abandoned mothers with small children—a system that ultimately became absorbed into the Social Security system. In 1912, they convinced Congress to establish the Children’s Bureau in the Labor Department, an agency directed to develop policies to protect children. In many of these efforts, the clubwomen formed alliances with other women’s groups, such as the Women’s Trade Union League (WTUL), founded in 1903 by female union members and upper-class reformers and committed to persuading women to join unions. In addition to working on behalf of protective legislation for women, WTUL members held public meetings on behalf of female workers, raised money to support strikes, marched on picket lines, and bailed striking women out of jail. Black women occasionally joined clubs dominated by whites. But most clubs excluded blacks, and so African Americans formed clubs of their own. Some of them affiliated with the General Federation, but most became part of the independent National Association of Colored Women. Some black clubs also took positions on issues of particular concern to African Americans, such as lynching and aspects of segregation.

THE PROGRESSIVES
• 495 

SUFFRAGE PAGEANT
On March 3, 1913—the day before Woodrow Wilson’s presidential inauguration—more than 5,000 supporters of woman suffrage staged a parade in Washington, D.C., that overshadowed Wilson’s arrival in the capital. Crowds estimated at over half a million watched the parade; some of the onlookers attacked the marchers. In this photograph from the event, suffragist Florence Noyce poses as Liberty in front of the U.S. Treasury Building. (The Library of Congress) 
Woman Suffrage
 Perhaps the largest single reform movement of the progressive era, indeed one of the largest in American history, was the fight for woman suffrage. Throughout the late nineteenth century, many suffrage advocates argued that “natural rights” entitled them to the same rights as men—including, first and foremost, the right to vote. Elizabeth Cady Stanton, for example, wrote in 1892 of woman as “the arbiter of her own destiny . . . if we are to consider her as a citizen, as a member of a great nation, she must have the same rights as all other members.” This was an argument that challenged the views of the many men and women who believed that society required a distinctive female “sphere,” in which women would serve first and foremost as wives and mothers. A powerful antisuffrage movement emerged, dominated by men but with the active support of many women. To these critics, woman suffrage seemed a radical demand. In the first years of the twentieth century, suffragists were becoming better organized and more politically sophisticated than their opponents. Under the leadership of Anna Howard Shaw, a Boston social worker, and Carrie Chapman Catt, a journalist from Iowa, membership in the National American Woman Suffrage Association (NAWSA) grew from about 13,000 in 1893 to over 2 million in 1917. The movement gained strength because many of its most prominent leaders began to justify suffrage in “safer,” less threatening ways. Suffrage, some supporters began to argue, would not challenge the “separate sphere” in which women resided. Instead, they claimed that because women occupied a distinct sphere—because as mothers and wives and homemakers they had special experiences and

496 • CHAPTER 20


 special sensitivities to bring to public life—woman suffrage would make an important contribution to politics. In particular, many suffragists argued that enfranchising women would help the temperance movement, by giving its largest group of supporters a political voice. Some suffrage advocates claimed that once women had the vote, war would become a thing of the past, since women would—by their calming, maternal influence—help curb the belligerence of men. The principal triumphs of the suffrage movement began in 1910, when Washington became the first state in fourteen years to extend suffrage to women. California followed a year later, and four other western states in 1912. In 1913, Illinois became the first state east of the Mississippi to embrace woman suffrage. And in 1917 and 1918, New York and Michigan—two of the most populous states in the Union—gave women the vote. By 1919, thirty-nine states had granted women the right to vote in at least some elections; fifteen had allowed them full participation. In 1920, finally, suffragists won Nineteenth Amendment ratification of the Nineteenth Amendment, which guaranteed voting rights to women throughout the nation. To some feminists, however, the victory seemed less than complete. Alice Paul, head Alice Paul of the militant National Woman’s Party (founded in 1916), never accepted the relatively conservative “separate sphere” justification for suffrage. She argued that the Nineteenth Amendment alone would not be sufficient to protect women’s rights. Women needed more: a constitutional amendment that would provide full, legal protection for their rights and would prohibit all discrimination on the basis of gender. But Alice Paul’s argument found limited favor even among many of the most important leaders of the recently triumphant suffrage crusade.

THE ASSAULT ON THE PARTIES
 Sooner or later, most progressive goals required the involvement of government. Only government, reformers agreed, could effectively counter the many powerful private interests that threatened the nation. But American government at the dawn of the new century was poorly adapted to meet progressive demands. Before progressives could reform Reforming Government ­ society effectively, they would have to reform government itself. Many reformers believed the first step must be an assault on the dominant role the political parties played in the life of the state.

Early Attacks
 Attacks on party dominance had been frequent in the late nineteenth century. Greenbackism and Populism, for example, had been efforts to break the hammerlock with which the Republicans and Democrats controlled public life. The Independent Republicans (or mugwumps) had attempted to challenge the grip of partisanship. The early assaults enjoyed some success. In the 1880s and 1890s, for example, most states adopted the secret ballot. Prior to that, the political parties themselves had printed ballots (or “tickets”), with the names of the party’s candidates, and no others. They distributed the tickets to their supporters, who then simply went to the polls to deposit them New Secret Ballot in the ballot boxes. The old system had made it possible for bosses to monitor the voting behavior of their constituents. The new secret ballot—printed by the

THE PROGRESSIVES
• 497 

 government and distributed at the polls to be filled out and deposited in secret—helped chip away at the power of the parties over the voters.

Municipal Reform
 Many progressives believed the impact of party rule was most damaging in the cities. Municipal government therefore became the first target of those working for political reform. The muckrakers were especially successful in arousing public outrage at corruption and incompetence in city politics. They struck a responsive chord among a powerful group of urban middle-class progressives, who set out to destroy the power of city bosses and their entrenched political organizations. One of the first major successes in municipal reform came in Galveston, Texas, where the old city government proved completely unable to deal with the effects of a destructive hurricane in 1900. Capitalizing on public dismay, reformers won approval of a new city charter that replaced the mayor and council with an elected, nonpartisan commission. In 1907, Des Moines, Iowa, adopted its own version of the commission plan, and other cities soon followed. Another approach to municipal reform was the city manager plan, by which elected officials hired an outside expert—often a professionally trained business manager or engineer—to take charge of the government. The city manager would presumably remain City-Manager Plan untainted by the corrupting influence of politics. By the end of the progressive era, almost 400 cities were operating under commissions, and another 45 employed city managers. In most urban areas, reformers had to settle for lesser victories. Some cities made the election of mayors nonpartisan (so that the parties could not choose the candidates) or moved them to years when no presidential or congressional races were in progress (to reduce the influence of the large turnouts that party organizations produced). Reformers tried to make city councilors run at large, to limit the influence of ward leaders and district bosses. They tried to strengthen the power of the mayor at the expense of the city council, on the assumption that reformers were more likely to succeed in getting a sympathetic mayor elected than they were to win control of the entire council.

Statehouse Progressivism
 Other progressives turned to state government as an agent for reform. They looked with particular scorn on state legislatures, whose ill-paid, relatively undistinguished members, they believed, were generally incompetent, often corrupt, and totally controlled by party bosses. Reformers began looking for ways to circumvent the boss-controlled legislatures by increasing the power of the electorate. A big victory came in 1913, when the states ratified a constitutional amendment—the seventeenth—that transferred the right to elect U.S. senators from the state legislatures to ordinary voters. Two other important changes were proposed by Populists in the 1890s: the initiative and the referendum. The initiative allowed reformers to circumvent Initiative and Referendum state legislatures by submitting new legislation directly to the voters in general elections. The referendum provided a method by which actions of the legislature could be returned to the electorate for approval. By 1918, more than twenty states had enacted one or both of these reforms. The direct primary and the recall were other efforts to limit the power of party and improve the quality of elected officials. The primary election was Direct Primary and Recall

498 • CHAPTER 20


 an attempt to remove the selection of candidates from the bosses and give it to the people. In the South, it was also an effort to limit black voting—since primary voting, many white southerners believed, would be easier to control than general elections. The recall gave voters the right to remove a public official from office at a special election, which could be called after a sufficient number of citizens had signed a petition. By 1915, every state in the nation had instituted primary elections for at least some offices. The recall encountered more strenuous opposition, but a few states (such as California) adopted it as well. The most celebrated state-level reformer was Robert M. La Follette of Wisconsin. Elected Robert La Follette governor in 1900, he helped turn his state into what reformers across the nation described as a “laboratory of progressivism.” Under his leadership, Wisconsin progressives won approval of direct primaries, initiatives, and referendums. They regulated railroads and utilities. They passed laws to regulate the workplace and provide compensation for laborers injured on the job. They instituted graduated taxes on inherited fortunes, and they nearly doubled state levies on railroads and other corporate interests.

Parties and Interest Groups
 The reformers did not, of course, eliminate parties from American political life. But they did contribute to a decline in party influence. Evidence of their impact came from, among other things, the decline in voter turnout. In the late nineteenth century, up to 81 percent of eligible voters routinely turned out for national elections. In the early twentieth century, the figure declined markedly. In the presidential election of 1900, 73 percent of the electorate voted. By 1912, turnout had declined to about 59 percent. Never again has voter turnout reached as high as 70 percent. Why did voter turnout decline in these years? The secret ballot was one reason. Party bosses had less ability to get voters to the polls. Illiterate voters had trouble reading the new ballots. Party bosses lost much of their authority and were unable to mobilize voters as successfully as they had in the past. But perhaps the most important Decline of Party Influence reason for the decline of party rule (and voter turnout) was that other power centers were beginning to replace them. They have become known as “interest groups.” Beginning late in the nineteenth century and accelerating rapidly in the twentieth century, new organizations emerged outside the party system: professional organizations, trade associations representing businesses and industries, labor organizations, farm lobbies, and many others. Social workers, the settlement house movements, women’s clubs, and others learned to operate as interest groups to advance their demands without relying on parties.

SOURCES OF PROGRESSIVE REFORM
 Middle-class reformers, most of them from the East, dominated the public image and much of the substance of progressivism in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. But they were not alone in seeking to improve social conditions. Workingclass Americans, African Americans, westerners, and even party bosses played crucial roles in advancing some of the important reforms of the era. (For historians’ changing views on who the progressives were and what motivated them, see “Debating the Past: Progressivism.”)

THE PROGRESSIVES
• 499 

Labor, the Machine, and Reform
 Although the American Federation of Labor, and its leader Samuel Gompers, remained largely aloof from many of the reform efforts of the time, some unions nevertheless played important roles in reform battles. Between 1911 and 1913, thanks to political pressure from labor groups such as the newly formed Union Labor Party, California passed a child labor law, a workmen’s compensation law, and a limitation on working hours for women. Union pressures contributed to the passage of similar laws in many other states as well. Party bosses sometimes allowed their machines to become vehicles of social reform. One example was New York’s Tammany Hall, the nation’s oldest and most notorious city machine. Its astute leader, Charles Francis Murphy, began in the early years of the twentieth century to fuse the techniques of boss rule with some of the concerns of social reformers. Tammany at times used its political power on behalf of legislation to improve working conditions, protect child laborers, and eliminate the worst abuses of the industrial economy. In 1911, a terrible fire swept through the factory of the Triangle Shirtwaist Company in New York; 146 workers, most of them women, died. Many of them Triangle Shirtwaist Fire had been trapped inside the burning building because management had locked the emergency exits to prevent malingering. For the next three years, a state commission studied the disaster and the conditions of factories generally. In 1914, the commission issued a series of reports calling for major reforms in the conditions of modern labor. The report itself was a classic progressive document—based on the testimony of experts and filled

VICTIMS OF THE TRIANGLE SHIRTWAIST FIRE, 1911
In this bleak photograph, victims of the fire in the Triangle 
 Shirtwaist Company are laid out on the sidewalk of the building, as police and passersby look up at the scene of the blaze. This tragedy galvanized New York legislators into passing laws to protect workers. (© Granger, NYC—All Rights Reserved.)

DEBATING THE PAST


Progressivism
 Until the early 1950s, most historians seemed to agree on the central characteristics of early-twentieth-century progressivism. It was just what many progressives themselves had said it was: a movement by the people to curb the power of special ­interests. More specifically, it was a protest by an aroused citizenry against the excessive power of urban bosses, corporate moguls, and corrupt elected officials. In 1951, the historian George Mowry began challenging these assumptions by examining progressives in California and describing them as a small, privileged elite of business and professional figures: people who considered themselves the natural leaders of society and who were trying to recover their fading influence from the new capitalist institutions that had displaced them. ­ Progressivism was not, in other words, a popular democratic movement but the effort of a displaced elite to restore its authority. Richard Hofstadter expanded on this idea in The Age of Reform (1955) by describing reformers as people afflicted by “status ­ ­anxiety”—fading elites suffering not from economic but from psychological discontent. The Mowry-Hofstadter argument soon encountered a range of challenges. Gabriel Kolko, in The Triumph of Conservatism (1963), rejected both the older “democratic” view of progressivism and the newer status-­anxiety view. Progressive reform, he argued, was not an effort to protect the people from the corporations; it was, rather, a vehicle through which corporate leaders used the government to protect themselves from competition. A more moderate reinterpretation came from historians embracing what would later 500 •

 be called the “organizational” approach to twentieth-century American history. Samuel Hays, in The Response to Industrialism (1957), and Robert Wiebe, in The Search for Order (1967), portrayed progressivism as a broad effort by businessmen, professionals, and other middle-class people to bring order and efficiency to political and economic life. In the new industrial society, economic power was increasingly concentrated in large national organizations, while social and ­political life remained centered primarily in local communities. Progressivism, Wiebe argued, was the effort of a “new middle class”—a class tied to the emerging national economy—to stabilize and enhance its ­position in society by bringing those two worlds together. In the 1970s and 1980s, much of the scholarship on progressivism focused on discovering new groups among whom ­“progressive” ideas and efforts flourished. Historians found evidence of progressivism in the rising movement by consumers to define their interests; in the growth of reform movements among African Americans; in the changing nature of urban political machines; and in the political activism of working people and labor organizations. Other scholars attempted to identify progressivism with broad changes in the structure and culture of politics. Richard McCormick, writing in 1981, argued that the crucial change in the progressive era was the decline of political parties and the corresponding rise of interest groups working for particular social and economic goals. At the same time, many historians have focused on the role of women (and the vast network of voluntary associations they

 c­ reated in shaping and promoting progressive reform). Some progressive battles, historians such as Kathryn Sklar, Ruth Rosen, Elaine Tyler May, and Linda Gordon have argued, were part of an effort by women to protect their interests within the domestic sphere in the face of jarring challenges from the new industrial world. This protective urge drew women reformers to such issues as temperance, divorce, prostitution, and the regulation of female and child labor. Other women worked to expand their own roles in the public world, particularly through their support of suffrage. The gendered ­interests of women reformers are, many historians insist, critical to an understanding of progressivism. More recently, a number of historians have sought to place progressivism in a broader context. Daniel Rodgers’s Atlantic

 Crossings (1998) is an important study of how European reformers shaped the goals of many American progressives. Both Michael McGerr, in A Fierce Discontent (2003), and Alan Dawley, in Changing the World (2003), see progressivism as a fundamentally moral project—McGerr, as an effort by the middle class to create order and stability, and Dawley, as an effort by groups on the left to attack social injustice. Progressivism, they argue, was not just a political movement but also an effort to remake society and ­reshape ­social relations.

•


UNDERSTAND, ANALYZE, & EVALUATE
 1. What is the gendered view of progres-

 sive reform advanced by historians? 2. Was progressivism a “people’s”

 ­movement?

 with statistics and technical data. When its recommendations reached the New York legislature, its most effective supporters were two Tammany Democrats from working-class backgrounds: Senator Robert F. Wagner and Assemblyman Alfred E. Smith. With the support of Murphy and the backing of other Tammany legislators, they helped pass a series of pioneering labor laws that imposed strict regulations on factory owners and established effective mechanisms for enforcement.

Western Progressives
 The American West produced some of the most notable progressive leaders of the time: Hiram Johnson of California, George Norris of Nebraska, William Borah of Idaho, and others—almost all of whom spent at least some of their political careers in the United States Senate. For western states, the most important vehicle of reform was the federal government, which exercised a kind of authority in the West that it had never possessed in the East. Disputes over water, for example, almost always involved rivers and streams that crossed state lines. More significant, perhaps, the federal government exercised enormous power over the lands and resources of the western states and provided substantial subsidies to the region in the form of land grants and support for railroad and water projects. Huge areas of the West remained (and still remain) public lands, controlled by Washington. Much of the growth of the West was (and continues to be) a result of federally funded dams, water projects, and other infrastructure undertakings.

African Americans and Reform
 Most white progressives paid little attention to race. But among African Americans themselves, the progressive era produced significant challenges to existing racial norms.

• 501


502 • CHAPTER 20


 African Americans faced greater obstacles than any other group in seeking reform. So it was not surprising, perhaps, that so many African Americans embraced the message of Booker T. Washington in the late nineteenth century. Washington encouraged black men and women to work for immediate self-improvement rather than long-range social change. By the beginning of the twentieth century, however, a powerful challenge to the philosophy of Washington was emerging. The chief spokesperson for this new approach was W. E. B. Du Bois, a sociologist and historian and one of the first African Americans to receive a degree from Harvard. In The Souls of Black Folk (1903), Du Bois launched an open attack on the philosophy of Washington, accusing him of encouraging white efforts to sustain segregation and of limiting the aspirations of his race. Rather than content themselves with education at trade and agricultural schools, Du Bois encouraged talented blacks to accept nothing less than a full university education and aspire to the professions. They should, above all, fight for their civil rights, not simply wait for them to be granted as a reward for patient striving. In 1905, Du Bois and a group of his supporters met at Niagara Falls—on the Canadian side of the border because no hotel on the American side of the falls would have them— and launched what became known as the Niagara Movement. Four years later, they joined with sympathetic white progressives to form the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP). In the years that followed, the new organizaNAACP Founded tion worked for equal rights. Among the many issues that engaged the NAACP and other African American organizations was lynching in the South. The most determined opponents of lynching were southern women, and the most effective crusader was a black woman, Ida B. Wells-Barnett, who worked both on her own (at great personal risk) and with such Ida B. Wells-Barnett organizations as the National Association of Colored Women and the Women’s Convention of the National Baptist Church to try to expose lynching and challenge segregation.

THE CRISIS W. E. B.
Du Bois founded The Crisis, the magazine of the NAACP, in 1910. Its object was to “show the danger of race prejudice, particularly as manifested today toward colored people.” This photograph shows the magazine’s office. (© Underwood & Underwood/Corbis) 
THE PROGRESSIVES
• 503 

CRUSADES FOR SOCIAL ORDER AND REFORM
 Many reformers crusaded on behalf of what they considered moral issues—working to eliminate alcohol, curb prostitution, limit divorce, and restrict immigration.

The Temperance Crusade
 Many progressives considered the elimination of alcohol from American life a necessary step in restoring order to society. Scarce wages vanished as male workers spent hours in saloons. Drunkenness spawned violence, and occasionally murder, within urban families. Many ­working-class wives and mothers hoped through temperance to reform male behavior and thus improve women’s lives. Employers, too, regarded alcohol as an impediment to industrial efficiency; workers often missed time on the job because of drunkenness or came to the ­factory intoxicated. Critics of economic privilege denounced the liquor industry as one of the nation’s most sinister trusts. And political reformers, who (correctly) looked on the saloon as one of the central institutions of the urban machine, saw an attack on drinking as part of an attack on the bosses. Out of such sentiments emerged the temperance movement. There had been a major temperance movement before the Civil War, mobilizing large numbers of people in a crusade with strong evangelical overtones. In 1873, the movement developed new strength. Temperance advocates formed the Women’s Christian Temperance Union (WCTU), which was led after 1879 by Frances Willard. By 1911, it had 245,000 WCTU members and had become the single largest women’s organization in American history to that point. In 1893, the Anti-Saloon League joined the temperance movement and, along with the WCTU, began to press for the legal abolition of saloons. Gradually, that demand grew to include the complete prohibition of the sale and manufacture of alcoholic beverages. Pressure for prohibition grew steadily through the first decades of the new century. By 1916, nineteen states had passed prohibition laws. America’s entry into World Prohibition War I, which made the use of grain for alcohol seem wasteful and unnecessary, provided the last push to the advocates of prohibition. In 1917, with the support of rural fundamentalists who opposed alcohol on moral and religious grounds, progressive advocates of prohibition steered through Congress a constitutional amendment. Two years later, after ratification by every state in the nation except Connecticut and Rhode Island (with large populations of Catholic immigrants opposed to prohibition), the Eighteenth Amendment became law, to take effect in January 1920.

Immigration Restriction
 Virtually all reformers agreed that the growing immigrant population had created social problems, but there was wide disagreement on how best to respond. Some progressives believed that the proper approach was to help the new residents adapt to American ­society. Others argued that the only solution was to limit the flow of new arrivals. In the first decades of the century, pressure grew to close the nation’s gates. New scholarly theories argued that the introduction of immigrants into American society was polluting the nation’s racial stock. One of these theories, eugenics, began as the science of altering the reproductive processes of plants and animals to produce new hybrids or breeds. But in the late nineteenth century, eugenicists spread the spurious belief that human inequalities were hereditary and that immigration was contributing to the multiplication of the unfit. A special federal commission of “experts,” chaired by Senator William

504 • CHAPTER 20


P.
Dillingham of Vermont, issued a study filled with statistics and scholarly testimony. It argued that the newer immigrant groups—largely southern and eastern Europeans—had proved themselves less assimilable than earlier immigrants. Immigration, the report implied, should be restricted by nationality. Even many people who rejected these racial arguments supported limiting immigration as a way to solve such urban problems as overcrowding, unemployment, strained social services, and social unrest. The combination of these concerns gradually won the support of some of the nation’s leading progressives to limit immigration—among them former president Theodore Roosevelt. Powerful opponents—employers who saw immigration as a source of cheap labor, immigrants themselves, and their political representatives—managed to block the restriction movement for a time. But by the beginning of World War I, which itself effectively blocked immigration temporarily, the nativist tide was gaining strength. 
The Dream of Socialism
 Although never a force to rival or even seriously threaten the two major parties, socialism gained considerable strength during the early years of the twentieth century. In the election of 1900, the Socialist Party of America attracted the support of fewer than 100,000 voters; Eugene V. Debs in 1912, its durable leader and perennial presidential candidate, Eugene V. Debs, received nearly 1 million ballots. Strongest in urban immigrant communities, particularly among Germans and Jews, it also attracted the loyalties of a substantial number of Protestant farmers in the South and the Midwest. Virtually all socialists agreed on the need for basic structural changes in the economy, but they differed widely on the extent of those changes and the tactics necessary to achieve them. Some socialists endorsed the radical goals of European Marxists (a complete end to capitalism and private property); others envisioned more moderate reform that would allow small-scale private enterprise to survive but would nationalize major industries. Some believed in working for reform through electoral politics; others favored militant direct action. Among the militants was the radical labor union the Industrial Workers of the World IWW (“Wobblies”) (IWW), known to opponents as the “Wobblies.” Under the leadership of William (“Big Bill”) Haywood, the IWW advocated a single union for all workers and was one of the few labor organizations to champion the cause of unskilled workers. The Wobblies were widely believed to have been responsible for dynamiting railroad lines and power stations and committing other acts of terror in the first years of the twentieth century. Moderate socialists who advocated peaceful change through political struggle dominated the Socialist Party. They emphasized a gradual education of the public to the need for change and patient efforts within the system to enact it. But the party refused to support the nation’s war effort in World War I. The growing wave of antiradicalism during the war subjected the socialists to enormous harassment and persecution, contributing to socialism’s decline.

Decentralization and Regulation
 Most progressives retained faith in the possibilities of reform within a capitalist system. Rather than nationalize basic industries, many reformers hoped to restore the economy to a more human scale. They argued that the federal government should work to break up the largest combinations and enforce a balance between the need for bigness and the need for competition. This viewpoint came to be identified particularly closely with Louis D. Louis Brandeis Brandeis, a brilliant lawyer and, later, justice of the Supreme Court, who

THE PROGRESSIVES
• 505 

 wrote widely (most notably in his 1913 book Other People’s Money) about the “curse of bigness.” Brandeis insisted that government must regulate competition in such a way as to ensure that large combinations did not emerge. Other progressives were less enthusiastic about the virtues of competition. More important to them was efficiency. Government, they argued, should not fight “bigness” but rather should guard against abuses of power by large institutions. It should distinguish between “good trusts” and “bad trusts.” Since economic consolidation was destined to remain a permanent feature of American society, continuing oversight by a strong, modernized government was essential. Thus, many progressives believed that government should play a more active role in regulating and planning economic life. One of those who came to endorse that position (although not fully until after 1910) was Theodore Roosevelt, who once said: “We should enter upon a course of supervision, control, and regulation of those great corporations.” Roosevelt became, for a time, the most powerful symbol of the reform impulse at the national level.

THEODORE ROOSEVELT AND
THE MODERN PRESIDENCY
 To a generation of progressive reformers, Theodore Roosevelt was more than an admired public figure; he was an idol. No president before, and few since, attracted such attention and devotion. Yet for all his popularity among reformers, Roosevelt was in many respects decidedly conservative. He earned his extraordinary popularity less because of the extent of the reforms he championed than because he brought to his office a broad conception of its powers. He invested the presidency with something of its modern status as the center of national political life.

The Accidental President
 When President William McKinley was assassinated in September 1901, Roosevelt, fortytwo years old at the time, became the youngest man ever to assume the presidency. “I told William McKinley that it was a mistake to nominate that wild man at Philadelphia,” party boss Mark Hanna was reported to have exclaimed. “Now look, that damned cowboy is President of the United States!” As president, Roosevelt rarely openly rebelled against the leaders of his party. He became, rather, a champion of cautious, moderate change. Reform, he believed, was a vehicle less for remaking American society than for protecting it against more radical challenges. Roosevelt allied himself with those progressives who urged regulation (but not destruction) of the trusts. At the heart of his policy was to give the Roosevelt’s Vision of Federal Power government the power to investigate corporations and publicize the results. Although Roosevelt was not a trustbuster at heart, he made a few highly publicized efforts to break up combinations. In 1902, he ordered the Justice Department to invoke the Sherman Antitrust Act against a great new railroad monopoly in the Northwest, the Northern Securities Company, a $400 million enterprise pieced together by J. P. Morgan and others. Roosevelt filed more than forty additional antitrust suits during Antitrust Suits the remainder of his presidency, but he made no serious commitment to reverse the ­prevailing trend toward economic concentration. When a bitter 1902 strike by the United Mine Workers endangered coal supplies for the coming winter, Roosevelt asked both the operators and the miners to accept impartial federal

506 • CHAPTER 20


BOYS IN THE MINES
These young boys, covered in grime and no more than twelve years old, pose for Lewis Hine outside the coal mine in Pennsylvania where they worked as “breaker boys,” crawling into newly blasted areas and breaking up the loose coal. The rugged conditions in the mines were one cause of the great strike of 1902, in which Theodore Roosevelt intervened. (The Library of Congress) 
 arbitration. When the mine owners balked, Roosevelt threatened to send federal troops to seize the mines. The operators finally relented. Arbitrators awarded the strikers a 10 percent wage increase and a nine-hour day, although no recognition of their union—less than the miners had wanted but more than they would likely have won without Roosevelt’s intervention.

The “Square Deal”
 During the 1904 campaign for the presidency, Roosevelt boasted that he had worked in the anthracite coal strike to provide everyone with a “square deal.” One of his first targets after winning the election was the powerful railroad industry. The Interstate Commerce Act of 1887, establishing the Interstate Commerce Commission (ICC), had been an early effort to Hepburn Act regulate the industry, but over the years, the courts had sharply limited its influence. The Hepburn Railroad Regulation Act of 1906 sought to restore some regulatory authority to the government by giving the ICC the power to oversee railroad rates. Roosevelt also pressured Congress to enact the Pure Food and Drug Act, which Pure Food and Drug Act restricted the sale of dangerous or ineffective medicines. The Jungle, a powerful novel published by Upton Sinclair in 1906, included appalling descriptions of conditions in the meatpacking industry. Roosevelt pushed for passage of the Meat Inspection Act, which helped eliminate many diseases once transmitted in impure meat. Starting in 1907, he proposed even more stringent reforms: an eight-hour day for workers, broader compensation for victims of industrial accidents, inheritance and income taxes, and regulation of the stock market. Conservative opposition blocked much of his agenda, widening the gulf between the president and the conservative wing of his party.

THE PROGRESSIVES
• 507 

Roosevelt and the Environment
 Roosevelt’s aggressive policies on behalf of conservation contributed to that gulf. Using executive powers, he restricted private development on millions of acres of undeveloped government land—most of it in the West—by adding them to the previously modest national forest system. When conservatives in Congress restricted his authority over public lands in 1907, Roosevelt and his chief forester, Gifford Pinchot, seized all the forests and many of the water power sites still in the public domain before the bill became law. Roosevelt was the first president to take an active interest in the new and struggling American conservation movement. In the early twentieth century, many people who considered themselves conservationists—including Pinchot, the first director of the U.S. Forest Service (which he helped create)—promoted policies to protect land for carefully managed development. Roosevelt also supported public reclamation and irrigation projects. In 1902, the president backed the National Reclamation Act, which provided federal funds for the construction of dams, reservoirs, and canals in the West—projects that would open new lands for cultivation and (years later) provide cheap electric power. Despite his sympathy with Pinchot’s vision of conservation, Roosevelt also shared some of the concerns of the naturalists—those committed to protecting the natural beauty of the land and the health of its wildlife from human intrusion. Early in his presidency, Roosevelt spent four days camping in the Sierras with John Muir, the nation’s leading preservationist and the founder of the Sierra Club. Roosevelt also added significantly to the still-young National Park System, whose purpose was to protect public land from exploitation or development. (For Muir’s views on the system, see “Consider the Source: John Muir on the Value of Wild Places.”) North Cascades (1968)

Olympic
(1938)


Mount
Rainier
(1899)


Redwood
(1968)


Crater Lake
(1902)


Lassen
Volcanic
(1916)


Sequoia
(1890)


Kings
Canyon
(1940)


Grand Teton
(1929)
Rocky
Arches Mountain
(1971) (1915)


Grand
Canyon
(1919)


Mesa Verde
(1906)


Shenandoah
(1926)
Mammoth Cave
(1921)


Platt
(1906)


Gates of
 the Arctic

Great Smoky
Mountains
(1926)


Hot
Springs
(1921)


Guadalupe
Mountains
(1966)
Big Bend
(1935)


Kobuk
Valley (1981)
 WrangelSt. Elias Denali (1917) Mt. McKinley 4000 km (1917) 500 mi Lake Clark Kenai Glacier Bay (1981) Katmai Fjords (1925) 1000 km (1981) (1918)

200 mi




Acadia
(1919)


Wind Cave
(1903)


Carlsbad Caverns
(1923)


Haleakala (1960)
Hawaii
Volcanoes
(1916)


National Forests


(North Unit)
Theodore Roosevelt
Yellowstone
(1947)
(1872)
(South Unit)


Petrified
Forest
(1962)




 National Parks (date established) Isle Royal (1931)

Bryce
Canyon
Zion (1924) Capitol Reef
(1971)
(1919)
Canyonlands
(1964)


Yosemite
(1890)




Voyageurs
(1971)


Glacier
(1910)






500 mi


1000 km


Everglades
(1934)


ESTABLISHMENT OF NATIONAL PARKS AND FORESTS
This map illustrates the steady growth throughout the late nineteenth and twentieth centuries of the systems of national parks and national forests in the United States. Although Theodore Roosevelt is widely and correctly remembered as a great champion of national parks and forests, the greatest expansions of these systems occurred after his presidency. Note, for example, how many new areas were added in the 1920s. • What is the difference between national parks and national forests? 
CO NS IDER T HE S O URC E
JOHN MUIR ON THE VALUE OF WILD PLACES, 1901
 John Muir is often called the “father of the national parks” for his role as advocate on behalf of legislation to designate certain wilderness areas as off-limits for commercial development. In this excerpt from his book Our National Parks, he argues for the restorative benefits of visiting unspoiled nature. The tendency nowadays to wander in wildernesses is delightful to see. Thousands of tired, nerve-shaken, over-civilized people are beginning to find out that going to the mountains is going home; that wildness is a necessity; and that mountain parks and reservations are useful not only as fountains of timber and irrigating rivers, but as fountains of life. Awakening from the stupefying effects of the vice of overindustry and the deadly apathy of luxury, they are trying as best they can to mix and enrich their own little ongoings with those of Nature, and to get rid of rust and disease. Briskly venturing and roaming, some are washing off sins and cobweb cares of the devil’s spinning in all-day storms on mountains; sauntering in rosiny pinewoods or in gentian meadows, brushing through chaparral, bending down and parting sweet, flowery sprays; tracing rivers to their sources, getting in touch with the nerves of Mother Earth; jumping from rock to rock, feeling the life of them, learning the songs of them, panting in whole-souled ­exercise, and rejoicing in deep, long-drawn breaths of pure wildness. This is fine and natural and full of promise. So also is the growing interest in the care and preservation of forests and wild places in general, and in the half wild parks and gardens of towns. . . . When, like a merchant taking a list of his goods, we take stock of our wildness, we are glad to see how much of even the most destructible kind is still unspoiled. 508 •

 Looking at our continent as scenery when it was all wild, lying between beautiful seas, the starry sky above it, the starry rocks beneath it, to compare its sides, the East and the West, would be like comparing the sides of a rainbow. But it is no longer equally beautiful. . . . [T]he continent’s outer beauty is fast passing away, especially the plant part of it, the most destructible and most universally charming of all. Only thirty years ago, the great Central Valley of California, five hundred miles long and fifty miles wide, was one bed of golden and purple flowers. Now it is ploughed and pastured out of existence, gone forever,— scarce a memory of it left in fence corners and along the bluffs of the streams. . . . The same fate, sooner or later, is awaiting them all, unless awakening public opinion comes forward to stop it. . . . The Grand Cañon Reserve of Arizona, of nearly two million acres, or the most ­interesting part of it, as well as the Rainier region, should be made into a national park, on account of their supreme grandeur and beauty. . . . No matter how far you have wandered hitherto, or how many famous gorges and valleys you have seen, this one, the Grand Cañon of the Colorado, will seem as novel to you, as unearthly in the color and grandeur and quantity of its architecture, as if you had found it after death, on some other star; so incomparably lovely and grand and supreme is it above all the other cañons in our fire-moulded, earthquake-shaken, rain­ washed, wave-washed, river and glacier sculptured world. UNDERSTAND, ANALYZE, & EVALUATE 1. What benefits does Muir describe as a re-

 sult of spending time in the “wilderness”?

 What maladies does Muir believe the “wilderness” will correct? How do his arguments reflect the economic and ­social history of his time?

 2. What is Muir’s purpose? Is he attempt-

 ing primarily to instruct or to persuade? How does that purpose affect the tone of the writing?

 Source: Library of Congress, Materials from the General Collection and Rare Book and Special Collections Division of the Library of Congress.

 The contending views of the early conservation movement came to a head beginning in 1906 in a controversy over the Hetch Hetchy Valley in Yosemite Fight over Hetch Hetchy National Park—a spectacular high-walled valley popular with naturalists. But many residents of San Francisco worried about finding enough water to serve their growing population. They saw Hetch Hetchy as an ideal place for a dam, which would create a large reservoir for the city. In 1906, San Francisco suffered a devastating earthquake and fire. Widespread sympathy for the city strengthened the case for the dam, and Roosevelt turned the decision over to Pinchot, who approved its construction. For over a decade, a battle raged between naturalists and the advocates of the dam, a battle that consumed the energies of John Muir for the rest of his life and that eventually, many believed, led him to an early death. To Pinchot, the needs of the city were more important than the claims of preservation. Muir helped place a referendum question on the ballot in 1908, certain that the residents of the city would oppose the project. Instead, San Franciscans approved the dam by a huge margin. Construction of the dam finally began after World War I. This setback for the naturalists was not, however, a total defeat. The fight against Hetch Hetchy helped mobilize a new coalition of people committed to preservation of wilderness.

Panic and Retirement
 Despite the flurry of reforms Roosevelt was able to enact, the government still had relatively little control over the industrial economy. That became clear in 1907, when a serious panic and recession began. Conservatives blamed Roosevelt’s “mad” economic policies for the disaster. And while the president naturally (and correctly) disagreed, he nevertheless acted quickly to reassure business leaders that he would not interfere with their recovery efforts. The financier J. P. Morgan helped construct a pool of the assets of several important New York banks to prop up shaky financial institutions. The key to the arrangement, Morgan told the president, was a purchase by U.S. Steel of the shares of the Tennessee Coal and Iron Company, currently held by a threatened New York bank. Morgan insisted that he needed assurances that the purchase would not prompt antitrust action. Roosevelt tacitly agreed, and the Morgan plan proceeded. Whether or not as a result, the panic soon subsided. Roosevelt loved being president, and many people assumed that he would run for reelection in 1908, despite the long-standing tradition of presidents serving no more than two terms. But the Panic of 1907 and Roosevelt’s reform efforts so alienated conservatives in his own party that he might have had difficulty winning the Republican nomination. In 1904, moreover, he had made a public promise to step down four years later. And so in 1909, Roosevelt, fifty years old, retired from public life—briefly. • 509

510 • CHAPTER 20


THE TROUBLED SUCCESSION
 William Howard Taft, who assumed the presidency in 1909, had been Theodore Roosevelt’s most trusted lieutenant and his handpicked successor; progressive reformers believed him to be one of their own. But Taft was also a restrained and moderate jurist, a man with a punctilious regard for legal process; conservatives expected him to abandon Roosevelt’s aggressive use of presidential powers. By seeming acceptable to almost everyone, Taft easily won election to the White House in 1908 over William Jennings Bryan, running for the Democrats for the third time. Four years later, however, Taft would leave office the most decisively defeated president of the twentieth century, his party deeply divided and the government in the hands of a Democratic administration for the first time in twenty years.

William Howard Taft


Taft and the Progressives
 Taft’s first problem arose in the opening months of the new administration, when he called Congress into special session to lower protective tariff rates, an old progressive demand. But the president made no effort to overcome the opposition of the congressional Old Guard, arguing that to do so would violate the constitutional doctrine of separation of powers. The result was the feeble Payne-Aldrich Tariff, which reduced tariff rates scarcely at all. A sensational controversy that broke out late in 1909 helped destroy Taft’s popularity with reformers for good. Many progressives had been unhappy when Taft replaced Roosevelt’s secretary of the interior, James R. Garfield, an aggressive conservationist, with Richard A. Ballinger, a conservative corporate lawyer. Suspicion of Ballinger grew when he attempted to invalidate Roosevelt’s removal of nearly 1 million acres of forests and mineral reserves from private development. In the midst of this mounting concern, Louis Glavis, an Interior Department investigator, charged Ballinger with having once connived to turn over valuable public coal lands in Alaska to a private syndicate for personal profit. Glavis took the evidence to Gifford Pinchot, still director of the U.S. Forest Service and a critic of Ballinger–Pinchot Dispute Ballinger’s policies. Pinchot took the charges to the president. Taft investigated them and decided they were groundless. Unsatisfied, Pinchot leaked the story to the press and asked Congress to investigate the scandal. The president discharged him for insubordination, and the congressional committee appointed to study the controversy, dominated by Old Guard Republicans, exonerated Ballinger. But progressives throughout the country supported Pinchot. The controversy aroused as much public passion as any dispute of its time. By the time it was over, Taft had alienated the supporters of Roosevelt completely—and, it seemed, irrevocably.

The Return of Roosevelt
 During most of these controversies, Theodore Roosevelt was out of the country on a long hunting safari in Africa and an extended tour of Europe. To the American public, however, Roosevelt remained a formidable presence. His return to New York in the spring of 1910 was a major public event. Roosevelt insisted that he had no plans to reenter politics, but within a month he announced that he would embark on a national speaking tour before

THE PROGRESSIVES
• 511 

ROOSEVELT AT OSAWATOMIE
Roosevelt’s speech at Osawatomie, Kansas, in 1910 was the most radical of his career and openly marked his break with the Taft administration and the Republican leadership. “The essence of any struggle for liberty,” he told his largely conservative audience, “has always been, and must always be to take from some one man or class of men the right to enjoy power, or wealth, or position or immunity, which has not been earned by service to his or their fellows.” (© Granger, NYC—All Rights Reserved.) 
 the end of the summer. Furious with Taft, he was becoming convinced that he alone was capable of reuniting the Republican Party. The real signal of Roosevelt’s decision to assume leadership of Republican reformers came in a speech he gave on September 1, 1910, in Osawatomie, Kansas. In it he outlined a set of principles, which he labeled the “New Nationalism,” that made “New Nationalism” clear he had moved a considerable way from the cautious conservatism of the years of his presidency. He argued that social justice was possible only through a strong federal government whose executive acted as the “steward of the public welfare.” He supported graduated income and inheritance taxes, workers’ compensation for industrial accidents, regulation of the labor of women and children, tariff revision, and firmer regulation of corporations.

Spreading Insurgency
 The congressional elections of 1910 provided further evidence of how far the progressive revolt had spread. In primary elections, conservative Republicans suffered defeat after defeat, while almost all the progressive incumbents were reelected. In the general election, the Democrats won control of the House of Representatives for the first time in sixteen years and gained strength in the Senate. But Roosevelt still denied any

512 • CHAPTER 20


 presidential ambitions and claimed that his real purpose was to pressure Taft to return to progressive policies. Two events, however, changed his mind. The first, on October 27, 1911, was the announcement by the administration of a suit against U.S. Steel, which charged, among other things, that the 1907 acquisition of the Tennessee Coal and Iron Company had been illegal. Roosevelt had approved that acquisition in the midst of the 1907 panic, and he was enraged by the implication that he had acted improperly. Roosevelt was still reluctant to become a candidate for president because Senator Robert La Follette, the great Wisconsin progressive, had been working since 1911 to secure the presidential nomination for himself. But La Follette’s candidacy stumbled in February 1912 when, exhausted and distraught over the illness of a daughter, he appeared to suffer a nervous breakdown during a speech in Philadelphia. Roosevelt announced his candidacy on February 22.

 Roosevelt versus Taft For all practical purposes, the campaign for the Republican nomination had now become a battle between Roosevelt and Taft. Roosevelt scored overwhelming victories in all ­thirteen presidential primaries. Taft, however, remained the choice of most party leaders, who controlled the nominating process. The battle for the nomination at the Chicago convention revolved around an unusually large number of contested delegates: 254 in all. Roosevelt needed fewer than half the disputed seats to clinch the nomination. But the Republican National Committee, controlled by the Old Guard, awarded all but 19 of them to Taft. At a rally the night before the convention opened, Roosevelt addressed 5,000 cheering supporters. “We stand at Armageddon,” he told the roaring crowd, “and we battle for the Lord.” The next day, he led his supporters out of the convention, and out of the party. The convention then quietly nominated Taft on the first ballot. Roosevelt summoned his supporters back to Chicago in August for another convention, this one to launch the new Progressive Party and to nominate himself as its presidential can“Bull Moose” Party didate. Roosevelt approached the battle feeling, as he put it, “fit as a bull moose” (thus giving his new party an enduring nickname). But Roosevelt was also aware that his cause was almost hopeless, partly because many of the insurgents who had supported him during the primaries refused to follow him out of the Republican Party. It was also because of the man the Democrats had nominated for president.

WOODROW WILSON AND THE NEW FREEDOM
 The 1912 presidential contest was not simply one between conservatives and reformers. It was also one between two brands of progressivism. And it matched the two most important national leaders of the early twentieth century in an unequal contest.

Woodrow Wilson
 Reform sentiment had been gaining strength within the Democratic Party as well as the Republican Party in the first years of the century. At the June 1912 Democratic Convention in Baltimore, Champ Clark, the conservative Speaker of the House, was

THE PROGRESSIVES
• 513 

 unable to assemble the two-thirds majority necessary for nomination because of progressive opposition. Finally, on the forty-sixth ballot, Woodrow Wilson, the governor of New Jersey and the only genuinely progressive candidate in the race, emerged as the party’s nominee. Wilson had been a professor of political science at Princeton until 1902, when he was named president of the university. Elected governor of New Jersey in 1910, he quickly earned a national reputation for winning passage of progressive legislation. As a presidential candidate in 1912, Wilson presented a progressive program that came to be called the “New Freedom.” Roosevelt’s New Nationalism supported ­ economic ­concentration and using government to regulate and control it. Wilson’s “New Freedom” Wilson seemed to side with those who (like Louis Brandeis) believed that bigness was both unjust and inefficient, that the proper response to monopoly was not to regulate it but to destroy it. The 1912 presidential campaign was an anticlimax. Taft, resigned to defeat, barely campaigned. Roosevelt campaigned energetically (until a gunshot wound from a would-be assassin forced him to the sidelines during the last weeks before the election), but he







































29 15 24








10 12


8 12














Candidate (Party)


Electoral Vote


Popular Vote (%)


Woodrow Wilson
(Democratic)
Theodore Roosevelt
(Progressive/Bull Moose)
William H. Taft
(Republican)




6,293,454
(41.9)




Eugene V. Debs
(Socialist)
 Other parties (Prohibition, Socialist Labor)

—


4,119,538
(27.4)
3,484,980
(23.2)
900,672
(6.0)


—


235,025




 58.8% of electorate voting

 The election of 1912 was one of the most unusual in American history because of the dramatic schism within the Republican Party. Two Republican presidents—William Howard Taft, the incumbent, and Theodore Roosevelt, his predecessor—ran against each other, opening the way for a victory by the Democratic candidate, Woodrow Wilson, who won with only 42 percent of the popular vote. A fourth candidate, the socialist Eugene V. Debs, received a significant 6 percent of the vote. • What events caused the schism between Taft and Roosevelt?

THE ELECTION OF 1912


514 • CHAPTER 20


 failed to draw any significant number of Democratic progressives away from Wilson. In November, Roosevelt and Taft split the Republican vote; Wilson held on to most Democrats and won. He received only 42 percent of the popular vote, compared with 27 percent for Roosevelt, 23 percent for Taft, and 6 percent for the socialist Eugene Debs. But in the electoral college, Wilson won 435 of the 531 votes.

The Scholar as President
 Wilson was a bold and forceful president. He exerted firm control over his cabinet, and he delegated real authority only to those who were loyal to him. His most powerful adviser, Colonel Edward M. House, was an intelligent and ambitious Texan who held no office and whose only claim to authority was his personal intimacy with the president. In legislative matters, Wilson skillfully welded together a coalition that would support his goals. Democratic majorities in both houses of Congress made his task easier. Wilson’s first triumph as president was the fulfillment of an old Democratic (and

WOODROW WILSON
Woodrow Wilson, the 28th President of the United States, was a Virginian (the first southerner to be elected president since before the Civil War), a professor of political science and later president of Princeton University, governor of New Jersey, and a progressive. His election to the presidency brought the first Democrat to the White House since 1896. (The Library of Congress) 
THE PROGRESSIVES
• 515 

 progressive) goal: a substantial lowering of the protective tariff. The UnderwoodSimmons Tariff provided cuts significant enough, progressives believed, to introduce real competition into American markets and thus to help break the power of trusts. To make up for the loss of revenue under the new tariff, Congress Lowering the Tariff approved a graduated income tax, which the recently adopted Sixteenth Amendment to the Constitution now permitted. This first modern income tax imposed a 1 percent tax on individuals and corporations earning more than $4,000 a year, with rates ranging up to 6 percent on incomes over $500,000 annually. Wilson held Congress in session through the summer to work on a major reform of the American banking system: the Federal Reserve Act, which Banking System Reform Congress passed and the president signed on December 23, 1913. It created twelve regional banks, each to be owned and controlled by the individual banks of its district. The regional Federal Reserve banks would hold a certain percentage of the assets of their member banks in reserve; they would use those reserves to support loans to private banks at an interest (or “discount”) rate that the Federal Reserve system would set; they would issue a new type of paper currency—Federal Reserve notes—that would become the nation’s basic medium of trade and would be backed by the government. Most important, they would be able to shift funds quickly to troubled areas—to meet increased demands for credit or to protect imperiled banks. Supervising and regulating the entire system was a national Federal Reserve Board, whose members were appointed by the president. In 1914, turning to the central issue of his 1912 campaign, Wilson proposed two measures to deal with the problem of monopoly, which took shape as the Corporate Oversight Federal Trade Commission Act and the Clayton Antitrust Act. The Federal Trade Commission Act created a regulatory agency that would help businesses determine in advance whether their actions would be acceptable to the government. The agency would also have authority to launch prosecutions against “unfair trade practices,” and it would have wide power to investigate corporate behavior. Wilson signed the Federal Trade Commission Bill happily, but he seemed to lose interest in the Clayton Antitrust Bill, which proposed stronger measures to break up trusts. Wilson did little to protect it from conservative assaults, which greatly weakened it.

Retreat and Advance
 By the fall of 1914, Wilson believed that the New Freedom program was essentially complete and that agitation for reform would now subside. He refused to support the movement for national woman suffrage. Deferring to southern Democrats, he condoned the reimposition of segregation in the agencies of the federal government (in contrast to Roosevelt, who had ordered the elimination of many such barriers). When congressional progressives attempted to enlist his support for new reform legislation, Wilson dismissed their proposals as unconstitutional or unnecessary. The congressional elections of 1914, however, shattered the president’s complacency. Democrats suffered major losses in Congress, and voters who in 1912 had supported the Progressive Party began returning to the Republicans. Wilson realized he would not be able to rely on a divided opposition when he ran for reelection in 1916. By the end of 1915, therefore, Wilson had begun to support a second flurry of reforms. In January 1916, he appointed Louis Brandeis to the Supreme Court,

516 • CHAPTER 20


 making him not only the first Jew but also the most advanced progressive to serve there. Later, Wilson supported a measure to make it easier for farmers to receive credit, and another measure creating a system of workers’ compensation for federal employees. In 1916, Wilson supported the Keating-Owen Act, which prohibited the shipment of goods produced by underage children across state lines, thus giving an expanded Child-Labor Laws importance to the constitutional clause assigning Congress the task of regulating interstate commerce. The president similarly supported measures that used federal taxing authority as a vehicle for legislating social change. After the Court struck down Keating-Owen, a new law attempted to achieve the same goal by imposing a heavy tax on the products of child labor. (The Court later struck down that law too.) The Smith-Lever Act of 1914 offered matching federal grants to support agricultural extension education. Over time, these innovative uses of government overcame most of the constitutional objections and became the foundation of a long-term growth in federal power over the economy.

CONCLUSION
 The powerful surge of reform efforts in the last years of the nineteenth century and the first years of the twentieth century caused many Americans to identify themselves as “progressives.” That label meant many different things to many different people, but at its core was a belief that human effort and government action could improve society. By the early twentieth century, progressivism had become a powerful, transformative force in American life. This great surge of reform eventually reached the federal government and national politics, as progressives came to believe that success required the engagement of the federal government. Two national leaders, Theodore Roosevelt and Woodrow Wilson, contributed to a period of national reform that made the government in Washington a great center of power for the first time since the Civil War—a position it has never relinquished. Progressivism did not solve the nation’s problems, but it gave movements, organizations, and governments new tools to deal with them.

KEY TERMS/PEOPLE/PLACES/EVENTS
Alice Paul 496
Bull Moose Party 512
 conservationists 507 eugenics 503 Hetch Hetchy 509 Hull House 492 Ida B. Wells-Barnett 502 IWW (“Wobblies”) 504 Jane Addams 492 John Muir 507 Louis Brandeis 504

 muckrakers 489 NAACP 502 New Freedom 513 New Nationalism 511 Nineteenth Amendment 496 progressivism 488 prohibition 503 Robert La Follette 498 Social Gospel 491 socialism 504 social justice 489

Theodore Roosevelt 505
Triangle Shirtwaist
 Company fire 499 W. E. B. Du Bois 502 William Howard Taft 510 Women’s Christian Temperance Union (WCTU) 503 Woodrow Wilson 513

THE PROGRESSIVES
• 517 

RECALL AND REFLECT
 1. 	What “moral” crusades did progressives undertake in their efforts to reform the

 ­social order? 2. 	How did W. E. B. Du Bois’s philosophy on race relations differ from that of Booker T.

Washington?
 3. 	What were some of the approaches progressives used to challenge the power and

 ­influence of capitalist corporate America? 4. 	What was the difference between Theodore Roosevelt’s “New Nationalism” and

 Woodrow Wilson’s “New Freedom”?



AMERICA AND
THE GREAT WAR
THE “BIG STICK”: AMERICA AND THE WORLD,
1901–1917
THE ROAD TO WAR
“OVER THERE”
THE SEARCH FOR A NEW WORLD ORDER
A SOCIETY IN TURMOIL


LOOKING AHEAD
 1. What were the most important events that led up to the United States declaring war on Germany? 2. How did U.S. participation in the Great War affect the nation’s economy and society, both during the war and after the conflict ended? 3. Why did the Great War fail to become the “war to end all wars”?

THE “GREAT WAR,” AS IT
was known to a generation unaware that a greater war would soon follow, began quietly in August 1914 when Austria-Hungary invaded the tiny Balkan nation of Serbia. Within weeks, however, the conflict had grown into a conflagration engaging the armies of most of the major nations of Europe. Americans looked on with horror as the war became what many people claimed was the most savage in history. It dragged on, brutally and inconclusively, for over four years. Most Americans also believed at first that the conflict had little to do with them. They were wrong. After nearly three years of attempting to affect the outcome of the conflict without becoming embroiled in it, the United States formally entered the war in April 1917. 
518 •


THE “BIG STICK”:
AMERICA AND THE
WORLD, 1901–1917
 To most of the American public, foreign affairs remained largely remote in the early twentieth century. But to Theodore Roosevelt and later presidents, that remoteness made foreign affairs appealing. Overseas, the president could act with less regard for Congress and the courts.

Roosevelt and “Civilization”
 Theodore Roosevelt believed in using American power in the world (a conviction he once alluded to by citing the proverb, “Speak softly, and carry a big stick”). But he had two different standards for using that power. Roosevelt believed that an important distinction existed between the “civilized” and “uncivilized” nations of the world. “Civilized” nations, as he defined them, were predominantly white and Anglo-Saxon or Teutonic; “uncivilized” nations were generally nonwhite, Latin, or Slavic. Civilized nations were also, by Roosevelt’s definition, producers of industrial goods. Uncivilized nations were suppliers of raw materials and markets for industrial products. Roosevelt believed that a civilized society had the right and duty to intervene in the affairs of “backward nations” to preserve order and stability—for the sake of both nations. That belief, the obligation of a “civilized” nation to, in effect, police the world, was one important reason for Roosevelt’s early support of the development of American sea power. By 1906, the American navy had attained a size and strength surpassed only by that of Great Britain.

TIME LINE
 World War I begins

 Panama Canal opened

 U.S. troops in Haiti Lusitania torpedoed Wilson supports preparedness

 Wilson reelected U.S. troops in Mexico

 German unrestricted submarine warfare U.S. enters World War I



Selective Service Act


Sedition Act


War Industries Board
 created

 Wilson’s Fourteen Points Armistice ends war Paris Peace Conference

 Senate rejects Treaty of Versailles Race riots in Chicago and other cities Steel strike and other labor actions

 Palmer raids and Red Scare Harding elected president

Sacco and Vanzetti
 executed

• 519


