710 • CHAPTER 29


 the crime. Later that day he was mysteriously murdered by a Dallas nightclub owner, Jack Ruby, as he was being moved from one jail to another. Most Americans at the time accepted the conclusions of a federal commission appointed by President Johnson to investigate the assassination. The commission, chaired by Chief Justice Earl Warren, found that both Oswald and Ruby had acted alone, that there was no larger conspiracy. Warren Commission In later years, however, many Americans came to believe that the Warren Commission report had ignored evidence of a wider conspiracy behind the murders. Controversy over the assassination continues still.

Lyndon Johnson
 The Kennedy assassination was a national trauma—a defining event for almost everyone old enough to be aware of it. At the time, however, much of the nation took comfort in the personality and performance of Kennedy’s successor in the White House, Lyndon Baines Johnson. Johnson was a native of the poor “hill country” of west Texas and had risen to become majority leader of the U.S. Senate by dint of extraordinary, even obsessive, effort and ambition. Having failed to win the Democratic nomination for president in 1960, he surprised many who knew him by agreeing to accept the vice presidential nomination on the ticket with Kennedy. The events in Dallas thrust him into the White House. Johnson’s rough-edged, even crude, personality could hardly have been more different from Kennedy’s. But like Kennedy, Johnson was a man who believed in the active use of power. Between 1963 and 1966, he compiled the most impressive legislative record of any president since Franklin Roosevelt. He was aided by the tidal wave of emotion that

THE JOHNSON TREATMENT
Lyndon Johnson was legendary for his powers of persuasion—for a combination of charm and intimidation that often worked on even the most experienced politicians. He is shown here in the Oval Office meeting with his old friend Senator Richard Russell of Georgia and demonstrating one of his most powerful and unsettling techniques: moving so close to the person with whom he was talking as to be almost touching him. (Lyndon Baines Johnson Library) 
THE TURBULENT SIXTIES
• 711 

 followed the death of Kennedy, which helped win support for many New Frontier proposals. But Johnson also constructed a greater and more far reaching reform program of his own, one that he ultimately labeled the “Great Society.” And he won “Great Society” approval of much of it through the same sort of skillful lobbying in Congress that had made him an effective majority leader. Johnson’s first year in office was, by necessity, dominated by the campaign for reelection. There was little doubt that he would win—particularly after the Republican Party nominated the very conservative Senator Barry Goldwater of Arizona. In the November 1964 election, the president received a larger plurality, over 61 percent, than any candidate before or since. Goldwater, with his hard-line stance against communism and government expansion, managed to carry only his home state of Arizona and five states in the Deep South. Nevertheless, the failed Goldwater campaign mobilized many right-wing activists who would propel the growth of conservative political strength for decades to come. Record Democratic majorities in both houses of Congress, many of whose members had been swept into office only because of the margin of Johnson’s victory, ensured that the president would be able to fulfill many of his goals.

The Assault on Poverty
 For the first time since the New Deal, the federal government took steps in the 1960s to create important new social welfare programs. The most important of these was Medicare, which provides federal aid to elderly individuals for medical expenses. Medicare and Medicaid Its enactment in 1965 came at the end of a bitter twenty-year debate between those who believed in the concept of national health assistance and those who denounced it as “socialized medicine.” But Medicare pacified many critics. For one thing, it avoided the stigma of “welfare” by making Medicare benefits available to all elderly Americans, regardless of need (just as Social Security had done with pensions). That created a large middle-class constituency for the program. It also defused the opposition of the medical community by allowing doctors serving Medicare patients to practice privately and (at first) to charge their normal fees; Medicare simply shifted responsibility for paying those fees from the patient to the government. In 1966, Johnson steered to passage the Medicaid program, which extended federal medical assistance to welfare recipients and other indigent people of all ages. Medicare and Medicaid were early steps in a much larger assault on poverty—one that Kennedy had been planning in the last months of his life and that Johnson launched only weeks after taking office. The centerpiece of this “war on poverty,” as Johnson called it, was the Office of Economic Opportunity (OEO), which created an array of new educational, employment, housing, and health-care programs. But the OEO was controversial from the start, in part because of its commitment to the idea of “Community Action.” Community Action was an effort to involve members of poor communities themselves in the planning and administration of the programs designed to help Community Action Programs them. The Community Action programs provided jobs for many poor people and gave them valuable experience in administrative and political work. But despite its achievements, the Community Action approach proved impossible to sustain. Administrative failures damaged the program. So did the apparent excesses of a few agencies, which damaged the popular image of the Community Action programs and indeed the war on poverty as a whole. The OEO spent nearly $3 billion during its first two years of existence, and it helped reduce poverty in some areas. But it fell far short of eliminating poverty altogether. That

712 • CHAPTER 29


 was in part because of the weaknesses of the programs themselves and in part because funding for them, inadequate from the beginning, dwindled as the years passed and a costly war in Southeast Asia became the nation’s first priority.

Cities, Schools, and Immigration
 Closely tied to the antipoverty program were federal efforts to promote the revitalization of decaying cities and to strengthen the nation’s schools. The Housing Act of 1961 offered $4.9 billion in federal grants to cities for the preservation of open spaces, the development of mass-transit systems, and the subsidization of middle-income housing. In 1966, Johnson established a new cabinet agency, the Department of Housing and Urban Development (whose first secretary, Robert Weaver, was the first African American ever to serve in the cabinet). Johnson also inaugurated the Model Cities Program, which offered federal subsidies for urban redevelopment pilot programs. Kennedy had fought for federal aid to public education, but he had failed to overcome two important obstacles. Many Americans feared that aid to education was the first step Federal Aid to Education toward federal control of the schools, and Catholics insisted that federal assistance must extend to parochial as well as public schools. Johnson managed to circumvent both objections with the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 and a series of subsequent measures. The bills extended aid to all types of schools and based the aid on the economic conditions of the students, not on the needs of the schools themselves. The Johnson administration also supported the Immigration Act of 1965, one of the most important pieces of legislation of the 1960s. For decades since the 1920s, Immigration Act of 1965 the law maintained a strict limit on the number of newcomers admitted to the country each year (170,000). But the 1965 act eliminated the “national origins” system established in the 1920s, which gave preference to immigrants from northern Europe over those from other parts of the world. It continued to restrict immigration from some parts of Latin America, but it allowed people from all parts of Europe, Asia, and Africa to enter the United States on an equal basis. By the early 1970s, the character of American immigration had changed dramatically. The numbers of immigrants grew significantly, with members of new national groups—and ­particularly large groups of Asians—entering the United States and transforming the character of the American population.

Legacies of the Great Society
 Taken together, the Great Society reforms significantly increased federal spending. For a time, rising tax revenues from the growing economy nearly compensated for the new expenditures. In 1964, Johnson managed to win passage of the $11.5 billion tax cut that Kennedy had first proposed in 1962. The cut increased the federal deficit, but substantial economic growth over the next several years made up for much of the revenue initially lost. As Great Society programs began to multiply, however—particularly as they began to compete with the escalating costs of America’s military ventures—the federal budget rapidly outpaced increases in revenues. In 1961, the federal government had spent $94.4 billion. By 1970, that sum had risen to $196.6 billion. The high costs of the Great Society, and the failures of some of it, weakened the popularity of the federal efforts to solve social problems. But the Great Society was also

THE TURBULENT SIXTIES
• 713 

 responsible for some remarkable achievements. It significantly reduced hunger in America. It made medical care available to millions of elderly and poor people who would otherwise have had great difficulty affording it. It contributed to the greatest reduction in poverty in American history. In 1959, according to the most widely accepted estimates, 21 percent of the American people lived below the officially established poverty line (a level that did not survive for very long). In 1969, only 12 percent remained below that line. Much of that progress was a result of economic growth, but some of it was a direct result of Great Society programs.

THE BATTLE FOR RACIAL EQUALITY
 By the early 1960s, African Americans forced issues of racial justice and equality to the forefront of American politics. While scholars debate the origins and legacies of the modern civil rights movement, none challenge how deeply it influenced the nation’s history in the late twentieth century. (See “Debating the Past: The Civil Rights Movement.”)

Expanding Protests
 John Kennedy was sympathetic to the cause of racial justice, but he was far from a committed crusader. Like presidents before him, he feared alienating southern voters and powerful southern Democrats in Congress. His administration hoped to contain the racial problem by enforcing existing laws and using executive orders—not proposing new legislation. But the pressure for change was growing uncontainable even before Kennedy took office. Throughout the 1950s, African Americans in northern cities had grown increasingly active in opposing discrimination. They demanded progress in housing, jobs, and education. Protests grew in the 1960s, especially in the South. This restiveness soon spread. In February 1960, black college students in Greensboro, North Carolina, staged a sit-in at a segregated Woolworth’s lunch counter; and in the following months, such demonstrations spread throughout the South, forcing many merchants to integrate their facilities. In the fall of 1960, some of those who had participated in the sit-ins formed the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee (SNCC)—a student branch of Martin Luther King Jr.’s Southern Christian Leadership Conference; SNCC worked to keep the spirit of resistance alive. In 1961, an interracial group of students, working with the Congress of Racial Equality (CORE), began what they called “freedom rides.” Traveling by bus Freedom Rides ­throughout the South, they tried to force the desegregation of bus stations. They were met in some places with such savage violence on the part of some white southerners that Attorney General Robert Kennedy finally dispatched federal marshals to help keep the peace and ordered the integration of all bus and train stations. Events in the Deep South in 1963 helped bring the growing movement to something of a climax. In April, Martin Luther King Jr. helped launch a series of nonviolent demonstrations in Birmingham, Alabama. Police Commissioner Eugene “Bull” Connor personally supervised a brutal effort to break up the peaceful marches, arresting hundreds of demonstrators and using attack dogs, tear gas, electric cattle prods, and fire hoses—at times even against small children—in full view of television cameras. Two months later,

DEBATING THE PAST


The Civil Rights Movement
 The civil rights movement was one of the most important events in the modern history of the United States. It helped force the dismantling of legalized segregation and disenfranchisement of African Americans and also served as a model for other groups ­mobilizing to demand dignity and rights. And like all important events in history, it has produced scholarship that examines the movement in a number of different ways. The early histories of the civil rights movement remain widely accepted. They rest on a heroic narrative of moral purpose and personal courage by which great men and women ­inspired ordinary people to rise up and struggle for their rights. This narrative generally ­begins with the Brown decision of 1954 and the Montgomery bus boycott of 1955, continues through the civil rights campaigns of the early 1960s, and culminates in the Civil Rights Acts of 1964 and 1965. Among the central events in this narrative are the March on Washington of 1963, with Martin Luther King Jr.’s famous “I Have a Dream” speech, and the assassination of King in 1968, which has often symbolized the end of the movement and the beginning of a different, more complicated period of the black freedom struggle. The key element of these narratives is the central importance to the movement of a few great leaders, most notably King himself. Among the best examples of this narrative are Taylor Branch’s powerful studies of the life and struggles of King, Parting the Waters (1988), Pillar of Fire (1998), and At Canaan’s Edge (2006), as well as David Garrow’s important study, Bearing the Cross (1986). Few historians would deny the importance of King and other leaders to the successes of the civil rights movement. But a number of scholars have argued that the leader-centered narrative obscures the vital contributions of ordinary people in communities throughout

 the South, and the nation, to the struggle. John Dittmer’s Local People: The Struggle for Civil Rights in Mississippi (1994) and Charles Payne’s I’ve Got the Light of Freedom (1995) both examine the day-to-day work of the movement’s rank and file in the early 1960s and ­argue that their efforts were at least as important as those of King and other leaders. The national leadership helped bring visibility to these struggles, but King and his circle were usually present only briefly, if at all, for the ­actual work of communities in challenging segregation. Only by understanding the local origins of the movement, these and other scholars argue, can we understand its true character. Scholars also disagree about the time frame of the movement. Rather than beginning the story in 1954 or 1955 (as in Robert Weisbrot’s excellent 1991 synthesis Freedom Bound or in William Chafe’s remarkable 1981 local study Civilities and Civil Rights, which examined the Greensboro sit-ins of 1961), a number of scholars have tried to move the story into both earlier periods and later ones. Robin Kelly’s Race Rebels (1994) emphasizes the important contributions of working-class African Americans, some of them allied for a time with the Communist Party, to the undermining of racist assumptions starting in the 1930s. These activists organized some of the earliest civil rights demonstrations—sit-ins, marches, and other efforts to challenge segregation—well before the conventional dates for the beginning of the movement. Gail O’Brien’s The Color of the Law (1999) examines a 1946 “race riot” in Columbia, Tennessee, arguing for its importance as a signal of the early growth of African American militancy and the m ­ ovement of that militancy from the streets into the legal ­system. Other scholars have looked beyond the 1960s and have incorporated events outside the orbit of the formal “movement” to explain

BROWN V. BOARD OF EDUCATION
This photograph, taken for an Atlanta newspaper, illustrated the long and dangerous walk that Linda Brown, one of the plaintiffs in the famous desegregation case that ultimately reached the Supreme Court, had to travel each day on her way to a segregated school in Topeka, Kansas. An allwhite school was located close to her home, but to reach the black school she had to attend required a long walk and a long bus ride each day. Not only does the picture illustrate the difficulties segregation created for Linda Brown, it was also part of a broad publicity campaign launched by the supporters of the case. (Photo by Carl Iwasaki/© Time & Life Pictures/Getty Images) 
 the history of the civil rights struggle. A growing literature on northern, urban, and relatively radical activists has suggested that focusing too much on mainstream leaders and the celebrated efforts in the South in the 1960s ­diverts our view from the equally important challenges facing northern African Americans and the very different tactics and strategies that they often chose to pursue their goals. The enormous attention historians have given to the life and legacy of Malcolm X—among them Alex Haley’s influential Autobiography of Malcolm X (1965), Michael Eric Dyson’s Making Malcolm (1996), and Manning Marable’s important ­biography, Malcolm X: A Life of Reinvention (2012)—is an example of this, as is the increasing attention scholars have given to black radicalism in the late 1960s and beyond and to such militant groups as the Black Panthers. Other literature has extended the civil rights struggle even further, into the 1980s and ­beyond, and has brought into focus such issues as the highly disproportionate number of African Americans sentenced to death within the criminal justice system. Randall Kennedy’s

 Race, Crime, and the Law (1997) is a particularly ­important study of this issue. Even Brown v. Board of Education (1954), the great landmark of the legal challenge to segregation, has been subject to reexamination. Richard Kluger’s narrative history of the Brown decision, Simple Justice (1975), is a classic statement of the traditional view of Brown as a triumph over injustice. But others have been less certain of the dramatic success of the ruling. James T. Patterson’s Brown v. Board of Education: A Civil Rights Milestone and Its Troubled Legacy (2001) argues that the Brown decision long preceded any national consensus on the need to end segregation and that its impact was far less decisive than earlier scholars have suggested. Michael Klarman’s From Jim Crow to Civil Rights (2004) examines the role of the Supreme Court in advancing civil rights and suggests, among other things, that the Brown decision may actually have retarded racial progress in the South for a time because of the enormous backlash it created. Charles Ogletree’s All Deliberate Speed (2004) and Derrick Bell’s Silent Covenants (2004) both argue that the Court’s decision did not provide an effective enforcement mechanism for desegregation and in many other ways failed to support measures that would have made school desegregation a reality. Stephen Tuck’s We Ain’t What We Ought to Be: The Black Freedom Struggle from Emancipation to Obama (2011) concludes his bro‑ad narrative of the road to racial equality by focusing on the continued activism of African Americans into the present. As the literature on the African American freedom struggles of the twentieth century has grown, historians have begun to speak of civil rights movements, rather than a single, cohesive movement.

•


UNDERSTAND, ANALYZE, & EVALUATE
 1. If historians now speak of plural civil rights

 movements, what are these movements? 2. Why are the contributions of local

 grassroots workers so often overlooked, in studies of the civil rights movement as well as in accounts of other great events in American history?

716 • CHAPTER 29


 Governor George Wallace stood in the doorway of the Foster Auditorium at the University of Alabama to prevent the court-ordered enrollment of several black students. Only after the arrival of federal marshals did he give way. The same night, NAACP official Medgar Evers was murdered in Mississippi. And in September, the bombing of the Sixteenth Street Baptist Church in Birmingham killed four African American children.

A
National Commitment  The events in Alabama and Mississippi were a warning to the president that he could no longer avoid the issue of race. In an important television address the night of the University of Alabama confrontation, Kennedy spoke eloquently of the “moral issue” facing the nation. Days later, he introduced new legislative proposals prohibiting segregation in “public accommodations” (stores, restaurants, theaters, hotels), barring discrimination in employment, and increasing the power of the government to file suits on behalf of school integration. To generate support for the legislation, and to dramatize the power of the growing movement, more than 200,000 demonstrators marched down the Mall in March on Washington Washington, D.C., in August 1963 and gathered before the Lincoln Memorial for the largest civil rights demonstration in the nation’s history to that point.

MARTIN LUTHER KING JR. IN WASHINGTON
Moments after completing his memorable speech during the August 1963 March on Washington, King waves to the vast and enthusiastic crowd that had gathered in front of the Lincoln Memorial to demand “equality and jobs.” (© AP Images) 
THE TURBULENT SIXTIES
• 717 

 Martin Luther King Jr., in one of the greatest speeches of American politics, aroused the crowd with a litany of resonant American images prefaced again and again by the phrase “I have a dream.” The assassination of President Kennedy three months later gave new impetus to civil rights legislation. The ambitious measure that Kennedy had proposed in June 1963 was stalled in the Senate after having passed through the House of Representatives with relative ease. Early in 1964, after Lyndon Johnson had applied both public Civil Rights Act of 1964 and private pressure, supporters of the measure finally mustered the two-thirds majority necessary to end a filibuster by southern senators; and the Senate passed the most important civil rights bill of the twentieth century.

The Battle for Voting Rights
 Having won a significant victory in one area, the civil rights movement shifted its focus to another: voting rights. During the summer of 1964, thousands of civil rights workers, black and white, northern and southern, spread throughout the South, but primarily into Mississippi, to work on behalf of black voter registration and participation. The campaign was known as “Freedom Summer,” and it produced a violent “Freedom Summer” response from many southern whites. Three of the first freedom workers to arrive in the South—two whites, Andrew Goodman and Michael Schwerner, and one African American, James Chaney—were murdered. Local law enforcement officials were involved in the crime. The Freedom Summer also produced the Mississippi Freedom Democratic Party (MFDP), an integrated alternative to the regular state Democratic party organization. Under the leadership of Fannie Lou Hamer and others, the MFDP challenged the regular party’s right to its seats at the Democratic National Convention that summer. (See “Consider the Source: Fannie Lou Hamer on the Struggle for Voting Rights.”) President Johnson, with King’s help, managed to broker a compromise by which members of the MFDP could be seated as observers, with promises of party reforms later on, while the regular party retained its official standing. Many MFDP members rejected the agreement and left the convention embittered. A year later, in March 1965, King helped organize a major demonstration in Selma, Alabama, to press for the right of blacks to register to vote. Selma sheriff Jim Clark led local police in a vicious attack on the demonstrators, which was televised nationally. Two northern whites participating in the Selma march were murdered in the course of the effort there. The widespread national outrage that followed the events in Alabama helped push Lyndon Johnson to win passage of the Voting Rights Act of 1965, which provided federal protection to African Americans attempting to exercise their Selma and the Voting Rights Act right to vote. But important as such gains were, they failed to satisfy the rapidly rising expectations of civil rights activists as the focus of the movement began to move from political to economic issues.

The Changing Movement
 By 1966, of African Americans 69 percent lived in metropolitan areas and 45 percent lived outside the South. Although the economic condition of most Americans was improving, in many poor urban black communities things were getting significantly worse. Indeed, more than half of all nonwhite Americans lived in poverty at the beginning of the 1960s.

CO NS IDER T HE S O URC E
FANNIE LOU HAMER ON THE STRUGGLE FOR
VOTING RIGHTS
 Fanny Lou Hamer shone a harsh spotlight on racial terror in her native state of Mississippi during her speech before the Credentials Committee of the Democratic National Convention in Atlantic City, New Jersey, in August 1964. With this testimony, Hamer tried—unsuccessfully—to unseat the all-white Mississippi delegation and seat members of the Mississippi Freedom Democratic Party (MFDP). Four years later, the MFDP succeeded in winning seats at the Convention. Mr. Chairman, and to the Credentials Committee, my name is Mrs. Fannie Lou Hamer, and I live at 626 East Lafayette Street, Ruleville, Mississippi, Sunflower County, the home of Senator James O. Eastland, and Senator Stennis. It was the 31st of August in 1962 that eighteen of us traveled twenty-six miles to the county courthouse in Indianola to try to register to become first-class citizens. We was met in Indianola by policemen, Highway Patrolmen, and they only ­allowed two of us in to take the literacy test at the time. After we had taken this test and started back to Ruleville, we was held up by the City Police and the State Highway Patrolmen and carried back to Indianola where the bus driver was charged that day with driving a bus the wrong color. After we paid the fine among us, we continued on to Ruleville, and Reverend Jeff Sunny carried me four miles in the rural area where I had worked as a timekeeper and sharecropper for eighteen years. I was met there by my children, who told me that the plantation owner was angry because I had gone down to try to register. After they told me, my husband came, and said the plantation owner was raising Cain because I had tried to register. Before he 718 •

 quit talking the plantation owner came and said, “Fannie Lou, do you know—did Pap tell you what I said?” And I said, “Yes, sir.” He said, “Well I mean that.” He said, “If you don’t go down and withdraw your registration, you will have to leave.” Said, “Then if you go down and withdraw,” said, “you still might have to go because we are not ready for that in Mississippi.” And I addressed him and told him and said, “I didn’t try to register for you. I tried to register for myself.” I had to leave that same night. On the 10th of September 1962, sixteen bullets was fired into the home of Mr. and Mrs. Robert Tucker for me. That same night two girls were shot in Ruleville, Mississippi. Also Mr. Joe McDonald’s house was shot in. And June the 9th, 1963, I had attended a voter registration workshop; was returning back to Mississippi. Ten of us was traveling by the Continental Trailway bus. When we got to Winona, Mississippi, which is Montgomery County, four of the people got off to use the washroom, and two of the people—to use the restaurant—two of the people wanted to use the washroom. The four people that had gone in to use the restaurant was ordered out. During this time I was on the bus. But when I looked through the window and saw they had rushed out I got off of the bus to see what had happened. And one of the ladies said, “It was a State Highway Patrolman and a Chief of Police ordered us out.” I got back on the bus and one of the persons had used the washroom got back on the bus, too. As soon as I was seated on the bus, I saw when they began to get the five people in a highway patrolman’s car. I stepped off of

 the bus to see what was happening and somebody screamed from the car that the five workers was in and said, “Get that one there.” When I went to get in the car, when the man told me I was under arrest, he kicked me. I was carried to the county jail and put in the booking room. They left some of the people in the booking room and began to place us in cells. I was placed in a cell with a young woman called Miss Ivesta Simpson. After I was placed in the cell I began to hear sounds of licks and screams, I could hear the sounds of licks and horrible screams. And I could hear somebody say, “Can you say, ‘yes, sir,’ nigger? Can you say ‘yes, sir’?” And they would say other horrible names. She would say, “Yes, I can say ‘yes, sir.’” “So, well, say it.” She said, “I don’t know you well enough.” They beat her, I don’t know how long. And after a while she began to pray, and asked God to have mercy on those people. And it wasn’t too long before three white men came to my cell. One of these men was a State Highway Patrolman and he asked me where I was from. I told him Ruleville and he said, “We are going to check this.” They left my cell and it wasn’t too long ­before they came back. He said, “You are from Ruleville all right,” and he used a curse word. And he said, “We are going to make you wish you was dead.” I was carried out of that cell into another cell where they had two Negro prisoners. The State Highway Patrolmen ordered the first Negro to take the blackjack. The first Negro prisoner ordered me, by orders from the State Highway Patrolman, for me to lay down on a bunk bed on my face. I laid on my face and the first Negro ­began to beat. I was beat by the first Negro

 until he was exhausted. I was holding my hands behind me at that time on my left side, because I suffered from polio when I was six years old. After the first Negro had beat until he was exhausted, the State Highway Patrolman ordered the second Negro to take the ­blackjack. The second Negro began to beat and I began to work my feet, and the State Highway Patrolman ordered the first Negro who had beat me to sit on my feet—to keep me from working my feet. I began to scream and one white man got up and b­ egan to beat me in my head and tell me to hush. One white man—my dress had worked up high—he walked over and pulled my dress—I pulled my dress down and he pulled my dress back up. I was in jail when Medgar Evers was murdered. All of this is on account of we want to ­register, to become first-class citizens. And if the Freedom Democratic Party is not seated now, I question America. Is this America, the land of the free and the home of the brave, where we have to sleep with our telephones off the hooks because our lives be threatened daily, because we want to live as decent h ­ uman beings, in America? Thank you. UNDERSTAND, ANALYZE, & EVALUATE 1. What tactics were used to prevent

 Hamer from registering to vote? 2. Why did the Highway Patrolmen

 choose black prisoners to beat Hamer? 3. When the television networks broadcast this speech, the level of public support for the Mississippi Freedom Democratic Party rose sharply. What aspects of Hamer’s speech were so effective?

Source: Fannie Lou Hamer, “Testimony Before the Credentials Committee,” Democratic National Convention,
 August 22, 1964. Copyright © 1964 by Fannie Lou Hamer. All rights reserved. Used with permission.

• 719


720 • CHAPTER 29


 The great publicity of the civil rights movement in the South intensified antidiscrimination efforts in northern cities. Those cities had no Jim Crow laws but much segregation. Many African American leaders (and their white supporters), having struggled in relative obscurity in the 1940s and 1950s, began to move the battle against job discrimination to a new level. They argued that the only way for employers to prove they were not discriminating against African Americans was to demonstrate that they were hiring minorities. If necessary, they should adopt positive measures to recruit minorities. Lyndon Johnson gave his support to the concept of affirmative action in 1965. Over the next decade, affirmative action guidelines gradually extended to virtually all institutions doing business with or receiving funds from the federal government (including schools and universities)—and to many others as well. Discrimination based on gender also began to receive federal interest. When “sex” was added at the last minute to Title VII of the 1964 Civil Rights Act, many thought it was an attempt to kill the bill. Regardless, the result added federal authority to begin dismantling the entrenched discrimination of women in the workplace and higher education. A symbol of the movement’s new direction, and of the problems it would cause, was a major campaign in the summer of 1966 in Chicago, in which King played a prominent role. Organizers of the Chicago campaign hoped to direct national attention to housing and employment discrimination in northern industrial cities. But the Chicago campaign evoked vicious and at times violent opposition from white residents and failed to attract wide attention or support in the way events in the South had done.

Urban Violence
 Well before the Chicago campaign, the problem of urban poverty had thrust itself into national prominence when riots broke out in African American neighborhoods in major cities. There were disturbances in the summer of 1964, most notably in New York City’s Harlem. The most serious race riot since the end of World War II occurred the following summer in the Watts section of Los Angeles. In the midst of a traffic arrest, a white police officer struck a protesting black bystander with his club. The incident triggered a storm of anger and a week of violence. Thirty-four people died during the uprising, which was eventually quelled by the National Guard. In the summer of 1966, forty-three additional outbreaks occurred, the most serious in Chicago and Cleveland. And in the summer of 1967, eight major disorders took place, including the largest of them all—a racial clash in Detroit in which forty-three people died. Televised images of the violence alarmed millions of Americans and created both a new sense of urgency and a growing sense of doubt among some whites who had embraced the cause of racial justice only a few years before. A special Commission on Civil Disorders, ordered by the president in response to the riots, issued a celebrated report in the spring of 1968 recommending massive spending to eliminate the abysmal conditions of the ghettoes. To many white Americans, however, the riots exposed the need for stern measures to stop violence and lawlessness.

Black Power
 Disillusioned with the ideal of peaceful change through cooperation with whites, an increasing number of African Americans turned to a new approach to the racial issue: the philosophy of black power. Black power meant many different things. But in all its forms,

THE TURBULENT SIXTIES
• 721 

 it suggested a shift away from the goals of assimilation and toward increased awareness of racial distinctiveness. Perhaps the most enduring impact of the black-power ideology was a social and psychological one: instilling racial pride in African Americans. But black power took political forms as well, and it created a deep schism within the civil rights movement. Traditional black organizations that emphasized cooperation with sympathetic whites— groups such as the NAACP, the Urban League, and King’s Southern Christian Leadership Conference—now faced competition from more radical groups. The Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee and the Congress of Racial Equality had both begun as relatively moderate interracial organizations. By the mid-1960s, however, these and other groups were calling for more radical and occasionally even violent action against white racism and were openly rejecting the approaches of older, more established black leaders. The most radical expressions of the black-power idea came from such revolutionary organizations as the Black Panthers, based in Oakland, California, and the separatist group the Nation of Islam, which denounced whites as “devils” and appealed to African Americans to embrace the Islamic faith and work for complete racial separation. The most celebrated of the Black Muslims, as whites often termed them, was Malcolm Little, who adopted the name Malcolm X (“X” to denote his lost African Malcolm X surname). Malcolm X left the Nation of Islam in 1964 and founded the Muslim Mosque, Inc., which he hoped would allow him to work with other civil rights leaders. After a pilgrimage to Mecca, he returned with a new hope that racial problems could be overcome. He died in 1965 when gunmen, presumably under orders from rivals within the Nation of Islam, assassinated him. But he remained a major figure in many African American communities long after his death, attaining a stature comparable to that of Martin Luther King Jr.

RESPONSE” AND THE COLD WAR
 In international affairs as much as in domestic reform, the optimistic liberalism of the Kennedy and Johnson administrations dictated a more active and aggressive approach to dealing with the nation’s problems than that of the 1950s.

Diversifying Foreign Policy
 The Kennedy administration entered office convinced that the United States needed to be able to counter communist aggression in more flexible ways than the atomic-weaponsoriented defense strategy of the Eisenhower years. In particular, Kennedy was unsatisfied with the nation’s ability to meet communist threats in “emerging areas” of the Third World—the areas in which, Kennedy believed, the real struggle against communism would be waged in the future. He gave enthusiastic support to the expansion of the Special Forces (or “Green Berets,” as they were soon known)—soldiers trained specifically to fight guerrilla conflicts and other limited wars. Kennedy also favored expanding American influence through peaceful means. To repair the badly deteriorating relationship with Latin America, he proposed an “Alliance for Progress”—a series of projects for peaceful development and stabilization of the nations of that region. Kennedy also inaugurated the Agency for International Development

722 • CHAPTER 29


 (AID) to coordinate foreign aid. And he established what became one of his most popular innovations: the Peace Corps, which sent young American volunteers abroad to work in developing areas. Among the first foreign policy ventures of the Kennedy administration was a disastrous assault on the Castro government in Cuba. The Eisenhower administration had started the project; and by the time Kennedy took office, the CIA had been working for months to Bay of Pigs train a small army of anti-Castro Cuban exiles. On April 17, 1961, with the approval of the new president, 2,000 of the armed exiles landed at the Bay of Pigs in Cuba, expecting first American air support and then a spontaneous uprising by the Cuban people on their behalf. They received neither. At the last minute, as it became clear that things were going badly, Kennedy withdrew the air support, fearful of involving the United States too directly in the invasion. Nor did the expected uprising occur. Instead, well-armed Castro forces easily crushed the invaders, and within two days the entire mission had collapsed. Peace Corps

 Confrontations with the Soviet Union In the grim aftermath of the Bay of Pigs, Kennedy traveled to Vienna in June 1961 for his first meeting with Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev. Their frosty exchange of views did little to reduce strains between the two nations—nor did Khrushchev’s veiled threat of war unless the United States ceased to support a noncommunist West Berlin in the heart of East Germany. Khrushchev was particularly unhappy about the mass exodus of residents of East Germany to the West through the easily traversed border in the center of Berlin. But he ultimately found a method short of war to stop it. Just before dawn on August 13, 1961, the East German government, complying with directives from Moscow, constructed a wall between East and West Berlin. Guards fired on those who continued to try to escape. For nearly thirty years, the Berlin Wall served as the most potent physical symbol of the conflict between the communist and noncommunist worlds. The rising tensions culminated the following October in the most dangerous and dramatic crisis of the Cold War. During the summer of 1962, American intelligence agencies became aware of the arrival of a new wave of Soviet technicians and equipCuban Missile Crisis ment in Cuba and of military construction in progress. On October 14, aerial reconnaissance photos produced clear evidence that the Soviets were constructing sites on the island for offensive nuclear weapons. To the Soviets, placing missiles in Cuba probably seemed a reasonable—and relatively inexpensive—way to counter the presence of American missiles in Turkey (and a way to deter any future American invasion of Cuba). But to Kennedy and most other Americans, the missile sites represented an act of naked aggression by the Soviets toward the United States. Almost immediately, the president—working with a special executive committee assembled to deal with the crisis—decided that the weapons must go. On October 22, he ordered a naval and air blockade around Cuba, a “quarantine” against all offensive weapons. Preparations were under way for an American air attack on the missile sites when, late in the evening of October 26, Kennedy received a message from Khrushchev implying that the Soviet Union would remove the missile bases in exchange for an American pledge not to invade Cuba. The president agreed. And, in secret, Kennedy agreed to withdraw the Kennedy–Khrushchev Pact missiles from Turkey in what is now called the Kennedy– Khrushchev Pact. The resolution of the conflict was a political victory for Kennedy,

THE TURBULENT SIXTIES
• 723 

 and in an effort to avoid the threat of war again, the two leaders established a Moscow– Washington hotline that created a direct link between the nuclear nations. The improved dialogue between the nuclear superpowers also paved the way for the Nuclear Test Ban Treaty of 1963, which banned atmospheric tests.

Johnson and the World
 Lyndon Johnson entered the presidency with little prior experience in international affairs. He was eager, therefore, not only to continue the policies of his predecessor but also to prove quickly that he, too, was a strong and forceful leader. An internal rebellion in the Dominican Republic gave him an opportunity to do so. A 1961 assassination had toppled the repressive dictatorship of General Rafael Trujillo, and for the next four years various factions in the country had struggled for dominance. In the spring of 1965, a conservative regime began to collapse in the face of a revolt by a broad range of groups on behalf of the left-wing nationalist Juan Bosch. Arguing (without any evidence) that Bosch planned to establish a pro-Castro communist regime, Johnson dispatched 30,000 American troops to quell the disorder. Only after a conservative candidate defeated Bosch in a 1966 election were the forces withdrawn. From Johnson’s first moments in office, however, his foreign policy was almost totally dominated by the bitter civil war in Vietnam and by the expanding involvement of the United States there.

UNITED STATES
Houston


AT L A N T I C
OCEAN


New Orleans


BA
HA
M
A


CUBA


S


 1959—Batista overthrown and Castro installed 1961—Unsuccessful anti-Castro invasion backed by CIA 1962—U.S. blockade of Cuba during missile crisis

Gulf of
Mexico


MEXICO


DOMINICAN
REPUBLIC


1965–1966—Occupation
 by U.S. forces following overthrow of Trujillo 1994—U.S. intervenes on behalf San of Aristide Juan

 Guantánamo (U.S.-leased naval base)

JAMAICA
Mexico
City


PA C I F I C
OCEAN






GUATEMALA


Veracruz


BELIZE


HONDURAS


Caribbean
Sea


 1981—U.S. military and economic aid

HAITI


VIRGIN
ISLANDS


Santo
PUERTO
 Domingo RICO

 1986—U.S. flies Jean-Claude Duvalier into exile

GRENADA


1983—Invasion by
 U.S. and regional allies; restoration of pro-Western government

NICARAGUA


1979—Overthrow of Somoza
Caracas
 1954—U.S.-backed San followed by U.S. aid to Contras overthrow of socialist Salvador 1981–1990—U.S. military and government Managua economic support for anti1954–1976,1981— VENEZUELA Sandinista forces EL SALVADOR military support 1958—Anti-Nixon riots GUYANA 1980—Increased COSTA military and economic RICA COLOMBIA support to government U.S. military and during civil war economic aid PANAMA 1978—Canal Zone Treaty—control Canal 500 mi Zone returned to Panama, U.S. retains control of canal operation to 1999 BRAZIL 1000 km 1989—U.S. troops ensure ouster of Noriega Bogotá

 The Cold War greatly increased the readiness of the United States to intervene in the affairs of its Latin American neighbors. This map presents the many times and ways in which Washington ordered interventions in Central America, the Caribbean, and the northern nations of South America. During much of this period, the interventions were driven by Cold War concerns—by fears that communists might take over nations near the United States as they had taken over Cuba in the early 1960s. • What other interests motivated the United States to exert influence in Latin America even after the end of the Cold War?

THE UNITED STATES IN LATIN AMERICA, 1954–2006


724 • CHAPTER 29


THE AGONY OF VIETNAM
 George Kennan, who helped devise the containment doctrine in the name of which America went to war in Vietnam, once called the conflict “the most disastrous of all America’s undertakings over the whole 200 years of its history.” Yet at first, the conflict in Vietnam seemed simply one more Third World struggle on the periphery of the Cold War.

America and Diem
 Having thrown its support to the new leader of South Vietnam, Ngo Dinh Diem, in the aftermath of the 1954 Geneva accords, and having supported Diem in his blatant refusal to hold the elections in 1956 that the accords had required, the United States found itself drawn steadily deeper into the unstable politics of this fractious new nation. Diem, an aristocratic Catholic from central Vietnam and an outsider in the south, was also a hard-line nationalist uncontaminated by any collaboration with the French and bent on shoring up the authority of his regime. And he was, for a time, apparently successful. With the help of the American CIA, Diem waged an effective campaign against some of the powerful religious sects and the South Vietnamese organized crime syndicate, which had challenged the authority of the central government. As a result, the United States came to regard Diem as a powerful and impressive alternative to Ho Chi Minh, his communist rival in North Vietnam. America threw military and economic aid at Diem’s feet. Diem’s early successes in suppressing sects led him in 1959 to begin a similar campaign to eliminate the supporters of Ho Chi Minh who had stayed behind in the south after the partition. That effort persuaded the Vietminh—or supporters of Ho Chi Minh and the communist North—to resume the armed struggle for national unification. In 1959, the Vietminh cadres in the south created the National Liberation Front (NLF), known to Viet Cong many Americans as the Viet Cong—an organization closely allied with the North Vietnamese government. In 1960, under orders from Hanoi, and with both material and manpower support from North Vietnam, the NLF began military operations in the south. This marked the beginning of what Americans know as the Vietnam War. By 1961, NLF forces had established effective control over many areas of the countryside and were threatening Diem’s power. By then, Diem was also losing the support of many other groups in South Vietnam, including his own military. In 1963, a desperate Diem regime precipitated a major crisis by trying to repress the South Vietnamese Buddhists in an effort to make Catholicism the dominant religion of the country and limit political dissent. The Buddhists staged enormous antigovernment demonstrations, during which a monk doused himself with gasoline, sat cross-legged in downtown Saigon, and set himself on fire—in view of photographers and television cameras. Later, other Buddhists burned themselves in other areas. Alarmed American officials pressured Diem to reform his now tottering government, but the president made no significant concessions. As a result, in the fall of 1963, Kennedy gave his approval to a plot by a group of South Vietnamese generals to topple Diem. In Diem Assassinated early November 1963, the generals staged the coup, assassinated Diem along with his brother Ngo Dinh Nhu (killings the United States had not wanted or expected), and established the first of a series of new governments, which were, for over Ngo Dinh Diem

THE TURBULENT SIXTIES
• 725 

 three years, even less stable than the one they had overthrown. A few weeks after the coup, John Kennedy was assassinated.

From Aid to Intervention
 Lyndon Johnson inherited what was already a substantial American commitment to the survival of an anticommunist South Vietnam. During his first months in office, he expanded the American involvement in Vietnam only slightly, sending an additional 5,000 military advisers there and preparing to send 5,000 more. Then, early in August 1964, the president announced that American destroyers on patrol in international waters in the Gulf of Tonkin had been attacked by North Vietnamese torpedo boats. Later information raised serious doubts as to whether the administration reported the attacks accurately. At the time, however, virtually no one questioned Johnson’s portrayal of the incident as a serious act of aggression. By a vote of 416 to 0 in the House and 88 to 2 in the Senate, Congress hurriedly passed the Gulf of Tonkin Resolution, which authorized Gulf of Tonkin Resolution the president to “take all necessary measures” to protect American forces and “prevent further aggression” in Southeast Asia. The resolution became, in Johnson’s view at least, an open-ended legal authorization for escalation of the conflict. With the South Vietnamese leadership still in disarray and the communist military pressure growing stronger, more and more of the burden of opposition to the Viet Cong fell on the United States. In February 1965, after communist forces attacked an American military base at Pleiku, Johnson ordered American bombings of the north, in an attempt to destroy the depots and transportation lines responsible for the flow of North Vietnamese soldiers and supplies into South Vietnam. The bombing continued intermittently until 1972. A month later, in March 1965, two battalions of American marines landed at Da Nang in South Vietnam, bringing the total American troop strength to over 100,000. Four months later, the president announced that American soldiers would now begin playing an active role in the conflict. By the end of the year, there were more than 180,000 American combat troops in Vietnam; in 1966, that number doubled; and by the end of 1967, over 500,000 American soldiers fought there. In the meantime, the air war intensified. By the spring of 1966, more than 4,000 Americans and an unknown number of Vietnamese had been killed.

The Quagmire
 Central to the American war effort in Vietnam was a strategy known as “attrition,” a strategy premised on the belief that the United States could inflict more “Attrition” Strategy damage on the enemy than the enemy could absorb. But the attrition strategy failed because the North Vietnamese, believing that they were fighting a war for national independence, were willing to commit many more soldiers and resources to the conflict than the United States had predicted. The United States also failed in expecting its bombing of the north to eliminate the communists’ war-making capacity. North Vietnam was not a modern industrial society, and it had relatively few of the sorts of targets against which bombing is effective. The North Vietnamese also responded to the bombing with great ingenuity. They created a network of underground tunnels, shops, and factories. The North Vietnamese also were provided substantial aid from the Soviet Union and China. They continually

726 • CHAPTER 29


CHINA


Lao Cai


NORTH VIETNAM
Dien Bien Phu
Bl
 ac k

BURMA


Re


Thai Nguyen


 dR .

Hanoi


R.


Haiphong
Mekong R.


 Luang PLAIN Prabang OF

Gulf of
Tonki n


Thanh Hoa


JARS


Hainan


LAOS
Vinh
Vientiane


Udon Thani


 ng

GHW


Yom R.


Sepone
Khe Sanh


Hue


R.


Da Nang


Phu Bai


Hoi An


HI


I


Mu
 nR

Chulai
My Lai


.


Udon
Ratchathani


Ratchasima


R.


SH


 ng

Dak To


Quang Ngai


Kon Tum
Ankhe


Bangkok


CAMBODIA


Pleiku
CENTRAL
HIGHLANDS


Battambang
Tonle
Sap


SOUTH
VIETNAM


Kompong
Cham .
 gR

Pursat
Phnom Penh
1970—U.S. and South
 Vietnam troops entered Viet Cong strongholds inside Cambodia

Gulf of
Thailan d


Sihanoukville


 n Meko

Bo Duc
Tay Ninh




200 mi


400 km


Da Lat


Qui Nhon


Nha Trang


Camranh Bay
Phanrang


Song Be
PLAIN OF
REEDS


Cantho




Sout h
Chin a
Se a


P


FR


D
IEN


Ko


Don
Muang


Po Sak R.


Takhli


 e

 ko

R


.


 DMZ (Demilitarized Zone) M

 ng

Pi


Phanom


AY


THAILAND


Dong Hoi
Partition Line 1954


Saigon


Mekong
River
Delta


 U.S. bases U.S. and South Vietnam invasion of Cambodia Ho Chi Minh Trail (communist supply route)

THE WAR IN VIETNAM AND INDOCHINA, 1964–1975
Much of the Vietnam War was fought in small engagements in widely scattered areas and did not conform to traditional notions of combat. But as this map shows, there were traditional battles and invasions and supply routes as well. The red arrows in the middle of the map show the general path of the Ho Chi Minh Trail, the main supply route by which North Vietnam supplied its troops and allies in the south. The blue arrow in southern South Vietnam indicates the point at which American troops invaded Cambodia in 1970. • What is there in the geography of Indochina, as presented on this map, that helps explain the great difficulty the American military had in securing South Vietnam against communist attacks? 
THE TURBULENT SIXTIES
• 727 

 moved the Ho Chi Minh Trail to make it elusive to American bombers. Far from breaking the north’s resolve, the bombing seemed actually to strengthen popular commitment to the war. Another important part of the American strategy was the “pacification” program, whose purpose was to push the Viet Cong from particular regions and then “Pacification” Program “pacify” those regions by winning the “hearts and minds” of the people. Routing the Viet Cong was often possible, but the subsequent pacification was more difficult. Gradually, the pacification program gave way to a more heavy-handed relocation strategy, through which American troops uprooted villagers from their homes, sent them fleeing to refugee camps or into the cities (producing by 1967 more than 3 million refugees), and then destroyed the vacated villages and surrounding countryside. “It became necessary to destroy the village in order to save it,” an American military official famously said of one such action, thus revealing the flawed assumptions of the pacification program. As the war dragged on and victory remained elusive, some American officers and officials urged the president to expand the military efforts. But Johnson resisted—in part because he remembered the Korean War. He feared drawing China directly into the Vietnam War, and he was beginning to encounter obstacles and frustrations at home.

The War at Home
 Few Americans, and even fewer influential ones, had protested the American involvement in Vietnam as late as the end of 1965. But as the war dragged on inconclusively, political support for it began to erode. By the end of 1967, American students opposed to the war (and to the military draft) had become a significant political force. Enormous peace marches in New York, Washington, D.C., and other cities drew broad public attention to the antiwar movement. (Music also raised awareness; see “Patterns of Popular Culture: The Folk-Music Revival.”) In the meantime, a growing number of journalists, particularly reporters who had spent time in Vietnam, helped sustain the movement with their frank revelations about the brutality and apparent futility of the war. Senator J. William Fulbright of Arkansas, chair of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, also turned against the war and in January 1966 began to stage highly publicized and occasionally televised congressional hearings to air criticisms of it. Other members of Congress joined Fulbright in opposing Johnson’s policies—including, in 1967, Robert F. Kennedy, brother of the slain president, now a senator from New York. Even within the administration, the consensus seemed to be crumbling. Robert McNamara, who had done much to help extend the initial American involvement in Vietnam, quietly left the government, disillusioned, in 1968. His successor as secretary of defense, Clark Clifford, became a quiet but powerful voice within the administration on behalf of a­ ­cautious scaling down of the commitment. In the meantime, Johnson’s commitment to fighting the war while continuing his Great Society reforms helped cause a rise in inflation, from the 2 percent level it had occupied through most of the early 1960s to 3 percent in 1967, 4 percent in 1968, and 6 percent in 1969. In August 1967, Johnson asked Congress for a tax increase to avoid even more ruinous inflation. In return, congressional conservatives demanded a $6 billion reduction in the funding for Great Society programs. The president accepted the reduction as a way to mollify congressional conservatives unnerved by economic troubles and critical of social welfare programs.

PATTERNS OF POPULAR CULTURE


The Folk-Music Revival
 Two impulses of the 1960s—the renewed interest among young people in the politics of the left, and the search for an “authentic” alternative to what many considered the ­artificial, consumerist culture of modern America—helped produce the revived popularity of folk music in that turbulent era. Although the harder, harsher, and more sensual music of rock ’n’ roll was more visible and more popular in the 1960s, folk ­music more clearly expressed many of the political ideas and aspirations that were welling up in the youth culture of the time. The folk-music tradition, like most American musical traditions, had many roots. It drew from some of the black musical traditions of the South, and from the white country music of Appalachia. And it drew most immediately from a style of music developed by musicians associated with the Communist Party’s Popular Front in the 1930s. Woody Guthrie, Pete Seeger, the Weavers, and others whose music would become popular again in the 1960s began their careers singing in Popular Front and union rallies during the Great Depression. Their music, like the Popular Front itself, set out to seem entirely American, rooted in the nation’s folk traditions. Folk music remained alive in the 1940s and 1950s, but it had only a modest popular following. Pete Seeger and the Weavers continued to perform and to attract attention on college campuses. Harry Belafonte and the Kingston Trio recorded slick, pop versions of folk songs in an effort to bring them to mass audiences. In 1952, Folkway Records ­released the Anthology of American Folk Music, a collection of eighty-four performances ­recorded in the 1920s and 1930s that b­ ecame an inspiration and an important source of 728 •

 material to many younger folk musicians. Folk-music festivals—at Berkeley, Newport, and Chicago—began to proliferate beginning in 1959. And an important community of folk musicians lived and performed ­together in the 1950s and early 1960s in New York City’s Greenwich Village. As the politics of the 1960s became more heated, and as young people in particular ­became politically aroused, it was folk music that most directly reflected their new values and concerns. Peter, Paul, and Mary—­ although only intermittently political—­ became icons to much of the New Left, beginning with their 1962 recording of “If I Had a Hammer,” a song first performed at Communist Party rallies in the 1940s by Pete Seeger and the Weavers. Bob Dylan, whose own politics were never wholly clear to the public, had a large impact on the 1960s left, even inadvertently providing a name to the most radical offshoot of Students for a Democratic Society (SDS), the Weathermen, who named themselves after a line from one of his songs: “You don’t need a weatherman to know which way the wind blows.”* Joan Baez, whose politics were no secret to anyone, was actively engaged in the antiwar movement and was arrested several times for participating in militant protests. But it was not just the overt political messages of folk musicians that made them so important to young Americans in the 1960s. In addition, folk was a kind of music that seemed to reflect the “authenticity” the youth culture was attempting to find. In truth, neither the musicians themselves nor the young Americans attracted to them had much real connection with the traditions they were trying to evoke. The audiences

 The Feejon Coffee House in Manhattan was popular among young writers, poets, and others in the late 1950s, in part because it was a gathering place for folk musicians, two of whom are shown here performing at right. (© John Orris/Getty Images) COFFEEHOUSE MUSIC

 for folk music—a product of rural and working-class traditions—were overwhelmingly urban, middle-class people. But the message of folk music—that there is a “real” America rooted in values of sharing and community, hidden beneath the crass commercialism of modern culture—resonated with the yearnings of many people in the 1960s (and beyond) for an alternative to their own troubled world. When young audiences responded to Woody Guthrie’s famous ballad “This Land Is Your Land,” they were expressing a hope for a different America— more democratic, more honest, and more natural than the land they knew.

•


UNDERSTAND, ANALYZE, & EVALUATE
 1. What did folk music, with roots in the

 musical traditions of blacks, rural folk, and working-class people, offer that made it so appealing to and popular with urban, middle-class audiences? 2. What similarities between the 1930s and the 1960s might help explain the popularity of folk music during both those decades? 3. What musical style or form today ­continues the folk-music tradition of ­expressing a political message and ­reflecting the search for “authenticity”?

 *Bob Dylan, “Subterranean Homesick Blues.” Copyright © 1965 by Warner Bros. Music. Copyright renewed 1993 by Special Rider Music. All rights reserved. International copyright secured. Reprinted by permission.

THE TRAUMAS OF 1968
 By the end of 1967, the twin crises of the war in Vietnam and the deteriorating racial situation at home had produced great social and political tensions. In the course of 1968, those tensions burst to the surface and seemed to threaten national chaos. (The year 1968 was turbulent elsewhere in the world as well; see “America in the World: 1968.”) • 729

AMERICA IN THE WORLD


 The year 1968 was one of the most turbulent in the postwar history of the United States. Much of what made it so traumatic were specifically American events—the growing controversy over the war in Vietnam, the assassinations of Martin Luther King Jr. and Robert Kennedy, racial unrest across the nation’s cities, student protests on campuses throughout America. But the turmoil of 1968 was not confined to the United States. There were tremendous upheavals in many parts of the globe that year. The most common form of turbulence around the world in 1968 was student ­unrest. In France, a student uprising in May far exceeded in size and ferocity anything that occurred in the United States. It ­attracted the support of French workers and briefly paralyzed Paris and other cities. It contributed to the downfall of the government of Charles de Gaulle a year later. In England, Ireland, Germany, Italy, the Netherlands, Mexico, Canada, Japan, and South Korea, students and other young people demonstrated in great numbers, and at times with violence, against governments, universities, and other structures of authority. Elsewhere, there was more widespread protest, as in Czechoslovakia, where hundreds of thousands of citizens took to the streets in support of what became known as “Prague Spring.” It caused a ­demand for greater democracy and a repudiation of many of the oppressive rules and structures imposed on the nation by its Soviet-dominated communist regimes. Russian tanks rolled into the city to crush the uprising. Many people have tried to explain why so much instability emerged in so many ­nations at the same time. One factor that 730 •

 contributed to the worldwide turbulence of 1968 was simple numbers. The postwar Baby Boom had created a very large age cohort in many nations, and by the late 1960s it was coming of age. In the industrial West, the sheer size of the new generation produced a tripling of the number of people attending colleges and universities. In fewer than twenty years it also created a heightened sense of the power of youth. The long period of postwar prosperity and relative peace in which this generation had grown up contributed to heightened expectations of what the world should offer them—and a greater level of impatience than previous generations had demonstrated with the ­obstacles that stood in the way of their hopes. A new global youth culture emerged that was in many ways at odds with the dominant culture of older generations. It valued nonconformity, personal freedom, and even rebellion. A second force contributing to the widespread turbulence of 1968 was the power of global media. Satellite communication introduced in the early 1960s made it possible to transmit live news across the world. Videotape technology and the creation of lightweight portable television cameras ­enabled media organizations to respond to events much more quickly and flexibly than in the past. The audience for these televised images was by now global and enormous, particularly in industrial nations but even in the poorest areas of the world. Protests in one country were suddenly capable of ­inspiring protests in others. Demonstrators in Paris, for example, spoke openly of how campus protests in the United States in 1968—for example, the student uprising at Columbia University in New York the previous month—had helped motivate French

 students to rise up as well. Just as American students were protesting against what they considered antiquated, paternalistic features of their universities, French students demanded an end to the rigid, autocratic character of their own academic world. In most parts of the world, the 1968 uprisings came and went without fundamentally altering institutions and systems. But many changes came in the wake of these protests. Universities around the globe undertook significant reforms. Religious ­ observance in mainstream churches and ­ synagogues in the West declined dramatically after 1968. New concepts of personal freedom gained legitimacy, helping to ­inspire social movements in the years that followed—among them the dramatic growth

 of feminism in many parts of the world and the emergence of the gay and lesbian rights movement. The events of 1968 did not produce a revolution in the United States or in most of the rest of the world, but it did help launch a period of dramatic social, cultural, and political changes that affected the ­peoples of many nations.

•


UNDERSTAND, ANALYZE, & EVALUATE
 1. What factors combined to produce the

 turbulence that resulted in the uprisings of 1968? 2. Did the demonstrators of 1968 succeed or fail to achieve their objectives? What were the long-term effects of the 1968 uprisings?

The Tet Offensive
 On January 31, 1968, the first day of the Vietnamese New Year (Tet), communist forces launched an enormous, concerted attack on American strongholds throughout South Vietnam. A few cities, most notably Hue, fell temporarily to the communists. But what made the Tet offensive so shocking to the American people, who saw vivid reports of it on television, was the sight of communist forces in the heart of Saigon, setting off bombs, shooting down South Vietnamese officials and troops, and holding down fortified areas (including, briefly, the American embassy). The Tet offensive also suggested to the American public something of the brutality of the fighting in Vietnam. In the midst of the fighting, television cameras recorded the sight of a South Vietnamese officer shooting a captured and defenseless young Viet Cong soldier in the head in the streets of Saigon. American forces soon dislodged the Viet Cong from most of the positions they had seized. And during the battle they had inflicted enormous casualties on the communists and permanently depleted the ranks of the NLF, forcing North Vietnamese troops to take on a much larger share of the subsequent fighting, but such accomplishments registered little with the American public who felt betrayed by an administration that had sworn the war was nearly over. Tet may have been a military victory for the United States, but it was a political defeat for the administration. In the following weeks, opposition to the war grew substantially. Leading newspapers and magazines, television commentators, and mainstream politicians began taking public stands against the conflict. Public opposition to the war almost doubled, and Johnson’s personal popularity rating had slid to 35 percent, the lowest of any president since Harry Truman.

The Political Challenge
 Beginning in the summer of 1967, dissident Democrats tried to mobilize support behind an antiwar candidate who would challenge Lyndon Johnson in the 1968 primaries. • 731

732 • CHAPTER 29


 When Robert Kennedy turned them down, they recruited Senator Eugene McCarthy of Minnesota. A brilliantly orchestrated campaign by young volunteers in the New Hampshire primary produced a startling showing by McCarthy in March; he nearly defeated the president. A few days later, Robert Kennedy entered the campaign, embittering many McCarthy supporters but bringing his own substantial strength among minorities, poor people, and workers to the antiwar cause. Polls showed the president trailing badly in the next scheduled primary, in Wisconsin. On March 31, 1968, Johnson went on television to announce a limited halt in the bombing of North Vietnam—his first major concession to the antiwar forces. And then, stunningly, he declared that he was withdrawing from the presidential contest. Robert Kennedy quickly established himself as the champion of the Democratic primaries, winning one election after another. In the meantime, however, Vice President Hubert Humphrey, with the support of President Johnson, entered the contest and began to attract the support of party leaders and of the many delegations that were selected not by popular primaries but by state party organizations. He soon overtook Kennedy as the front-runner in the race.

Assassinations and Politics
 On April 4, Martin Luther King Jr., who had traveled to Memphis, Tennessee, to lend his support to striking black sanitation workers in the city, was shot and killed while standing on the balcony of his motel. The assassin, James Earl Ray, who was captured two months later in London, had no apparent motive. Subsequent evidence suggested that he had been hired by others to do the killing, but he himself never revealed the identity of his employers. King’s tragic death produced a great outpouring of grief. Among some African Americans, it also produced anger. In the days after the assassination, major riots broke out in more than sixty American cities. Forty-three people died. Late in the night of June 6, Robert Kennedy appeared in the ballroom of a Los Angeles hotel to acknowledge his victory in that day’s California primary. As he left the ballroom after his victory statement, Sirhan Sirhan, a young Palestinian apparently enraged by proIsraeli remarks Kennedy had recently made, emerged from a crowd and shot him in the head. Early the next morning, Kennedy died. The shock of this second tragedy in two Assassination of Robert Kennedy months—and only five years after the assassination of John Kennedy—cast a pall over the remainder of the presidential campaign. When the Democrats finally gathered in Chicago in August, for a convention in which Hubert Humphrey was now the only real contender, even the most optimistic observers predicted turbulence. Inside the hall, delegates bitterly debated an antiwar plank in the party platform that both Kennedy and McCarthy supporters favored. Miles away, in a downtown park, thousands of antiwar protesters staged demonstrations. On the third night of the convention, as the delegates began their balloting on the now virtually inevitable nomination of Hubert Humphrey, demonstrators and police clashed in a bloody riot in the streets of Chicago. Hundreds of protesters were injured as police attempted to disperse them with tear gas and billy clubs. Aware that the violence was being televised to the nation, the demonstrators taunted the authorities with the chant, “The whole world is watching!” And Hubert Humphrey, who had spent years dreaming of becoming his party’s candidate for president, finally got the nomination but from a badly fractured party that would make it difficult for him to manage his campaign. Assassination of Dr. King

THE TURBULENT SIXTIES
• 733 

The Conservative Response
 The turbulent events of 1968 persuaded some observers that American society was in the throes of revolutionary change. In fact, however, the response of many Americans to the turmoil was to question the social changes of the prior decade and take a conservative political turn. The most visible sign of the conservative backlash was the surprising success of the campaign of George Wallace for the presidency. Wallace had been one of the leading spokesmen for the defense of segregation when, as governor of Alabama, he had attempted to block the admission of black students to the University of Alabama in George Wallace 1963. In 1968, he became a third-party candidate for president, basing his campaign on a host of c­ onservative grievances. He denounced the forced busing of students to achieve racial integration in public schools, the proliferation of government regulations and social programs, and what he called the permissiveness of authorities toward crime, race riots, and antiwar demonstrations. There was never any serious chance that Wallace would win the election, but his standing in the polls rose at times to over 20 percent. At the same time, a more effective effort to mobilize the conservative middle in favor of order and stability was under way within the Republican Party. Richard Nixon, whose

































26 13 26




















7 12














Candidate (Party)
Richard M. Nixon
(Republican)
Hubert H. Humphrey
(Democratic)
George C. Wallace
(American Independent)
 Other candidates (Prohibition, Socialist Labor, D. Gregory, Socialist Workers, Peace and Freedom, McCarthy)

Electoral Vote


Popular Vote (%)




31,770,237
(43.4)
31,270,533
(42.3)
9,906,141
(12.9)


—


218,347




 60.6% of electorate voting THE ELECTION OF 1968 The 1968 presidential election, which Richard Nixon won, was almost as close as the election of 1960, which he lost. Nixon might have won a more substantial victory had it not been for the independent candidacy of Governor George C. Wallace, who attracted many of the same conservative voters to whom Nixon appealed. • How does the distribution of Democratic and Republican strength in this election compare to that in 1960?

734 • CHAPTER 29


 political career had seemed at an end after his losses in the presidential race of 1960 and a California gubernatorial campaign two years later, reemerged as the spokesperson for what he called the “silent majority.” By offering a vision of stability, law and order, government retrenchment, and “peace with honor” in Vietnam, he easily captured the nomination of his party for the presidency. And despite a last-minute surge by Humphrey, Nixon hung on to eke out a victory almost as narrow as his defeat in 1960. He received 43.4 percent of the popular vote to Humphrey’s 42.3 percent (a margin of only about 500,000 votes), and 301 electoral votes to Humphrey’s 191. George Wallace, who like most third-party candidates faded in the last weeks of the campaign, still managed to poll 12.9 percent of the popular vote and to carry five southern states with a total of 46 electoral ballots. Nixon had hardly won a decisive personal mandate. But the election made clear that a majority of the American electorate was more interested in restoring stability than in promoting social change.

Nixon Elected


CONCLUSION
 Perhaps no decade of the twentieth century created more powerful and enduring images in America than the 1960s. It began with the election—and then the traumatic assassination— of an attractive and energetic young president, John Kennedy, who captured the imagination of millions and seemed to symbolize the rising idealism of the time. It produced a dramatic period of political innovation, led by President Lyndon Johnson, who greatly expanded the size and functions of the federal government and its responsibility for the welfare of the nation’s citizens. He called it the Great Society. This time also saw the emergence of a sustained and enormously powerful civil rights movement that won a series of crucial legal victories, including two major civil rights acts that dismantled the Jim Crow system constructed in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. The spirit of dynamism and optimism that made the early 1960s so productive also helped bring to the surface problems and grievances that had no easy solutions. The civil rights movement awakened expectations of social and economic equality that laws alone could not provide. The peaceful, interracial crusade of the early 1960s gradually turned into a much more militant, confrontational, and increasingly separatist movement toward the decade’s end. The idealism among white youths that began the 1960s, and played an important role in the political success of John Kennedy, evolved into an angry rebellion against many aspects of American culture and politics and produced a large upsurge of student protest that rocked the nation at the decade’s end. Perhaps most of all, a small and largely unnoticed Cold War commitment to defend South Vietnam against communist aggression from the north led to a large and disastrous war that destroyed the presidency of Lyndon Johnson, sent thousands of young men and women to their deaths, and showed no signs of producing a victory. A decade that began with high hopes and soaring ideals ended with division and deep disillusionment.

KEY TERMS/PEOPLE/PLACES/EVENTS
 affirmative action 720 Bay of Pigs 722 black power 720

Community Action
 programs 711 Cuban missile crisis 722

 freedom rides 713 Freedom Summer 717 George Wallace 733

THE TURBULENT SIXTIES
• 735 

Great Society 711
Gulf of Tonkin
Resolution 725
Immigration Act
 of 1965 712 John Kennedy 708 Lyndon Johnson 710

Malcolm X 721
March on Washington 716
Medicaid 711
Medicare 711
New Frontier 709
Ngo Dinh Diem 724
Richard Nixon 733


Robert Kennedy 732
 Tet offensive 731 Viet Cong (National Liberation Front) 724 Voting Rights Act 717

RECALL AND REFLECT
 1. 	What were the political effects of John Kennedy’s assassination? 2. 	How did increasing radicalism affect the successes and the setbacks of the civil rights

 ­movement? 3. 	What was the military strategy of the United States in Vietnam? What were the U.S. aims

 in that conflict? Why did the United States ultimately fail in Vietnam? 4. 	What accounted for growing opposition to the war in Vietnam? 5. 	What events made 1968 such a turbulent year both in the United States and elsewhere in

 the world? How did these events affect U.S. politics?



THE CRISIS OF
AUTHORITY
THE YOUTH CULTURE
THE MOBILIZATION OF MINORITIES
THE NEW FEMINISM
ENVIRONMENTALISM IN A TURBULENT
SOCIETY
NIXON, KISSINGER, AND THE VIETNAM WAR
NIXON, KISSINGER, AND THE WORLD
POLITICS AND ECONOMICS IN THE NIXON
YEARS
THE WATERGATE CRISIS


LOOKING AHEAD
 1. What were some of the characteristics of the social and cultural revolutions of the 1960s and 1970s? 2. How did the U.S. strategy in Vietnam change under Nixon? What was the result of the change in strategy? 3. What was the Watergate scandal and how did it affect the presidency?

THE ELECTION OF RICHARD NIXON
in 1968 was the result of more than the unpopularity of Lyndon Johnson and the Vietnam War. It was the result, too, of a broad popular reaction against what many Americans considered an assault on the foundations of their society and culture. In Richard Nixon such Americans found a man who seemed to match their mood. A product of a hardworking, middle-class family, Nixon projected an image of stern dedication to traditional values. Yet the presidency of Richard Nixon, far from returning calm and stability to American politics, coincided with, and helped produce, more years of crisis. 
736 •


THE YOUTH CULTURE
 Many conservatives in the 1960s and 1970s were alarmed by what they saw as a pattern of social and cultural anger by younger Americans. The protesters gave vent to two related impulses. One, emerging from the political left, was to create a great new community of “the people,” which would rise up to break the traditional power of elites and force the nation to end the war, pursue racial and economic justice, and transform its political life. The other, at least equally powerful impulse was the vision of personal “liberation.” It found expression in part through the efforts of many groups—African Americans, Indians, Hispanics, women, gay people, and o­ thers— to define and assert themselves and make demands on the larger society. It also found expression through the efforts of individuals to create a new culture—one that would allow them to escape from what some considered the dehumanizing pressures of the modern “technocracy.”

TIME LINE
 Friedan’s The Feminine Mystique Free Speech Movement begins National Organization for Women formed Turmoil in universities Rock concert in Woodstock, NY Cambodian incursion Kent State and Jackson State shootings

Pentagon Papers
 published Nixon imposes wage– price controls

The New Left
 Among the products of the racial crisis and the war in Vietnam was a radicalization of many American students. In the course of the 1960s, they formed what became known as the New Left. In 1962, a group of students (most of them white and many of them from the University of Michigan) gathered in Michigan to form Students for a Democratic Society (SDS), which became the most prominent organization of the New Left. Their declaration of beliefs, the Port Huron Statement, expressed their disillusionment with the society they had inherited and their determination to build a new politics. In the following years, SDS became the leading organization of student radicalism. Since most members of the New Left were students, much of their radicalism centered for a time on issues related to the modern university. A 1964 dispute at the University



 Nixon visits China SALT I “Christmas bombing” of North Vietnam Watergate burglary Nixon reelected

 U.S. withdraws from Vietnam Arab oil embargo Agnew resigns Supreme Court decides Roe v. Wade

 Nixon resigns; Ford becomes president

 South Vietnam falls

• 737


CO NS IDER T HE S O URC E
DEMANDS OF THE NEW YORK HIGH SCHOOL
STUDENT UNION
 Like high school students across the country, young New Yorkers formed a union and ­demanded reform in the city’s school system. Their demands from 1970 reflected the growing call among young Americans for greater control over public institutions and leaders and a new focus on the needs and ­aspirations of historically disadvantaged groups. 1 —No suspensions, involuntary transfers,

 exclusion from classes, detention, ­harassment of students. Due process for students. 2 —No cops in schools, no narcos, security guards, plain clothesmen, informers. 3 —No program cards, hall checks, ID’s, passes. 4 —An end to commercial and general ­diplomas, one diploma for every ­student upon graduation. 5 —Open admissions to colleges, a college education free for everyone who wants one. 6 —Jobs and housing for every student who wants them on graduating, dropping out, or leaving home. The army is not a decent job. 7 —No military recruiting in schools, no ­military assemblies, literature, no sending

 names to draft boards or ­recruiters. An immediate end to the draft. 8 —Black and Latin departments controlled by Black and Latin students. 9 —Community control of the schools and every other community facility. Students are part of the community. 10 —POWER! Student control of curriculum, publications, assemblies, clubs, student government, dress, etc. The right to organize politically. 11 —We support the fifteen points of the Black and Puerto Rican Citywide HS Council. UNDERSTAND, ANALYZE, & EVALUATE 1. What might have inspired the students’

 demand for “due process”? What other evidence of an anti-authoritarian sentiment can you detect here? 2. How did the civil rights and the black power movements shape this Student Union? What are some of the rights movements covered in this chapter that were not reflected in this statement? 3. What role did the Vietnam War play for these students—what made this a possibly quite personal issue?

 Source: New York High School Free Press (an underground newspaper), No. 8, reprinted in John Birmingham, Our Time Is Now: Notes from the High School Underground (New York: Praeger, 1970), p. 178.

 of California at Berkeley over the rights of students to engage in political activities on campus—the Free Speech Movement—was the first major outburst of what was to be nearly a decade of campus turmoil. The antiwar movement greatly inflamed and expanded the challenge to the universities; and beginning in 1968, campus demonstrations, riots, and building seizures became almost commonplace. At Columbia University in New York, students seized the offices of the president and others and occupied them for several days until local police forcibly ejected them. Over the next several years, hardly any major university was immune to some level of ­disruption. Small groups of especially dogmatic

Free Speech Movement


738 •


THE CRISIS OF AUTHORITY
• 739 

 radicals—among them the “Weathermen,” an offshoot of SDS—were responsible for a few cases of arson and bombing that destroyed campus buildings and claimed several lives. Protests also erupted in high schools, where students voiced similar demands for greater control over the curriculum on the subjects taught to them and over disciplinary policy. (See “Consider the Source: Demands of the New York High School Union.”) Not many people accepted the radical political philosophy of the New Left. But many supported the position of SDS and other groups on particular issues, and above all on the Vietnam War. Between 1967 and 1969, student activists organized some of the largest political demonstrations in American history to protest the war. A related issue that helped fuel the antiwar movement was opposition to the military draft. The gradual abolition of many traditional deferments—for Opposition to the Draft ­graduate students, teachers, husbands, fathers, and others—swelled the ranks of those faced with conscription (and thus likely to oppose it). Of the almost 2 million drafted, about 7,000 draft-age Americans simply refused induction, accepting what were occasionally long terms in jail as a result. Thousands of others fled to Canada, Sweden, and elsewhere (where they were joined by deserters from the armed forces) to escape conscription.

The Counterculture
 Closely related to the New Left was a new youth culture openly scornful of the values and conventions of middle-class society. The most visible characteristic of the counterculture, as it became known, was a change in personal styles. As if to display their contempt for conventional standards, young Americans flaunted long hair, shabby or flamboyant clothing, and a rebellious disdain for traditional speech and decorum. Also important to the counterculture was a new, more permissive view of sex and drugs. Like the New Left, the counterculture challenged modern American society, attacking what it claimed were its banality, its hollowness, its artificiality, its isolation from nature. The most committed adherents of the counterculture—the hippies, who came to dominate the Haight-Ashbury neighborhood of San Francisco and other places, and the social dropouts, many of whom retreated to rural communes—rejected modern society altogether and attempted to find refuge in a simpler, more “natural” existence. But even those whose commitment to the counterculture was less intense shared the idea of personal fulfillment through rejecting the inhibitions and conventions of middle-class culture and giving fuller expression to personal instinct and desire. The counterculture was only an exaggerated expression of impulses coursing through the larger society. Long hair and outlandish clothing became the badge not only of hippies and radicals but of an entire generation. The widespread use of marijuana, the freer attitudes toward sex, the iconoclastic (and often obscene) language––all spread far beyond the true devotees of the counterculture. One of the most powerful elements of the new youth society was rock music. Its growing influence in the 1960s was a result in part of the phenomenal popularity of the Beatles, the English group whose first visit to the United States in 1964 created a remarkable sensation. For a time, most rock musicians—like most popular musicians before them— concentrated largely on uncontroversial romantic themes. By the late 1960s, however, rock had begun to reflect many of the new iconoclastic values of its time. The Beatles, for example, abandoned their once simple and seemingly innocent style for a new, experimental, even mystical approach that reflected the growing popular fascination with drugs and Eastern religions. Other groups, such as the Rolling Stones, turned even more openly

