520 • CHAPTER 21


 This 1904 drawing by the famous Puck cartoonist Louis Dalrymple conveys the new image of America as a great power that Theodore Roosevelt hoped to convey. Roosevelt polices the world by dealing with “less civilized” people on the left using the “big stick” and with “civilized” nations on the right by using diplomacy. (© Granger, NYC—All Rights Reserved.) “THE NEW DIPLOMACY”

Protecting the “Open Door” in Asia
 In 1904, the Japanese staged a surprise attack on the Russian fleet at Port Arthur in southern Manchuria, a province of China that both Russia and Japan hoped to control. Roosevelt, hoping to prevent either nation from becoming dominant there, agreed to mediate an end to the conflict. Russia, faring badly in the war, had no choice but to agree. At a peace conference in Portsmouth, New Hampshire, in 1905, Roosevelt pressured the embattled Russians to accept Japan’s territorial gains. The Japanese agreed to cease the fighting and expand no farther. At the same time, Roosevelt negotiated a secret agreement with the Japanese to ensure that the United States could continue to trade freely in the region. Roosevelt received the Nobel Peace Prize in 1906 for his mediation of what became the Treaty of Portsmouth. In the years that followed, relations between the United States and Japan steadily deteriorated. Japan, by then the preeminent naval power in the Pacific, began to exclude American trade from many of the territories it controlled. Roosevelt took no direct action against Japan, but to be sure the Japanese government recognized the power of the United States, he sent sixteen battleships of the new American navy (known as the “Great White “Great White Fleet” Fleet” because the ships were temporarily painted white for the voyage) on an unprecedented journey around the world that included a call on Japan.

The Iron-Fisted Neighbor
 Roosevelt took a particular interest in Latin America. Embarking on a series of ventures in the Caribbean and South America, he established a pattern of American intervention in the region that would outlive his presidency.

AMERICA AND THE GREAT WAR
• 521 

 In 1902, the government of Venezuela began to renege on debts to European bankers. Naval forces of Britain, Italy, and Germany blockaded the Venezuelan coast in response. Then German ships began to bombard a Venezuelan port. Amid rumors that Germany planned to establish a permanent base in the region, Roosevelt used the threat of American naval power to pressure the German navy to withdraw. The incident helped persuade Roosevelt that European intrusions into Latin America could result not only from aggression but also from instability or irresponsibility (such as defaulting on debts) within the Latin American nations themselves. As a result, in 1904 he announced what came to be known as the “Roosevelt Corollary” to the Monroe “Roosevelt Corollary” Doctrine. The United States, he claimed, had the right not only to oppose European intervention in the Western Hemisphere but also to intervene in the domestic affairs of its neighbors if those neighbors proved unable to maintain order and national sovereignty on their own. The immediate motivation for the Roosevelt Corollary, and the first opportunity for using it, was a crisis in the Dominican Republic. A revolution had toppled its corrupt and bankrupt government in 1903, but the new regime proved no better able than the old to make good on the country’s $22 million in debts to European nations. Using the rationale provided by the Roosevelt Corollary, Roosevelt established, in effect, an American receivership, assuming control of Dominican customs and distributing 45 percent of the revenues to the Dominicans and the rest to foreign creditors. This arrangement lasted, in one form or another, for more than three decades.

The Panama Canal
 The most celebrated foreign policy accomplishment of Roosevelt’s presidency was the construction of the Panama Canal, which linked the Atlantic and the Pacific by creating a channel through Central America. At first, Roosevelt and many others favored a route across Nicaragua, which would permit a sea-level canal requiring no locks. But they soon turned instead to the narrow Isthmus of Panama (then part of Colombia), the site of an earlier failed effort by a French company to construct a channel. Although the Panama route was not at sea level, it was shorter than the one in Nicaragua, and construction was already about 40 percent complete. The French then lowered the price for its holdings, and the United States opted for Panama. Roosevelt dispatched John Hay, his secretary of state, to negotiate an agreement with Colombian diplomats that would allow construction to begin without delay. Under heavy American pressure, the Colombian chargé d’affaires, Tomás Herrán, unwisely signed an agreement giving the United States perpetual rights to a six-mile-wide “Canal Zone” across Colombia; in return, the United States would pay Colombia $10 million and an annual rental of $250,000. The outraged Colombian senate refused to ratify the treaty. Colombia then sent a new representative to Washington with instructions to demand at least $20 million from the Americans plus a share of the payment to the French. Roosevelt was furious and began to look for ways to circumvent the Colombian government. Philippe Bunau-Varilla, chief engineer of the French canal project, was a ready ally. In 1903, with the support of the United States, he helped organize and finance a revolution in Panama. Roosevelt landed troops from the U.S.S. Nashville there to “maintain order.” Their presence prevented Colombian forces from suppressing the rebellion, and three days later Roosevelt recognized Panama as an independent nation. The new Panamanian government quickly agreed to the terms the Colombian senate had rejected. Work on the canal proceeded rapidly, and it opened in 1914.

522 • CHAPTER 21


UNITED STATES


AT L A N T IC
OCEAN
CUBA


Gulf of
Mexico


 U.S. troops 1898–1902 1906–1909 1917–1922 Protectorate 1898–1934

DOMINICAN
REPUBLIC


 Bahía Honda 1903–1912

MEXICO


 Guantánamo Bay 1903–

 Military intervention 1914, 1916–1917

Mexico
City


PA C I F I C
OCEAN


Veracruz


HAITI


BRITISH HONDURAS


GUATEMALA
EL SALVADOR


HONDURAS C
a r i b b e a n Sea NICARAGUA 
 U.S. troops 1915–1934 Financial supervision 1915–1941

U.S.
Troops 1909–1910 1912–1925, 1926–1933
 Final supervision 1911–1924

PANAMA
Support of
 revolution

 U.S. interventions

VIRGIN
ISLANDS


 Purchased from Denmark

PUERTO
RICO


 Acquired from Spain

VENEZUELA


CANAL ZONE*


COSTA
RICA


 U.S. territory, 1900

 Naval base leased to U.S.

 U.S. troops 1916–1924 Financial supervision 1905–1941

 Control over canal beginning 1904

Settlement of
 boundary dispute 1895–1896

BRITISH
GUIANA


COLOMBIA


 * Canal Zone not a possession but controlled through a lease from Panama

Except for Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands, and the
 Canal Zone, the United States had no formal possessions in Latin America and the Caribbean in the late nineteenth century and the first half of the twentieth. But as this map reveals, the United States exercised considerable influence—both political and economic, augmented at times by military intervention—in these regions throughout this period. Note the particularly intrusive presence of the United States in the affairs of Cuba, Haiti, and the Dominican Republic—as well as the canal-related interventions in Colombia and Panama. • What were the reasons for American intervention in Latin America? THE UNITED STATES AND LATIN AMERICA, 1895–1941

Taft and “Dollar Diplomacy”
 Like his predecessor, William Howard Taft worked to advance the nation’s economic interests in Latin America. But he showed little interest in Roosevelt’s larger vision of world stability. Instead, Taft’s secretary of state, Philander C. Knox, worked aggressively to extend American investments into less-developed regions. Critics called his policies Dollar Diplomacy. The policy was particularly visible in the Caribbean. When a revolution broke out in Nicaragua Occupied Nicaragua in 1909, the administration quickly sided with the insurgents and sent American troops into the country to seize the customs houses. As soon as peace was restored, Knox encouraged American bankers to offer substantial loans to the new government, thus increasing Washington’s financial leverage over the country. When the new pro-American government faced an insurrection less than two years later, Taft again landed American troops in Nicaragua, this time to protect the existing regime. The troops remained there for more than a decade.

Diplomacy and Morality
 Woodrow Wilson entered the presidency with relatively little interest or experience in international affairs. Yet he faced international challenges of a scope and gravity unmatched

AMERICA AND THE GREAT WAR
• 523 

 by those of any president before him. In many respects, he continued—and even ­strengthened—the Roosevelt–Taft approach to foreign policy. Having already seized control of the finances of the Dominican Republic in 1905, the United States established a military government there in 1916. The military occupation lasted eight years. In Haiti, Wilson landed marines in 1915 to Interventions in the Caribbean quell a revolution during which a mob had murdered an unpopular president. American military forces remained in the country until 1934, and American officers drafted the new Haitian constitution adopted in 1918. When Wilson began to fear that the Danish West Indies might be about to fall into the hands of Germany, he bought the colony from Denmark and renamed it the Virgin Islands. Concerned about the possibility of European influence in Nicaragua, he signed a treaty with that country’s government allowing for intervention to protect American interests. Closer to the American border, the corrupt dictator Porfirio Díaz had long permitted American businessmen to establish an enormous economic presence in Mexico. In 1910, however, Díaz was overthrown by the popular leader Francisco Regime Changes in Mexico Madero, who promised democratic reform and seemed hostile to American businesses in Mexico. The United States quietly encouraged a reactionary general, Victoriano Huerta, to depose Madero early in 1913. But when the new government murdered Madero, Woodrow Wilson announced that he would never recognize Huerta’s “government of butchers.” Wilson hoped that by refusing to recognize Huerta he could help topple the regime and bring to power the constitutionalists, now led by Venustiano Carranza. But Huerta, with the support of American business interests, established a full military dictatorship in October 1913; a few months later, one of his army officers briefly arrested several American sailors from the U.S.S. Dolphin who had gone ashore in Veracruz Incident Tampico. The men were immediately released, but the American admiral demanded a twenty-one-gun salute as a public display of penance. The Mexicans refused. Wilson used the incident as a pretext for seizing the Mexican port of Veracruz. Wilson had envisioned a bloodless action, but in a clash with Mexican troops, the Americans killed 126 of the defenders and suffered 19 casualties. His show of force, however, had helped strengthen the position of the Carranza faction, which captured Mexico City in August 1914 and forced Huerta to flee the country. At last, it seemed, the crisis might be over. But Wilson reacted angrily when Carranza, whom he had previously supported, refused to accept American guidelines for the creation of a new government, and he briefly considered throwing his support to still another aspirant to leadership: Carranza’s erstwhile lieutenant Pancho Villa, now staking his own claim to power. When Villa’s Pancho Villa military position deteriorated, however, Wilson abandoned him and granted preliminary recognition to Carranza. Villa, angry at what he considered an American betrayal, retaliated in early 1916 by shooting sixteen American mining engineers in northern Mexico and seventeen more Americans across the border in Columbus, New Mexico. Wilson ordered General John J. Pershing to lead an American expeditionary force across the Mexican border in unsuccessful pursuit of Villa. They did engage in two ugly skirmishes with Carranza’s army, in which forty Mexicans and twelve Americans died. But before a fuller war could erupt, Wilson quietly withdrew American Pershing Expedition troops from Mexico and, in March 1917, finally granted formal recognition to the Carranza regime. By now, however, Wilson’s attention was turning to a far greater international crisis.

524 • CHAPTER 21


THE ROAD TO WAR
 By 1914, the European nations had created an unusually precarious international system. It careened into war very quickly on the basis of what seemed to be a minor series of provocations.

The Collapse of the European Peace
 The major powers of Europe were organized by 1914 in two great, competing alliances. The “Triple Entente” linked Britain, France, and Russia. The “Triple Alliance” united Germany, the Austro-Hungarian Empire, and Italy. The conflict emerged most directly out of a controversy involving nationalist movements within the Austro-Hungarian Empire. On June 28, 1914, Archduke Franz Ferdinand, heir to the throne of the tottering empire, was assassinated while paying a state visit to Sarajevo, the capital of Bosnia, then a province of Austria-Hungary. Slavic nationalists wished to annex Bosnia to neighboring Serbia. The killer of the archduke and his wife Sophie was a Serbian nationalist. Austria immediately blamed Serbia for the murders and issued impossible ultimatums. Russia, Serbia’s Slavic ally and a seeker of greater influence in the Balkans, mobilized its armies along the border with Austria-Hungary. The Germans, faced with that provocation against their ally and concerned about a two-front war against Russia and France, declared war against both. Germany’s subsequent assault on France ran through neutral Belgium, prompting Britain to declare war on Germany. The coalitions soon changed in name and membership. On one side were the Central Powers: Germany and Austria-Hungary, joined in the fall by the Ottoman Empire. On the Allies and Central Powers other side were the Allies, made up of Britain, France, and Russia. Hoping to seize territory from the Central Powers, Italy and Japan soon threw in their lot with the Allies. As these changes suggest, the alliance system did not necessarily bind nations to act as they did. Leaders made the decision for war based on their own interests and ambitions, on the assumption that national self-defense required it, and on the erroneous belief that their objectives could be met quickly. What the alliance system did was provide a framework within which the choices for war were made. As tragic as those choices seem in retrospect, no one expected or wanted the ghastly world war that followed.

 Wilson’s Neutrality Wilson called on his fellow citizens in 1914 to remain “impartial in thought as well as deed.” But that was impossible. Most Americans sympathized with Britain. Lurid reports of German atrocities in Belgium and France, sometimes (but not always) exaggerated by British propagandists, strengthened the hostility of many Americans toward Germany. Economic realities also made it impossible for the United States to deal with the belligerents on equal terms. The British had imposed a naval blockade on Germany to prevent munitions and supplies from reaching the enemy. As a neutral, the United States had the right, in theory, to trade with Germany, but the British blockade made that impossible. A truly neutral response to the blockade would have been to stop trading with Britain as well. But while the United States could survive an interruption of its relatively modest trade with the Central Powers, it could not easily weather a break in its much more

AMERICA AND THE GREAT WAR
• 525 

 extensive trade with the Allies. So America tacitly accepted the blockade of Germany and continued trading with Britain. By 1915, the United States had Continued Trade with Britain gradually transformed itself from a neutral power into the arsenal of the Allies. The Germans, in the meantime, were resorting to a new and, in American eyes, barbaric tactic: submarine warfare. Unable to challenge British domination on Sinking of Lusitania the ocean’s surface, the Germans announced early in 1915 that they would sink enemy vessels on sight. Months later, on May 7, a German submarine (or U-boat, a name derived from the German Unterseeboot) sank the British passenger liner Lusitania without ­warning, causing the deaths of 1,198 people, 128 of them Americans. The ship was carrying both passengers and munitions, but most Americans considered the attack an unprovoked act on civilians. Wilson angrily demanded that Germany promise not to repeat such outrages, and the Germans reluctantly agreed. But early in 1916, in response to an announcement that the Allies were now arming merchant ships to sink submarines, Germany proclaimed that it would fire on such vessels without warning. A few weeks later, it attacked the unarmed French steamer Sussex, injuring several American passengers. Again, Wilson demanded that Germany abandon its “unlawful” tactics; again, the German government relented.

 Preparedness versus Pacifism Despite the president’s increasing bellicosity in 1916, he was still far from ready to commit the United States to war. One obstacle was American domestic politics. The question of whether America should make military and economic preparations for war sparked a heated debate between pacifists and interventionists. Wilson at first denounced the idea of an American military buildup as needless and provocative. In the fall of 1915, however, he endorsed an ambitious proposal by American military leaders for a large and rapid increase in the nation’s armed forces. Still, the peace faction wielded considerable political strength, as became clear at the Democratic National Convention in the summer of 1916. The convention became ­especially enthusiastic when the keynote speaker punctuated his list of the president’s diplomatic achievements with the chant, “What did we do? What did we do? . . . We didn’t go to war! We didn’t go to war!” That speech helped produce one of the most prominent slogans of Wilson’s reelection campaign: “He kept us out of war.” During the campaign, Wilson did nothing to discourage those who argued that the Republican candidate, the progressive New York governor Charles Evans Hughes, was more likely than he to lead the nation into war. Wilson ultimately won reelection by fewer than 600,000 popular votes and only 23 electoral votes. But he was uncomfortable about a slogan that had aided his victory. “Any little German lieutenant,” he said of the U-boat situation, “can put us into the war at any time by some calculated outrage.”

Intervention
 Wilson was right—but it was the German leadership that provoked him. In January 1917 Germany made a desperate gamble, declaring unrestricted submarine warfare against all maritime traffic in the hopes of defeating the Allies before Wilson could mobilize an army. Meanwhile, the German foreign secretary Arthur Zimmermann Zimmermann Telegram sent a telegram to the German ambassador in Mexico instructing him to offer the Mexicans a deal: if they would join a military alliance, Germany would help Mexico take back

526 • CHAPTER 21






































29 15 24








10 12


8 12














Popular Vote (%)


Candidate (Party)


Electoral Vote


Woodrow Wilson
(Democratic)




Charles E. Hughes
(Republican)




A. L.
Benson (Socialist)


—


585,113
(3.2)


 Other parties (Prohibition; Socialist Labor)

—


233,909


9,129,606
(49.4)
8,538,221
(46.2)


 61.6% of electorate voting THE ELECTION OF 1916 Woodrow Wilson had good reason to be concerned about his reelection prospects in 1916. He had won only about 42 percent of the vote in 1912, and the Republican Party—which had been divided four years earlier—was now reunited around the popular Charles Evans Hughes. In the end, Wilson won a narrow victory over Hughes with just under 50 percent of the vote and a similarly narrow margin in the electoral college. Note the striking regional character of his victory. • How did Wilson use the war in Europe to bolster his election prospects?

 t­erritory in the present states of Texas, New Mexico, and Arizona. By March, when Wilson released the intercepted and decoded telegram—and after three United States ships were torpedoed by U-boats—war with Germany seemed imminent. Although German crimes on the seas, the offer to Mexico, and the threats to American commerce provided the immediate causes for war, Wilson had broader purposes in mind as well. The president hoped that American intervention, by earning him a seat at the postwar negotiating table, would usher in a new era. In the place of militarism, secret alliances, violence, and autocracy would come democracy, freedom of travel and commerce, open diplomacy, and self-determination. President Wilson articulated this vision on the rainy evening of April 2, 1917, when he asked Congress for a declaration of war. German U-boat warfare had claimed American Wilson’s War Message lives and treasure. The country’s honor could not tolerate such affronts. But aware of divisions in public opinion, Wilson sought to invest the moment with higher meaning. The war would make the world “safe for democracy” and safeguard “the rights of mankind.” America would not fight for material gain or territory, the president said, but to guarantee a future of free trade, self-governance, peace, and justice. Opposition to the war would not be tolerated. “If there should be disloyalty,” he warned, “it will be dealt with a firm hand of repression.”

AMERICA AND THE GREAT WAR
• 527 

 Wilson’s view carried the session, but dissenters spoke up. Some midwesterners and southerners saw corporate profits, not honor, at stake in the Atlantic. A few pacifists, including the first woman elected to Congress, Jeannette Rankin, a Republican from Montana, argued that no war was worth the costs. Still others argued the United States should stay out of Europe’s affairs. When the declaration of war finally passed on April 6, six senators and fifty representatives voted against it.

“OVER THERE”
 European armies on both sides of the conflict were decimated and exhausted by the time of Woodrow Wilson’s declaration of war. The Allies looked desperately to the United States for help in breaking the stalemate.

Mobilizing the Military
 By the spring of 1917, Great Britain was suffering such vast losses from German submarines that its ability to receive vital supplies from across the Atlantic was in jeopardy. Within weeks of joining the war, the United States had begun to alter the balance. A fleet of American destroyers aided the British navy in attacking the U-boats and planting antisubmarine mines in the North Sea. The results were dramatic. Sinkings of Allied ships had totaled nearly 900,000 tons in the month of April 1917; the figure dropped to 350,000 by December 1917 and to 112,000 by October 1918. Many Americans had hoped that providing naval assistance alone would be enough to end the war, but it quickly became clear that a major commitment of American ground forces would be necessary as well. Britain and France had few remaining reserves. After the Bolshevik Revolution in November 1917, a new communist Bolshevik Revolution ­government, led by V. I. Lenin, negotiated a hasty and costly peace between Russia and the Central Powers. That freed German troops to fight on the western front. The United States did not have a large enough standing army to provide the necessary ground forces in 1917. Even amid recruitment efforts (see “Consider the Source: Race, Gender, and World War I Posters”), enlistments proved inadequate. Only a national draft could provide the needed men. Despite protests, Wilson won passage of the Selective Service Act in mid-May. From a prewar total of 121,000 enlisted soldiers, the army Selective Service Act grew to more than 4 million, 2 million of whom went to France. Draftees comprised 72 percent of all American soldiers in the war—a far higher percentage than on either side of the Civil War. The typical American soldier (or doughboy) in the Great War was a white, single, poorly educated draftee in his early twenties. Women were barred from r­ egular ­military The Doughboy service, but could sign up for things like nursing, clerical work, and telephone operation. As many as 400,000 African Americans joined the military, the vast majority conscripted. But this was a strict Jim Crow army. Units were segregated, white officers were in charge, and blacks generally performed menial labor. Yet two combat divisions, the Ninety-Second and Ninety-Third, were composed entirely of African American soldiers. In training camps around the country, selectees learned how to be soldiers. They marched and drilled and practiced maneuvers. In case they weren’t sure what Basic Training they were fighting for, every backpack contained a copy of Wilson’s war message. For the huge number of foreign-born soldiers—approaching 20 percent of the wartime army, speaking forty-six different languages—military service acted as a tool of assimilation, to

CO NS IDER T HE S O URC E
RACE, GENDER, AND WORLD WAR I POSTERS
 Much can be learned about a society’s values from how it handles the mobilization of the home front during wartime. Nations typically clarify the terms of citizenship and service—asking some people to fight, and some to stay home and support the effort in other ways. As part of the broad national campaign to mobilize public opinion and service during World War I, American ­officials disseminated the two posters reproduced here. One urged enlistment, the other the purchase of war bonds. UNDERSTAND, ANALYZE, & EVALUATE 1. How do the posters use images of

 e­ ither enlistment or financial support for the war? 2. What do these posters say about contemporary understandings of gender roles? What did the state and society expect from men? What did they expect from women? 3. Like almost all recruiting posters of World War I, these two depict white people—despite the fact that many African Americans and ethnic minorities served as well. What does that say about mainstream attitudes toward race and ethnicity during World War I?

 women or the home to encourage

(The Library of Congress)


528 •


(The Library of Congress)


AMERICA AND THE GREAT WAR
• 529 

S


 o it tra

 fD

NORWAY


NETHERLANDS


North Sea


ENGLAND


SWEDEN
R
 ldt

.


 er ov

Sche
Ly


Ypres


 sR

GERMANY
Brussels


.


GREAT
BRITAIN
GERMANY


London


NETHERLANDS


BELGIUM
Ypres-Lys Offensive
Aug. 19–Nov. 11


Meus


 e R.

Paris


LUXEMBOURG


FRANCE
M
 ou nt ai ns

SWITZ.


 de nn es

Somme Offensive
Aug. 8–Nov. 11


O


 is e

LUX.


Oise-Aisne
Offensive
Aug. 18–Nov. 11


 ChâteauThierry June 3–4

R


 e



50 mi


ITALY


Verdun


Rheims


 MeuseArgonne Offensive Sept. 26–Nov. 11 St. Mihiel Offensive Sept. 12–18

 Allied nations

 Neutral nations

Central Powers


 National boundaries,

 Areas occupied by Central Powers Territory gained in German offensives, spring 1918

BATTLES


TROOP MOVEMENTS


FRONT LINES


 U.S. troops

 Battle line, July 18, 1918

.


 e Sein

R.


Aisne R.


 2nd Battle of the Marne July 18–Aug. 6

Marne R
.


Belleau Wood
June 6–26




Vienna
AUSTRIAHUNGARY


SPAIN


Mosell


Aisne-Marne
Offensive
July 18–Aug. 6


R.


Paris


RUSSIA


Ar


Cantigny
May 28


FRANCE


Berlin


BELGIUM


100 km


 Other Allied forces

 Allied victories

 Armistice line, Nov. 11, 1918

 These maps show the principal battles in which the United States participated in the last year of World War I. The small map on the upper right helps locate the area of conflict within the larger European landscape. The larger map at left shows the long, snaking red line of the western front in France—stretching from the border between France and southwest Germany all the way to the northeast border between Belgium and France. Along that vast line, the two sides had been engaged in murderous, inconclusive warfare for over three years by the time the Americans arrived. Beginning in the spring and summer of 1918, bolstered by reinforcements from the United States, the Allies began to win a series of important victories that finally enabled them to begin pushing the Germans back. American troops, as this map makes clear, were decisive along the southern part of the front. • At what point did the Germans begin to consider putting an end to the war?

AMERICA IN WORLD WAR I: THE WESTERN FRONT, 1918


 the delight of nativists. The draftees received moral instruction as well. Progressives in the government, as well as thousands of American parents, worried about the sexual purity of the soldier. One social hygiene poster implored the soldier to “Remember—the folks at home. Go back to them physically fit and morally clean. Don’t allow a whore to smirch your record.”

The Yanks Are Coming
 The United States had sent the first units of the American Expeditionary Forces (AEF) to France in June 1917 under the leadership of General John J. Pershing, but American soldiers weren’t heavily implicated in the fighting until the next year. In March 1918, the Germans launched nimble thrusts into the Allied defenses. Under the French commander of Allied forces, Ferdinand Foch, Pershing’s troops halted the German offensive at Cantigny and Château-Thierry. Then the American Second Division, including a brigade of marines, lost 9,800 casualties in a savage but successful fight to drive the Germans from Belleau Wood, a place that would live on in Marine Corps lore. In July the Germans attacked again, and at the Second Battle of the Marne, the Allies fought together to repulse them. Over the course of that summer, the influx of American divisions helped the Allies push the German army back roughly to its original position.

530 • CHAPTER 21


 By September, with American troops plentiful and the Germans depleted, the Allies prepared to advance toward Germany. Pershing withdrew many of his divisions to the Americans’ own sector on the southern edge of the front. From that position, the doughboys took the Saint-Mihiel salient, a bulge into Allied lines that the Germans had held for years. Foch then ordered Pershing’s divisions to their place in the war’s final Allied The Meuse-Argonne Offensive push, the Meuse-Argonne offensive. Beginning on September 26, more than a million American doughboys—the great majority of them seeing combat for the first time—advanced against the Germans, while to the northwest the British and French undertook coordinated campaigns. The Germans sagged but held, and something like trench warfare set in again. September and October were terrible months for the Americans, with 27,000 men killed. “Those of us who still lived,” wrote one doughboy, “who were able to move, in body if not in spirit, wanted to drop to our knees and implore God to stop this horrible slaughter of mankind.” By November the Germans had been worn down, their civilian population suffering from an increasingly effective blockade, their soldiers captured by the hundreds of thousands, their U-boats more or less neutralized by a convoy system, and their rear harassed Armistice by airplane bombardment. Facing invasion, the Germans sought an armistice. Early on the morning of November 11, 1918, while men along the front were still dying, representatives of the warring parties signed an armistice in a railway car in the French forest. The four-year “war to end all wars” shuddered to a close.

The New Technology of Warfare
 World War I was a proving ground for a range of new military technologies. The trench warfare that characterized the conflict was a result of the enormous destructive power of newly improved machine guns and higher-powered artillery. It was no longer feasible to send troops out into an open field. The new weaponry would slaughter them in an instant. Trenches sheltered troops while allowing limited, and usually inconclusive, fighting. But technology overtook the trenches, too, as mobile weapons— tanks and flamethrowers—proved capable of piercing entrenched positions. Most terrible of all, perhaps, new chemical weapons—poisonous mustard gas, which required troops to carry gas masks at all times—made it possible to attack entrenched soldiers without direct combat. The new forms of technological warfare required elaborate maintenance. Faster machine guns needed more ammunition. Motorized vehicles required fuel, spare parts, and mechanics capable of servicing them. The logistical difficulties of supply became a major factor in planning tactics and strategy. Late in the war, when the Allied armies were advancing toward Germany, they frequently had to stop for days at a time to wait for their equipment to catch up with them. World War I was the first conflict in which airplanes played a significant role. The planes themselves were relatively simple and not very maneuverable; but antiaircraft technology was not yet highly developed either, so their effectiveness was still significant. Planes began to be constructed to serve various functions: bombers, fighters (planes that would engage in “dogfights” with other planes), and reconaissance aircraft. The most “modern” part of the military during World War I was the navy. Battleships emerged that made use of new technologies such as turbine propulsion, hydraulic gun controls, electric light and power, wireless telegraphy, and advanced navigational aids. Submarines, which had made a brief appearance in the American Civil War, now became

Trench Warfare


AMERICA AND THE GREAT WAR
• 531 

 For most British, French, German, and, to a lesser extent, American troops in France, the most debilitating part of World War I was the misery of life in the trenches. Some young men lived in these cold, wet, muddy dugouts for months, even years, surrounded by filth, sharing their space with vermin, eating mostly rotten food. Occasional attacks to try to dislodge the enemy from its trenches usually ended in failure and became the scenes of terrible slaughter. (National Archives and Records Administration) LIFE IN THE TRENCHES

 significant weapons (as the German U-boat campaign in 1915 and 1916 made clear). The new submarines were driven by diesel engines that were more compact than steam engines and used fuel that was less explosive than that of gasoline engines. The new technologies were responsible for the war’s truly stunning statistics of death. Russia lost 1.8 million soldiers; Germany, 2 million; France, 1.4 million; Appalling Casualties the British Empire, 1 million; Austria-Hungary, 1.5 million; Italy, 460,000. Something

532 • CHAPTER 21


 like 5 million civilians died under the stress of war—by violence or slower means— though the exact number is hard to know. The United States lost 116,000 soldiers, about half of those in combat, the others to disease. Some perished in the 1918 influenza pandemic that ultimately claimed an estimated 50 to 100 million lives worldwide. Although only in the war briefly, the Americans had played a significant role in the victory. Their casualty rates in the periods of intense fighting approximated or exceeded those of their Allies. The prospect of more doughboys arriving in the future surely affected the German leadership’s capitulation in 1918. The British, Russian, and French contributions, of course, dwarfed the American one in sheer numbers. But Wilson’s army had acquitted itself well enough to earn him a seat at the negotiating table—one of his ambitions all along.

Organizing the Economy for War
 By the time the war ended, the federal government had appropriated $32 billion for war expenses—a staggering sum at the time. The entire federal budget had seldom exceeded $1 billion before 1915, and as recently as 1910 the nation’s entire gross national product had been only $35 billion. To raise the money, the government relied on two devices. First, it launched a major drive to solicit loans from the American people by selling “Liberty Bonds” “Liberty Bonds” to the public. By 1920, the sale of bonds, accompanied by elaborate patriotic appeals, had produced $23 billion. At the same time, new taxes were bringing in an additional sum of nearly $10 billion—some of it coming from levies on the “excess profits” of corporations but much of it coming from new, steeply graduated income and inheritance taxes that ultimately rose as high as 70 percent in some brackets. An even greater challenge was to organize the economy to meet war needs. In 1916, Wilson established the Council of National Defense, composed of members of his cabinet, and the Civilian Advisory Commission, which set up local defense councils in every state and locality. But this early administrative structure soon proved completely unworkable, and members of the council urged a more centralized approach. The administrative structure that slowly emerged was dominated by a series of “war boards,” one to oversee the railroads, one to supervise fuel supplies (largely coal), another to handle food (a board that elevated to prominence the brilliant young engineer and business executive Herbert Hoover). The boards generally succeeded in meeting essential war needs without paralyzing the domestic economy. The War Industries Board (WIB) was created in July 1917 to coordinate government War Industries Board purchases of military supplies. Casually organized at first, it stumbled badly until March 1918, when Wilson restructured it and placed it under the control of the Wall Street financier Bernard Baruch. Baruch decided which factories would convert to the production of which war materials, and he set prices for the goods they produced. When materials were scarce, Baruch decided to whom they should go. When corporations were competing for government contracts, he chose among them. Baruch viewed himself, openly and explicitly, as a partner of business; and within the WIB, businessmen themselves—the so-called dollar-a-year men, who took paid leave from their corporate jobs and worked for the government for a token salary—supervised the affairs of the private economy. The National War Labor Board, established in April 1918, served as the final mediator of labor disputes. It pressured industry to grant important concessions to workers: an

AMERICA AND THE GREAT WAR
• 533 

WOMEN INDUSTRIAL WORKERS
In World War II, such women were often called “Rosie the Riveter.” Their presence in these previously all-male work environments was no less startling to Americans during World War I. These women are shown working with acetylene torches to bevel armor plate for tanks. The photographer was Margaret Bourke-White, who herself broke gender boundaries as the first female photojournalist for Life magazine and the first female war correspondent. (Photo by Margaret Bourke-White/© The LIFE Picture Collection/Getty Images) 
 eight-hour day, the maintenance of minimal living standards, equal pay for women doing equal work, recognition of the right of unions to organize and bargain collectively. In return, it insisted that workers forgo strikes and that employers not engage in lockouts.

The Search for Social Unity
 Government leaders were painfully aware that public sentiment about the war was sharply divided. The most conspicuous official effort to support the war was a vast propaganda campaign orchestrated by the Committee on Public Information (CPI), Wartime Propaganda under the direction of the progressive journalist George Creel. The CPI supervised the distribution of over 75 million pieces of printed material and controlled much of the information available for newspapers and magazines. Creel encouraged journalists to exercise “self-censorship” when reporting war news, and most complied by covering the war largely as the government wished. By 1918, government-distributed posters and films were offering lurid (and exaggerated) portrayals of the savagery of the Germans. In this climate, songwriters and other artists produced popular works that heavily favored the war. (See “Patterns of Popular Culture: George M. Cohan, ‘Over There,’ 1917.”) The government also began efforts to suppress dissent. CPI-financed advertisements in magazines implored citizens to report to the authorities any evidence among their neighbors of disloyalty, pessimism, or yearning for peace. The Espionage Act of 1917 gave the government new tools with which to combat spying, sabotage, or obstruction of the war effort (crimes that were often broadly defined). The Sabotage Act and the Sedition Act,

PATTERNS OF POPULAR CULTURE


George M. Cohan, “Over
There,” 1917
 Music was one of the richest forms of American popular culture in the early twentieth century, much of it emanating from New York City companies in a neighborhood known as Tin Pan Alley. Lyricists and composers, eager to peddle their sheet music widely, had long captured popular attitudes toward the issues of their day. In 1915, with men dying in the Great War at a staggering rate, songwriters churned out such antimilitarist numbers as “I Didn’t Raise My Boy to Be a Soldier” and “Don’t Take My Darling Boy Away!” In April 1917, however, President Wilson’s demand for unanimity changed Tin Pan Alley’s tune. Songs now demonized Kaiser Wilhelm II, the emperor of Germany, glorified the American doughboy (a term dating to the mid-nineteenth century but of mysterious origins) and sentimentalized the homefront family. Other tunes became anthems of American confidence and strength, none more so than George M. Cohan’s “Over There.” Even before that hit—which ­became the best-known song of the war— Cohan was a leading figure in the American entertainment industry, a prolific creator and performer of Broadway productions, and the composer of hundreds of original songs, including classics such as “Yankee Doodle Boy.” Written just after Wilson’s war address of April 2, “Over There” offered a jaunty soundtrack for American intervention. It was sung on the home front and in basic training; doughboys in France found it in songbooks issued by various civilian agencies. “Over 534 •

 There” represented a prominent strain in public culture of 1917—deeply patriotic, ­optimistic, and sentimental—even as many Americans worried quietly about what this new war would mean for them and their families. Johnnie, get your gun, Get your gun, get your gun, Take it on the run, On the run, on the run. Hear them calling, you and me, Every son of liberty. Hurry right away, No delay, no delay, Make your daddy glad To have had such a lad. Tell your sweetheart not to pine, To be proud her boy’s in line. Chorus Over there, over there Send the word, send the word over there That the Yanks are coming, The Yanks are coming, The drums rum-tumming Ev’rywhere. So prepare, say a pray’r, Send the word, send the word to beware. We’ll be over, we’re coming over, And we won’t come back till it’s over Over there. Johnnie get your gun, Get your gun, get your gun, Johnnie show the Hun Who’s a son of a gun. Hoist the flag and let her fly, Yankee Doodle do or die.

 Pack your little kit, Show your grit, do your bit. Yankee Doodle fill the ranks, From the towns and the tanks. Make your mother proud of you, And the old Red, White and Blue.

UNDERSTAND, ANALYZE, & EVALUATE
 1. How did this song seek to motivate

•


 (repeat chorus twice)

 young men to join the army? What ­image of war did this song convey? 2. What relationship between the United States and Europe did the chorus ­imply?

 Source: George M. Cohan, “Over There” (public domain).

 both passed in 1918, expanded the meaning of the Espionage Act to make illegal any public expression of opposition to the war; in practice, they Espionage and Sedition Acts allowed officials to prosecute anyone who criticized the president or the government. The most frequent targets of the new legislation were anticapitalist groups such as the Socialist Party and the Industrial Workers of the World (IWW). Many Americans had favored the repression of socialists and radicals even before the war; the wartime policies now made it possible to move against them with full legal sanction. Eugene V. Debs, the humane leader of the Socialist Party and an opponent of the war, was sentenced to ten years in prison in 1918. (A pardon by President Warren G. Harding ultimately won his release in 1921.) Big Bill Haywood and members of the IWW were energetically prosecuted. Only by fleeing to the Soviet Union did Haywood avoid imprisonment. In all, more than 1,500 people were arrested in 1918 for the crime of criticizing the government or the war. State and local governments, corporations, universities, and private citizens contributed as well to the climate of repression. A cluster of citizens’ groups emerged to mobilize “respectable” members of communities to root out disloyalty. The greatest target of abuse was the German American community. Most German Americans supported the American war effort once it began, but public opinion still turned bitterly hostile. A campaign to purge society of all things German quickly gathered speed, at times assuming ludicrous forms. Performances of German music were frequently banned. German foods such as sauerkraut and bratwurst were renamed “liberty cabbage” and “liberty sausage.” German books were removed from library shelves. Courses in the German language were dropped from school curricula. Germans were routinely fired from jobs in war industries, lest they “sabotage” important tasks.

THE SEARCH FOR A NEW WORLD ORDER
 Woodrow Wilson had led the nation into war promising a just and stable peace at its conclusion. Even before the armistice, he was preparing to lead the fight for what he considered a democratic postwar settlement.

The Fourteen Points
 On January 8, 1918, Wilson appeared before Congress to present the principles for which he believed the nation was fighting. He grouped the war aims under fourteen headings, widely known as the “Fourteen Points.” They fell into three broad categories. First, Wilson’s proposals contained a series of eight specific recommendations for adjusting postwar boundaries and establishing new nations to replace the defunct Austro-Hungarian • 535

536 • CHAPTER 21


 and Ottoman Empires. Second, five general principles would govern international conduct in the future: freedom of the seas, open covenants instead of secret treaties, reductions in armaments, free trade, and impartial mediation of colonial claims. Finally, there was a proposal for a “League of Nations” that would help implement these new principles and territorial adjustments and resolve future controversies. Wilson’s international vision ultimately enchanted not only much of his own generation (in both America and Europe) but also members of generations to come. It reflected his belief that the world was as capable of just and efficient government as were individual nations—that once the international community accepted certain basic principles of conduct and constructed modern institutions to implement them, the world could live in peace. Despite Wilson’s confidence, leaders of the Allied powers were preparing to resist him even before the armistice was signed. Britain and France, in particular, were in no mood for a benign and generous peace. At the same time, Wilson was encountering problems at home. In 1918, with the war almost over, Wilson unwisely tied support of his peace plans to the election of Democrats to Congress in November. Days later, the Republicans captured majorities in both houses. Domestic economic troubles, more than international issues, had been the most important factor in the voting; but the results damaged his ability to claim broad popular support for his peace plans. Wilson further antagonized the Republicans when he refused to appoint any important member of their party to the negotiating team that would attend the peace conference in Paris.

 Wilson’s International Vision

The Paris Peace Conference
 When Wilson entered Paris on December 13, 1918, he was greeted, some claimed, by the largest crowd in the history of France. The peace conference itself, however, proved less satisfying. The principal figures in the negotiations were the leaders of the victorious Allied nations: President Wilson, as well as David Lloyd George, the prime minister of Great Britain; Georges Clemenceau, the prime minister of France; and Vittorio Orlando, the prime minister of Italy. From the beginning, the atmosphere of idealism Wilson had sought to create competed with his counterparts’ national self-interest, thirst for revenge, and fears of the unstable Negotiating the Peace situation in eastern Europe and the threat of communism. Russia, whose new Bolshevik government was still fighting anti-Bolshevik counterrevolutionaries, was unrepresented in Paris; but the radical threat it seemed to pose to Western governments was never far from the minds of the delegates. In this tense and often vindictive atmosphere, Wilson was unable to win approval of many of his broad principles or to prevent the other allies from imposing punitive reparations on Germany. Wilson did manage to win some important victories in Paris in setting boundaries and dealing with former colonies. But his most visible triumph, and the one most important to him, was the creation of a permanent international organization to oversee world affairs and prevent future wars. On January 25, 1919, the Allies voted to The League of Nations accept the “covenant” of the League of Nations.

The Ratification Battle
 Wilson presented the Treaty of Versailles (so named for the palace outside Paris where the agreement was signed) to the Senate on July 10, 1919. But members of that chamber

AMERICA AND THE GREAT WAR
• 537 

 had many objections. Some—the so-called irreconcilables—believed that America should remain free of binding foreign entanglements. But many other opponents were principally concerned with constructing a winning issue for the Republicans in 1920. Most notable of these was Senator Henry Cabot Lodge of Massachusetts, the powerful Henry Cabot Lodge chair of the Foreign Relations Committee, who loathed the president and used every possible tactic to obstruct the treaty. Public sentiment clearly favored ratification, so at first Lodge could do little more than play for time. Gradually, however, his opposition to the treaty crystallized into a series of “reservations”—amendments to the League covenant further limiting American obligations to the organization. Wilson might still have won approval at this point if he had agreed to some relatively minor changes in the language of the treaty. But the president refused to yield. When he realized the Senate would not budge, Wilson decided to appeal to the public and embarked on a grueling, cross-country speaking tour to arouse public support for the treaty. For more than three weeks, he traveled over 8,000 miles by train, speaking as often as four times a day, resting hardly at all. Finally, he reached the end of his strength. After speaking at Pueblo, Colorado, on September 25, 1919, he collapsed with severe headaches. Canceling the rest of his itinerary, he rushed back to Washington, where, a few days later, he suffered a major stroke. For two weeks, he was close to death; for six weeks more, he was so seriously ill that he was virtually unable to conduct public business. His wife and his doctor formed an almost impenetrable barrier around him, shielding the president from any official pressures that might impede his recovery. Wilson ultimately recovered enough to resume a limited official schedule, but he was essentially an invalid for the remaining eighteen months of his presidency. His condition only intensified what had already been his strong tendency to view public issues in moral terms and to resist any attempts at compromise. When the Foreign Relations Committee finally sent the treaty to the Senate, recommending nearly fifty League Membership Rejected amendments and reservations, Wilson refused to consider any of them. The effort to win ratification failed. In the aftermath of this defeat, Wilson became convinced that the 1920 national election would serve as a “solemn referendum” on the League. By now, however, public interest in the peace process had begun to fade as a series of other crises claimed attention.

A SOCIETY IN TURMOIL
 Even during the Paris Peace Conference, many Americans were concerned less about international matters than about turbulent events at home. Some of this unease was a legacy of the almost-hysterical social atmosphere of the war years; some of it was a response to issues that surfaced after the armistice.

The Unstable Economy
 The war ended sooner than almost anyone had anticipated. Without warning, without planning, the nation lurched into the difficult task of economic reconversion. At first, the boom continued, but accompanied by raging inflation. Through most of 1919 and 1920, prices rose at an average of more than 15 percent a year. Finally, late in 1920, the economic bubble burst as inflation began killing the market for consumer Postwar Recession

538 • CHAPTER 21


 goods. Between 1920 and 1921, the gross national product declined nearly 10 percent; 100,000 businesses went bankrupt; and nearly 5 million Americans lost their jobs. Well before this severe recession began, labor unrest increased dramatically. The raging inflation of 1919 wiped out the modest wage gains workers had achieved during the war; Labor Unrest many laborers were worried about job security as veterans returned to the workforce; arduous working conditions continued to be a source of discontent. Employers aggravated the resentment by using the end of the war to rescind benefits they had been forced to concede to workers in 1917 and 1918—most notably, recognition of unions. The year 1919, therefore, saw an unprecedented strike wave. In January, a walkout by shipyard workers in Seattle, Washington, evolved into a general strike that brought the entire city to a virtual standstill. In September, the Boston police force struck to demand recognition of its union. With its police off the job, Boston erupted in violence and looting. Governor Calvin Coolidge called in the National Guard to restore order and attracted national acclaim by declaring, “There is no right to strike against the public safety.” Coolidge’s statement tapped into a broad middle-class hostility to unions and strikes. That hostility played a part in defeating the greatest strike of 1919: a steel strike that began in September, when 350,000 steelworkers in several Midwestern cities demanded an eight-hour day and union recognition. The long and bitter steel strike climaxed in a riot in Gary, Indiana, in which eighteen strikers were killed. Steel executives managed to keep most plants running with nonunion labor, and public opinion was so hostile to the strikers that the American Federation of Labor timidly repudiated the strike. By January, the strike—like most of the others in 1919—had collapsed.

The Demands of African Americans
 Black World War I veterans (400,000 of them) came home in 1919 and marched down the main streets of cities with other returning troops. And then in New York and elsewhere





PERCENTAGE OF TOTAL POPULATION
50%–75%


10%–25%


25%–50%


5%–10%


0%–5%


 Two great waves of migration produced a dramatic redistribution of the African American population in the first half of the twentieth century—one around the time of World War I, the other during and after World War II. The map on the left shows the almost exclusive concentration of African Americans in the South as late as 1910. The map on the right shows both the tremendous increase of black populations in northern states by 1950, and the relative decline of black populations in parts of the South. Note in particular the changes in Mississippi and South Carolina. • Why did the wars produce such significant migration out of the South? AFRICAN AMERICAN MIGRATION, 1910–1950

AMERICA AND THE GREAT WAR
• 539 

 they marched again through the streets of black neighborhoods such as Harlem, led by jazz bands and cheered by thousands of African Americans. They believed that the glory of black heroism in the war would make it impossible for white society ever again to treat African Americans as second-class citizens. As it turned out, the fact that black soldiers had fought in the war had almost no impact at all on white attitudes. But it profoundly affected black attitudes, accentuated African American bitterness, and increased the determination to fight for civil rights. During the war, nearly half a million blacks had migrated from the rural South to industrial cities (often enticed by northern “labor agents,” who offered free transportation) in search of the factory jobs the war was rapidly generating. This was the beginning of what became known as the Great Migration. Suddenly, large black communities arose in northern Great Migration cities, part of the broader twentieth-century transformation of the black population from a generally southern rural one to a northern urban one. By 1919, the racial climate had become savage and murderous. In the South, lynchings suddenly increased; more than seventy blacks, some of them war veterans, died at the hands of white mobs in 1919 alone. In the North, black factory workers faced widespread layoffs as returning white veterans displaced them from their jobs. And as whites became convinced that black workers with lower wage demands were hurting them economically, animosity grew rapidly. Wartime riots in East St. Louis and elsewhere were a prelude to a summer of much worse racial violence in 1919. In Chicago, a black teenager swimming in Chicago Race Riot Lake Michigan on a hot July day happened to drift toward a white beach. Whites onshore allegedly stoned him unconscious; he sank and drowned. Angry African Americans gathered in crowds and marched into white neighborhoods to retaliate; whites formed even larger crowds and roamed into mostly black neighborhoods. For more than a week, Chicago was virtually at war. In the end, 38 people had died—15 whites and 23 blacks— and 537 were injured; over 1,000 people were left homeless. The Chicago riot was the worst but not the only racial violence during the so-called red summer of 1919; in all, 120 people died in such racial outbreaks in little more than three months. Racially motivated urban riots were not new. But the 1919 riots were different in one respect: they did not just involve white people attacking blacks, but also blacks fighting back. The NAACP signaled this change by urging blacks not just to demand government protection but also to defend themselves. The poet Claude McKay, one of the major figures of what would soon be known as the Harlem Renaissance, wrote a poem after the Chicago riot called “If We Must Die”: Like men we’ll face the murderous cowardly pack. Pressed to the wall, dying, but fighting back.

 At the same time, a black Jamaican, Marcus Garvey, began to attract a wide following in the United States with his ideology of black ­nationalism. Marcus Garvey and Black Nationalism Garvey encouraged African Americans to reject assimilation into white society and to develop pride in their own race and culture. His Universal Negro Improvement Association (UNIA) launched a chain of black-owned grocery stores and pressed for the creation of other black businesses. Eventually, Garvey began urging his supporters to leave America and return to Africa, where they could create a new society of their own. In the early 1920s, the Garvey movement experienced explosive growth for a time, but it began to decline after Garvey was indicted in 1923 on charges of business fraud. He was deported to Jamaica two years later. But the allure of black nationalism survived in black culture long after Garvey was gone.

540 • CHAPTER 21


The Red Scare
 Many Americans regarded the industrial warfare and racial violence of 1919 as frightening omens of instability and radicalism. After the Russian Revolution of November 1917, communism was no longer simply a theory, but the basis of an important regime. Concerns about the communist threat grew in 1919 when the Bolshevik government announced the formation of the Communist International (or Comintern), whose purpose was to export revolution around the world. In America, meanwhile, there was, in addition to the great number of imagined radicals, a modest number of real ones. These small groups of radicals were presumably responsible for a series of bombings in the spring of 1919. In April, the post office intercepted several dozen parcels addressed to leading businessmen and politicians that were triggered to explode when opened. Two months later, eight bombs exploded in eight cities within minutes of one another, suggesting a nationwide conspiracy. The combination of strikes and the Comintern announcement produced what became known as the Red Scare. Nearly thirty states enacted new peacetime sedition laws imposing harsh penalties on promoters of revolution. Spontaneous acts of violence against supposed radicals occurred in some communities, and universities and other institutions tried to expel radicals from their midst. But the greatest agent of the Red Scare was the federal government. On New Year’s Day, 1920, Attorney General A. Mitchell Palmer and his Palmer Raids ambitious young assistant, J. Edgar Hoover, orchestrated a series of raids on alleged radical centers throughout the country and arrested more than 6,000 people. Most of those arrested were ultimately released, but about 500 who were not American citizens were summarily deported. Later in 1920, a bomb exploded on Wall Street, killing thirtyeight people. No one was ever convicted of this bombing. The ferocity of the Red Scare gradually abated, but its effects lingered well into the 1920s. In May 1920, two Italian immigrants, Nicola Sacco and Bartolomeo Vanzetti, were charged with the murder of a paymaster in South Braintree, Massachusetts. The case against them was weak and suffused with nativist prejudices and fears; but because both men were confessed anarchists, they faced a widespread public presumption of guilt. They were convicted and eventually sentenced to death. Over the next several years, public Sacco and Vanzetti support for Sacco and Vanzetti grew to formidable proportions. But on August 23, 1927, amid widespread protests in the United States and around the world, Sacco and Vanzetti, still proclaiming their innocence, died in the electric chair.

Refuting the Red Scare
 An unexpected result of postwar turmoil was the emergence of a vigorous defense of civil liberties that not only discredited the Red Scare, but also helped give new force to the Bill of Rights. The heavy-handed actions of the federal government after the war created a powerful backlash. It destroyed the career of A. Mitchell Palmer. It almost nipped in the bud the ascent of J. Edgar Hoover. It damaged the Democratic Party. And it led to an organization committed to protecting civil liberties: the National Civil Liberties Bureau, launched in 1917, which in 1920 was renamed the American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU) and which remains a prominent institution today. At the same time, members of the Supreme Court—most notably Justices Oliver Wendell Holmes and Louis Brandeis—gradually moved to defend unpopular speech. The clash of “fighting faiths,” Holmes wrote in a dissent in 1920, was best resolved “by free trade in

AMERICA AND THE GREAT WAR
• 541 

 ideas—that the best test of truth is . . . the competition of the market.” This and other dissents eventually became law as other justices committed themselves to a robust defense of speech, however unpopular.

 The Retreat from Idealism On August 26, 1920, the Nineteenth Amendment, guaranteeing women the right to vote, became part of the Constitution. To the suffrage movement, this was the culmination of nearly a century of struggle. To many progressives, it seemed to promise new support for reform. Yet the Nineteenth Amendment marked not the beginning of a new era of progressive reform but the end of an earlier one. Economic problems, labor unrest, racial tensions, and the intensity of the antiradicalism they helped create—all combined in the years immediately Disillusionment and Reaction ­following the war to produce a general sense of disillusionment. That became particularly apparent in the election of 1920. Woodrow Wilson hoped the campaign would be a referendum on the League of Nations, and the Democratic candidates, Governor James M. Cox of Ohio and Assistant Secretary of the Navy Franklin D. Roosevelt, dutifully tried to keep Wilson’s ideals alive. The Republican presidential nominee, Warren Gamaliel Harding, an obscure Ohio senator, offered a different vision. He embraced no soaring ideals, only a vague promise of a return, as he later phrased it, to “normalcy.” Harding won in a landslide, with 61 percent of the popular vote and victories in every state outside the South. The party made major gains in Congress as well. To many Americans it seemed that, for better or worse, a new age had begun.

CONCLUSION
 Presidents Roosevelt, Taft, and Wilson contributed to a continuation, and indeed an expansion, of America’s active role in international affairs, in part as an effort to abet the growth of American capitalism and in part as an attempt to impose American ideas of morality and democracy on other parts of the world. Similar mixtures of ideals and self-interest soon guided the United States into a great world war. For a time after the outbreak of war in Europe in 1914, most Americans—President Wilson among them—wanted nothing so much as to stay out of the conflict. But as the war dragged on and the tactics of Britain and Germany began to impinge on American trade and access to the seas, the United States found itself drawn into the conflict. In April 1917, Congress agreed to the president’s request that the United States enter the war as an ally of Britain, France, and Russia. Within a few months of the arrival of American troops in Europe, Germany agreed to an armistice and the war ended. American casualties, although not inconsiderable, were negligible compared to the millions suffered by the European combatants. Wilson’s bold and idealistic dream of a peace based on international cooperation suffered a painful death. The Treaty of Versailles, which he helped draft, contained a provision for a League of Nations, which Wilson believed could transform the international order. But the League quickly became controversial in the United States; and despite strenuous efforts by the president—efforts that hastened his own physical collapse—the treaty was defeated in the Senate. In the aftermath of that traumatic battle, the American people turned away from Wilson and his ideals and prepared for a very different era.

542 • CHAPTER 21


 The social experience of the war in the United States was, on the whole, dismaying to reformers. Although the war enhanced some reform efforts—most notably prohibition and woman suffrage—it also introduced an atmosphere of intolerance and repression into American life. The aftermath of the war was even more disheartening to progressives, because of both a brief but highly destabilizing recession and a wave of repression directed against labor, radicals, African Americans, and immigrants.

KEY TERMS/PEOPLE/PLACES/EVENTS
Allies 524
Central Powers 524
Dollar Diplomacy 522
General John J. Pershing 523
Great Migration 539
Henry Cabot Lodge 537
League of Nations 536


Lusitania 525
Marcus Garvey 539
Nicola Sacco and
Bartolomeo Vanzetti 540
Palmer Raids 540
Panama Canal 521
Pancho Villa 523


Red Scare 540
Roosevelt Corollary 521
Selective Service Act 527
The Fourteen Points 535
 trench warfare 530 War Industries Board 532 Zimmermann Telegram 525

RECALL AND REFLECT
 Who opposed U.S. involvement in World War I and why? How did the Wilson administration mobilize the nation for war? What effect did the war have on race relations in the United States? What were some of the ways that U.S. participation in the Great War changed American society? 5. Why did the battle over ratification of the Treaty of Versailles come to an impasse? Why did the Senate ultimately reject the treaty? What was the significance of that ­rejection?

1.
2.
3.
4.




THE NEW ERA
THE NEW ECONOMY
THE NEW CULTURE
A CONFLICT OF CULTURES
REPUBLICAN GOVERNMENT


LOOKING AHEAD
 1. How did the technological innovations of the early twentieth century affect industry and American social life of the 1920s? 2. What were some of the cultural conflicts of the 1920s, and what caused them? 3. Is the term the New Era a fitting description of the 1920s?

IN POPULAR CULTURE, THE 1920s
are often remembered as an era of affluence, conservatism, and cultural frivolity. In reality, however, the decade was a time of significant, even dramatic social, economic, and political change. The American economy not only enjoyed spectacular growth but also developed new forms of organization. Many Americans reshaped themselves to reflect the increasingly urban, industrial, consumer-oriented society of the United States. And American government experimented with new approaches to public policy. That was why contemporaries liked to refer to the 1920s as the “New Era”—an age in which America was becoming a modern nation. At the same time, however, the decade saw the rise of a series of spirited, and at times effective, rebellions against the transformations in American life. The intense cultural conflicts that characterized the 1920s showed that much of American society remained unreconciled to the modernizing currents of the New Era. 
• 543


THE NEW ECONOMY


TIME LINE
1914–1920
Great Migration of
 blacks to the North Prohibition begins Harding elected president Lewis’s Babbitt

 Harding dies; Coolidge becomes president Harding administration scandals revealed National Origins Act passed Coolidge elected president Ku Klux Klan membership peaks Fitzgerald’s The Great Gatsby Scopes trial First sound motion picture, The Jazz Singer

 Hoover elected president

544 •


 After the recession of 1921–1922, the United States began a period of almost uninterrupted prosperity and economic expansion. Less ­visible at the time, but equally significant, was the survival (and even the growth) of inequalities and imbalances.

Technology, Organization,
 and Economic Growth No one could deny the remarkable feats of the American economy in the 1920s. The nation’s manufacturing output rose by more than 60 percent. Per capita income grew by a third. Inflation was negligible. A mild recession in 1923 briefly interrupted the pattern of growth; but when it subsided early in 1924, the economy expanded with even greater vigor. The economic boom was a result of many things, but one of the most important was technology. As a result of the development of the assembly line and other innovations, automobiles now became one of the most important industries in the nation, stimulating growth in such related industries as steel, rubber, and glass, tool companies, oil corporations, and road construction. The increased mobility that the automobile made possible increased the demand for suburban housing, fueling a boom in the construction industry. Radio contributed as well to the economic growth. Early radio had been able to broadcast little besides pulses, which meant that radio communication could occur only through the Morse code. But with the discovery of the theory of modulation, pioneered by the Canadian scientist Reginald Fessenden, it became possible to transmit speech and music. Many people built their own radio sets at home for very little money, benefiting from the discovery that inexpensive crystals could receive signals over long distances (but not very well over short ones). These “shortwave” radios, which allowed

THE NEW ERA
• 545 

 individual owners to establish contact with one another, marked the beginning of what later became known as “ham radio.” Once commercial broadcasting began, families flocked to buy more conventional radio sets powered by reliable vacuum tubes and capable of receiving high-quality signals over short and medium distances. By 1925, there were 2 million sets in American homes, and by the end of the 1920s, almost every family had one. Commercial aviation developed slowly in the 1920s, beginning with the use of planes to deliver mail. On the whole, airplanes remained curiosities and sources of Commercial Aviation entertainment. But technological advances—the development of the radial engine and the creation of pressurized cabins—laid the groundwork for the great increase in commercial travel in the 1930s and beyond. Electronics, home appliances, plastics and synthetic fibers (such as nylon), aluminum, magnesium, oil, electric power, and other industries fueled by technological advances—all grew dramatically. Telephones continued to proliferate. By the late 1930s, there were approximately 25 million telephones in the United States, roughly one for every six people. (See “Consider the Source: America’s Early Telephone Network.”) The seeds of future technological breakthroughs were also visible. In both England and America, scientists and engineers were working to transform primitive calculating machines into devices capable of performing more complicated tasks. By the early Early Computing 1930s, researchers at MIT, led by Vannevar Bush, had created an instrument capable of performing a variety of complicated tasks—the first analog computer. A few years later, Howard Aiken, with financial assistance from Harvard and MIT, built a much more complex computer with memory, capable of multiplying eleven-digit numbers in three seconds. Genetic research had begun in Austria in the mid-nineteenth century through the work of Gregor Mendel, a Catholic monk who performed experiments on the Genetic Research hybridization of vegetables in his monastery garden. His findings attracted little attention during his lifetime, but in the early twentieth century they were discovered by several investigators and helped shape modern genetic research. Among the American pioneers was Thomas Hunt Morgan of Columbia University and, later, Cal Tech, whose experiments with fruit flies revealed how several genes could be transmitted together. He also revealed the way in which genes were arranged along the chromosome. His work helped open the path to understanding how genes could recombine—a critical discovery that led to more advanced experiments in hybridization and genetics. Large sectors of American business accelerated their drive toward national organization and consolidation. Certain industries—notably those dependent on large-scale mass production, such as steel and automobiles—seemed to move naturally toward concentrating production in a few large firms. Other industries—less dependent on technology and less susceptible to great economies of scale—proved more resistant to consolidation. The strenuous efforts by industrialists throughout the economy to find ways to curb competition reflected a strong fear of overcapacity. Even in the booming 1920s, industrialists remembered how too-rapid expansion and overproduction had helped produce recessions in 1893, 1907, and 1920. The great unrealized dream of the New Era was to find a way to stabilize the economy so that such collapses would never occur again.

Workers in an Age of Capital
 Despite the remarkable economic growth, more than two-thirds of the American people in 1929 lived at no better than what one major study described as the “minimum comfort level.” Half of those were at or below the level of “subsistence and poverty.”

CO NS IDER T HE S O URC E
AMERICA’S EARLY TELEPHONE NETWORK
 Alexander Graham Bell received a patent for the invention of the telephone in 1876. By 1914, telephone exchanges linked more than 70,000 places and 8 million subscribers in

 the United States. This map, part of an advertisement for the American Telephone and Telegraph Company, shows the extent of telephone coverage that year.

(Popular Electricity and Modern Mechanics, September, 19, 1914).


546 •


UNDERSTAND, ANALYZE, & EVALUATE
 1. In what area of the United States

 was the concentration of telephone ­exchanges the heaviest? Why do you think there were more exchanges in this part of the country than in other areas? 2. The text accompanying the map explains that the same-sized dots are used for large cities as for small villages. Would

 the use of different-sized dots to ­indicate larger cities or smaller towns make the map more representative of U.S. telephone usage in 1914? 3. This map is part of an advertisement produced by the American Telephone and Telegraph Company. How does that fact influence a reading of the ­information provided in the map and accompanying text?

 American labor experienced both the successes and the failures of the 1920s. On the one hand, most workers saw their standard of living rise during the decade. Some employers adopted paternalistic techniques that came to be known as welfare capitalism.

THE STEAMFITTER
Lewis Hine was among the first American photographers to recognize his craft as an art. In this carefully posed photograph from the mid-1920s, Hine made a point that many other artists were making in other media: the rise of the machine could serve human beings, but might also bend them to its own needs. (© New York Public Library, USA/Bridgeman Images) 
• 547


