 outraged by Americans’ circumventions of the law. Religious leaders on both sides of the border denounced illegal drinking — but profits were staggering. The difficulties of enforcing prohibition contributed to its repeal in 1933 (Chapter 23).

 Evolution in the Schools At the state and local levels, controversy erupted as fundamentalist Protestants sought to mandate school curricula based on the biblical account of creation. In 1925, Tennessee’s legislature outlawed the teaching of “any theory that denies the story of the Divine creation of man as taught in the Bible, [and teaches] instead that man has descended from a lower order of animals.” The American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU), formed during the Red Scare to protect free speech rights, challenged the law’s constitutionality. The ACLU intervened in the trial of John T. Scopes, a high school biology teacher who taught the theory of evolution to his class and faced a jail sentence for doing so. The case attracted national attention because Clarence Darrow, a famous criminal lawyer, defended Scopes, while William Jennings Bryan, the three-time Democratic presidential candidate, spoke for the prosecution. Journalists dubbed the Scopes trial “the monkey trial.” This label referred both to Darwin’s argument that human beings and other primates share a common ancestor and to the circus atmosphere at the trial, which was broadcast live over a Chicago radio station. (Proving that urbanites had their own prejudices, acerbic critic H. L. Mencken dismissed antievolutionists as “gaping primates of the upland valleys,” implying that they had not evolved.) The jury took only eight minutes to deliver its verdict: guilty. Though the Tennessee Supreme Court later overturned Scopes’s conviction, the law remained on the books for more than thirty years. Nativism Some native-born Protestants pointed to immigration as the primary cause of what they saw as America’s moral decline. A nation of 105 million people had added more than 23 million immigrants over the previous four decades; the newcomers included many Catholics and Jews from Southern and Eastern Europe, whom one Maryland congressman referred to as “indigestible lumps” in the “national stomach.” Such attitudes recalled hostility toward Irish and Germans in the 1840s and 1850s. In this case, they fueled a momentous shift in immigration policy. “America must be kept American,” President Coolidge declared in 1924. Congress had banned Chinese immigration in 1882, and Theodore Roosevelt had

Cultural Conflict, Bubble, and Bust, 1919–1932




 negotiated a so-called gentleman’s TRACE CHANGE agreement that limited Japanese OVER TIME immigration in 1907. Now nativ- How did debates over ists charged that there were also alcohol use, the teaching too many European arrivals, some of evolution, immigration, of whom undermined Protes- anti-Semitism, and racism tantism and imported anarchism, evolve in the 1920s? socialism, and other radical doctrines. Responding to this pressure, Congress passed emergency immigration restrictions in 1921 and a permanent measure three years later. The National Origins Act (1924) used backdated census data to establish a baseline: in the future, annual immigration from each country could not exceed 2 percent of that nationality’s percentage of the U.S. population as it had stood in 1890. Since only small numbers of Italians, Greeks, Poles, Russians, and other Southern and Eastern European immigrants had arrived before 1890, the law drastically limited immigration from those places. In 1929, Congress imposed even more restrictive quotas, setting a cap of 150,000 immigrants per year from Europe and continuing to ban most immigrants from Asia. The new laws, however, permitted unrestricted immigration from the Western Hemisphere. As a result, Latin Americans arrived in increasing numbers, finding jobs in the West that had gone to other immigrants before exclusion. More than 1 million Mexicans entered the United States between 1900 and 1930, including many during World War I. Nativists lobbied Congress to cut this flow; so did labor leaders, who argued that impoverished migrants lowered wages for other American workers. But Congress heeded the pleas of employers, especially farmers in Texas and California, who wanted cheap labor. Only the Great Depression cut off migration from Mexico. Other anti-immigrant measures emerged at the state level. In 1913, by an overwhelming majority, California’s legislature had passed a law declaring that “aliens ineligible to citizenship” could not own “real property.” The aim was to discourage Asians, especially Japanese immigrants, from owning land, though some had lived in the state for decades and built up prosperous farms. In the wake of World War I, California tightened these laws, making it increasingly difficult for Asian families to establish themselves. California, Washington, and Hawaii also severely restricted any school that taught Japanese language, history, or culture. Denied both citizenship and land rights, Japanese Americans would be in a vulnerable position at the outbreak of World War II, when anti-Japanese hysteria swept the United States.



 PART 7

DOMESTIC AND GLOBAL CHALLENGES, 1890–1945

The U.S. Border Patrol, Laredo, Texas, 1926
 In 1926, San Antonio photographer Eugene O. Goldbeck took this photograph of U.S. Border Patrol officers in Laredo. Since 1917, Mexicans, like other immigrants, had been subject to a head tax and literacy test. The U.S. government had not enforced these provisions, however, because of pressure from southwestern employers eager for cheap Mexican labor. Following passage of the National Origins Act in 1924, the United States established the Border Patrol. Its increasing efforts to police the border slowed the casual movement of Mexican workers in and out of the United States. Why do you think the Border Patrol posed in this way for Goldbeck’s picture? Notice that some of the officers depicted here were dressed as civilians. What might this signify? Harry Ransom Center, University of Texas at Austin.

 The National Klan The 1920s brought a nationwide resurgence of the Ku Klux Klan (KKK), the white supremacist group formed in the post–Civil War South. Soon after the premiere of Birth of a Nation (1915), a popular film glorifying the Reconstructionera Klan, a group of southerners gathered on Georgia’s Stone Mountain to revive the group. With its blunt motto, “Native, white, Protestant supremacy,” the Klan recruited supporters across the country (Thinking Like a Historian, p. 716). KKK members did not limit their harassment to blacks but targeted immigrants, Catholics, and Jews as well, with physical intimidation, arson, and economic boycotts. At the height of its power, the Klan wielded serious political clout and counted more than three million members, including many women. The Klan’s mainstream appeal was illustrated by President Woodrow Wilson’s public praise for Birth of a Nation. Though the Klan declined nationally after 1925, robbed of a potent issue by passage of the anti-immigration bill, it remained strong in the South, and pockets of KKK activity persisted in all parts of the country (Map 22.1). Klan activism lent a menacing cast to political issues. Some local Klansmen, for example, cooperated with

 members of the Anti-Saloon League to enforce prohibition laws through threats and violent attacks. The rise of the Klan was part of an ugly trend that began before World War I and extended into the 1930s. In 1915, for example, rising anti-Semitism was marked by the lynching of Leo Frank, a Jewish factory supervisor in Marietta, Georgia, who was wrongly accused of the rape and murder of a thirteen-year-old girl. The rise of the national Klan helped prepare the way for white supremacist movements of the 1930s, such as the Los Angeles–based Silver Legion, a fringe paramilitary group aligned with Hitler’s Nazis. Far more influential were major figures such as industrialist Henry Ford, whose Dearborn Independent railed against immigrants and warned that members of “the proud Gentile race” must arm themselves against a Jewish conspiracy aimed at world domination. Challenged by critics, Ford issued an apology in 1927 and admitted that his allegations had been based on “gross forgeries.” But with his paper’s editorials widely circulated by the Klan and other groups, considerable long-term damage had been done.

 The Election of 1928 Conflicts over race, religion, and ethnicity created the climate for a stormy

 CHAPTER 22

Cultural Conflict, Bubble, and Bust, 1919–1932


C A N A D A


!


 ME.

WASH. NORTH DAKOTA

 MONTANA

!%


 OREGON

MINN. WIS.

WYOMING NEBRASKA

 NEVADA

 UTAH

!


!% %


 COLORADO

 CALIF.

 ARIZONA

 Governor elected with Klan support U.S. senator elected with Klan support

%


 MICH.

 IOWA

!


 KANSAS

 ILL. '

 MO.

IND. W.
!% VA. KY. % !% 
 TENN.

%%


 OKLAHOMA

NEW MEXICO

ARK. MISS. LA. '

%


 TEXAS '

PACIFIC OCEAN

!
%


!


SOUTH DAKOTA

 IDAHO

VT. N.H. N.Y. '

!'
 ALA.

!


 PA. '

'


 VA.

N.J.


MASS. R.I. CONN.

DEL. MD. N

N.C.
'


S.C.


 GA. '

E


W
S


ATLANTIC OCEAN FLA. '

Gulf of Mexico


 MEXICO

 ' Major areas of Klan violence





 500 miles 500 kilometers

 MAP 22.1 Ku Klux Klan Politics and Violence in the 1920s Unlike the Reconstruction-era Klan, the Klan of the 1920s was geographically dispersed and had substantial strength in the West and Midwest as well as in the South. Although the Klan is often thought of as a rural movement, some of the strongest “klaverns” were in Chicago, Los Angeles, Atlanta, Detroit, and other large cities. The organization’s members operated as vigilantes in areas where they were strong; elsewhere, their aggressive tactics triggered riots between Klansmen and their ethnic and religious targets.

 presidential election in 1928. Democrats had traditionally drawn strength from white voters in the South and immigrants in the North: groups that divided over prohibition, immigration restriction, and the Klan. By 1928, the northern urban wing gained firm control. Democrats nominated Governor Al Smith of New York, the first presidential candidate to reflect the aspirations of the urban working class. A grandson of Irish peasants, Smith had risen through New York City’s Democratic machine to become a dynamic reformer. But he offended many small-town and rural Americans with his heavy New York accent and brown derby hat, which highlighted his ethnic working-class origins. Middle-class reformers questioned his ties to Tammany Hall; temperance advocates opposed him as a “wet.” But the governor’s greatest handicap was his religion.

 Although Smith insisted that his Catholic beliefs would not affect his duties as president, many Protestants opposed him. “No Governor can kiss the papal ring and get within gunshot of the White House,” vowed one Methodist bishop. Smith proved no match for the Republican nominee, Secretary of Commerce Herbert Hoover, who embodied the technological promise of the modern age. Women who had mobilized for Hoover’s conservation campaigns during World War I enlisted as Hoover Hostesses, inviting friends to their homes to hear the candidate’s radio speeches. Riding on eight years of Republican prosperity, Hoover promised that individualism and voluntary cooperation would banish poverty. He won overwhelmingly, with 444 electoral votes to Smith’s 87 (Map 22.2). Because many



THINKING LIKE A HISTORIAN
Who Joined the Ku Klux Klan? 
 Asked why a person would join the Klan, you might cite racism and religious bigotry. But the story is complicated: many whites with strong prejudices did not join the Klan in the 1920s, while others did. Why?

 1. Klan wedding in Washington, D.C., 1925.

 propaganda. . . . The idea of drink will be maintained by means of the Jewish stage, Jewish jazz, and the Jewish comics, until somebody comes down hard upon it. 4. Report on a Klan gathering in Birmingham, Alabama, 1923.

 Edgewood Park was crowded by noon. Klansmen and their wives and families enjoyed a great barbecue, went swimming, dancing, and picknicking. There were airplane stunts during the day with band concerts thrown in for good measure. At night there was a wonderful display of fireworks following the initiation and the address of the Imperial Wizard.

Source: Getty Images


 5. Klansmen in Buffalo, New York, 1924. Data based on historical research into a Klan membership list of almost 2,000 men in the Buffalo area.

 TABLE 22.1 2. Poem read at a meeting of KKK Grand Dragons, North Carolina, 1923.

Klansmen in Buffalo, New York, 1924


Percentage
 of KKK Members

Percentage of
Total Native
White Male
Workers in
Buffalo


 Professional (predominantly clergy, doctors, engineers, pharmacists)

6.1


4.7


 Business (small businessmen, managers, inspectors, accountants)

18.5


10.4


 3. “95% of Bootleggers Jews,” editorial, Dearborn Independent, Michigan, 1922.

 Low nonmanual (salesmen, clerks, foremen)

27.7


22.6


 Violation and evasion of the Prohibition laws has had a deep Jewish complexion from the very beginning. . . . This does not mean, of course, that every bootlegger is a Jew. Unless you live in Chicago, New York or other large cities, an actual meeting with the Jew in this minor capacity will not be frequent. The Jew is the possessor of the wholesale stocks; . . . But notwithstanding all this carefulness, the bulk of the arrests made in the United States have been among Jews. . . . The maintenance of the idea of drink in the minds of the people is due to Jewish

 Skilled (machinists, electricians, railroad engineers, construction trades)

30.6


25.3


 Semiskilled and service (factory and rail workers, deliverymen, policemen, repairmen)

16.4


30.2


0.5


14.5


 God Give Us Men! The Invisible Empire demands strong Minds, great hearts, true faith and ready hands . . . Men who possess opinions and a will; Men who have honor; men who will not lie; Men who can stand before a demagogue and damn his treacherous flattering without winking! . . . Men of dependable character; men of sterling worth; Then wrongs will be redressed, and right will rule the earth.



Occupational Group


 Unskilled (laborers, gardeners)

 6. Interviews conducted in the 1980s with Indiana Klanswomen about Klan life in the 1920s. Seeking truthful accounts, the interviewer allowed the women to remain anonymous.

Anonymous
 For [the Klan] to say, we want to get rid of the niggers, we want to get rid of the Catholics, it didn’t mean a thing to us. . . . I can remember quite well the stories that you hear sitting on the porch. . . . They’d talk about religion, and they’d talk about Catholics. . . . The Catholics were considered horrible people. . . . Anonymous Kelly had a grocery store. Well, it hurt their business terribly because people wouldn’t go in there, because the Klan would tell you not to. . . . If you had a empty house . . . , why you were told not to rent it to a Catholic. Some Klan leader said that the Pope was coming to take over the country, and he said he might be on the next train that went through North Manchester. You know, just trying to make it specific. So, about a thousand people went out to the train station and stopped the train. It only had . . . one passenger on it. They took him off, and he finally convinced them that he wasn’t the Pope. He was a carpet salesman. And so they put him on the next train and he went on to Chicago. 7. Editorial by National Imperial Wizard Hiram Wesley Evans in the KKK periodical Dawn: A Journal for True American Patriots, November 10, 1923.

 Humanity has become a commodity. For mercenary motives, our importers of it want the most inferior grade. Industry desires cheap labor. Therefore, we have had this recent flood of 5 and 10-cent citizenship. Take any map which shows the concentration of the South and Eastern European type of immigrant and you will see [that] wherever manufacturing and mining and lumbering predominate, there the hordes of unskilled labor have overwhelmingly been assembled. . . . The present and recent flood of inferior foreigners has vastly increased our illiteracy, vitally lowered the health level and visibly menaced America by inheritable mental and moral deficiencies. . . . [Farms are] the only legitimate and justifiable excuse for cheap labor, yet that class is moving irresistibly cityward to swell the slums and multiply immorality. For example, throughout the south the colored race . . . is migrating to the North — not to its rural districts, but to its industrial centers. 8. “Program for America,” in the KKK newspaper American Standard, April 15, 1925.

 Laws to require the reading of the Holy Bible in every American public school.

 Recognition of the fact . . . that Romanism is working here to undermine Americanism. . . . Since Roman Catholics give first allegiance to an alien political potentate, the pope . . . their claim to citizenship, to the ballot, and to public office in this Protestant country is illegitimate, and must be forbidden by law. . . . A law to destroy the alien influence of the foreign language press [by] requiring that the English language be used exclusively. . . . Recognition of the tendency toward moral disintegration, resulting from the activities . . . of the anti-Christian Jews, in our theaters, our motion pictures, and in American business circles; the discontinuance of these anti-Christian activities, and the exclusion of Jews of this character from America. The return of the Negroes to their homeland of Africa, under the protection and with the help of the United States Government. Strict adherence to the Constitution of the United States, including the Prohibition Amendment, by every citizen. Sources: (2) Kelly J. Baker, Gospel According to the Klan (Lawrence: University Press of Kansas, 2011), 119; (3) Dearborn Independent editorial reprinted in Aspects of Jewish Power in the United States (Dearborn, MI: Dearborn Publishing, 1922), 34–40; (4) Rory McVeigh, The Rise of the Ku Klux Klan (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2009), 150; (5) Shawn Lay, Hooded Knights on the Niagara (New York: New York University Press, 1995), chapter 4 (esp. 87); (6) Kathleen M. Blee, Women in the Klan (Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press, 1991), 78–79, 149–151; (7) McVeigh, 64–65; (8) American Standard, April 15, 1925, 172.

ANALYZING THE EVIDENCE 1.
Based on the documents above, identify factors that made the KKK appealing to some Americans in the 1920s. 2. Which groups in source 5 were over- and underrepresented in the Klan? The same historian found that at least 34 percent of local Klan members were German American. Review the Thinking Like a Historian feature in Chapter 21, page 692. Why might Germans have been especially likely to join the Klan in this period? 3. What are the advantages and limitations of source 6? 4. Imagine that Republican president Calvin Coolidge had set up a federal agency to discourage KKK activity (an action he did NOT take). He put you in charge of the effort and gave you a generous budget. How would you have spent the funds? Explain why you believe your strategy might have been effective. 
PUTTING IT ALL TOGETHER
Using your knowledge of Chapter 22, and drawing on evidence from the documents above, write a brief essay explaining how the rise of the KKK in the 1920s reflected larger patterns in American society and politics. 




 PART 7

DOMESTIC AND GLOBAL CHALLENGES, 1890–1945

Harlem in Vogue






































29 15






8 12






10 12












Candidate
Herbert C. Hoover
(Republican)
Alfred E. Smith
(Democrat)


Electoral
Vote


Popular
Vote


Percent of
Popular Vote




21,391,993


58.2




15,016,169


40.9


 MAP 22.2 The Presidential Election of 1928 Historians still debate the extent to which 1928 was a critical election — an election that produced a significant realignment in voting behavior. Although Republican Herbert Hoover swept the popular and the electoral votes, Democrat Alfred E. Smith won majorities not only in the South, his party’s traditional stronghold, but also in Rhode Island, Massachusetts, and (although it is not evident on this map) all of the large cities of the North and Midwest. In subsequent elections, the Democrats won even more votes among African Americans and European ethnic groups and, until 1980, were the nation’s dominant political party.

 southern Protestants refused to vote for a Catholic, Hoover carried five ex-Confederate states, breaking the Democratic “Solid South” for the first time since Reconstruction. Smith, though, carried industrialized Massachusetts and Rhode Island as well as the nation’s twelve largest cities, suggesting that urban voters were moving into the Democrats’ camp.

Intellectual Modernism
 The horrors of World War I prompted many intellectuals to question long-standing assumptions about civilization, progress, and the alleged superiority of Western cultures over so-called primitive ways of life. In the United States, these questions contributed to struggles between modernity and tradition, reflected not only in politics but also in art and literature. Some of these intellectual movements had their roots in the devastation of Europe; others — such as the Harlem Renaissance — emerged from social upheavals the Great War had wrought at home.

 The Great Migration tripled New York’s black population in the decade after 1910. Harlem stood as “the symbol of liberty and the Promised Land to Negroes everywhere,” as one minister put it. Talented African Americans flocked to the district, where they created bold new art forms and asserted ties to Africa.

Black Writers and Artists Poet Langston Hughes
 captured the upbeat spirit of the Harlem Renaissance when he asserted, “I am a Negro — and beautiful.” Other writers and artists also championed race pride. Claude McKay and Jean Toomer represented in fiction what philosopher Alain Locke called, in an influential 1925 book, The New Negro. Painter Jacob Lawrence, who had grown up in crowded tenement districts of the urban North, used bold shapes and vivid colors to portray the daily life, aspirations, and suppressed anger of African Americans. No one embodied the energy and optimism of the Harlem Renaissance more than Zora Neale Hurston. Born in the prosperous black community of Eatonville, Florida, Hurston had been surrounded as a child by examples of achievement, though she struggled later with poverty and isolation. In contrast to some other black thinkers, Hurston believed African American culture could be understood without heavy emphasis on the impact of white oppression. After enrolling at Barnard College and studying with anthropologist Franz Boas, Hurston traveled through the South and the Caribbean for a decade, documenting folklore, songs, and religious beliefs. She incorporated this material into her short stories and novels, celebrating the humor and spiritual strength of ordinary black men and women. Like other work of the Harlem Renaissance, Hurston’s stories and novels sought to articulate what it meant, as black intellectual W. E. B. Du Bois wrote, “to be both a Negro and an American.” Jazz To millions of Americans, the most famous product of the Harlem Renaissance was jazz. Though the origins of the word are unclear, many historians believe it was a slang term for sex — an etymology that makes sense, given the music’s early association with urban vice districts. As a musical form, jazz coalesced in New Orleans and other parts of the South before World War I. Borrowing from blues, ragtime, and other popular forms, jazz musicians developed an ensemble style in which performers, keeping a rapid ragtime beat, improvised around a basic melodic line. The majority of early jazz musicians were black, but white

 CHAPTER 22

Cultural Conflict, Bubble, and Bust, 1919–1932




Archibald Motley, Blues, 1929
 Painter Archibald Motley (1891–1981) was born in New Orleans but arrived in Chicago as a small child, when his family — like thousands of other African Americans — moved north in search of opportunity. Motley was able to study at the Art Institute of Chicago and by the 1920s also showed his work in New York City. Many of his paintings depicted life in the predominantly African American neighborhood on Chicago’s South Side that was widely known as the Black Belt. This piece, Blues, was painted when Motley was living in Paris. It shows the powerful impact jazz had on European listeners. Art Institute of Chicago.

 performers, some of whom had more formal training, injected elements of European concert music. In the 1920s, as jazz spread nationwide, musicians developed its signature mode, the improvised solo. The key figure in this development was trumpeter Louis Armstrong. A native of New Orleans, Armstrong learned his craft playing in the saloons and brothels of the city’s vice district. Like tens of thousands of other African Americans he moved north, settling in Chicago in 1922. Armstrong showed an inexhaustible capacity for melodic invention, and his dazzling solos inspired other musicians. By the late 1920s, soloists became the celebrities of jazz, thrilling audiences with their improvisational skill. As jazz spread, it followed the routes of the Great Migration from the South to northern and midwestern cities, where it met consumers primed to receive it. Most cities had plentiful dance halls where jazz could be featured. Radio also helped popularize jazz, with the emerging record industry marketing the latest tunes. As white listeners flocked to ballrooms and clubs to hear Duke Ellington and other stars, Harlem became the hub of this commercially lucrative jazz. Those who hailed “primitive” black music rarely suspended their racial condescension: visiting a mixed-race club became known as “slumming.” The recording industry soon developed race records specifically aimed at urban working-class blacks. The breakthrough came in 1920, when Otto

K. E.
Heinemann, a producer who sold immigrant records in Yiddish, Swedish, and other languages, recorded singer Mamie Smith performing “Crazy Blues.” This smash hit prompted big recording labels like Columbia and Paramount to copy Heinemann’s approach. Yet, while its marketing reflected the segregation of American society, jazz brought black music to the center stage of American culture. It became the era’s signature music, so much so that novelist F. Scott Fitzgerald dubbed the 1920s the “Jazz Age.” 
 Marcus Garvey and the UNIA Harlem’s creative energy generated broad political aspirations. The Harlem-based Universal Negro Improvement Association (UNIA), led by charismatic Jamaican-born Marcus Garvey, arose in the 1920s to mobilize African American workers and champion black separatism. Garvey urged followers to move to Africa, arguing that people of African descent would never be treated justly in white-run countries. The UNIA soon claimed four million followers, including many EXPLAIN recent migrants to northern cit- CONSEQUENCES ies. It published a newspaper, How did the Great MigraNegro World, and solicited funds tion lead to flourishing for the Black Star steamship com- African American culture, politics, and intellectual pany, which Garvey created as an life, and what form did enterprise that would foster trade these activities take? with the West Indies and carry



 PART 7

DOMESTIC AND GLOBAL CHALLENGES, 1890–1945

 that had sought representation at the Versailles treaty table, protests against U.S. occupation of Haiti, and modernist experiments in literature and the arts. One African American historian wrote in 1927, “The grandiose schemes of Marcus Garvey gave to the race a consciousness such as it had never possessed before. The dream of a united Africa, not less than a trip to France, challenged the imagination.”

Critiquing American Life
 Paralleling the defiant creativity of Harlem, other artists and intellectuals of the 1920s raised voices of dissent. Some had endured firsthand the shock of World War I, an experience so searing that American writer Gertrude Stein dubbed those who survived it the Lost Generation. Novelist John Dos Passos railed at the obscenity of “Mr. Wilson’s war” in The Three Soldiers (1921). Ernest Hemingway’s novel A Farewell to Arms (1929) portrayed war’s futility and dehumanizing consequences. Augusta Fells Savage, African American Sculptor Born in Florida in 1892, Augusta Fells Savage arrived in New York in 1921 to study and remained to take part in the Harlem Renaissance. Widowed at a young age and struggling to support her parents and young daughter, Savage faced both racism and poverty. Much of her work has been lost because she sculpted in clay and could not afford to cast in bronze. Savage began to speak out for racial justice after she was denied, on the basis of her race, a fellowship to study in Paris. In 1923, she married a close associate of UNIA leader Marcus Garvey. Augusta Savage with her sculpture Realization, c. 1938/Andrew Herman, photographer. Federal Art Project, Photographic Division collection, Archives of American Art/Smithsonian Institution.

 American blacks to Africa. But the UNIA declined as quickly as it had risen. In 1925, Garvey was imprisoned for mail fraud because of his solicitations for the Black Star Line. President Coolidge commuted his sentence but ordered his deportation to Jamaica. Without Garvey’s leadership, the movement collapsed. However, the UNIA left a legacy of activism, especially among the working class. Garvey and his followers represented an emerging pan-Africanism. They argued that people of African UNDERSTAND descent, in all parts of the world, POINTS OF VIEW had a common destiny and should What criticisms of maincooperate in political action. Sevstream culture did eral developments contributed to modernist American this ideal: black men’s military writers offer in the service in Europe during World 1920s? War I, the Pan-African Congress

UNIA
Parade in Harlem, Early 1920s This photo, taken at 138th Street in Harlem, shows the collective pride fostered by Marcus Garvey’s Universal Negro Improvement Association. What types of people do you see in the crowd? How are they dressed? Note the slogan carried by a rider in the automobile: “The New Negro Has No Fear.” Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture, New York Public Library. 
 CHAPTER 22

 Other writers also explored the dark side of the human psyche. In such dramas as Desire Under the Elms (1924), playwright Eugene O’Neill depicted characters driven by raw, ungovernable sexual impulses. O’Neill first made his mark with The Emperor Jones (1920), a popular Broadway drama about a black dictator driven from power by his people. Appealing to Americans’ fascination with Haiti, the play offered an ambiguous message: its black protagonist was played not by the customary white actors made up in blackface, but by African Americans who won acclaim for their performances. W. E. B. Du Bois called it “a splendid tragedy.” But others were dissatisfied with the play’s primitivism; one actor who played Emperor Jones altered the script to omit offensive racial epithets. The white crowds who made The Emperor Jones a hit, like those who flocked to Harlem’s jazz clubs, indulged a problematic fascination with “primitive” sexuality. In a decade of conflict between traditional and modern worldviews, many writers exposed what they saw as the hypocrisy of small-town and rural life (American Voices, p. 722.) The most savage critic of conformity was Sinclair Lewis, whose novel Babbitt (1922) depicted the disillusionment of an ordinary small-town salesman. Babbitt was widely denounced as un-American; Elmer Gantry (1927), a satire about a greedy evangelical minister on the make, provoked even greater outrage. But critics found Lewis’s work superb, and in 1930 he became the first American to win the Nobel Prize for literature. Even more famous was F. Scott Fitzgerald’s The Great Gatsby (1925), which offered a scathing indictment of Americans’ mindless pursuit of pleasure and material wealth.

From Boom to Bust
 Spurred by rapid expansion during the war, American business thrived in the 1920s. Corporations expanded more and more into overseas markets, while at home a national consumer culture emphasized leisure and fun. But some sectors of the economy, notably agriculture, never recovered from a sharp recession in the wake of World War I. Meanwhile, close observers worried over the rapid economic growth and easy credit that fueled the Roaring Twenties. Their fears proved well founded: the “Roar” ended in the Great Depression.

The Postwar Economy
 Immediately after World War I, the United States experienced a series of economic shocks. They began with rampant inflation, as prices jumped by one-third in

Cultural Conflict, Bubble, and Bust, 1919–1932


 1919 alone. Then came a two-year recession that raised unemployment to 10 percent. Finally, the economy began to grow smoothly, and more Americans began to benefit. Between 1922 and 1929, national per capita income rose an impressive 24 percent. Large-scale corporations continued to replace small business in many sectors of the economy. By 1929, through successive waves of consolidation, the two hundred largest businesses had come to control almost half of the country’s nonbanking corporate wealth. The greatest number of mergers occurred in rising industries such as chemicals (with DuPont in the lead) and electrical appliances (General Electric). At the same time, mergers between Wall Street banks enhanced New York City’s position as the financial center of the nation and increasingly the world. Aided by Washington’s dollar diplomats, U.S. companies exercised growing global power. Seeking cheaper livestock, giant American meat-packers opened plants in Argentina; the United Fruit Company developed plantations in Costa Rica, Honduras, and Guatemala; General Electric set up production facilities in Latin America, Asia, and Australia. Despite the boom, the U.S. economy had areas of significant weakness throughout the 1920s. Agriculture, which still employed one-fourth of all American workers, never fully recovered from the postwar recession. Once Europe’s economy revived, its farmers flooded world markets with grain and other farm products, causing agricultural prices to fall. Other industries, including coal and textiles, languished for similar reasons. As a consequence, many rural Americans shared little of the decade’s prosperity. The bottom 40 percent of American families earned an average annual income of only $725 (about $9,100 today). Many, especially rural tenants and sharecroppers, languished in poverty and malnutrition.

Consumer Culture
 In middle-class homes, Americans of the 1920s sat down to a breakfast of Kellogg’s corn flakes before getting into Ford Model Ts to work or shop at Safeway. On weekends, they might head to the local theater to see the newest Charlie Chaplin film. By 1929, electric refrigerators and vacuum cleaners came into use in affluent homes; 40 percent of American households owned a radio. The advertising industry reached new levels of ambition and sophistication, entering what one historian calls the era of the “aggressive hard sell.” The 1920s gave birth, for example, to fashion modeling and style consulting. “Sell them their dreams,” one radio announcer urged advertisers in 1923. “People



AMERICAN VOICES

Urban Writers Describe
Small-Town America


 In the early twentieth century, the United States was becoming an urban society. By 1920, life outside the metropolis seemed sufficiently remarkable to warrant sociological investigation — or at least, city people thought so. Presented here are three views of rural and small-town America, all published during the 1920s. Though cities had become the wellspring of American intellectual life, urban writers juxtaposed their own experiences with those of people they thought of as living in “Middletown, U.S.A.”

Sinclair Lewis


Main Street
 In his novel Main Street (1920), Sinclair Lewis portrayed the fictional midwestern town of Gopher Prairie. In the excerpts below, Lewis’s narrator describes the reactions of young, urban Carol Kennicott, wife of the town’s new doctor, and Bea Sorenson, a Swedish American farm girl.

 When Carol had walked for thirty-two minutes she had completely covered the town, east and west, north and south; and she stood at the corner of Main Street and Washington Avenue and despaired. Main Street with its two-story brick shops, its storyand-a-half wooden residences, its muddy expanse from concrete walk to walk, its huddle of Fords and lumberwagons, was too small to absorb her. The broad, straight, unenticing gashes of the streets let in the grasping prairie on every side. She realized the vastness and the emptiness of the land. The skeleton iron windmill on the farm a few blocks away, at the north end of Main Street, was like the ribs of a dead cow. She thought of the coming of the Northern winter, when the unprotected houses would crouch together in terror of storms galloping out of that wild waste. They were so small and weak, the little brown houses. They were shelters for sparrows. . . . She wanted to run, fleeing from the encroaching prairie, demanding the security of a great city. Her dreams of creating a beautiful town were ludicrous. Oozing out from every drab wall, she felt a forbidding spirit which she could never conquer. She trailed down the street on one side, back on the other, glancing into the cross streets. It was a private Seeing Main Street tour. She was within ten minutes beholding not only the heart of a place called Gopher Prairie, but ten thousand towns from Albany to San Diego. Dyer’s Drug Store, a corner building of regular and unreal blocks of artificial stone. Inside the store, a greasy marble soda-fountain with an electric lamp of red and green and curdled-yellow mosaic shade. Pawed-over

 heaps of toothbrushes and combs and packages of shaving-soap. Shelves of soap-cartons, teething-rings, garden-seeds, and patent medicines in yellow packages — nostrums for consumption, for “women’s diseases” — notorious mixtures of opium and alcohol, in the very shop to which her husband sent patients for the filling of prescriptions. The train which brought Carol to Gopher Prairie also brought Miss Bea Sorenson. Miss Bea was a stalwart, corn-colored, laughing young woman, and she was bored by farm-work. She desired the excitements of city-life, and the way to enjoy city-life was, she had decided, to “go get a yob as a hired girl in Gopher Prairie.” . . . Bea had never before been in a town larger than Scandia Crossing, which has sixty-seven inhabitants. As she marched up the street she was meditating that it didn’t hardly seem like it was possible there could be so many folks all in one place at the same time. My! It would take years to get acquainted with them all. And swell people, too! A fine big gentleman in a new pink shirt with a diamond, and not no washed-out blue denim working-shirt. A lovely lady in a longery dress (but it must be an awful hard dress to wash). And the stores! . . . A drug store with a soda fountain that was just huge, awful long, and all lovely marble . . . and the soda spouts, they were silver, and they came right out of the bottom of the lamp-stand! Behind the fountain there were glass shelves, and bottles of new kinds of soft drinks, that nobody ever heard of. Suppose a fella took you there! Anzia Yezierska

Bread Givers
 A child of Jewish immigrants from Eastern Europe, Anzia Yezierska grew up on the Lower East Side of New York City. In her autobiographical novel Bread Givers (1925), Yezierska described her arrival in the Ohio town where she attended college.

 Before this, New York was all of America to me. But now I came to a town of quiet streets, shaded with green trees. No crowds, no tenements. No hurrying noise to beat the race of the hours. Only a leisured quietness whispered in the air: Peace. . . . Each house had its own green grass in front, its own free space all around, and it faced the street with the calm security of being owned for generations, and not rented by the month from a landlord. In the early twilight, it was like a picture out of fairyland to see people sitting on their porches, lazily swinging in their hammocks, or watering their own growing flowers. So these are the real Americans, I thought, thrilled by the lean, straight bearing of the passers-by. They had none of that terrible fight for bread and rent that I always saw in the New York people’s eyes. . . . All the young people I had ever seen were shut up in factories. But here were young girls and young men enjoying life, free from the worry for a living. . . . The spick-and-span cleanliness of these people! It smelled from them, the soap and the bathing. Their fingernails so white and pink. . . . What a feast of happenings each day of college was to those other students. Societies, dances, letters from home, packages of food, midnight spreads and even birthday parties. I never knew that there were people glad enough of life to celebrate the day they were born. Source: From Bread Givers by Anzia Yezierska. Copyright © 1970 by Louise Levitas Henriksen. Reprinted by permission of Persea Books, Inc., New York. All rights reserved.

Robert S. Lynd and Helen Merrell Lynd


 locally are bought on time payment, and a working man earning $35.00 a week frequently plans to use one week’s pay each month as payment for his car. The automobile has apparently unsettled the habit of careful saving for some families. . . . “I’ll go without food before I’ll see us give up the car,” said one woman emphatically. . . . Many families feel that an automobile is justified as an agency holding the family group together. . . . [But] the fact that 348 boys and 382 girls in the three upper years of the high school placed “use of the automobile” fifth and fourth respectively in a list of twelve possible sources of disagreement between them and their parents suggests that this may be an increasing decentralizing agent. . . . If the automobile touches the rest of Middletown’s living at many points, it has revolutionized its leisure . . . making leisure-time enjoyment a regularly expected part of every day and week rather than an occasional event. . . . The frequency of movie attendance of high school boys and girls is about equal, business class families tend to go more often than do working class families, and children of both groups attend more often without their parents than do all the individuals or combinations of family members put together. . . . It is probable that time formerly spent in lodges, saloons, and unions is now being spent in part at the movies, at least occasionally with other members of the family. Like the automobile and radio, the movies [break] up leisure time into an individual, family, or small group affair. Source: Excerpt from Middletown: A Study in American Culture, by Robert S. Lynd and Helen M. Lynd. Copyright © 1929 by Harcourt, Inc. and renewed 1957 by Robert S. and Helen M. Lynd. Reprinted by permission of Houghton Mifflin Harcourt Publishing Company. All rights reserved.

Middletown
 In 1929, sociologists Robert S. Lynd and Helen Merrell Lynd published Middletown, a study of life in a small midwestern city. Middletown was not a single community but a composite of several communities studied by the Lynds.

 The first real automobile appeared in Middletown in 1900. . . . At the close of 1923 there were 6,221 passenger cars in the city, one for every 6.1 persons, or roughly two for every three families. . . . As, at the turn of the century, business class people began to feel apologetic if they did not have a telephone, so ownership of an automobile has now reached the point of being an accepted essential of normal living. . . . According to an officer of a Middletown automobile financing company, 75 to 90 percent of the cars purchased

QUESTIONS FOR ANALYSIS 1.
What attitudes toward the small town and big city does Main Street represent? Why do you think Lewis includes views as different as Carol’s and Bea’s? 2. How does the urban experience of Yezierska’s narrator shape her reaction to life in an Ohio town? How might small-town residents have reacted to her description of them as “the real Americans”? How might Lewis have responded to Yezierska’s description? 3. How do the two novelists (Lewis and Yezierska) differ from the sociologists (the Lynds) in the issues they emphasize, and in their tone and point of view? What features of small-town life does each text emphasize? 




 PART 7

DOMESTIC AND GLOBAL CHALLENGES, 1890–1945

American Companies Abroad
 United Fruit was one of the many American companies that found opportunities for investment in South America in the 1920s and that introduced tropical foods to the United States. The company used elaborate and informative color advertisements to sell its products. Bananas were sufficiently exotic that the ads explained to consumers how to tell when bananas were ripe and how to store them (“Never place them in the ice-box”). John W. Hartman Center/Duke University Special Collections Library.

 don’t buy things to have things. . . . They buy hope — hope of what your merchandise will do for them.” In practice, participation in consumer culture was as contested as the era’s politics. It was no accident that white mobs in the Tulsa race riot plundered radios and phonograph players from prosperous African American homes: the message was that whites deserved such items and blacks did not. But neither prosperity nor poverty was limited by race. Surrounded by exhortations to indulge in luxuries, millions of working-class Americans barely squeaked by, with wives and mothers often working to pay for basic necessities. In times of crisis, some families sold their furniture, starting with pianos and phonographs and continuing, if necessary, to dining tables and beds. In the Los Angeles suburb of South Gate, white working-class men secured jobs in the steel and automobile industries, but prices were

 high and families often found it difficult to make ends meet. Self-help was the watchword as families bartered with neighbors and used their yards to raise vegetables, rabbits, and chickens. The lure of consumer culture created friction. Wives resented husbands who spent all their discretionary cash at the ballpark. Generational conflicts emerged, especially when wage-earning children challenged the expectation that their pay should go “all to mother.” In St. Louis, a Czech-born woman was exasperated when her son and daughter stopped contributing to rent and food and pooled their wages to buy a car. In Los Angeles, one fifteen-year-old girl spent her summer earning $2 a day at a local factory. Planning to enroll in business school, she spent $75 on dressy shoes and “a black coat with a red fox collar.” Her brother reported that “Mom is angry at her for ‘squandering’ so much money.”

 CHAPTER 22

 Many poor and affluent families shared one thing in common: they stretched their incomes, small or large, through new forms of borrowing such as auto loans and installment plans. “Buy now, pay later,” said the ads, and millions did. Anyone, no matter how rich, could get into debt, but consumer credit was particularly perilous for those living on the economic margins. In Chicago, one Lithuanian man described his neighbor’s situation: “She ain’t got no money. Sure she buys on credit, clothes for the children and everything.” Such borrowing turned out to be a factor in the bust of 1929.

 The Automobile No possession proved more popular than the automobile, a showpiece of modern consumer capitalism that revolutionized American life. Car sales played a major role in the decade’s economic boom: in one year, 1929, Americans spent $2.58 billion on automobiles. By the end of the decade, they owned 23 million cars — about 80 percent of the world’s automobiles — or an average of one for every six people. The auto industry’s exuberant expansion rippled through the economy, with both positive and negative results. It stimulated steel, petroleum, chemical, rubber, and glass production and, directly or indirectly, created 3.7 million jobs. Highway construction became

Cultural Conflict, Bubble, and Bust, 1919–1932




 a billion-dollar-a-year enterprise, PLACE EVENTS financed by federal subsidies and IN CONTEXT state gasoline taxes. Car owner- How did the radio, autoship spurred urban sprawl and, in mobile, and Hollywood 1924, the first suburban shopping movies exemplify the center: Country Club Plaza out- opportunities and the side Kansas City, Missouri. But risks of 1920s consumer cars were expensive, and most culture? Americans bought them on credit. This created risks not only for buyers but for the whole economy. Borrowers who could not pay off car loans lost their entire investment in the vehicle; if they defaulted, banks were left holding unpaid loans. Amid the boom of the 1920s, however, few worried about this result. Cars changed the way Americans spent their leisure time, as proud drivers took their machines on the road. An infrastructure of gas stations, motels, and drive-in restaurants soon catered to drivers. Railroad travel faltered. The American Automobile Association, founded in 1902, estimated that by 1929 almost a third of the population took vacations by car. As early as 1923, Colorado had 247 autocamps. “I had a few days after I got my wheat cut,” reported one Kansas farmer, “so I just loaded my family . . . and lit out.” An elite Californian complained that automobile travel was no

Automobiles at Jacksonville Beach, Florida, 1923
 The automobile transformed Americans’ leisure pursuits. As proud car owners took to the road in ever-larger numbers, the “vacation” became a summer staple. Auto travel created a booming business in gas stations, roadside motels, campgrounds, and sightseeing destinations. A Florida vacation — once reserved for wealthy northeasterners who had traveled to Miami’s exclusive hotels by first-class rail car — became an attainable luxury for middle-class and even some working-class families. © Curt Teich Postcard Archives, Lake County Museum.



 PART 7

DOMESTIC AND GLOBAL CHALLENGES, 1890–1945

Charlie Chaplin and Jackie Coogan
 Charlie Chaplin (left) and Jackie Coogan starred together in The Kid (1921), a silent comedy that also included sentimental and dramatic moments, promising viewers “a smile . . . and perhaps a tear.” Chaplin, born in London in 1889, moved to the United States in 1912 and over the next two decades reigned as one of Hollywood’s most famous silent film stars. In 1919, he joined with D. W. Griffith, Mary Pickford, and other American directors and stars to create the independent studio United Artists. The Kid made the Los Angeles–born Coogan — discovered by Chaplin on the vaudeville stage — into America’s first child star. Library of Congress.

 longer “aristocratic.” “The clerks and their wives and sweethearts,” observed a reporter, “driving through the Wisconsin lake country, camping at Niagara, scattering tin cans and pop bottles over the Rockies, made those places taboo for bankers.”

 Hollywood Movies formed a second centerpiece of consumer culture. In the 1910s, the moviemaking industry had begun moving to southern California to take advantage of cheap land, sunshine, and varied scenery within easy reach. The large studios — United Artists, Paramount, and Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer — were run mainly by Eastern European Jewish immigrants like Adolph Zukor, who arrived from Hungary in the 1880s. Starting with fur sales, Zukor and a partner then set up five-cent theaters in Manhattan. “I spent a good

 deal of time watching the faces of the audience,” Zukor recalled. “With a little experience I could see, hear, and ‘feel’ the reaction to each melodrama and comedy.” Founding Paramount Pictures, Zukor signed emerging stars and produced successful feature-length films. By 1920, Hollywood reigned as the world’s movie capital, producing nearly 90 percent of all films. Large, ornate movie palaces attracted both middle-class and working-class audiences. Idols such as Rudolph Valentino, Mary Pickford, and Douglas Fairbanks set national trends in style. Thousands of young women followed the lead of actress Clara Bow, Hollywood’s famous flapper, who flaunted her boyish figure. Decked out in knee-length skirts, flappers shocked the older generation by smoking and wearing makeup. Flappers represented only a tiny minority of women, but thanks to the movies and advertising, they became influential symbols of women’s sexual and social emancipation. In cities, young immigrant women eagerly bought makeup and the latest flapper fashions and went dancing to jazz. Jazz stars helped popularize the style among working-class African Americans. Mexican American teenagers joined the trend, though they usually found themselves under the watchful eyes of la dueña, the chaperone. Politicians quickly grasped the publicity value of American radio and film to foreign relations. In 1919, with government support, General Electric spearheaded the creation of Radio Corporation of America (RCA) to expand U.S. presence in foreign radio markets. RCA — which had a federal appointee on its board of directors — emerged as a major provider of radio transmission in Latin America and East Asia. Meanwhile, by 1925, American films made up 95 percent of the movies screened in Britain, 80 percent in Latin America, and 70 percent in France (America Compared, p. 727). The United States was experimenting with what historians call soft power — the exercise of popular cultural influence — as radio and film exports celebrated the American Dream.

The Coming of the Great Depression
 By 1927, strains on the economy began to show. Consumer lending had become the tenth-largest business in the country, topping $7 billion that year. Increasing numbers of Americans bought into the stock market, often with unrealistic expectations. One Yale professor proclaimed that stocks had reached a “permanently high plateau.” Corporate profits were so high that some companies, fully invested in their own operations, plowed excess earnings into the stock

AMERICA C O M PA R E D

Hollywood in Europe


 European film studios struggled after World War I to reach audiences who had fallen in love with American movies. Working-class Europeans, in particular, preferred Hollywood’s offerings to the films produced in Europe. In this 1928 article from a cinematography journal, German expressionist filmmaker Erich Pommer suggested new strategies for expanding an audience for European films. Expressionists, influenced by romanticism and modernism, explored dark themes such as spiritual crisis and insanity. (A famous example of expressionist painting is Edvard Munch’s The Scream.) Pommer worked for American studios and later fled to the United States after the rise of Hitler.

 The towering importance of the American motion picture on the world’s markets cannot be safely explained by the unlimited financial resources at the disposal of the American producers. . . . Its main reason is the mentality of the American picture, which, notwithstanding all attacks and claims to the contrary, apparently comes nearest to the taste of international cinema audiences. . . . The specific and unique element of the American film is the fact of its being absolutely uncomplicated. Being what is called “naïve” it knows no problems. . . . Universal Appeal. It is really preferable to have a picture too light rather than too heavy, because in the latter case there is a danger that the public will not understand the story. This is the worst thing that can happen with a picture. . . . Spectacular Appeal. The international appeal of a picture has its foundation in a story. It is totally independent of the capital invested and of the splendor and luxury used in its production. The fact that in most cases the supers and monumental pictures have proved to be such international successes, does not disprove this claim.

 market. Other market players compounded risk by purchasing on margin. An investor might, for example, spend $20 of his own money and borrow $80 to buy a $100 share of stock, expecting to pay back the loan as the stock rose quickly in value. This worked as long as the economy grew and the stock market climbed. But those conditions did not last. Yet when the stock market fell, in a series of plunges between October 25 and November 13, 1929, few onlookers understood the magnitude of the crisis. Cyclical downturns had been a familiar part of the industrializing economy since the panic of the 1830s; they tended to follow periods of rapid growth and speculation. A sharp recent recession, in 1921, had not

 Such productions always have a simple story of universal appeal, because it is simply impossible to use spiritual thoughts and impressions of the soul in a picture deluxe. The splendour in such production is not merely created for decoration — it is its outstanding purpose. . . . But splendour means show, and a show is always and everywhere easy to understand. . . . Source: Excerpt from “The International Picture: A Lesson on Simplicity” by Erich Pommer from “Film Europe” and “Film America”: Cinema, Commerce and Cultural Exchange 1920–1939, edited by Andrew Higson and Richard Maltby, 1999, ISBN: 978-0-85989-546-0. Used by permission of Exeter University Press.

QUESTIONS FOR ANALYSIS 1.
How does Pommer characterize the attraction of popular American films for European audiences? What does he mean when he calls those films “naïve”? 2. How does Pommer propose to produce German films that will compete with Hollywood? What constraints and challenges did he face? 
 triggered disaster. The market IDENTIFY CAUSES rose again in late 1929 and early What domestic and global 1930, and while a great deal factors helped cause the of money had been lost, most Great Depression? Americans hoped the aftermath of the crash would be brief. In fact, the nation had entered the Great Depression. Over the next four years, industrial production fell 37 percent. Construction plunged 78 percent. Prices for crops and other raw materials, already low, fell by half. By 1932, unemployment had reached a staggering 24 percent (Figure 22.1). A precipitous drop in consumer spending deepened the crisis. Facing hard times and unemployment, Americans cut back dramatically, creating a

 PART 7

DOMESTIC AND GLOBAL CHALLENGES, 1890–1945

24.9
23.6
21.7
20.1




19.0
16.9


 Percent unemployed



17.2


15.9


14.3


14.6


11.7
9.9


8.7


8.5
6.7
5.1




5.2


4.6


5.0
2.4


1.4 1.4






4.7


4.2
3.3


3.2


3.2
1.9


1.8








1.2


1.9




 FIGURE 22.1 Unemployment, 1915–1945 During the 1920s, business prosperity and low rates of immigration resulted in historically low unemployment levels. The Great Depression threw millions of people out of work; by 1933, one in four American workers was unemployed, and the rate remained high until 1941, when the nation mobilized for World War II.

 vicious cycle of falling demand and forfeited loans. In late 1930, several major banks went under, victims of overextended credit and reckless management. The following year, as industrial production slowed, a much larger wave of bank failures occurred, causing an even greater shock. Since the government did not insure bank deposits, accounts in failed banks simply vanished. Some people who had had steady jobs and comfortable savings found themselves broke and out of work. Not all Americans were devastated by the depression; the middle class did not disappear and the rich lived in accustomed luxury. But incomes plummeted even among workers who kept their jobs. Salt Lake City went bankrupt in 1931. Barter systems developed, as barbers traded haircuts for onions and potatoes and laborers worked for payment in eggs or pork. “We do not dare to use even a little soap,” reported one jobless Oregonian, “when it will pay for an extra egg, a few more carrots for our children.” “I would be only too glad to dig ditches to keep my family from going hungry,” wrote a North Carolina man.

 Where did desperate people turn for aid? Their first hope lay in private charity, especially churches and synagogues. But by the winter of 1931, these institutions were overwhelmed, unable to keep pace with the extraordinary need. Only eight states provided even minimal unemployment insurance. There was no public support for the elderly, statistically among the poorest citizens. Few Americans had any retirement savings, and many who had saved watched their accounts erased by failing banks. Even those who were not wiped out had to adapt to depression conditions. Couples delayed marriage and reduced the number of children they conceived. As a result, the marriage rate fell to a historical low, and by 1933 the birthrate dropped from 97 births per 1,000 women to 75. Often the responsibility for birth control fell to women. It was “one of the worst problems of women whose husbands were out of work,” a Californian told a reporter. Campaigns against hiring married women were common, on the theory that available jobs should go to male breadwinners. Three-quarters of the nation’s school districts banned married women

 CHAPTER 22

Cultural Conflict, Bubble, and Bust, 1919–1932


Minnesota Potato Farmers
 The prosperity and consumer pleasures of the 1920s hardly extended to all Americans. This Minnesota family had horses, not a tractor; many of the women’s clothes were probably made by hand. Rural and working-class Americans, who often struggled in the 1920s, found conditions even harsher after 1929. On the other hand, farmers had resources to fall back on that city folks did not: they could grow their own food, and they had long experience in “making do.” Minnesota Historical Society.

 from working as teachers — ignoring the fact that many husbands were less able to earn than ever before. Despite restrictions, female employment increased, as women expanded their financial contributions to their families in hard times. The depression crossed regional boundaries, though its severity varied from place to place. Bank failures clustered heavily in the Midwest and plains, while areas dependent on timber, mining, and other extractive industries suffered catastrophic declines. Although southern states endured less unemployment because of their smaller manufacturing base, farm wages plunged. In many parts of the country, unemployment rates among black men stood at double that of white men; joblessness among African American women was triple that of white women. By 1932, comprehending the magnitude of the crisis, Americans went to the ballot box and decisively rejected the probusiness, antiregulatory policies of the 1920s. A few years earlier, with business booming, politics had been so placid that people chuckled when President Coolidge disappeared on extended fishing trips. Now, Americans wanted bold action in Washington. Faced with the cataclysm of the Great Depression, Americans would transform their government and create a modern welfare state.

SUMMARY
Although involvement in World War I strengthened the United States economically and diplomatically, it left the nation profoundly unsettled. Racial tensions exploded after the war as African Americans pursued new opportunities and asserted their rights. Meanwhile, labor unrest grew as employers cut wages and sought to break unions. Labor’s power declined sharply in the war’s aftermath, while anxieties over radicalism and immigration prompted a nationwide Red Scare. The politics of the 1920s brought a backlash against prewar progressivism. The agenda of women reformers met very limited success. Republican administrations pursued probusiness “normalcy” at home and “dollar diplomacy” abroad. Prohibition and the Scopes trial demonstrated the influence religion could exert on public policy, while rising nativism fueled a resurgent Ku Klux Klan and led to sweeping new restrictions on immigration. Postwar alienation found artistic expression in new forms of modernism, which denounced the dehumanizing effects of war and criticized American materialism and hypocrisy. Spreading throughout the nation 




 PART 7

CHAPTER REVIEW

 from New Orleans, jazz appealed to elite and popular audiences alike. Black artists and intellectuals of the Harlem Renaissance, including many inspired by panAfrican ideas, explored the complexities of African American life. Business thrived and a booming consumer culture, exemplified by the radio, the automobile, and

C H A P T E R


 Hollywood films, created new forms of leisure, influencing daily life and challenging older sexual norms. However, the risky speculation and easy credit of the 1920s undermined the foundations of the economy. After the 1929 crash, these factors, along with a range of interconnected global conditions, plunged the United States into the Great Depression.

R E V I E W


M A K E I T S T I C K
Go to LearningCurve to retain what you’ve read. 
TERMS TO KNOW

 Identify and explain the significance of each term below.

Key Concepts and Events
 Adkins v. Children’s Hospital (p. 707) welfare capitalism (p. 708) Red Scare (p. 708) Palmer raids (p. 709) Sheppard-Towner Federal Maternity and Infancy Act (p. 709) Women’s International League for Peace and Freedom (p. 710) associated state (p. 710) Teapot Dome (p. 710) dollar diplomacy (p. 711) prohibition (p. 712) American Civil Liberties Union (p. 713)

Key People
 Scopes trial (p. 713) National Origins Act (p. 713) Ku Klux Klan (p. 714) Harlem Renaissance (p. 718) jazz (p. 718) Universal Negro Improvement Association (p. 719) pan-Africanism (p. 720) Lost Generation (p. 720) consumer credit (p. 725) Hollywood (p. 726) flapper (p. 726) soft power (p. 726)

A.
Mitchell Palmer (p. 708) Nicola Sacco and Bartolomeo
Vanzetti (p. 709)
Henry Ford (p. 714)
Leo Frank (p. 714)
Zora Neale Hurston (p. 718)
Louis Armstrong (p. 719)
Marcus Garvey (p. 719)
Adolph Zukor (p. 726)


REVIEW QUESTIONS
Answer these questions to demonstrate your understanding of the chapter’s main ideas. 
 1. What was the Republican vision of “normalcy,” and

 how did the Harding and Coolidge administrations seek to realize it?

 2. Along what lines did Americans find themselves

 divided in the 1920s? How were those conflicts expressed in politics? In culture and intellectual life?

 CHAPTER 22

 3. What factors contributed to the economic boom of

 the 1920s and the crash that followed?

THEMATIC UNDERSTANDING
Between 1917 
 and 1945, the “Roaring Twenties” were the only years when the United States did not face a major economic or international crisis. Review the categories

MAKING CONNECTIONS

 of “America in the World,” “Politics and Power,” and “Identity” on the thematic timeline on page 671. In what ways do they suggest that the prosperous 1920s were a politically distinctive era? What continuities do you see in politics and foreign policy?

 Recognize the larger developments and continuities within and across chapters by answering these questions.

ACROSS TIME AND PLACE
The Ku Klux Klan 
 of the Reconstruction era (Chapter 15) emerged in a specific political and social context; while the Klan of the 1920s built on its predecessor, its goals and scope were different. Using material from Chapters 15 and 22, imagine that you are investigating a series of Klan meetings in each era (1870s and 1920s). Where would you conduct your investigation? How might you explain, to the public, the Klan’s membership and activities? How would you compare the two Klans?

MORE TO EXPLORE

CHAPTER REVIEW

 This chapter includes two depictions of people dancing to jazz: the Life magazine cover that opens the chapter (p. 705) and Blues (p. 719) by Archibald John Motley Jr., an African American painter of the Harlem Renaissance. Look at these pictures carefully. Who do you think were the intended audiences for each? What evidence could you point to in support of that conclusion? What messages do you think the Life artist and Motley wanted to convey?

VISUAL EVIDENCE

 Start here to learn more about the events discussed in this chapter.

Lynn Dumenil, The Modern Temper (1995). A
 readable overview of events in the 1920s. David Levering Lewis, When Harlem Was in Vogue (1979). A wonderful account of politics, arts, and culture in the vibrant “Negro capital of the world.” Daniel Okrent, Last Call: The Rise and Fall of Prohibition (2010). A lively recent history of the movement to ban liquor. Martha L. Olney, Buy Now, Pay Later (1991). Explores the rise and impact of consumer credit.

 Mary A. Renda, Taking Haiti (2001). A compelling exploration of U.S. occupation of Haiti and its impact on Haiti and especially the United States. The PBS series American Experience has produced an excellent documentary on the Scopes trial; information and documents are available at pbs.org/wgbh/ amex/monkeytrial/. For a broad view of the 1929 crash and its impact, see pbs.org/wgbh/amex/crash.





 PART 7

CHAPTER REVIEW

 TIMELINE



 Ask yourself why this chapter begins and ends with these dates and then identify the links among related events.

 New Ku Klux Klan founded United States occupies Haiti



 United States occupies Dominican Republic



 Race riot in East St. Louis, Illinois



 Race riot in Chicago Boston police strike Palmer raids Women’s International League for Peace and Freedom founded



Height of Red Scare
 Eighteenth Amendment (prohibition) takes effect Warren Harding wins presidency Eugene O’Neill’s The Emperor Jones



 Race riots in Rosewood, Florida, and Tulsa, Oklahoma Sheppard-Towner Federal Maternity and Infancy Act



 Adkins v. Children’s Hospital President Harding dies Calvin Coolidge assumes presidency Teapot Dome scandal Equal Rights Amendment first introduced in Congress



National Origins Act
 Coolidge wins presidential election against Democrats and La Follette’s Progressive Party First suburban shopping center opens outside Kansas City, Missouri



Coronado Coal Company v. United Mine Workers
 Scopes “monkey trial” Alain Locke’s The New Negro F. Scott Fitzgerald’s The Great Gatsby



 Sacco and Vanzetti executed



 Herbert Hoover wins presidency



 Stock market crashes precipitate Great Depression

 CHAPTER 22

CHAPTER REVIEW

KEY TURNING POINTS:
American politics underwent two shifts in the period covered in this chapter: one in the aftermath of World War I, and another in 1932. What caused each turning point? What factors in American Society, economics, and culture help explain each moment of political change? 




C H A P T E R
EARLY RESPONSES TO THE DEPRESSION, 1929–1932
Enter Herbert Hoover Rising Discontent The 1932 Election 
THE NEW DEAL ARRIVES, 1933–1935
Roosevelt and the First Hundred Days The New Deal Under Attack 
THE SECOND NEW DEAL AND THE REDEFINING OF LIBERALISM, 1935–1938
The Welfare State Comes into Being From Reform to Stalemate 
THE NEW DEAL’S IMPACT ON SOCIETY A
People’s Democracy Reshaping the Environment The New Deal and the Arts The Legacies of the New Deal 


Managing the Great Depression,
Forging the New Deal
1929–1939


I


 n his inaugural address in March 1933, IDENTIFY THE BIG IDEA President Franklin Delano Roosevelt What new roles did the American did not hide the country’s precarious government take on during the condition. “A host of unemployed citizens New Deal, and how did these roles face the grim problem of existence,” he shape the economy and society? said, “and an equally great number toil with little return. Only a foolish optimist can deny the dark realities of the moment.” Roosevelt, his demeanor sincere and purposeful, saw both despair and determination as he looked out over the country. “This nation asks for action, and action now.” From Congress he would request “broad Executive power to wage a war against the emergency, as great as the power that would be given to me if we were in fact invaded by a foreign foe.” With these words, Roosevelt launched a program of federal activism — which he called the New Deal — that would change the nature of American government. The New Deal represented a new form of liberalism, a fresh interpretation of the ideology of individual rights that had long shaped the character of American society and politics. Classical nineteenth-century liberals believed that, to protect those rights, government should be small and relatively weak. However, the “regulatory” liberals of the early twentieth century had safeguarded individual freedom and opportunity by strengthening state and federal control over large businesses and monopolies. New Deal activists went much further: their social-welfare liberalism expanded individual rights to include economic security. Beginning in the 1930s and continuing through the 1960s, they increased the responsibility of the national government for the welfare of ordinary citizens. Their efforts did not go unchallenged. Conservative critics of the New Deal charged that its “big government” programs were paternalistic and dangerous, undermining individual responsibility and constraining personal freedom. This division between the advocates and To see a longer excerpt of Roosevelt’s inaugural the critics of the New Deal address, along with other primary sources from this shaped American politics for period, see Sources for America’s History. the next half century. Before Roosevelt was elected president, between the onset of the depression in 1929 and November 1932, the “dark realities of the moment” wore down American society. Rising unemployment, shuttered businesses, failing banks, and home foreclosures tore at the nation’s social fabric. As crisis piled upon crisis and the federal government’s initiatives under President Hoover proved ineffectual, Americans had to reconsider more than the role of government in economic life: they had to rethink many of the principles of individualism and free enterprise that had guided so much of the nation’s history.

 The New Deal This Federal Arts Project poster from 1936 captured the spirit of the New Deal under

 President Franklin Roosevelt. Roosevelt and other “New Dealers” hoped to get people working again during the depths of the Great Depression, raise their spirits, and help rebuild the national infrastructure. Library of Congress.





 PART 7

DOMESTIC AND GLOBAL CHALLENGES, 1890–1945

Early Responses to the
Depression, 1929–1932
 The American economy collapsed between 1929 and 1932. U.S. gross domestic product fell almost by half, from $103.1 billion to $58 billion. Consumption dropped by 18 percent, construction by 78 percent, and private investment by 88 percent. Nearly 9,000 banks closed their doors, and 100,000 businesses failed. Corporate profits fell from $10 billion to $1 billion. Unemployment rose to 25 percent. Fifteen million people were out of work by 1933, and many who had jobs took wage cuts. “Hoover made a souphound outa me!” sang jobless harvest hands in the Southwest. The depression respected no national boundaries. Germany had preceded the United States into economic contraction in 1928, and its economy, burdened by heavy World War I reparations payments, was brought to its knees by 1929. France, Britain, Argentina, Brazil, Poland, and Canada were hard hit as well (America Compared, p. 737). The legacies of World War I made recovery difficult in two respects. First, Britain’s central bank was in no position to resume its traditional role in managing the international financial system. Second, the war disrupted the international gold standard. The United States and most European nations had tied the value of their currencies to the price of gold, and the amount of gold held in reserves, since the late nineteenth century. This system had worked fairly well for a few decades, but it was vulnerable during economic downturns, when large financiers withdrew their investments and demanded gold payments. The gold standard rendered the international monetary system inflexible at a moment that required great flexibility in global finance.

Enter Herbert Hoover
 President Herbert Hoover and Congress responded to the downturn by drawing on two powerful American traditions. The first was the belief that economic outcomes were the product of individual character. People’s fate was in their own hands, and success went to those who deserved it. The second PLACE EVENTS tradition held that through volunIN CONTEXT tary action, the business commuWhat economic principles nity could right itself and recover guided President Hoover from economic downturns withand Congress in their out relying on government assisresponse to the Great tance. Following these principles, Depression? Hoover asked Americans to

 tighten their belts and work hard. After the stock market crash, he cut federal taxes in an attempt to boost private spending and corporate investment. “Any lack of confidence in the economic future or the strength of business in the United States is foolish,” Hoover assured the country in late 1929. Treasury secretary Andrew Mellon suggested that the downturn would help Americans “work harder” and “live a more moral life.” While many factors caused the Great Depression, Hoover’s adherence to the gold standard was a major reason for its length and severity in the United States. Faced with economic catastrophe, both Britain and Germany abandoned the gold standard in 1931; when they did so, their economies recovered modestly. But the Hoover administration feared that such a move would weaken the value of the dollar. In reality, an inflexible money supply discouraged investment and therefore prevented growth. The Roosevelt administration would ultimately remove the United States from the burdens of the gold standard in 1933. By that time, however, the crisis had achieved catastrophic dimensions. Billions had been lost in business and bank failures, and the economy had stalled completely. Along with their adherence to the gold standard, the Hoover administration and many congressional Republicans believed in another piece of economic orthodoxy that had protected American manufacturing in good economic times but that proved damaging during the downturn: high tariffs (taxes on imported goods designed to encourage American manufacturing). In 1930, Republicans enacted the Smoot-Hawley Tariff. Despite receiving a letter from more than a thousand economists urging him to veto it, Hoover approved the legislation. What served American interests in earlier eras now confounded them. SmootHawley triggered retaliatory tariffs in other countries, which further hindered global trade and led to greater economic contraction throughout the industrialized world. The president recognized that individual initiative, voluntarism, and high tariffs might not be enough, given the depth of the crisis, so he proposed government action as well. He called on state and local governments to provide jobs by investing in public projects. And in 1931, he secured an unprecedented increase of $700 million in federal spending for public works. Hoover’s most innovative program was the Reconstruction Finance Corporation (RFC), which provided federal loans to railroads, banks, and other businesses. But the RFC lent money too cautiously, and by the end of 1932, after a year in operation, it had loaned out only 20 percent of its $1.5 billion in funds.

AMERICA C O M PA R E D
The Great Depression in England and the United States 
 In a 1954 book, Denis Brogan, a professor at Cambridge University in England, looked back at the descent into the Great Depression between 1929 and 1932 and explained the significance of Franklin Roosevelt’s election from an English perspective. The second selection is from an oral history conducted in the 1970s with an ordinary resident of London, who recalled life in the 1930s.

Denis W. Brogan, “From England”


 Gladys Gibson, a Resident of London in the 1930s

 No event . . . has so colored the European view of the United States as “the Depression.” The first news of the crash of 1929 was not ill received. There was not only a marked feeling of Schadenfreude at the snub that destiny had given to the overconfident masters of the new world, but also a widespread belief that the extravagant gambling of the New York market was one of the chief causes of our ills. . . . But as the extent, depth, and duration of the American depression began to be appreciated, as its impact on all the world, especially on the dangerously unstable political and economic status quo of Germany and Austria, became more evident, as the old wound of unemployment was made to bleed more deeply in Britain, the tendency to blame the United States became overwhelming. Gone were the illusions about the “secret of high wages.” If ever found, it had now been lost. American politics was seen as not only sterile but positively immoral and dangerous. . . . American business and its political arm, the Republican Party, had been tried in the balance and found wanting. And it is safe to say that the election of F. D. Roosevelt was welcomed in every country of Europe as good news almost overshadowing the nomination of Adolf Hitler as Chancellor of the German Reich.

 Most of the unemployed were genuinely seeking work. A heavy snowfall was a blessing, when men with broken boots earned a little money by sweeping the streets. The Boroughs [a form of local administration in London] took on unemployed, in strict rotation, for thirteen weeks of unskilled work. It sometimes put a man back in benefit and took him off the hated dole. The situation began to change after Munich, when more men found work. Salvation came with the War, when the despised unemployed became valued workers or serving helpers.

 Like most federal initiatives under Hoover, the RFC was not nearly aggressive enough given the severity of the depression. With federal officials fearing budget deficits and reluctant to interfere with the private market, caution was the order of the day. Few chief executives could have survived the downward economic spiral of 1929–1932, but Hoover’s reluctance to break with the philosophy of limited government and his insistence that recovery was always just around the corner contributed to his unpopularity.

Source: Joseph, Franz M., As Others See Us. © 1959 Princeton University Press, 1987
 renewed PUP. Reprinted by permission of Princeton University Press. Nigel Gray, The Worst of Times: An Oral History of the Great Depression in Britain (Totowa, NJ: Barnes & Noble Books, 1985), 54.

QUESTIONS FOR ANALYSIS 1.
Why would Brogan call the United States “overconfident masters of the new world”? What are his criticisms of U.S. economic policy? 2. How does the testimony of Gladys Gibson about the “hated dole” compare with what you have learned about attitudes in the United States in these years? 
 By 1932, Americans perceived Hoover as insensitive to the depth of the country’s economic suffering. The nation had come a long way since the depressions of the 1870s and 1890s, when no one except the most radical figures, such as Jacob Coxey, called for direct federal aid to the unemployed (Chapter 20). Compared with previous chief executives — and in contrast to his popular image as a “do-nothing” president — Hoover had responded to the national emergency with unprecedented government action. But the nation’s needs



 PART 7

DOMESTIC AND GLOBAL CHALLENGES, 1890–1945

Hooverville
 The depression cast hundreds of thousands of Americans out of their homes. Most found shelter with relatives, but those with little choice had to make do as they could. Encampments such as this one south of downtown Seattle, Washington — places where the homeless crafted makeshift lodging out of whatever materials were at hand — became known as Hoovervilles. The name reflected Americans’ attitudes toward President Hoover, whose popularity plummeted as the depression deepened. University of Washington Libraries, Special Collections, UW2129.

 were even more unprecedented, and Hoover’s programs failed to meet them (Map 23.1).

Rising Discontent
 As the depression deepened, the American vocabulary now included the terms Hoovervilles (shantytowns where people lived in packing crates) and Hoover blankets (newspapers). Bankrupt farmers banded together to resist the bank agents and sheriffs who tried to evict them from their land. To protest low prices for their goods, in the spring of 1932 thousands of midwestern farmers joined the Farmers’ Holiday Association, which cut off supplies to urban areas by barricading roads and dumping milk, vegetables, and other foodstuffs onto the roadways. Agricultural prices were so low that the Farmers’ Holiday Association favored a government-supported farm program.

 In the industrial sector, layoffs and wage cuts led to violent strikes. When coal miners in Harlan County, Kentucky, went on strike over a 10 percent wage cut in 1931, the mine owners called in the state’s National Guard, which crushed the union. A 1932 confrontation between workers and security forces at the Ford Motor Company’s giant River Rouge factory outside Detroit left five workers dead and fifty with serious injuries. A photographer had his camera shot from his hands, and fifteen policemen were clubbed or stoned. Whether on farms or in factories, those who produced the nation’s food and goods had begun to push for a more aggressive response to the nation’s economic troubles. Veterans staged the most publicized — and most tragic — protest. In the summer of 1932, the Bonus Army, a determined group of 15,000 unemployed World War I veterans, hitchhiked to Washington to demand

 CHAPTER 23



Managing the Great Depression, Forging the New Deal, 1929–1939


 MAP 23.1 The Great Depression: Families on Relief Although the Great Depression was a nationwide crisis, some regions were hit harder than others. Economic hardship was widespread in the agricultural-based southern and Appalachian states of the Northeast and Midwest. As the depression worsened in 1931 and 1932, local and state governments, as well as charitable organizations, could not keep up with the demand for relief. After Franklin D. Roosevelt assumed the presidency in 1933, the national government began a massive program of aid through the Federal Emergency Relief Administration (FERA).

 WASH.

VT. MONTANA

N. DAK.

OREGON IDAHO

 WIS.

S. DAK. WYOMING NEBRASKA

NEVADA UTAH

 COLO.

 ARIZONA

KANSAS OKLA.

N. MEX.

 MO.

 ARK.

 MICH.

 immediate payment of pension awards that were due to be paid in 1945. “We were heroes in 1917, but we’re bums now,” one veteran complained bitterly. While their leaders unsuccessfully lobbied Congress, the Bonus Army set up camps near the Capitol building. Hoover called out regular army troops under the command of General Douglas MacArthur, who forcefully evicted the marchers and burned their main encampment to the ground. When newsreel footage showing the U.S. Army attacking and injuring veterans reached movie theaters across the nation, Hoover’s popularity plunged. In another measure of how the country had changed since the 1890s, what Americans had applauded when done to Coxey in 1894 was condemned in 1932.

The 1932 Election
 Despite rising discontent, the national mood was mixed as the 1932 election approached. Many Americans had internalized the ideal of the self-made man and blamed themselves for their economic hardships. Despair, not anger, characterized their mood. Others, out of work for a year or more, perhaps homeless, felt the deeper stirrings of frustration and rage. Regardless of their circumstances, most Americans believed that something altogether new had to be tried — whatever that might be. The Republicans, reluctant to dump an incumbent president, unenthusiastically renominated Hoover. The Democrats turned to New York governor Franklin Delano Roosevelt, whose state had initiated innovative relief and unemployment programs. Roosevelt, born into a wealthy New York family, was a distant cousin to former president Theodore

E


W


LA. FLA.



N


 GA.

Percentage of Families
 on Relief, 1933 Below 8 percent 8–15 percent Over 15 percent

R.I.
CONN. N.J. DEL. MD.

IND. OHIO W. VA. VA. KY. N.C. TENN. S.C.

MISS. ALA. TEXAS

N.H.
 MASS.

N.Y.
 PA.

IOWA ILL.

 CALIF.

 ME.

 MINN.



S


 500 miles

 500 kilometers

 Roosevelt, whose career he emuUNDERSTAND lated. After attending Harvard POINTS OF VIEW College and Columbia University, What did the depression Franklin Roosevelt served as look like when seen from assistant secretary of the navy the vantage of ordinary during World War I (as Theodore Americans? Roosevelt had done before the War of 1898). Then, in 1921, a crippling attack of polio left both of his legs permanently paralyzed. Supported by his wife, Eleanor, he slowly returned to public life and campaigned successfully for the governorship of New York in 1928 and again in 1930. Running for the presidency in 1932, Roosevelt pledged vigorous action but gave no indication what that action might be, arguing simply that “the country needs and, unless I mistake its temper, the country demands bold, persistent experimentation.” He won easily, receiving 22.8 million votes to Hoover’s 15.7 million. Elected in November, Roosevelt would not begin his presidency until March 1933. (The Twentieth Amendment, ratified in 1933, set subsequent inaugurations for January 20.) Meanwhile, Americans suffered through the worst winter of the depression. Unemployment continued to climb, and in three major industrial cities in Ohio, it shot to staggering levels: 50 percent in Cleveland, 60 percent in Akron, and 80 percent in Toledo. Private charities and public relief agencies reached only a fraction of the needy. The nation’s banking system was so close to collapse that many state governors closed banks temporarily to avoid further withdrawals. Several states were approaching bankruptcy, their tax revenues too low to pay for basic services. By March 1933, the nation had hit rock bottom.



 PART 7

DOMESTIC AND GLOBAL CHALLENGES, 1890–1945

The New Deal Arrives,
1933–1935
 The ideological differences between Herbert Hoover and Franklin Roosevelt were not vast. Both leaders wished to maintain the nation’s economic institutions and social values, to save capitalism while easing its worst downturns. Both believed in a balanced government budget and extolled the values of hard work, cooperation, and sacrifice. But Roosevelt’s personal charm, political savvy, and willingness to experiment made him far more effective and more popular than Hoover. Most Americans felt a kinship with their new president, calling him simply FDR. His New Deal would put people to work and restore hope for the nation’s future.

Roosevelt and the First Hundred Days
 A wealthy patrician, Roosevelt was an unlikely figure to inspire millions of ordinary Americans. But his close rapport with the American people was critical to his political success. More than 450,000 letters poured into the EXPLAIN White House in the week after his CONSEQUENCES inauguration. The president’s What specific new roles masterful use of the new medium did the American governof radio, especially his evening ment take up as a result of the legislation passed radio addresses to the American during the first hundred public known as fireside chats, days? made him an intimate presence in people’s lives. Thousands of citizens felt a personal relationship with FDR, saying, “He gave me a job” or “He saved my home” (American Voices, p. 742). Citing the national economic emergency, Roosevelt further expanded the presidential powers that Theodore Roosevelt and Woodrow Wilson had increased previously. To draft legislation and policy, he relied heavily on financier Bernard Baruch and a “Brains Trust” of professors from Columbia, Harvard, and other leading universities. Roosevelt also turned to his talented cabinet, which included Harold L. Ickes, secretary of the interior; Frances Perkins at the Labor Department; Henry A. Wallace at Agriculture; and Henry Morgenthau Jr., secretary of the treasury. These intellectuals and administrators attracted hundreds of highly qualified recruits to Washington. Inspired by New Deal idealism, many of them would devote their lives to public service and the principles of social-welfare liberalism.

 Roosevelt could have done little, however, without a sympathetic Congress. The 1932 election had swept Democratic majorities into both the House and Senate, giving the new president the lawmaking allies he needed. The first months of FDR’s administration produced a whirlwind of activity on Capitol Hill. In a legendary session, known as the Hundred Days, Congress enacted fifteen major bills that focused primarily on four problems: banking failures, agricultural overproduction, the business slump, and soaring unemployment. Derided by some as an “alphabet soup” because of their many abbreviations (CCC, WPA, AAA, etc.), the new policies and agencies were more than bureaucracies: they represented the emergence of a new American state.

 Banking Reform The weak banking system hobbled the entire economy, curtailing consumer spending and business investment. Widespread bank failures had reduced the savings of nearly nine million families, and panicked account holders raced to withdraw their funds. On March 5, 1933, the day after his inauguration, FDR declared a national “bank holiday” — closing all the banks — and called Congress into special session. Four days later, Congress passed the Emergency Banking Act, which permitted banks to reopen if a Treasury Department inspection showed that they had sufficient cash reserves. In his first Sunday night fireside chat, to a radio audience of sixty million, the president reassured citizens that their money was safe. When the banks reopened on March 13, calm prevailed and deposits exceeded withdrawals, restoring stability to the nation’s basic financial institutions. “Capitalism was saved in eight days,” quipped Roosevelt’s advisor Raymond Moley. Four thousand banks had collapsed in the months prior to Roosevelt’s inauguration; only sixtyone closed their doors in all of 1934 (Table 23.1). A second banking law, the Glass-Steagall Act, further restored public confidence by creating the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC), which insured deposits up to $2,500 (and now insures them up to $250,000). The act also prohibited banks from making risky, unsecured investments with the deposits of ordinary people. And in a profoundly important economic and symbolic gesture, Roosevelt removed the U.S. Treasury from the gold standard in June 1933, which allowed the Federal Reserve to lower interest rates; since 1931, it had been raising rates, which had only deepened the downturn. Saving the banks and leaving the gold standard led to a mild and, it would turn out, brief recovery.

 CHAPTER 23

Managing the Great Depression, Forging the New Deal, 1929–1939


 TABLE 23.1 American Banks and Bank Failures, 1920–1940 Year

Total Number of Banks


 Total Assets ($ billion)

Bank Failures




30,909


53.1






25,568


72.3






22,242


70.1


2,294




14,771


51.4


4,004




15,913


55.9






15,076


79.7




SOURCE:
Historical Statistics of the United States: Colonial Times to 1970 (Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1975), 1019, 1038–1039. 
Agriculture and Manufacturing Roosevelt and the
 New Deal Congress next turned to agriculture and manufacturing. In those sectors, a seeming paradox was evident: the depression led to overproduction in agriculture and underproduction in manufacturing. Reversing both problematic trends was critical. The Agricultural Adjustment Act (AAA) began direct governmental regulation of the farm economy for the first time. To solve the problem of overproduction, which lowered prices, the AAA provided cash subsidies to farmers who cut production of seven major commodities: wheat, cotton, corn, hogs, rice, tobacco, and dairy products. Policymakers hoped that farm prices would rise as production fell. By dumping cash in farmers’ hands, the AAA briefly stabilized the farm economy. But the act’s benefits were not evenly distributed. Subsidies went primarily to the owners of large and medium-sized farms, who often cut production by reducing the amount of land they rented to tenants and sharecroppers. In Mississippi, one plantation owner received $26,000 from the federal government, while thousands of black sharecroppers living in the same county received only a few dollars in relief payments. In manufacturing, the New Deal attacked declining production with the National Industrial Recovery Act. A new government agency, the National Recovery Administration (NRA), set up separate self-governing private associations in six hundred industries. Each industry — ranging from large corporations producing coal, cotton textiles, and steel to small businesses making pet food and costume jewelry — regulated itself by agreeing on prices and production quotas. Because large companies usually ran these associations, the NRA solidified their power at the expense of smaller enterprises and consumer interests.

 The AAA and the NRA were designed to rescue the nation’s productive industries and stabilize the economy. The measures had positive effects in some regions, but most historians agree that, overall, they did little to end the depression.

 Unemployment Relief The Roosevelt administration next addressed the massive unemployment problem. By 1933, local governments and private charities had exhausted their resources and were looking to Washington for assistance. Although Roosevelt wanted to avoid a budget deficit, he asked Congress to provide relief for millions of unemployed Americans. In May, Congress established the Federal Emergency Relief Administration (FERA). Directed by Harry Hopkins, a hard-driving social worker from New York, the FERA provided federal funds for state relief programs. Roosevelt and Hopkins had strong reservations about the “dole,” the nickname for government welfare payments. As Hopkins put it, “I don’t think anybody can go year after year, month after month, accepting relief without affecting his character.” To support the traditional values of individualism, the New Deal put people to work. Early in 1933, Congress established the Public Works Administration (PWA), a construction program, and several months later, Roosevelt created the Civil Works Administration (CWA) and named Hopkins its head. Within thirty days, Hopkins had put 2.6 million men and women to work; at its peak in 1934, the CWA provided jobs for 4 million Americans repairing bridges, building highways, and constructing public buildings. A stopgap measure to get the country through the winter of 1933–1934, the CWA lapsed in the spring, when Republican opposition compelled New Dealers to abandon it. A longer-term program, the Civilian Conservation Corps (CCC), mobilized



AMERICAN VOICES
Ordinary People Respond to the New Deal 
 Franklin Roosevelt’s fireside chats and his relief programs prompted thousands of ordinary Americans to write directly to the president and his wife, Eleanor. Taken together, their letters offer a vivid portrait of depression-era America that includes popular support for, and opposition to, the New Deal.

Mrs. M. H. A.
 Mrs. M. H. A. worked in the County Court House in Eureka, California.

June 14, 1934
Dear Mrs. Roosevelt:
 I know you are overburdened with requests for help and if my plea cannot be recognized, I’ll understand it is because you have so many others, all of them worthy. . . . My husband and I are a young couple of very simple, almost poor families. We married eight years ago on the proverbial shoe-string but with a wealth of love. . . . We managed to build our home and furnish it comfortably. . . . Then came the depression. My work has continued and my salary alone has just been sufficient to make our monthly payments on the house and keep our bills paid. . . . But with the exception of two and one-half months work with the U.S. Coast and Geodetic Survey under the C.W.A. [Civil Works Administration], my husband has not had work since August, 1932. My salary could continue to keep us going, but I am to have a baby. . . . I can get a leave of absence from my job for a year. But can’t you, won’t you do something so my husband can have a job, at least during that year? . . . As I said before, if it were only ourselves, or if there were something we could do about it, we would never ask for help. We have always stood on our own feet and been proud and happy. But you are a mother and you’ll understand this crisis. Very sincerely yours, Mrs. M. H. A. Unsigned Letter This unsigned letter came from a factory worker in Paris, Texas.

November 23, 1936
Dear President,
 [N]ow that we have had a land Slide [in the election of 1936] and done just what was best for our country . . .

 I do believe you Will Strain a point to help the ones who helped you mostly & that is the Working Class of People I am not smart or I would be in a different line of work & better up in ever way yet I will know you are the one & only President that ever helped a Working Class of People. . . . I am a White Man American age, 47 married wife 2children in high School am a Finishing room foreman I mean a Working foreman & am in a furniture Factory here in Paris Texas where thaire is 175 to 200 Working & when the NRA [National Recovery Administration] came in I was Proud to See my fellow workmen Rec 30 Per hour in Place of 8 cents to 20 cents Per hour. . . . I can’t see for my life President why a man must toil &work his life out in Such factories 10 long hours ever day except Sunday for a small sum of 15 cents to 35 cents per hour & pay the high cost of honest & deason living expences. . . . please see if something can be done to help this one Class of Working People the factories are a man killer not venelated or kept up just a bunch of Republickins Grafters 90/100 of them Please help us some way I Pray to God for relief. I am a Christian . . . and a truthful man & have not told you wrong & am for you to the end. [not signed] R. A. R. A. was sixty-nine years old and an architect and builder in Lincoln, Nebraska.

May 19/34
Dear Mrs Roosevelt:
 In the Presidents inaugral address delivered from the capitol steps the afternoon of his inaugration he made mention of The Forgotten Man, and I with thousands of others am wondering if the folk who was borned here in America some 60 or 70 years a go are this Forgotten Man, the President had in mind, if we are this Forgotten Man then we are still Forgotten. We who have tried to be diligent in our support of this most wonderful nation of ours boath social and

 other wise, we in our younger days tried to do our duty without complaining. . . . And now a great calamity has come upon us and seemingly no cause of our own it has swept away what little savings we had accumulated and we are left in a condition that is imposible for us to correct, for two very prominent reasons if no more. First we have grown to what is termed Old Age, this befalls every man. Second, . . . we are confronted on every hand with the young generation, taking our places, this of corse is what we have looked forward to in training our children. But with the extra ordinary crisese which left us helpless and placed us in the position that our fathers did not have to contend with. . . . We have been honorable citizens all along our journey, calamity and old age has forced its self upon us please do not send us to the Poor Farm but instead allow us the small pension of $40.00 per month. . . . Mrs. Roosevelt I am asking a personal favor of you as it seems to be the only means through which I may be able to reach the President, some evening very soon, as you and Mr. Roosevelt are having dinner together privately will you ask him to read this. And we American citizens will ever remember your kindness. Yours very truly. R. A. M. A. M. A. was a woman who held a low-level salaried position in a corporation.

Jan. 18, 1937
[Dear Mrs. Roosevelt:]
 I . . . was simply astounded to think that anyone could be nitwit enough to wish to be included in the so called social security act if they could possibly avoid it. Call it by any name you wish it, in my opinion, (and that of many people I know) [it] is nothing but downright stealing. . . . I am not an “economic royalist,” just an ordinary white collar worker at $1600 per [year — about $23,600 in 2009]. Please show this to the president and ask him to remember the wishes of the forgotten man, that is, the one who dared to vote against him. We expect to be tramped on but we do wish the stepping would be a little less hard. Security at the price of freedom is never desired by intelligent people. M. A.

M. A. H.
M. A. H.
was a widow who ran a small farm in Columbus, Indiana. 
December 14, 1937
Mrs. Roosevelt:
 I suppose from your point of view the work relief, old age pensions, slum clearance and all the rest seems like a perfect remedy for all the ills of this country, but I would like for you to see the results, as the other half see them. We have always had a shiftless, never-do-well class of people whose one and only aim in life is to live without work. I have been rubbing elbows with this class for nearly sixty years and have tried to help some of the most promising and have seen others try to help them, but it can’t be done. We cannot help those who will not try to help themselves and if they do try a square deal is all they need, . . . let each one paddle their own canoe, or sink. . . . I live alone on a farm and have not raised any crops for the last two years as there was no help to be had. I am feeding the stock and have been cutting the wood to keep my home fires burning. There are several reliefers around here now who have been kicked off relief but they refuse to work unless they can get relief hours and wages, but they are so worthless no one can afford to hire them. . . . They are just a fair sample of the class of people on whom so much of our hard earned tax-money is being squandered and on whom so much sympathy is being wasted. . . . You people who have plenty of this worlds goods and whose money comes easy have no idea of the heart-breaking toil and self-denial which is the lot of the working people who are trying to make an honest living, and then to have to shoulder all these unjust burdens seems like the last straw. . . . No one should have the right to vote theirself a living at the expense of the tax payers. . . . M. A. H. Sources (in order): Robert S. McElvaine, Down & Out in the Great Depression (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1983), 54–55; Gerald Markowitz and David Rosner, eds., “Slaves of the Depression”: Worker’s Letters About Life on the Job (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1987), 21; Robert S. McElvaine, Down & Out in the Great Depression (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1983), 97, 147, 143.

QUESTIONS FOR ANALYSIS 1.
How do you explain the personal, almost intimate, tone of these letters to the Roosevelts? 2. How have specific New Deal programs helped or hurt the authors of these letters? 3. What are the basic values of the authors? Do the values of those who support the New Deal differ from the values of those who oppose it? 




 PART 7

DOMESTIC AND GLOBAL CHALLENGES, 1890–1945

Selling the NRA in Chinatown
 To mobilize support for its program, the National Recovery Administration (NRA) distributed millions of posters to businesses and families, urging them to display its symbol, the Blue Eagle, in shops, factories, and homes. Here Constance King and Mae Chinn of the Chinese YMCA affix a poster (and a Chinese translation) to a shop in San Francisco that is complying with the NRA codes. © Bettmann/Corbis.

 250,000 young men to do reforestation and conservation work. Over the course of the 1930s, the “CCC boys” built thousands of bridges, roads, trails, and other structures in state and national parks, bolstering the national infrastructure (Map 23.2).

 Housing Crisis Millions of Americans also faced the devastating prospect of losing their homes. The economic expansion of the 1920s had produced the largest inflationary housing bubble in American history to that point, a scenario in which home prices rose wildly, fueled by excessive borrowing. In the early 1930s, as

 home prices collapsed and banks closed, home owners were dragged down with them. More than half a million Americans lost their homes between 1930 and 1932, and in cities such as Cleveland and Indianapolis, half of all home mortgage holders faced possible foreclosure. In response, Congress created the Home Owners Loan Corporation (HOLC) to refinance home mortgages. In just two years, the HOLC helped more than a million Americans retain their homes. The Federal Housing Act of 1934 would extend this program under a new agency, the Federal Housing Administration (FHA). Together, the HOLC, the FHA,

 CHAPTER 23

North Cascades


C A N A D A


Olympic
Mount
Rainier


Glacier


 WA

Voyageurs
 ND

Craters of
 the Moon ID

Redwood


 NY

 SD

UT
Capitol Reef Zion 
Kings
Canyon
Sequoia
Death
Valley


Rocky Mountain


 IL

 CO

Joshua
Tree


 MO

NC N

Big
Bend


E


 SC

AR MS

 AL

W


 GA

S


 TX

ATLANTIC OCEAN

Shenandoah
 VA

TN
Great Smoky Mountains 
White Sands


 DE

 KY

OK
El Malpais NM 
 NJ

 IN

KS
Great Sand Dunes 
PACIFIC OCEAN

 MD

OH WV

Canyonlands


Petrified
Mojave Forest
Natonal AZ
Preserve
Saguaro


RI PA

 IA

Grand Canyon
Channel
Islands


 CT

 MI

Dinosaur


NH MA

 WI

NE NV

Acadia
 VT

 WY

Yosemite


 ME

MN
Yellowstone Grand Teton 
Lassen
Volcanic


 CA

Isle
Royale


Pictured Rocks


MT
Crater Lake OR 


Managing the Great Depression, Forging the New Deal, 1929–1939


 LA





 300 miles

 300 kilometers

 FL

CCC
Camp 
 MEXICO

Gulf of Mexico


Everglades


U.S.
National Park 

 MAP 23.2 Civilian Conservation Corps Camps The Civilian Conservation Corps (CCC) gave hope to unemployed young men during the Great Depression. The first camp opened in Big Meadows, Virginia, in July 1933, and by the end of the decade CCC camps had appeared across the length of the country, located in rural, mountainous, and forested regions alike. Young men constructed bridges and roads, built hiking trails, erected public campgrounds, and performed other improvements. By the early 1940s, the CCC had planted three billion trees, among its many other contributions to the national infrastructure.

 and the subsequent Housing Act of 1937 permanently changed the mortgage system and set the foundation for the broad expansion of home ownership in the post–World War II decades (Chapter 25). When an exhausted Congress recessed in June 1933, at the end of the Hundred Days, it had enacted Roosevelt’s agenda: banking reform, recovery programs for agriculture and industry, public works, and unemployment relief. Few presidents had won the passage of so many measures in so short a time. The new federal agencies were far from perfect and had their critics on both the radical left and the conservative right. But the vigorous actions taken by Roosevelt and Congress had halted the downward economic spiral of the Hoover years, stabilized the financial sector, and sent a message of hope from the nation’s political leaders. For all that,

 however, the New Deal did not break the grip of the depression.

The New Deal Under Attack
 As New Dealers waited anxiously for the economy to revive, Roosevelt turned his attention to the reform of Wall Street, where reckless speculation and overleveraged buying of stocks had helped trigger the financial panic of 1929. In 1934, Congress established the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) to regulate the stock market. The commission had broad powers to determine how stocks and bonds were sold to the public, to set rules for margin (credit) transactions, and to prevent stock sales by those with inside information about corporate plans. The Banking Act of 1935



 PART 7

DOMESTIC AND GLOBAL CHALLENGES, 1890–1945

 authorized the president to appoint a new Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, placing control of interest rates and other money-market policies in a federal agency rather than in the hands of private bankers.

 Critics on the Right Such measures exposed the New Deal to attack from economic conservatives — also known as the political right. A man of wealth, Roosevelt saw himself as the savior of American capitalism, declaring simply, “To preserve we had to reform.” Many bankers and business executives disagreed. To them, FDR became “That Man,” a traitor to his class. In 1934, Republican business leaders joined with conservative Democrats in the Liberty League to fight what they called the “reckless spending” and “socialist” reforms of the New Deal. Herbert Hoover condemned the NRA as a “state-controlled or state-directed social or economic system.” That, declared the former president, was “tyranny, not liberalism.” The National Association of COMPARE AND Manufacturers (NAM) was even CONTRAST more important than the Liberty How did critics on the right League in opposing the New Deal, and left represent differas the NAM’s influence stretched ent kinds of challenges to far into the post–World War II Roosevelt and the New decades. Sparked by a new generDeal? ation of business leaders who

 believed that a publicity campaign was needed to “serve the purposes of business salvation,” the NAM produced radio programs, motion pictures, billboards, and direct mail in the late 1930s. In response to what many conservatives perceived as Roosevelt’s antibusiness policies, the NAM promoted free enterprise and unfettered capitalism. After World War II, the NAM emerged as a staunch critic of liberalism and forged alliances with influential conservative politicians such as Barry Goldwater and Ronald Reagan. For its part, the Supreme Court repudiated several cornerstones of the early New Deal. In May 1935, in Schechter v. United States, the Court unanimously ruled the National Industrial Recovery Act unconstitutional because it delegated Congress’s lawmaking power to the executive branch and extended federal authority to intrastate (in contrast to interstate) commerce. Roosevelt protested but watched helplessly as the Court struck down more New Deal legislation: the Agricultural Adjustment Act, the Railroad Retirement Act, and a debt-relief law known as the Frazier-Lemke Act.

 Critics on the Populist Left If business leaders and the Supreme Court thought that the New Deal had gone too far, other Americans believed it had not gone far enough. Among these were public figures who, in the tradition of American populism, sought to place government on the side of ordinary citizens against

Father Coughlin
 One of the foremost critics of the New Deal was the “Radio Priest,” Father Charles E. Coughlin. Coughlin believed that Roosevelt and the Democratic Party had not gone far enough in their efforts to ensure the social welfare of all citizens. For instance, he and his organization, the National Union for Social Justice, urged Roosevelt to nationalize the banks. Coughlin, whose radio audience reached 30 million at the height of his popularity, was one of the most recognizable religious leaders in the country. Unfortunately, his remarks in the early 1930s were often laced with anti-Semitism (anti-Jewish sentiment). © Bettmann/Corbis.

 CHAPTER 23

Managing the Great Depression, Forging the New Deal, 1929–1939


 corporations and the wealthy. Francis Townsend, a doctor from Long Beach, California, spoke for the nation’s elderly, most of whom had no pensions and feared poverty. In 1933, Townsend proposed the Old Age Revolving Pension Plan, which would give $200 a month (about $3,300 today) to citizens over the age of sixty. To receive payments, the elderly would have to retire and open their positions to younger workers. Townsend Clubs sprang up across the country in support of the Townsend Plan, mobilizing mass support for old-age pensions. The most direct political threat to Roosevelt came from Louisiana senator Huey Long. As the Democratic governor of Louisiana from 1928 to 1932, the flamboyant Long had achieved stunning popularity. He increased taxes on corporations, lowered the utility bills of consumers, and built new highways, hospitals, and schools. To push through these measures, Long seized almost dictatorial control of the state government. Now a U.S. senator, Long broke with the New Deal in 1934 and, like Townsend, established a national movement. According to his Share Our Wealth Society, inequalities in the distribution of wealth prohibited millions of ordinary families from buying goods, which kept factories humming. Long’s society advocated a tax of 100 percent on all income over $1 million and on all inheritances over $5 million. He hoped that this populist program would carry him into the White House. That prospect encouraged conservatives, who hoped that a split between New Dealers and populist reformers might return the Republican Party, and its ideology of limited government and free enterprise, to political power. In fact, Roosevelt feared that Townsend and Long, along with the popular “radio priest,” Father Charles Coughlin, might join forces to form a third party. He had to respond or risk the political unity of the country’s liberal forces (Map 23.3).

The Second New Deal and the
Redefining of Liberalism,
1935–1938
 As attacks on the New Deal increased, Roosevelt and his advisors moved politically to the left. Historians have labeled this shift in policy the Second New Deal. Roosevelt now openly criticized the “money classes,” proudly stating, “We have earned the hatred of entrenched greed.” He also decisively countered the rising popularity of Townsend, Coughlin, and Long by



 adopting parts of their programs. The administration’s Revenue Act of 1935 proposed a substantial tax increase on corporate profits and higher income and estate taxes on the wealthy. When conservatives attacked this legislation as an attempt to “soak the rich,” Congress moderated its taxation rates. But FDR was satisfied. He had met the Share Our Wealth Society’s proposal with a tax plan of his own.

 The Welfare State Comes into Being The Revenue Act symbolized the administration’s new outlook. Unlike the First New Deal, which focused on economic recovery, the Second New Deal emphasized social justice and the creation of a safety net: the use of the federal government to assist working people and to provide COMPARE AND economic security for the old, the CONTRAST disabled, and the unemployed. How did the Second New The resulting welfare state — a Deal differ from the first? term applied to industrial democracies that adopted various government-guaranteed social-welfare programs — fundamentally changed American society.

 The Wagner Act and Social Security The first beneficiary of Roosevelt’s Second New Deal was the labor movement. Section 7(a) of the National Industrial Recovery Act (NIRA) had given workers the right to organize unions, producing a dramatic growth in rankand-file militancy and leading to a strike wave in 1934. When the Supreme Court voided the NIRA in 1935, labor unions called for new legislation that would allow workers to organize and bargain collectively with employers. Named for its sponsor, Senator Robert F. Wagner of New York, the Wagner Act (1935) upheld the right of industrial workers to join unions. The act outlawed many practices that employers had used to suppress unions, such as firing workers for organizing activities. It also established the National Labor Relations Board (NLRB), a federal agency with the authority to protect workers from employer coercion and to guarantee collective bargaining. A second initiative, the Social Security Act of 1935, had an equally widespread impact. Other industrialized societies, such as Germany and Britain, had created national old-age pension systems at the turn of the century, but American reformers had failed to secure a similar program in the United States. The Townsend and Long movements now pressed Roosevelt to act, giving political muscle to pension proponents within the administration. Children’s welfare advocates,



 PART 7

DOMESTIC AND GLOBAL CHALLENGES, 1890–1945

N
W
E


 Seattle’s Unemployed Citizen’s League, 1930–31

C A N A D A


S


NORTH DAKOTA

MONTANA OREGON IDAHO

 Farm workers begin organizing, California, 1933 CALIF. San Francisco general strike, 1934

 NEVADA

 Housewives’ meat strikes Los Angeles, 1935. Strikes and demonstrations also in New York, Detroit, Denver, and Miami, 1935

PACIFIC OCEAN

 UTAH

 ARIZONA

NEW MEXICO

 Upton Sinclair, leader of End Poverty in California, wins Democratic primary for governor but loses election, 1934

 Strike, demonstration, or protest Political action

 MINN.

 Milk strikes, Wisconsin, 1933 SOUTH DAKOTA Progressive Party WIS. WYOMING launched, Madison, Sioux City farmers’ strike, 1932 IOWA NEBRASKA ILL. Strike at Republic Steel, Chicago, 1937 COLORADO

 Dr. Francis Townsend proposes an "Old Age Revolving Pension" and organizes Townsend Clubs with the slogan, "$200 a month at sixty," 1933–34

 Los Angeles cannery strike (women), 1939

Father Charles
Coughlin, the
"Radio Priest,"
 organizes the National Union for Social Justice,

 Communist-led "Ford Hunger March," Dearborn, 1932

 WASH.

 Bonus Army march begins in Portland, 1932

 Sit-down strike at General Motors, Flint, 1936–37

 Sit-down strike at Chrysler, Detroit,

Strike at General
Motors, Cleveland,
 Sit-down strike, rubber workers, Akron, 1936

N.Y.


ME.
Textile strike, N.H. Lawrence, 1934 VT. MASS. 
R.I.
PA. CONN. RCA
strike, OHIO Camden, 1936 N.J. 100,000 participate in leftist demonstration in New IND. General strike, DEL. York City, 1930 Toledo, 1934 MD. W. VA. KY. VA. National Negro Congress MO. KANSAS organizes tobacco strike, Strike at General N.C. Richmond, 1935 Motors, Anderson, Sit-down strike at General Motors, Kansas City, 1936 Kentucky miners’ strike, 1931 ARK. TENN. S.C. OKLAHOMA Strike at General Motors, ALA. GA. Atlanta, 1936 Southern Tenant Farmers’ MISS. Union leads marching strikes Alabama Sharecroppers Union against cotton planters, 1935–36 organized, 1931 LA. TEXAS FLA. ATLANTIC 
 ILGWU garment workers strike in San Antonio (women),

 MEXICO

 Huey Long, governor of Louisiana, 1928–31, United States senator, 1931–35, launches national Share-Our-Wealth Society, 1934

 OCEAN

Gulf of Mexico




 MICH.



 500 miles 500 kilometers

 MAP 23.3 Popular Protest in the Great Depression, 1933–1939 The depression forced Americans to look closely at their society, and many of them did not like what they saw. Some citizens expressed their discontent through popular movements, and this map suggests the geography of discontent. The industrial Midwest witnessed union movements, strikes, and Radio Priest Charles Coughlin’s demands for social reform. Simultaneously, farmers’ movements — tenants in the South, smallholders in the agricultural Midwest — engaged in strikes and dumping campaigns and rallied behind the ideas of progressives in Wisconsin and Huey Long in the South. Protests took diverse forms in California, which was home to strikes by farmworkers, women, and — in San Francisco — all wageworkers. The West was also the seedbed of two important reform proposals: Upton Sinclair’s End Poverty in California (EPIC) movement and Francis Townsend’s Old Age Revolving Pension clubs.

 concerned about the fate of fatherless families, also pressured the president. The resulting Social Security Act had three main provisions: old-age pensions for workers; a joint federal-state system of compensation for unemployed workers; and a program of payments to widowed mothers and the blind, deaf, and disabled. Roosevelt, however, limited the reach of the legislation. Knowing that compulsory pension and unemployment legislation alone would be controversial, he dropped a provision for national health insurance, fearing it would doom the entire bill.

 The Social Security Act was a milestone in the creation of an American welfare state. Never before had the federal government assumed such responsibility for the well-being of so many citizens. Social Security, as old-age pensions were known, became one of the most popular government programs in American history. On the other hand, the assistance program for widows and children known as Aid to Dependent Children (ADC) became one of its most controversial measures. ADC covered only 700,000 youngsters in 1939; by 1994, its successor, Aid to

 CHAPTER 23

Managing the Great Depression, Forging the New Deal, 1929–1939


United Auto Workers
Strike
 Trade unions were among the most active and vocal organizations of the 1930s. Organized labor led a number of major strikes between 1934 and 1936 in various industries. None was more important to the future of trade unions than the sit-down strikes at major automobile plants, including General Motors and Chevrolet in Flint, Michigan, in 1936 and 1937. These strikes, in which workers stopped the assembly lines but refused to leave the factories, compelled GM to recognize the United Auto Workers (UAW), which became one of the strongest trade unions in American history. © Bettmann/Corbis.

 Families with Dependent Children (AFDC), enrolled 14.1 million Americans. A minor program during the New Deal, AFDC grew enormously in the 1960s and remained an often maligned cornerstone of the welfare state until it was eliminated under President Clinton in 1996.

New Deal Liberalism The Second New Deal
 created what historians call New Deal liberalism. Classical liberalism held individual liberty to be the foundation of a democratic society, and the word liberal had traditionally denoted support for freemarket policies and weak government. Roosevelt and his advisors, along with intellectuals such as British economist John Maynard Keynes, disagreed. They countered that, to preserve individual liberty, government must assist the needy and guarantee the basic welfare of citizens. This liberal welfare state was opposed by inheritors of the nineteenth-century ideology of laissez-faire capitalism, who gradually became known as conservatives. These two visions of liberty and government — with liberals on one side and conservatives on the other — would shape American politics for the next half century.

From Reform to Stalemate
 Roosevelt’s first term had seen an extraordinary expansion of the federal state. The great burst of government action between 1933 and 1935 was unequaled in the nation’s history (though Congress and President Lyndon Johnson nearly matched it in 1965–1966; see Chapter 28). Roosevelt’s second term, however, was characterized by a series of political entanglements and economic bad news that stifled further reform.

 The 1936 Election FDR was never enthusiastic about public relief programs. But with the election of 1936 on the horizon and 10 million Americans still out of work, he won funding for the Works Progress Administration (WPA). Under the energetic direction of Harry Hopkins, the WPA employed 8.5 million Americans between 1935, when it was established, and 1943. The agency’s workers constructed or repaired 651,087 miles of road, 124,087 bridges, 125,110 public buildings, 8,192 parks, and 853 airports. But although the WPA was an extravagant operation by 1930s standards, it reached only about one-third of the nation’s unemployed.





 PART 7

DOMESTIC AND GLOBAL CHALLENGES, 1890–1945

 As the 1936 election approached, new voters joined the Democratic Party. Many had personally benefitted from New Deal programs such as the WPA or knew people who had (Table 23.2). One was Jack Reagan, a down-on-his-luck shoe salesman (and the father of future president Ronald Reagan), who took a job as a federal relief administrator in Dixon, Illinois, and became a strong supporter of the New Deal. In

 TABLE 23.2 Major New Deal Legislation Agriculture

 Agricultural Adjustment Act (AAA)



 Resettlement Administration (RA) Rural Electrification Administration



 Farm Security Administration (FSA)



Agricultural Adjustment Act of 1938
Finance and Industry




Emergency Banking Act
 Glass-Steagall Act (created the FDIC) National Industrial Recovery Act (NIRA)



 Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC)



Banking Act of 1935
 Revenue Act (wealth tax) Conservation and the Environment



 Tennessee Valley Authority (TVA) Civilian Conservation Corps (CCC) Soil Conservation and Domestic Allotment Act Labor and Social Welfare



 Section 7(a) of NIRA



National Labor Relations Act (Wagner Act)
 National Labor Relations Board (NLRB) Social Security Act



National Housing Act




 Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA) Relief and Reconstruction



Federal Emergency Relief Administration
 (FERA) Civil Works Administration (CWA) Public Works Administration (PWA)



 Works Progress Administration (WPA) National Youth Administration (NYA)

 addition to voters such as Reagan, Roosevelt could count on a powerful coalition of organized labor, midwestern farmers, white ethnic groups, northern African Americans, and middle-class families concerned about unemployment and old-age security. He also commanded the support of intellectuals and progressive Republicans. With difficulty, the Democrats held on to the votes of their white southern constituency as well. Republicans recognized that the New Deal was too popular to oppose directly, so they chose as their candidate the progressive governor of Kansas, Alfred M. Landon. Landon accepted the legitimacy of many New Deal programs but criticized their inefficiency and expense. He also pointed to authoritarian regimes in Italy and Germany and hinted that FDR harbored similar dictatorial ambitions. These charges fell on deaf ears. Roosevelt’s victory in 1936 was one of the most lopsided in American history. The assassination of Huey Long by a Louisiana political rival in September 1935 had eliminated the threat of a serious third-party challenge. Roosevelt received 60 percent of the popular vote and carried every state except Maine and Vermont. Organized labor, in particular, mobilized on behalf of FDR, donating money, canvassing door to door, and registering hundreds of thousands of new voters. The New Republic, a liberal publication, boasted that “it was the greatest revolution in our political history.” “I see one-third of a nation ill-housed, ill-clad, illnourished,” the president declared in his second inaugural address in January 1937. But any hopes that FDR had for expanding the liberal welfare state were quickly dashed. Within a year, staunch opposition to Roosevelt’s initiatives arose in Congress, and a sharp recession undermined confidence in his economic leadership.

 Court Battle and Economic Recession Roosevelt’s first setback in 1937 came when he surprised the nation by asking for fundamental changes to the Supreme Court. In 1935, the Court had struck down a series of New Deal measures by the narrow margin of 5 to 4. With the Wagner Act, the Tennessee Valley Authority, and Social Security all slated to come before the Court, the future of the New Deal rested in the hands of a few elderly, conservative-minded judges. To diminish their influence, the president proposed adding a new justice to the Court for every member over the age of seventy, a scheme that would have brought six new judges to the bench at the time the legislation was proposed. Roosevelt’s opponents protested that he was trying to “pack” the Court. After a bitter, months-long debate, Congress rejected this blatant attempt to alter the judiciary to the president’s advantage.

 CHAPTER 23

Managing the Great Depression, Forging the New Deal, 1929–1939


 If Roosevelt lost the battle, he went on to win the war. Swayed in part by the president’s overwhelming electoral victory in the 1936 election, the Court upheld the Wagner and Social Security Acts. Moreover, a series of timely resignations allowed Roosevelt to reshape the Supreme Court after all. His new appointees — who included the liberal-leaning and generally pro–New Deal Hugo Black, Felix Frankfurter, and William O. Douglas — viewed the Constitution as a “living document” that had to be interpreted in the light of present conditions. The so-called Roosevelt recession of 1937–1938 dealt another blow to the president. From 1933 to 1937, gross domestic product had grown at a yearly rate of about 10 percent, bringing industrial output back to 1929 levels. Unemployment had declined from 25 percent to 14 percent. “The emergency has passed,” declared Senator James F. Byrnes of South Carolina. Acting on this assumption, Roosevelt slashed the federal budget. Following the president’s lead, Congress cut the WPA’s funding in half, causing layoffs of about 1.5 million workers, and the Federal Reserve, fearing inflation, raised interest rates. These measures halted recovery. The stock market responded by dropping sharply, and unemployment jumped to 19 percent. Quickly reversing course, Roosevelt began once again to spend his way out of the recession by boosting funding for the WPA and resuming public works projects. Although improvised, this spending program accorded with the theories of John Maynard Keynes, a visionary British economist. Keynes transformed economic thinking in capitalist societies in the 1920s by arguing that government intervention could smooth out the highs and lows of the business cycle through deficit spending and the manipulation of interest rates, which determined the money supply. This view was sharply criticized by Republicans and conservative Democrats in the 1930s, who disliked government intervention in the economy. But Keynesian economics gradually won wider acceptance as World War II defense spending finally ended the Great Depression. A reformer rather than a revolutionary, Roosevelt had preserved capitalism and liberal individualism — even as he transformed them in significant ways. At the same time, conservatives had reclaimed a measure of power in Congress, and those who believed the New Deal had created an intrusive federal bureaucracy kept reform in check after 1937. Throughout Roosevelt’s second term, a conservative coalition of southern Democrats, rural Republicans, and industrial interests in both parties worked to block or impede social legislation. By 1939, the era of change was over.

 The New Deal’s Impact on Society Whatever its limits, the New Deal had a tremendous impact. Its ideology of social-welfare liberalism fundamentally altered Americans’ relationship to their government and provided assistance to a wide range of ordinary people: the unemployed, the elderly, workers, and the poor. In doing so, New Dealers created a sizable federal bureaucracy: the number of civilian federal employees increased by 80 percent between 1929 and 1940, reaching a total of 1 million. The expenditures — and deficits — of the federal government grew at an even faster rate. In 1930, the Hoover administration spent $3.1 billion and had a surplus of almost $1 billion; in 1939, New Dealers expended $9.4 billion and ran a deficit of nearly $3 billion (still small by later standards). But the New Deal represented more than figures on a balance sheet. Across the country, the new era in government inspired democratic visions among ordinary citizens (Thinking Like a Historian, p. 752).

A
People’s Democracy In 1939, writer John La Touche and musician Earl Robinson produced “Ballad for Americans.” A patriotic song, it called for uniting “everybody who’s nobody . . . Irish, Negro, Jewish, Italian, French, and English, Spanish, Russian, Chinese, Polish, Scotch, Hungarian, Litvak, Swedish, Finnish, Canadian, Greek, and Turk, and Czech and double Czech American.” The song captured the democratic aspirations that the New Deal had awakened. Millions of ordinary people believed that the nation could, and should, become more egalitarian. Influenced by the liberal spirit of the New Deal, Americans from all walks of life seized the opportunity to push for change in the nation’s social and political institutions. 
 Organized Labor Demoralized and shrinking during the 1920s, labor unions increased their numbers and clout during the New Deal, thanks to the Wagner Act. “The era of privilege and predatory individuals is over,” labor leader John L. Lewis declared. By the end of the decade, the number of unionized workers had tripled to 23 percent of the nonagricultural workforce. A new union movement, led by the Congress of Industrial Organizations (CIO), promoted “industrial unionism” — organizing all the workers in an industry, from skilled machinists to unskilled janitors, into a single union. The American Federation of Labor (AFL),



THINKING LIKE A HISTORIAN
The New Deal and Public Works 
 More than half a dozen New Deal programs were devoted to building up the physical and cultural infrastructure of the country. The former included roads, bridges, dams, trails, and national parks. The latter included artwork, murals, plays, and other forms of literary expression. Examine the following documents and use them collectively to analyze the New Deal’s relationship to infrastructure, art, culture, and politics.

 1. Harold L. Ickes, secretary of the interior, The New Democracy, 1934.

 Our Government is no longer a laissez-faire Government, exercising traditional and more or less impersonal powers. There exists in Washington a sense of responsibility for the health, safety, and well-being of the people. . . . I believe that we are at the dawn of a day when the average man, woman, and child in the United States will have an opportunity for a happier and richer life. And it is just and desirable that this should be so. . . . We are not here merely to endure a purgatorial existence in anticipation of a beatific eternity after the grave closes on us. We are here with hopes and aspirations and legitimate desires that we are entitled to have satisfied to at least a reasonable degree. Nor will such a social program as we are discussing cause a strain on our economic system. 2. Herbert Johnson cartoon, Saturday Evening Post, 1935.

The Granger Collection, New York.




 3. Federal Writers’ Project interview with a WPA draftsman, Newburyport, Massachusetts, June 25, 1939.

 One reason people here don’t like the WPA is because they don’t understand it’s not all bums and drunks and aliens! Nobody ever explains to them that they’d never have had the new High School they’re so [. . .] proud of if it hadn’t been for the WPA. They don’t stop to figure that new brick sidewalks wouldn’t be there, the shade trees wouldn’t be all dressed up to look at along High Street and all around town, if it weren’t for WPA projects. To most in this town, and I guess it’s not much different in this, than any other New England place, WPA’s just a racket, set up to give a bunch of loafers and drunks steady pay to indulge in their vices! They don’t stop to consider that on WPA are men and women who have traveled places and seen things, been educated and found their jobs folded up and nothing to replace them with.

 4. Ben Shahn, WPA mural, 1938. This is part of a three-panel mural commissioned by the Works Progress Administration (WPA) and painted at a public school in Roosevelt, New Jersey, by the well-known artist Ben Shahn.

Courtesy of Roosevelt Arts Project/Picture Research Consultants & Archives


 5. David E. Lilienthal, TVA: Democracy on the March, 1944. Written by the former chairman of the Tennessee Valley Authority.

ANALYZING THE EVIDENCE

 I believe men may learn to work in harmony with the forces of nature, neither despoiling what God has given nor helpless to put them to use. I believe in the great potentialities for well-being of the machine and technology and science; and though they do hold a real threat of enslavement and frustration for the human spirit, I believe those dangers can be averted. I believe that through the practice of democracy the world of technology holds out the greatest opportunity in all history for the development of the individual, according to his own talents, aspirations, and willingness to carry the responsibilities of a free man. . . . Such are the things that have happened in the Tennessee Valley. Here men and science and organizational skills applied to the resources of waters, land, forests, and minerals have yielded great benefits for the people. And it is just such fruits of technology and resources that people all over the world will, more and more, demand for themselves. That people believe these things can be theirs — this it is that constitutes the real revolution of our time, the dominant political fact of the generation that lies ahead.

PUTTING IT ALL TOGETHER

 1. What sorts of reasons do the authors of sources 1 and 5 give for supporting New Deal programs? What does the “good life” look like in their view, and how is it connected to the New Deal? 2. What do sources 2 and 3 suggest about possible opposition to New Deal programs? What sorts of public burdens do New Deal opponents envision? 3. Consider source 4. What can we learn from a mural about the spirit of the New Deal? Identity specific elements of the mural and think about what they might signify about the society the muralist envisioned. What kind of faith in the federal government does the mural reveal?

 Using evidence from the sources in this feature, alongside material from the chapter and from your knowledge of the period, write an essay in which you analyze Americans’ attitudes toward New Deal public works projects. If they were positive or optimistic, what was the basis of their optimism? If they were critical, what was the basis of their criticism? From these sources, can you identify a governing spirit of New Deal reform?

Sources: (1) Harold L. Ickes, The New Democracy (New York: W. W. Norton &
Company Inc., 1934), 60–61; (3) Federal Writers’ Project Life Histories, Library of
 Congress, lcweb2.loc.gov/ammem/wpaintro/wpahome.html; (5) David E. Lilienthal, TVA: Democracy on the March (New York: Harper & Row Publishers, 1944), xxii, 3.





 PART 7

DOMESTIC AND GLOBAL CHALLENGES, 1890–1945

 representing the other major group of unions, favored organizing workers on a craft-by-craft basis. Both federations dramatically increased their membership in the second half of the 1930s. Labor’s new vitality translated into political action and a long-lasting alliance with the Democratic Party. The CIO helped fund Democratic campaigns in 1936, and its political action committee became a major Democratic contributor during the 1940s. These successes were real but limited. The labor movement did not become the dominant force in the United States that it was in Europe, and unions never enrolled a majority of American wageworkers. Antiunion employer groups such as the National Association of Manufacturers and the Chamber of Commerce remained powerful forces in American business life. After a decade of gains, organized labor remained an important, but secondary, force in American industry.

 Women and the New Deal Because policymakers saw the depression primarily as a crisis of male breadwinners, the New Deal did not directly challenge gender inequities. New Deal measures generally enhanced women’s welfare, but few addressed their specific needs and concerns. However, the Roosevelt administration did welcome women into the higher ranks of government. Frances Perkins, the first woman named to a cabinet post, served as secretary of labor throughout Roosevelt’s presidency. While relatively few, female appointees often worked to open up other opportunities in government for talented women. The most prominent woman in American politics was the president’s wife, Eleanor Roosevelt. In the 1920s, she had worked to expand positions for women in political parties, labor unions, and education. A tireless advocate for women’s rights, during her years in the White House Mrs. Roosevelt emerged as an independent public figure and the most influential First Lady in the nation’s history. Descending into coal mines to view working conditions, meeting with African Americans seeking antilynching laws, and talking to people on breadlines, she became the conscience of the New Deal, pushing her husband to do more for the disadvantaged. “I sometimes acted as a spur,” Mrs. Roosevelt later reflected, “even though the spurring was not always wanted COMPARE AND or welcome.” CONTRAST Without the intervention of What aspects of the New Eleanor Roosevelt, Frances Deal inspired ordinary Perkins, and other prominent Americans? What stymied women, New Deal policymakers their ambitions? would have largely ignored the

Roosevelts Visit Camp Tara
 Franklin Roosevelt was a wealthy patrician, but one of his great political skills was the ability to connect with ordinary Americans. His wife, Eleanor, shared a similar gift, perhaps to an even greater degree. In an era when staged photographs had become an important part of a politician’s image-making, Roosevelt made certain to appear frequently in settings in which he mingled with the public. Here, he and Eleanor visit a vocational training camp for jobless women in 1934; FDR is seated on the far left while Eleanor greets two women standing beside the car. AP/Wide World Photos.

 needs of women. A fourth of the National Recovery Act’s employment rules set a lower minimum wage for women than for men performing the same jobs, and only 7 percent of the workers hired by the Civil Works Administration were female. The Civilian Conservation Corps excluded women entirely. Women fared better under the Works Progress Administration; at its peak, 405,000 women were on the payroll. Most Americans agreed with such policies. When Gallup pollsters in 1936 asked people whether wives should work outside the home when their husbands had jobs, 82 percent said no. Such sentiment reflected a persistent belief in women’s secondary status in American economic life.

African Americans Under the New Deal Across
 the nation, but especially in the South, African Americans held the lowest-paying jobs and faced harsh social and political discrimination. Though FDR did not fundamentally change this fact, he was the most popular president among African Americans since Abraham Lincoln. African Americans held 18 percent of WPA jobs, although they constituted 10 percent of the population. The Resettlement Administration, established in 1935 to help small farmers and tenants buy land, actively protected the rights of black tenant

 CHAPTER 23

Managing the Great Depression, Forging the New Deal, 1929–1939


 farmers. Black involvement in the New Deal, however, could not undo centuries of racial subordination, nor could it change the overwhelming power of southern whites in the Democratic Party. Nevertheless, black Americans received significant benefits from New Deal relief programs and believed that the White House cared about their plight, which caused a momentous shift in their political allegiance. Since the Civil War, black voters had staunchly supported the Republican Party, the party of Abraham Lincoln, known as the Great Emancipator. Even in the depression year of 1932, they overwhelmingly supported Republican candidates. But in 1936, as part of the tidal wave of national support for FDR, northern African Americans gave Roosevelt 71 percent of their votes and have remained solidly Democratic ever since. African Americans supported the New Deal partly because the Roosevelt administration appointed a number of black people to federal office, and an informal “black cabinet” of prominent African American intellectuals advised New Deal agencies. Among the most important appointees was Mary McLeod Bethune. Born in 1875 in South Carolina to former slaves, Bethune founded Bethune-Cookman College and served during the 1920s as president of the National Association of Colored Women. She joined the New Deal in 1935, confiding to a friend that she “believed in the democratic and humane program” of FDR. Americans, Bethune observed, had to become “accustomed to seeing Negroes in high places.” Bethune had access to the White House and pushed continually for New Deal programs to help African Americans. But the New Deal was limited in its approach to race. Roosevelt did not go further in support of black rights, because of both his own racial blinders and his need for the votes of the white southern Democrats in Congress — including powerful southern senators, many of whom held influential committee posts in Congress. Most New Deal programs reflected prevailing racial attitudes. Roosevelt and other New Dealers had to trim their proposals of measures that would substantially benefit African Americans. Civilian Conservation Corps camps segregated blacks, and most NRA rules did not protect black workers from discrimination. Both Social Security and the Wagner Act explicitly excluded the domestic and agricultural jobs held by most African Americans in the 1930s. Roosevelt also refused to support legislation making lynching a federal crime, which was one of the most pressing demands of African Americans in the 1930s. Between 1882 and 1930, more than 2,500 African Americans were lynched by white mobs in the southern

 states, which means that statistically, one man, woman, or child was murdered every week for fifty years. But despite pleas from black leaders, and from Mrs. Roosevelt herself, FDR feared that southern white Democrats would block his other reforms in retaliation for such legislation. If lynching embodied southern lawlessness, southern law was not much better. In an infamous 1931 case in Scottsboro, Alabama, nine young black men were accused of rape by two white women hitching a ride on a freight train. The women’s stories contained many inconsistencies, but within weeks a white jury had convicted all nine defendants; eight received the death sentence. After the U.S. Supreme Court overturned the sentences because the defendants had been denied adequate legal counsel, five of the men were again convicted and sentenced to long prison terms. Across the country, the Scottsboro Boys, as they were known, inspired solidarity within African American communities. Among whites, the Communist Party took the lead in publicizing the case — and was one of the only white organizations to do so — helping to support the Scottsboro Defense Committee, which raised money for legal efforts on the defendants’ behalf. In southern agriculture, where many sharecroppers were black while landowners and government administrators were white, the Agricultural Adjustment Act hurt rather than helped the poorest African Americans. White landowners collected government subsidy checks but refused to distribute payments to their sharecroppers. Such practices forced 200,000 black families off the land. Some black farmers tried to protect themselves by joining the Southern Tenant Farmers Union (STFU), a biracial organization founded in 1934. “The same chain that holds you holds my people, too,” an elderly black farmer reminded his white neighbors. But landowners had such economic power and such support from local sheriffs that the STFU could do little. A generation of African American leaders came of age inspired by the New Deal’s democratic promise. But it remained just a promise. From the outset, New Dealers wrestled with potentially fatal racial politics. Franklin Roosevelt and the Democratic Party depended heavily on white voters in the South, who were determined to maintain racial segregation and white supremacy. But many Democrats in the North and West — centers of New Deal liberalism — would come to oppose racial discrimination. This meant, ironically, that the nation’s most liberal political forces and some of its most conservative political forces existed side by side in the same political party. Another thirty years





 PART 7

DOMESTIC AND GLOBAL CHALLENGES, 1890–1945

Scottsboro Defendants
 The 1931 trial in Scottsboro, Alabama, of nine black youths accused of raping two white women became a symbol of the injustices African Americans faced in the South’s legal system. Denied access to an attorney, the defendants were found guilty after a three-day trial, and eight were sentenced to death. When the U.S. Supreme Court overturned their convictions in 1932, the International Labor Defense Organization hired noted criminal attorney Samuel Leibowitz to argue the case. Leibowitz eventually won the acquittal of four defendants and jail sentences for the rest. This 1933 photograph, taken in a Decatur jail, shows Leibowitz conferring with Haywood Patterson, in front of the other eight defendants. Brown Brothers.

 would pass before black Americans would gain an opportunity to reform U.S. racial laws and practices.

 Indian Policy New Deal reformers seized the opportunity to implement their vision for the future of Native Americans, with mixed results. Indian peoples had long been one of the nation’s most disadvantaged and powerless groups. In 1934, the average individual Indian income was only $48 per year, and the Native American unemployment rate was three times the national average. The plight of Native Americans won the attention of the progressive commissioner of the Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA), John Collier, an intellectual and critic of past BIA practices. Collier understood what Native Americans had long known: that the government’s decades-long policy of forced assimilation, prohibition of Indian religions, and confiscation of Indian lands had left most tribes poor, isolated, and without basic self-determination. Collier helped to write and push through Congress the Indian Reorganization Act of 1934, sometimes

 called the Indian New Deal. On the positive side, the law reversed the Dawes Act of 1887 (Chapter 16) by promoting Indian self-government through formal constitutions and democratically elected tribal councils. A majority of Indian peoples — some 181 tribes — accepted the reorganization policy, but 77 declined to participate, primarily because they preferred the traditional way of making decisions by consensus rather than by majority vote. Through the new law, Indians won a greater degree of religious freedom, and tribal governments regained their status as semisovereign dependent nations. When the latter policy was upheld by the courts, Indian people gained a measure of leverage that would have major implications for native rights in the second half of the twentieth century. Like so many other federal Indian policies, however, the “Indian New Deal” was a mixed blessing. For some peoples, the act imposed a model of selfgovernment that proved incompatible with tribal traditions and languages. The Papagos of southern Arizona, for instance, had no words for budget or

 CHAPTER 23

Managing the Great Depression, Forging the New Deal, 1929–1939


Indian New Deal
 Commissioner of Indian Affairs John Collier poses with chiefs of the Blackfoot Indian tribe in 1934. Collier helped reform the way the U.S. federal government treated Native Americans. As part of what many called the Indian New Deal, Collier lobbied Congress to pass the Indian Reorganization Act. The act gave Indian tribes greater control over their own affairs and ended many of the most atrocious federal practices, such as forcing Indian children into white-run boarding schools and dividing up and selling reservation land. The legislation’s long-term results were mixed, but it signaled the beginning of greater autonomy for Indian tribes across the country. © Bettmann/Corbis.

 representative, and they made no linguistic distinctions among law, rule, charter, and constitution. In another case, the nation’s largest tribe, the Navajos, rejected the BIA’s new policy, largely because the government was simultaneously reducing Navajo livestock to protect the Boulder Dam project. In theory, the new policy gave Indians a much greater degree of self-determination. In practice, however, although some tribes did benefit, the BIA and Congress continued to interfere in internal Indian affairs and retained financial control over reservation governments.

 Struggles in the West By the 1920s, agriculture in California had become a big business — intensive, diversified, and export-oriented. Large-scale corporateowned farms produced specialty crops — lettuce, tomatoes, peaches, grapes, and cotton — whose staggered harvests allowed the use of transient laborers. Thousands of workers, immigrants from Mexico and Asia and white migrants from the midwestern states,

 trooped from farm to farm and from crop to crop during the long picking season. Some migrants settled in the rapidly growing cities along the West Coast, especially the sprawling metropolis of Los Angeles. Under both Hoover and FDR, the federal government promoted the “repatriation” of Mexican citizens — their deportation to Mexico. Between 1929 and 1937, approximately half a million people of Mexican descent were deported. But historians estimate that more than 60 percent of these were legal U.S. citizens, making the government’s actions constitutionally questionable. Despite the deportations, many Mexican Americans benefitted from the New Deal and generally held Roosevelt and the Democratic Party in high regard. People of Mexican descent, like other Americans, took jobs with the WPA and the CCC, or received relief in the worst years of the depression. The National Youth Administration (NYA), which employed young people from families on relief and sponsored a variety of school programs, was especially important in





 PART 7

DOMESTIC AND GLOBAL CHALLENGES, 1890–1945

Mexican American Farm Workers
 Among the most hard-pressed workers during the Great Depression were those who labored in the nation’s agricultural field, orchards, and processing plants. Agriculture was a big-time corporate business by the 1930s, and in California and other parts of the Southwest it employed hundreds of thousands of poor Mexican Americans and Mexican immigrants. Seizing on the spirit of social protest sweeping the country in the early 1930s, many of these workers went on strike for better wages and working conditions. Here, women from Mexican American communities are heading to the cotton fields near Corcoran, California, to urge workers to join a major strike of cotton pickers. Though the workers in Corcoran won some wage improvements in this 1933 strike, the fierce battle between employers and workers in American agriculture was far from over and continues to this day. Library of Congress.

 southwestern cities. In California, the Mexican American Movement (MAM), a youth-focused organization, received assistance from liberal New Dealers. New Deal programs did not fundamentally improve the migrant farm labor system under which so many people of Mexican descent labored, but Mexicans joined the New Deal coalition in large numbers because of the Democrats’ commitment to ordinary Americans. “Franklin D. Roosevelt’s name was the spark that started thousands of Spanish-speaking persons to the polls,” noted one Los Angeles activist. Men and women of Asian descent — mostly from China, Japan, and the Philippines — formed a small minority of the American population but were a significant presence in some western cities. Immigrants from Japan and China had long faced discrimination. A 1913 California law prohibited them from owning land. Japanese farmers, who specialized in fruit and vegetable crops, circumvented this restriction by putting land titles in the names of their American-born children. As the depression cut farm prices and racial

 discrimination excluded young Japanese Americans from nonfarm jobs, about 20 percent of the immigrants returned to Japan. Chinese Americans were less prosperous than their Japanese counterparts. Only 3 percent of Chinese Americans worked in professional and technical positions, and discrimination barred them from most industrial jobs. In San Francisco, the majority of Chinese worked in small businesses: restaurants, laundries, and firms that imported textiles and ceramics. During the depression, they turned for assistance to Chinese social organizations such as huiguan (district associations) and to the city government; in 1931, about one-sixth of San Francisco’s Chinese population was receiving public aid. But few Chinese benefitted from the New Deal. Until the repeal of the Exclusion Act in 1943, Chinese immigrants were classified as “aliens ineligible for citizenship” and therefore were excluded from most federal programs. Because Filipino immigrants came from a U.S. territory, they were not affected by the ban on Asian

 CHAPTER 23



Managing the Great Depression, Forging the New Deal, 1929–1939


 reshaped the use of natural resources, especially water, in the United States.

 immigration enacted in 1924. During the 1920s, their numbers swelled to about 50,000, many of whom worked as laborers on large corporate-owned farms. As the depression cut wages, Filipino immigration slowed to a trickle, and it was virtually cut off by the Tydings-McDuffie Act of 1934. The act granted independence to the Philippines (which since 1898 had been an American colony), classified all Filipinos in the United States as aliens, and restricted immigration from the Philippines to fifty people per year.

 The Dust Bowl Among the most hard-pressed citizens during the depression were farmers fleeing the “dust bowl” of the Great Plains. Between 1930 and 1941, a severe drought afflicted the semiarid states of Oklahoma, Texas, New Mexico, Colorado, Arkansas, and Kansas. Farmers in these areas had stripped the land of its native vegetation, which destroyed the delicate ecology of the plains. To grow wheat and other crops, they had IDENTIFY CAUSES pushed agriculture beyond the Why did the natural envinatural limits of the soil, making ronment receive so much their land vulnerable, in times of attention under New Deal drought, to wind erosion of the programs, and with what topsoil (Map 23.4). When the result? winds came, huge clouds of thick dust rolled over the land, turning the day into night. This ecological disaster prompted a mass exodus. At least 350,000 “Okies” (so called whether or not they were from Oklahoma) loaded their belongings into cars and trucks and headed to California. John Steinbeck’s novel The Grapes of Wrath (1939) immortalized them, and New Deal photographer Dorothea Lange’s haunting images of California migrant camps made them the public face of the depression’s human toll.

Reshaping the Environment
 Attention to natural resources was a dominant theme of the New Deal, and the shaping of the landscape was among its most visible legacies. Franklin Roosevelt and Interior Secretary Harold Ickes saw themselves as conservationists in the tradition of FDR’s cousin, Theodore Roosevelt. In an era before environmentalism, FDR practiced what he called the “gospel of conservation.” The president cared primarily about making the land — and other natural resources, such as trees and water — better serve human needs. National policy stressed scientific land management and ecological balance. Preserving wildlife and wilderness was of secondary importance. Under Roosevelt, the federal government both responded to environmental crises and MAP 23.4 The Dust Bowl and Federal Building Projects in the West, 1930–1941 N W

E


Co


 lu m b i a R .

S


R.


A U.S.
Weather Bureau scientist called the drought of the 1930s “the worst in the climatological history of the country.” Conditions were especially severe in the southern plains, where farming on marginal land threatened the environment even before the drought struck. As farm families migrated west on U.S. Route 66, the federal government began a series of massive building projects that provided flood control, irrigation, electric power, and transportation facilities to residents of the states of the Far West. 
 CANADA

Co


 lo

 do ra

PACIFIC OCEAN
Area of dust bowl Area of severe wind erosion Area of dust storm, May 1933 Margin of semiarid west (20" annual rainfall) Each dot represents 5,000 acres in marginal cropland 1924–1929 Major migration route 
Gulf of Mexico


 MEXICO





 500 miles 500 kilometers



 PART 7

DOMESTIC AND GLOBAL CHALLENGES, 1890–1945

U.S.
Department of Agriculture, lent their expertise to establishing sound farming practices in the plains. 
The Human Face of the Great Depression
 Migrant Mother by Dorothea Lange is one of the most famous documentary photographs of the 1930s. On assignment for the Resettlement Administration, Lange spent only ten minutes in a pea-pickers’ camp in Nipomo, California. There she captured this image (though not the name) of the woman whose despair and resignation she so powerfully recorded. In the 1970s the woman was identified as Florence Thompson, a native Cherokee from Oklahoma, who disagreed with Lange’s recollections of the circumstances of the taking of the photograph. Thompson and her family had left Nipomo, however, by the time the publication of this image sparked a large relief effort directed at the camp’s migrant workers. Library of Congress.

 Roosevelt and Ickes believed that poor land practices made for poor people. Under their direction, government agencies tackled the dust bowl’s human causes. Agents from the newly created Soil Conservation Service, for instance, taught farmers to prevent soil erosion by tilling hillsides along the contours of the land. They also encouraged (and sometimes paid) farmers to take certain commercial crops out of production and plant soil-preserving grasses instead. One of the U.S. Forest Service’s most widely publicized programs was the Shelterbelts, the planting of 220 million trees running north along the 99th meridian from Abilene, Texas, to the Canadian border. Planted as a windbreak, the trees also prevented soil erosion. A variety of government agencies, from the CCC to the

 Tennessee Valley Authority The most extensive New Deal environmental undertaking was the Tennessee Valley Authority (TVA), which Roosevelt saw as the first step in modernizing the South. Funded by Congress in 1933, the TVA integrated flood control, reforestation, electricity generation, and agricultural and industrial development. The dams and their hydroelectric plants provided cheap electric power for homes and factories as well as ample recreational opportunities for the valley’s residents. The massive project won praise around the world (Map 23.5). The TVA was an integral part of the Roosevelt administration’s effort to keep farmers on the land by enhancing the quality of rural life. The Rural Electrification Administration (REA), established in 1935, was also central to that goal. Fewer than one-tenth of the nation’s 6.8 million farms had electricity. The REA addressed this problem by promoting nonprofit farm cooperatives that offered loans to farmers to install power lines. By 1940, 40 percent of the nation’s farms had electricity; a decade later, 90 percent did. Electricity brought relief from the drudgery and isolation of farm life. Electric irons, vacuum cleaners, and washing machines eased women’s burdens, and radios brightened the lives of the entire family. Along with the automobile and the movies, electricity broke down the barriers between urban and rural life. Grand Coulee As the nation’s least populated but fastest-growing region, the West benefitted enormously from the New Deal’s attention to the environment. With the largest number of state and federal parks in the country, the West gained countless trails, bridges, cabins, and other recreational facilities, laying the groundwork for the post–World War II expansion of western tourism. On the Colorado River, Boulder Dam (later renamed Hoover Dam) was completed in 1935 with Public Works Administration funds; the dam generated power for the region’s growing cities such as Las Vegas, Los Angeles, and Phoenix. The largest project in the West, however, took shape in an obscure corner of Washington State, where the PWA and the Bureau of Reclamation built the Grand Coulee Dam on the Columbia River. When it was completed in 1941, Grand Coulee was the largest electricity-producing structure in the world, and its 150-mile lake provided irrigation for the state’s major crops: apples, cherries, pears, potatoes, and wheat. Inspired by the dam and the modernizing spirit of the

Managing the Great Depression, Forging the New Deal, 1929–1939


Cairo
"
"
Paducah


Duck


R.


!


S.


"
Knoxville


E


"


 TENNESSEE

G


Oak Ridge


Nashville"


M


T


 berland R . C um

Asheville"


 Watt’s Bar

Florence


!


"
Chattanooga


R.


"
Huntsville


Decatur "
Te


"


"


 nn

 e

 ALABAMA





U


"


SOUTH CAROLINA

Atlanta


N


"


W




L


 GEORGIA

MISSISSIPPI
Birmingham 
B


 ee

Muscle Shoals
Tupelo


NORTH CAROLINA

E


Memphis


 ss

"


 VIRGINIA . h R R. inc ton Cl Hols Bristol "

Bowling Green"


R.


 ARKANSAS

WEST VIRGINIA

 KENTUCKY

 sippi

The Tennessee Valley Authority was one
 of the New Deal’s most far-reaching environmental projects. Between 1933 and 1952, the TVA built twenty dams and improved five others, taming the flood-prone Tennessee River and its main tributaries. The cheap hydroelectric power generated by the dams brought electricity to industries as well as hundreds of thousands of area residents, and artificial lakes provided extensive recreational facilities. Widely praised at the time, the TVA came under attack in the 1970s for its practice of strip mining and the pollution caused by its power plants and chemical factories.

ILLINOIS MISSOURI

Mi
 ss is

The Tennessee Valley Authority,
1933–1952


 ID

 MAP 23.5

R


 CHAPTER 23

E
S
 100 miles

 100 kilometers

 Area served by TVA electric power Tennessee River Valley watershed Principal TVA dam Steam power plant ! Chemical plant

 New Deal, folk singer Woody Guthrie wrote a song about the Columbia. “Your power is turning our darkness to dawn,” he sang, “so roll on, Columbia, roll on!” New Deal projects that enhanced people’s enjoyment of the natural environment can be seen today throughout the country. CCC and WPA workers built the famous Blue Ridge Parkway, which connects the Shenandoah National Park in Virginia with the Great Smoky Mountains National Park in North Carolina. In the West, government workers built the San Francisco Zoo, Berkeley’s Tilden Park, and the canals of San Antonio. The Civilian Conservation Corps helped to complete the East Coast’s Appalachian Trail and the West Coast’s Pacific Crest Trail through the Sierra Nevada. In state parks across the country, cabins, shelters, picnic areas, lodges, and observation towers stand as monuments to the New Deal ethos of recreation coexisting with nature.

 leading painters, muralists, and sculptors. Jackson Pollock, Alice Neel, Willem de Kooning, and Louise Nevelson all received support. The Federal Music Project and Federal Writers’ Project (FWP) employed 15,000 musicians and 5,000 writers, respectively. Among the latter were Saul Bellow, Ralph Ellison, and John Cheever, who became great American writers. The FWP also collected oral histories, including two thousand narratives by former slaves. The black folklorist and novelist Zora Neale Hurston finished three novels while in the Florida FWP, among them Their Eyes Were Watching God (1937). Richard Wright won the 1938 Story magazine prize for the best tale by a WPA writer and went on to complete Native Son (1940), a searing novel about white racism. Similarly, the Federal Theatre Project (FTP) nurtured such talented directors, actors, and playwrights as Orson Welles, John Huston, and Arthur Miller.

The New Deal and the Arts


The Legacies of the New Deal


 In response to the Great Depression, many American writers and artists redefined their relationship to society. Never had there been a decade, critic Malcolm Cowley suggested in 1939, “when literary events followed so closely on the flying coat-tails of social events.” New Deal administrators encouraged artists to create projects that would be of interest to the entire community, not just the cultured elite. Encouraged by the popular New Deal slogan “Art for the millions,” artists painted murals in hundreds of public buildings. The WPA’s Federal Art Project gave work to many young artists who would become the twentieth century’s

 The New Deal addressed the Great Depression by restoring hope and promising security. FDR and Congress created a powerful social-welfare state that took unprecedented responsibility for the well-being of American citizens. During the 1930s, millions of people began to pay taxes directly to the Social Security Administration, and more than one-third of the population received direct government assistance from federal programs, including old-age pensions, unemployment compensation, farm loans, relief work, and mortgage guarantees. New legislation regulated the stock market, reformed the Federal Reserve System,





 PART 7

DOMESTIC AND GLOBAL CHALLENGES, 1890–1945

Grand Coulee Dam
 This extraordinary photo from a Life magazine essay shows workers hitching a ride on a 13-ton conduit as it is lowered into place on the Grand Coulee Dam in Washington State. Dozens of dams were constructed across the country under the auspices of various New Deal programs, but none were more majestic than two in the West: Boulder Dam (renamed Hoover Dam in 1947) and Grand Coulee. Built to harness the awesome power of the Columbia River as it rushed to the Pacific, Grand Coulee would ultimately provide electric power to Seattle, Portland, and other West Coast cities and new irrigation waters for Washington’s apple and cherry orchards, among many other crops. Library of Congress.

 and subjected business corporations to federal regulation. The New Deal’s pattern of government involvement in social life would persist for the rest of the twentieth century. In the 1960s, Lyndon Johnson and the “Great Society” Congress dramatically expanded social-welfare programs, most of which remained intact in the wake of the “Reagan Revolution” of the 1980s. Like all other major social transformations, the New Deal was criticized both by those who thought it did too much and by those who believed it did too little. Conservatives, who prioritized limited government and individual freedom, pointed out that the New Deal state intruded deeply into the personal and financial lives of citizens and the affairs of business. Conversely, EXPLAIN advocates of social-welfare liberCONSEQUENCES alism complained that the New What was the New Deal’s Deal’s safety net had too many long-term legacy? holes: no national health-care system, welfare programs that excluded domestic workers and farm laborers, and state governments that often

 limited the benefits distributed under New Deal programs. Whatever the merits of its critics, the New Deal unquestionably transformed the American political landscape. From 1896 to 1932, the Republican Party had commanded the votes of a majority of Americans. That changed as Franklin Roosevelt’s magnetic personality and innovative programs brought millions of voters into the Democratic fold. Democratic recruits included first- and second-generation immigrants from southern and central Europe — Italians, Poles, Slovaks, and Jews — as well as African American migrants to northern cities. Organized labor aligned itself with a Democratic administration that had recognized unions as a legitimate force in modern industrial life. The elderly and the unemployed, assisted by the Social Security Act, likewise supported FDR. This New Deal coalition of ethnic groups, city dwellers, organized labor, African Americans, and a cross section of the middle class formed the nucleus of the northern Democratic Party and supported additional liberal reforms in the decades to come.

 CHAPTER 23

SUMMARY
We have seen how Franklin Delano Roosevelt’s First New Deal focused on stimulating recovery, providing relief to the unemployed, and regulating banks and other financial institutions. The Second New Deal was different. Influenced by the persistence of the depression and the growing popularity of Huey Long’s Share Our Wealth proposals, Roosevelt promoted social-welfare legislation that provided Americans with economic security. We also explored the impact of the New Deal on various groups of citizens, especially African Americans, women, and unionized workers. Our survey paid particular attention to the lives of the Mexicans, Asians, and Okies who worked in the farms and factories of California. Because of New Deal assistance, the mem- 
CHAPTER REVIEW

 bers of those groups gravitated toward the Democratic Party. The party’s coalition of ethnic workers, African Americans, farmers, parts of the middle classes, and white southerners gave FDR and other Democrats a landslide victory in 1936. Finally, we examined the accomplishments of the New Deal. In 1933, New Deal programs resolved the banking crisis while preserving capitalist institutions. Subsequently, these programs expanded the federal government and, through the Social Security system, farm subsidy programs, and public works projects, launched federal policies that were important to nearly every American. Great dams and electricity projects sponsored by the Tennessee Valley Authority, the Works Progress Administration in the West, and the Rural Electrification Administration permanently improved the quality of life for the nation’s citizens.

C H A P T E R


R E V I E W


M A K E I T S T I C K
Go to LearningCurve to retain what you’ve read. 
TERMS TO KNOW

 Identify and explain the significance of each term below.

Key Concepts and Events
Smoot-Hawley Tariff (p. 736)
Bonus Army (p. 738)
 fireside chats (p. 740) Hundred Days (p. 740) Glass-Steagall Act (p. 740) Agricultural Adjustment Act (p. 741) National Recovery Administration (p. 741) Public Works Administration (p. 741) Civilian Conservation Corps (p. 741) Federal Housing Administration (p. 744) Securities and Exchange Commission (p. 745) Liberty League (p. 746) National Association of Manufacturers (p. 746) Townsend Plan (p. 747)

Key People
 welfare state (p. 747) Wagner Act (p. 747) Social Security Act (p. 747) classical liberalism (p. 749) Works Progress Administration (p. 749) Roosevelt recession (p. 751) Keynesian economics (p. 751) Indian Reorganization Act (p. 756) dust bowl (p. 759) Tennessee Valley Authority (p. 760) Rural Electrification Administration (p. 760)

Herbert Hoover (p. 736)
Franklin Delano Roosevelt
 (p. 739) Father Charles Coughlin (p. 747) Huey Long (p. 747) Frances Perkins (p. 754) Eleanor Roosevelt (p. 754) Mary McLeod Bethune (p. 755) John Collier (p. 756)





 PART 7

CHAPTER REVIEW

REVIEW QUESTIONS
Answer these questions to demonstrate your understanding of the chapter’s main ideas. 
 1. Some historians have seen the New Deal as a natu-

 ral evolution of progressive reforms from earlier in the century. Others have argued that it represented a revolution in social values and government institutions. Do you view the New Deal as an extension of progressivism, or a radical break with the past? Provide evidence for your argument.

 2. How did the lives of women, workers, and racial

 and ethnic minority groups change during the Great Depression? What role did the New Deal play in helping those groups of Americans?

MAKING CONNECTIONS

 events listed under “Politics and Power,” “Identity,” and “Ideas, Beliefs, and Culture” on the thematic timeline on page 671. In what ways did the New Deal coalition and the emergence of the welfare state change the character of American politics? Why did Republicans oppose the Democratic initiatives, and how did these public debates shape visions of American national identity?

 Recognize the larger developments and continuities within and across chapters by answering these questions.

ACROSS TIME AND PLACE
People often 
 view the New Deal as a set of government programs and policies enacted by President Roosevelt and Congress. In this version, change comes from above. Yet there is also evidence that ordinary Americans played an important role in inspiring and championing aspects of the New Deal. Find several specific examples of this, and think about the possible connections between the struggles, protests, and actions of ordinary people and the programs of the New Deal.

MORE TO EXPLORE

THEMATIC UNDERSTANDING
Review the 
VISUAL EVIDENCE
Consider two images: the 
 famous Dorothea Lange photograph of Florence Thompson on page 760 and the photograph of workers building the Grand Coulee Dam on page 762. Why is the first image more frequently associated with the Great Depression than the second? How would it change our understanding of the era if we made the second photograph the iconic representation of the depression?

 Start here to learn more about the events discussed in this chapter.

Kristen Downey, The Woman Behind the New Deal:
 The Life of Frances Perkins, FDR’s Secretary of Labor and His Moral Conscience (2009). Discusses women and the New Deal years as seen through the life and career of an important reformer. Ira Katznelson, Fear Itself: The New Deal and the Origins of Our Times (2013). A powerful explanation of the New Deal’s racial politics. Robert S. McElvaine, The Great Depression (1984) and Down & Out in the Great Depression (1983). The first is an excellent overview of the depression and the New Deal; the second contains letters written by ordinary people.

James F. Simon, FDR and Chief Justice Hughes: The
 President, the Supreme Court, and the Epic Battle over the New Deal (2012). Shows the legal controversies surrounding FDR’s expansion of the state. John Steinbeck, The Grapes of Wrath (1939); Josephine Herbst, Pity Is Not Enough (1933); and Richard Wright, Native Son (1940). Classic depression-era novels. For extensive collections of 1930s materials, see the “New Deal Network” at newdeal.feri.org; government-commissioned art at archives.gov /exhibits/new_deal_for_the_arts; and the slave narratives collected by the Federal Writers’ Project at memory.loc.gov/ammem/snhtml.

 CHAPTER 23

 TIMELINE

CHAPTER REVIEW

 Ask yourself why this chapter begins and ends with these dates and then identify the links among related events.



Smoot-Hawley Tariff


1931–1937


 Scottsboro case: trials and appeals



 Bonus Army marches on Washington, D.C. Franklin Delano Roosevelt elected president



 FDR’s inaugural address and first fireside chats Emergency Banking Act begins the Hundred Days FDR takes U.S. off the gold standard Civilian Conservation Corps (CCC) created Agricultural Adjustment Act (AAA) National Industrial Recovery Act (NIRA) Tennessee Valley Authority (TVA) established Townsend Clubs promote Old Age Revolving Pension Plan



 Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) created Southern Tenant Farmers Union (STFU) founded Indian Reorganization Act Senator Huey Long promotes Share Our Wealth Society Father Charles Coughlin founds National Union for Social Justice



 Supreme Court voids NIRA in Schechter v. United States National Labor Relations (Wagner) Act Social Security Act creates old-age pension system Works Progress Administration (WPA) created Rural Electrification Administration (REA) established Supreme Court voids Agricultural Adjustment Act Congress of Industrial Organizations (CIO) formed



 Landslide reelection of FDR marks peak of New Deal power



 FDR’s Supreme Court plan fails

1937–1938


 “Roosevelt recession” raises unemployment

KEY TURNING POINTS:
Identify two critical turning points between 1934 and 1937, when the New Deal faced specific challenges. 




The World at War
1937–1945


C H A P T E R
THE ROAD TO WAR
The Rise of Fascism War Approaches The Attack on Pearl Harbor 
ORGANIZING FOR VICTORY
Financing the War Mobilizing the American Fighting Force Workers and the War Effort Politics in Wartime 
LIFE ON THE HOME FRONT
“For the Duration” Migration and the Wartime City Japanese Removal 
FIGHTING AND WINNING THE WAR
Wartime Aims and Tensions The War in Europe The War in the Pacific The Atomic Bomb and the End of the War The Toll of the War 


T


 he Second World War was the IDENTIFY THE BIG IDEA defining international event of the How did World War II transform twentieth century. Battles raged the United States domestically and across six of the world’s seven continents change its relationship with the and all of its oceans. It killed more than world? 50 million people and wounded hundreds of millions more. When it was over, the industrial economies and much of the infrastructure of Europe and East Asia lay in ruins. Waged with both technologically advanced weapons and massive armies, the war involved every industrialized power in Europe, North America, and Asia, as well as dozens of other nations, many of them colonies of the industrialized countries. The military conflict began on two continents: in Asia with Japan’s 1937 invasion of China across the Sea of Japan, and in Europe with the 1939 blitzkrieg (lightning war) conducted by Germany in Poland. It ended in 1945 after American planes dropped two atomic bombs, the product of stunning yet ominous scientific breakthroughs, on the Japanese cities of Hiroshima and Nagasaki. In between these demonstrations of technological prowess and devastating power, huge armies confronted and destroyed one another in the fields of France, the forests and steppes of Russia, the river valleys of China, the volcanic islands of the Pacific, and the deserts of North Africa. “Armed defense of democratic existence is now being gallantly waged in four continents,” President Franklin Delano Roosevelt told the nation in January 1941. After remaining neutral for several years, the United States would commit to that “armed defense.” Both FDR and British prime minister Winston Churchill came to see the war as a defense of democratic values from the threat posed by German, Italian, and Japanese fascism. For them, the brutal conflict was the “good war.” When the grim reality of the Jewish Holocaust came to light, U.S. participation in the war seemed even more just. But as much as it represented a struggle between democracy and fascism, it was also inescapably a war to maintain British, French, and Dutch control of colonies in Africa, India, the Middle East, and Southeast Asia. By 1945, democracy in the industrialized world had been preserved, and a new Euro-American alliance had taken hold; the future of the vast European colonial empires, however, remained unresolved. On the U.S. domestic front, World War II ended the Great Depression, hastened profound social changes, and expanded the scope and authority of the federal government. Racial politics and gender roles shifted under the weight of wartime migration and labor shortages. The pace of urbanization increased as millions of Americans uprooted themselves and moved hundreds or thousands of miles to join the military or to take a war job. A stronger, more robust federal government, the product of a long, hard-fought war, would remain in place to fight an even longer, more expensive, and potentially more dangerous Cold War in the ensuing years. These developments, which accelerated transformations already under way, would have repercussions far into the postwar decades.

 Black Mechanics in Tuskegee, Alabama World War II was a “total war,” fought on seven

 continents by hundreds of millions of people and massive national armies. Though a late arrival to the conflict, the United States played a critical role in defeating the Axis powers. Here, African American soldiers in Tuskegee, Alabama, make engine adjustments for a training flight. Jeff Ethell Color Archives.





 PART 7

DOMESTIC AND GLOBAL CHALLENGES, 1890–1945

The Road to War
 The Great Depression disrupted economic life around the world and brought the collapse of traditional political institutions. In response, an antidemocratic movement known as fascism, which had originated in Italy during the 1920s, developed in Germany, Spain, and Japan. By the mid-1930s, these nations had instituted authoritarian, militaristic governments led by powerful dictators: Benito Mussolini in Italy, Adolf Hitler in Nazi Germany, Francisco Franco in Spain, and, after 1940, Hideki Tojo in Japan. As early as 1936, President Roosevelt warned that other peoples had “sold their heritage of freedom” and urged Americans to work for “the survival of democracy” both at home and abroad. Constrained by strong isolationist sentiment, by 1940 FDR was cautiously leading the nation toward war against the fascist powers.

The Rise of Fascism
 World War II had its roots in the settlement of World War I. Germany struggled under the harsh terms of the Treaty of Versailles, and Japan and Italy had their desire for overseas empires thwarted by the treaty makers. Faced with the expansive ambitions and deep resentments of those countries, the League of Nations, the collective security system established at Versailles, proved unable to maintain the existing international order. Fascism, as instituted in Germany by Hitler, combined a centralized, authoritarian state, a doctrine of Aryan racial supremacy, and intense nationalism in a call for the spiritual reawakening of the German people. Fascist leaders worldwide disparaged parliamentary government, independent labor movements, and individual rights. They opposed both the economic collectivism of the Soviet Union — where, in theory, the state managed the economy to ensure social equality — and the competitive capitalist economies of the United States and Western Europe. Fascist movements arose around the world in the 1930s but managed to achieve power in only a handful of countries. Those countries were at the center of global war making in the 1930s.

 Japan and Italy The first challenge came from Japan. To become an industrial power, Japan required raw materials and overseas marIDENTIFY CAUSES kets. Like the Western European What motivated Japanese, powers and the United States Italian, and German expanbefore it, Japan embraced an sionism? expansionary foreign policy in

 pursuit of colonial possessions and overseas influence. In 1931, its troops occupied Manchuria, an industrialized province in northern China, and in 1937 the Japanese launched a full-scale invasion of China. In both instances, the League of Nations condemned Japan’s actions but did nothing to stop them. Japan’s defiance of the League encouraged a fascist leader half a world away: Italy’s Benito Mussolini, who had come to power in 1922. Il Duce (The Leader), as Mussolini was known, had long denounced the Versailles treaty, which denied Italy’s colonial claims in Africa and the Middle East after World War I. As in Japan, the Italian fascists desired overseas colonies for raw materials, markets, and national prestige. In 1935, Mussolini invaded Ethiopia, one of the few remaining independent countries in Africa. Ethiopian emperor Haile Selassie appealed to the League of Nations, but the League’s verbal condemnation and limited sanctions, its only real leverage, did not stop Italy from taking control of Ethiopia in 1936.

 Hitler’s Germany Germany, however, posed the gravest threat to the existing world order. Huge World War I reparation payments, economic depression, fear of communism, labor unrest, and rising unemployment fueled the ascent of Adolf Hitler and his National Socialist (Nazi) Party. When Hitler became chancellor of Germany in 1933, the Reichstag (the German legislature) granted him dictatorial powers to deal with the economic crisis. Hitler promptly outlawed other political parties, arrested many of his political rivals, and declared himself führer (leader). Under Nazi control, the Reichstag invested all legislative power in Hitler’s hands. Hitler’s goal was nothing short of European domination and world power, as he had made clear in his 1925 book Mein Kampf (My Struggle). The book outlined his plans to overturn the territorial settlements of the Versailles treaty, unite Germans living throughout central Europe in a great German fatherland, and annex large areas of Eastern Europe. The “inferior races” who lived in these regions — Jews, Gypsies, and Slavs — would be removed or subordinated to the German “master race.” These territories would provide Germany with what Hitler called “lebensraum” — a new region of settlement and farming and a source of natural resources. A virulent anti-Semite, Hitler had long blamed Jews for Germany’s problems. Once in power, he began a sustained and brutal persecution of Jews, which expanded into a campaign of extermination in the early 1940s. In 1935, Hitler began to rearm Germany, in violation of the Versailles treaty. No one stopped him. In

