 CHAPTER 4

Growth, Diversity, and
Conflict, 1720–1763


British North
America and the
Atlantic World
1660–1763
 By 1660, the patterns of colonial enterprise in the Americas were becoming clear. For the colonies of England — which became Britain after the 1707 Act of Union with Scotland — the period from 1660 to 1763 was one of growth and diversification. Slave imports to plantation colonies exploded, while a wide array of European peoples — coming from Ireland and continental Europe as well as England, Wales, and Scotland — jostled together in rapidly growing regions of neo-European settlement. Yet a coherent imperial vision for these American holdings emerged slowly, and the colonies remained largely independent of crown control. After 1689, Europe plunged into a century of warfare that had an enormous impact on the Americas. As wars spilled over into North America, British, French, and Spanish colonies all engaged more deeply with neighboring Indians, whom they often sought to employ as allies in their struggles to control North American territory. Native American polities were undergoing dramatic transformations in these same years, reshaping themselves to function more effectively in relation to their European neighbors. At the same time, warfare, immigration, and trade laid the foundation for more intensive interactions across the Atlantic. These interactions, and the cultural movements they supported, helped to knit together the increasingly diverse colonies of British North America. Part 2 addresses these developments, giving particular attention to the following three main concepts:



The Diversification of
British North America


Rise of the British Atlantic World


 The American colonies of the various European nations gradually diverged from each other in character. The tribute-based societies at the core of Spain’s empire developed into complex multiracial societies; Portuguese Brazil was dominated by its plantation and mining enterprises; the Dutch largely withdrew their energies from the Americas, except for a few plantation colonies; the French, too, developed several important plantation colonies in the West Indies but struggled to populate their vast North American holdings. The population of Britain’s colonies, by contrast, grew and diversified after 1660. Britain came to dominate the Atlantic slave trade and brought more than two million slaves to its American colonies. The great majority went to Jamaica, Barbados, and the other sugar islands, but half a million found their way to the mainland, where, by 1763, they constituted nearly 20 percent of the mainland colonies’ populations. Slavery was a growing and thriving institution in British North America. Non-English Europeans also crossed the Atlantic in very large numbers. The ethnic landscape of Britain’s mainland colonies was dramatically altered by 115,000 migrants from Ireland (most of them Scots-Irish Presbyterians) and 100,000 Germans. Most immigrated to Pennsylvania, which soon had the most ethnically diverse population of Europeans on the continent. Relations among these groups were often divisive, as each struggled to maintain its identity and autonomy in a rapidly changing landscape.

 These population movements were part of the larger growth and development of the Atlantic World, a phrase historians use to refer to the quickening pace of contacts and exchanges connecting Europe, Africa, and the Americas. The rise of the British Atlantic was a layered phenomenon that began with the strength of Britain’s transatlantic shipping networks, which in turn laid the foundation for large-scale population flows, rising economic productivity, and dramatic cultural transformations. The growing power of its navy, merchant marine, and manufacturing sector allowed Britain to dominate the eighteenth-century Atlantic. Much of the cultural impact of its maritime power derived from two further developments: the print revolution, which brought a vast array of ideas into circulation; and the consumer revolution, which flooded the Atlantic World with a wide array of newly available merchandise. The British Atlantic World gave rise to four critically important cultural developments. It spread Enlightenment ideas and helped to create a transatlantic community of literati interested in science and rationalism; it supported communities of Pietists who promoted the revival and expansion of Christianity; it gave wellto-do colonists access to genteel values and the finery needed to put them into action; and, by making such an abundance of consumer goods available, it encouraged colonists to go further into debt than they ever had before.

 PART 2

BRITISH NORTH AMERICA AND THE ATLANTIC WORLD, 1660–1763



British North
America and the
Atlantic World
1660–1763
Contact and Conflict


Thematic Understanding


 Alongside the diversification of colonial populations and the rise of the British Atlantic, the eighteenth century was shaped by contact and conflict: between colonies and their Native American neighbors, and also among rival European empires. In Europe, the period after 1689 has sometimes been called the Second Hundred Years’ War, when Britain, France, and their European allies went to war against each other repeatedly. As these conflicts came to the North American theater, they decisively influenced Indian relations. Native American populations shrank dramatically or disappeared altogether during the seventeenth century, devastated by the effects of the Columbian Exchange (Chapter 2). The rise of imperial warfare encouraged the process of “tribalization,” whereby Indians regrouped into political structures — called “tribes” by Europeans — that could deal more effectively with their colonial neighbors and strike alliances in times of war. Europeans, in turn, employed Indian allies as proxy warriors in their conflicts over North American territory. This pattern culminated in the Great War for Empire, which began in the North American backcountry, engaged thousands of provincial soldiers and Native American warriors, and reshaped the map of North America. The Treaty of Paris of 1763 gave Britain control of the entire continent east of the Mississippi. Events would soon show what a mixed blessing that outcome would turn out to be.

 This timeline organizes some of the important



 developments of this period into themes. How did the demographic changes outlined under the theme “Peopling” impact the developments that are listed under “Work, Exchange, and Technology”? >

WORK, EXCHANGE, & TECHNOLOGY

 PEOPLING

 POLITICS & POWER

South Atlantic System
 links plantation and neo-European colonies

The Middle Passage
 shapes Africans’ experiences of arrival

 Mercantilist legislation in England: Navigation Acts (1651, 1660, 1663)

 Indian slave trade emerges in South Carolina

 New York inherits Hudson River Valley manors from the Dutch; Carolina proprietors try but fail to institute a manorial system

 First Mennonites arrive in Pennsylvania (1683)

Dominion of New
England (1686–1689)
Glorious Revolution
(1688–1689)
War of the League of
Augsburg (1689–1697)


IDEAS, BELIEFS, & CULTURE

 IDENTITY

Collapse of the Puritan
 Commonwealth leads to toleration in England

 Restoration makes England a monarchy again; royalist revival

 Isaac Newton publishes Principia Mathematica (1687)

The Glorious Revolution
 makes England a constitutional monarchy Massachusetts loses its charter (1684) and gains a new one (1691)

Founding of the
Restoration Colonies:
 the Carolinas (1663), New York (1664), Pennsylvania (1681)

Migrants to Pennsylvania
 seek freehold lands Rapid expansion of African slave imports undergirds sugar, tobacco, and rice plantation systems



New England
 shipbuilding industry and merchant community come to dominate the coastal trade Agricultural labor and artisanal skills in high demand in the Middle colonies



 Quakers emigrate to Pennsylvania and New Jersey Second wave of Germans arrives in Pennsylvania, Shenandoah Valley

 Parliament creates Board of Trade (1696) War of the Spanish Succession (1702–1713)

 The price of wheat rises (doubles in Philadelphia, 1720–1770)

 Scots-Irish begin migrating to Pennsylvania (c. 1720)

 British trade dominates the Atlantic

 Parliament charters Georgia (1732)

Opportunity and
 inequality in the Middle colonies

 Penns make Walking Purchase from the Delawares (1737)

 Freehold society in crisis in New England Half of Middle colonies’ white men landless Conflicts over western lands and political power (1750–1775) British industry being mechanized; colonial debt crisis

 Colonists gain autonomy in the post– Glorious Revolution era

 Rise of toleration among colonial Protestants

 Tribalization developing among Native American peoples

 Print revolution begins

 Robert Walpole is prime minister (1720–1742) Stono Rebellion (1739) War of Jenkins’s Ear (1739–1741) War of the Austrian Succession (1740–1748)

 George Whitefield’s visit to America sparks the Great Awakening (1739) Benjamin Franklin founds American Philosophical Society (1743) New colleges, newspapers, magazines

Ohio Company of
 Virginia receives 200,000 acres (1749)



 John Locke publishes Two Treatises on Government (1690)

40,000 Germans
 and Swiss emigrate to Pennsylvania (1749–1756) Anglo-Americans pushing onto backcountry lands

French and Indian
War/Seven Years’ War
(1754–1763)


 At least twelve religious denominations in Philadelphia

The Albany Congress
(1754)


 Neolin promotes nativist revival among Ohio Indians (1763)

The Treaty of Paris
(1763)


African American
 community forms in the Chesapeake Planter aristocracy emerges in the Chesapeake and South Carolina Culture of gentility spreads among wellto-do

Victory in the Great
 War for Empire sparks pro-British pride in the colonies Desire for political autonomy and economic independence strong

 Pontiac’s Rebellion (1763)

 PART 1

 PART 2 THEMATIC TIMELINE, 1660–1763 TRANSFORMATIONS OF NORTH AMERICA, 1450-1700





The British Atlantic World
1660–1750


C H A P T E R
COLONIES TO EMPIRE, 1660–1713
The Restoration Colonies and Imperial Expansion From Mercantilism to Imperial Dominion The Glorious Revolution in England and America 
IMPERIAL WARS AND NATIVE PEOPLES
Tribalization Indian Goals 
THE IMPERIAL SLAVE ECONOMY
The South Atlantic System Africa, Africans, and the Slave Trade Slavery in the Chesapeake and South Carolina An African American Community Emerges The Rise of the Southern Gentry 
THE NORTHERN MARITIME ECONOMY
The Urban Economy Urban Society 
THE NEW POLITICS OF EMPIRE, 1713–1750
The Rise of Colonial Assemblies Salutary Neglect Protecting the Mercantile System Mercantilism and the American Colonies 


F


 or two weeks in June 1744, the IDENTIFY THE BIG IDEA town of Lancaster, Pennsylvania, How did the South Atlantic System hosted more than 250 Iroquois men, create an interconnected Atlantic women, and children for a diplomatic conWorld, and how did this system ference with representatives from Pennsylimpact development in the British vania, Maryland, and Virginia. Crowds of colonies? curious observers thronged Lancaster’s streets and courthouse. The conference grew out of a diplomatic system between the colonies and the Iroquois designed to air grievances and resolve conflict: the Covenant Chain. Participants welcomed each other, exchanged speeches, and negotiated agreements in public ceremonies whose minutes became part of the official record of the colonies. At Lancaster, the colonies had much to ask of their Iroquois allies. For one thing, they wanted them to confirm a land agreement. The Iroquois often began such conferences by resisting land deals; as the Cayuga orator Gachradodon said, “You know very well, when the White people came first here they were poor; but now they have got our Lands, and are by them become rich, and we are now poor; what little we have had for the Land goes soon away, but the Land lasts forever.” In the end, however, they had little choice but to accept merchandise in exchange for land, since colonial officials were unwilling to take no for an answer. The colonists also announced that Britain was once again going to war with France, and they requested military support from their Iroquois allies. Canassatego — a tall, commanding Onondaga orator, about sixty years old, renowned for his eloquence — replied, “We shall never forget that you and we have but one Heart, one Head, one Eye, one Ear, and one Hand. We shall have all your Country under our Eye, and To see a longer excerpt of the Canassatego take all the Care we can to document, along with other primary sources from prevent any Enemy from this period, see Sources for America’s History. coming into it.” The Lancaster conference — and dozens of others like it that occurred between 1660 and 1750 — demonstrates that the British colonies, like those of France and Spain, relied ever more heavily on alliances with Native Americans as they sought to extend their power in North America. Indian nations remade themselves in these same years, creating political structures — called “tribes” by Europeans — that allowed them to regroup in the face of population decline and function more effectively alongside neighboring colonies. The colonies, meanwhile, were drawn together into an integrated economic sphere — the South Atlantic System — that brought prosperity to British North America, while they achieved a measure of political autonomy that became essential to their understanding of what it meant to be British subjects.

 English Tobacco Label, c. 1700 This label, which was used to advertise Virginia tobacco to London consumers,

 illustrates the growth of plantation economies in North America. Three well-to-do planters, bewigged and dressed in fashionable, colorful coats, take their ease with pipes of tobacco and glasses of liquor while slaves labor for them in the fields. The product’s name — London’s Virginia — highlights the relationship between production on colonial plantations and consumption in the English metropolis. The Granger Collection, New York.





 PART 2

BRITISH NORTH AMERICA AND THE ATLANTIC WORLD, 1660–1763

Colonies to Empire, 1660–1713
 Before 1660, England governed its New England and Chesapeake colonies haphazardly. Taking advantage of that laxness and the English civil war, local “big men” (Puritan magistrates and tobacco planters) ran their societies as they wished. Following the restoration of the monarchy in 1660, royal bureaucrats tried to impose order on the unruly settlements and, enlisting the aid of Indian allies, warred with rival European powers.

The Restoration Colonies and
Imperial Expansion
 Charles II (r. 1660–1685) expanded English power in Asia and America. In 1662, he married the Portuguese princess Catherine of Braganza, whose dowry included the islands of Bombay (present-day Mumbai). Then, in 1663, Charles initiated new outposts in America by authorizing eight loyal noblemen to settle Carolina, an area that had long been claimed by Spain and populated by thousands of Indians. The following year, he awarded the just-conquered Dutch colony of New Netherland to his brother James, the Duke of York, who renamed the colony New York and then regranted a portion of it, called New Jersey, to another group of proprietors. Finally, in 1681, Charles granted a vast track to William Penn: Pennsylvania, or “Penn’s Woods.” In a great land grab, England had ousted the Dutch from North America, intruded into Spain’s northern empire, and claimed all the land in between.

 The Carolinas In 1660, English settlement was concentrated in New England and the Chesapeake. Five corporate colonies coexisted in New England: Massachusetts Bay, Plymouth, Connecticut, New Haven, and Rhode Island. (Connecticut absorbed New Haven in 1662, while Massachusetts Bay became a royal colony and absorbed Plymouth in 1692.) In the Chesapeake, Virginia was controlled by the crown while Maryland was in the hands of a Lord Proprietor. Like Lord Baltimore’s Maryland, the new settlements in Carolina, New York, New Jersey, and Pennsylvania — the Restoration Colonies, as historians call them — were proprietorships: the Carolina and Jersey grantees, the Duke of York, and William Penn owned all the land in their new colonies and could rule them as they wished, provided that their laws conformed broadly to those of England (Table 3.1). Indeed, in New York, James II refused to allow an elective assembly and ruled by decree. The Carolina proprietors envisioned a

 traditional European society; there the Fundamental Constitutions of Carolina (1669) legally established the Church of England and prescribed a manorial system, with a mass of serfs governed by a handful of powerful nobles. The manorial system proved a fantasy. The first North Carolina settlers were a mixture of poor families and runaway servants from Virginia and English Quakers, an equality-minded Protestant sect (also known as the Society of Friends). Quakers “think there is no difference between a Gentleman and a labourer,” complained an Anglican clergyman. Refusing to work on large manors, the settlers raised corn, hogs, and tobacco on modest family farms. Inspired by Bacon’s Rebellion, they rebelled in 1677 against taxes on tobacco and again in 1708 against taxes to support the Anglican Church. Through their stubborn independence, residents forced the proprietors to abandon their dreams of a feudal society. In South Carolina, the colonists also went their own way. The leading white settlers there were migrants from overcrowded Barbados. Hoping to re-create that island’s hierarchical slave society, they used enslaved workers — both Africans and Native Americans — to raise cattle and food crops for export to the West Indies. Carolina merchants opened a lucrative trade in deerskins and Indian slaves with neighboring peoples. Then, around 1700, South Carolina planters hit upon rice cultivation. The swampy estuaries of the coastal low country could be modified with sluices, floodgates, and check dams to create ideal rice-growing conditions, and slaves could do the backbreaking work. By 1708, white Carolinians relied upon a few thousand slaves to work their coastal plantations; thereafter, the African population exploded. Blacks outnumbered whites by 1710 and constituted two-thirds of the population by 1740.

 William Penn and Pennsylvania In contrast to the Carolinas, which languished for decades with proprietors and colonists at odds, William Penn’s colony was marked by unity of purpose: all who came hoped to create a prosperous neo-European settlement that approximated the social and economic systems they knew at home. In 1681, Charles II bestowed Pennsylvania (which included present-day Delaware) on William Penn as payment for a large debt owed to Penn’s father. The younger Penn, though born to wealth — he owned substantial estates in Ireland and England and lived lavishly — joined the Quakers, who condemned extravagance. Penn designed Pennsylvania as a refuge for his fellow Quakers, who were persecuted in England because they refused to serve in the military or pay taxes to support the Church of England. Penn

 CHAPTER 3

The British Atlantic World, 1660–1750


 TABLE 3.1 English Colonies Established in North America, 1660–1750 Chief Export/ Economic Activity

Colony


Date


Original
Colony Type


Carolina




Proprietary


North




 Farming, naval stores

South




 Rice, indigo

New Jersey




Proprietary


Church of England


Royal


Wheat


New York




Proprietary


Church of England


Royal


Wheat


Pennsylvania




Proprietary


Quaker


Proprietary


Wheat


Georgia




Trustees


Church of England


Royal


Rice


Royal


 Mixed farming, lumber, naval stores

Royal


 Fishing, mixed farming, naval stores

New Hampshire
 (separated from Massachusetts)

Nova Scotia






Royal


Royal


Religion


Status in 1775


Church of England


Royal


Congregationalist


Church of England


 himself had spent more than two years in jail in England for preaching his beliefs. Like the Puritans, the Quakers sought to restore Christianity to its early simple spirituality. But they rejected the Puritans’ pessimistic Calvinist doctrines, which restricted salvation to a small elect. The Quakers followed the teachings of two English visionaries, George Fox and Margaret Fell, who argued that God had imbued all men — and women — with an “inner light” of grace or understanding. Reflecting the sect’s emphasis on gender equality, 350 Quaker women would serve as ministers in the colonies. Mindful of the catastrophic history of Indian relations in the Chesapeake and New England, Penn exhorted colonists to “sit downe Lovingly” alongside the Native American inhabitants of the Delaware and Susquehanna valleys. He wrote a letter to the leaders of the Iroquois Confederacy alerting them to his intention to settle a colony, and in 1682 he arranged a public treaty with the Delaware Indians to purchase the lands that Philadelphia and the surrounding settlements would soon occupy. Penn’s Frame of Government (1681) applied the Quakers’ radical beliefs to politics. It ensured religious freedom by prohibiting a legally established church, and it promoted political equality by allowing all property-owning men to vote and hold office.

 Cheered by these provisions, thousands of Quakers, mostly yeoman families from the northwest Midland region of England, flocked to Pennsylvania. To attract European Protestants, Penn published pamphlets in Germany promising cheap land and religious toleration. In 1683, migrants from Saxony founded Germantown (just outside Philadelphia), and thousands of other Germans soon followed. Ethnic diversity, pacifism, and freedom of conscience made Pennsylvania the most open and democratic of the Restoration Colonies.

From Mercantilism to
Imperial Dominion
 As Charles II distributed American land, his ministers devised policies to keep colonial trade in English hands. Since the 1560s, the English crown had pursued mercantilist policies, using government subsidies and charters to stimulate English manufacturing and foreign trade. Now it extended these mercantilist strategies to the American settlements through the Navigation Acts (Table 3.2).

 The Navigation Acts Believing they had to control trade with the colonies to reap their economic benefits, English ministers wanted agricultural goods and raw materials to be carried to English ports in English





 PART 2

BRITISH NORTH AMERICA AND THE ATLANTIC WORLD, 1660–1763

 William Penn’s Treaty with the Indians, 1771 Benjamin West executed this famous picture of William Penn’s 1683 meeting with the Lenni-Lenapes, who called themselves the Common People. A Quaker pacifist, Penn refused to seize Indian lands by force and negotiated their purchase. But his son, Thomas Penn, probably had a political purpose when he commissioned the painting in 1771. By evoking a peaceful past, West’s work reinforced the Penn family’s proprietary claims, which were under strong attack by the Pennsylvania assembly. Pennsylvania Academy of the Fine Arts, Philadelphia, USA / The Bridgeman Art Library.

 vessels. In reality, Dutch and French shippers were often buying sugar and other colonial products from English colonies and carrying them directly into foreign markets. To counter this practice, the Navigation Act of 1651 required that goods be carried on ships owned by English or colonial merchants. New parliamentary acts in 1660 and 1663 strengthened the ban on foreign traders: colonists could export sugar and tobacco only to England and import European goods only through England; moreover, three-quarters of the crew on English vessels had PLACE EVENTS IN to be English. To pay the cusCONTEXT toms officials who enforced these How did the ambitions of laws, the Revenue Act of 1673 Charles II and James II imposed a “plantation duty” on remake English North American exports of sugar and America? tobacco.

 The English government backed these policies with military force. In three wars between 1652 and 1674, the English navy drove the Dutch from New Netherland and contested Holland’s control of the Atlantic slave trade by attacking Dutch forts and ships along the West African coast. Meanwhile, English merchants expanded their fleets, which increased in capacity from 150,000 tons in 1640 to 340,000 tons in 1690. This growth occurred on both sides of the Atlantic; by 1702, only London and Bristol had more ships registered in port than did the town of Boston. Though colonial ports benefitted from the growth of English shipping, many colonists violated the Navigation Acts. Planters continued to trade with Dutch shippers, and New England merchants imported sugar and molasses from the French West Indies. The Massachusetts Bay assembly boldly declared: “The laws of

 CHAPTER 3

The British Atlantic World, 1660–1750


 TABLE 3.2 Navigation Acts, 1651–1751 Purpose

Compliance


Act of 1651


 Cut Dutch trade

 Mostly ignored

Act of 1660


 Ban foreign shipping; enumerate goods that go only to England

 Partially obeyed

Act of 1663


 Allow European imports only through England

 Partially obeyed

Staple Act (1673)


 Ensure enumerated goods go only to England

 Mostly obeyed

Act of 1696


 Prevent frauds; create vice-admiralty courts

 Mostly obeyed

Woolen Act (1699)


 Prevent export or intercolonial sale of textiles

 Partially obeyed

Hat Act (1732)


 Prevent export or intercolonial sale of hats

 Partially obeyed

Molasses Act (1733)


 Cut American imports of molasses from French West Indies

 Extensively violated

Iron Act (1750)


 Prevent manufacture of finished iron products

 Extensively violated

Currency Act (1751)


 End use of paper currency as legal tender in New England

 Mostly obeyed

 MAINE (part of MASS.)

.
 eR nc re

Lake
Ontario


N


D


Hudson R.


NEW YORK

 MARYLAND

MASSACHUSETTS
Boston W BAY PLYMOUTH R.I. CONNECTICUT 
New York


PENNSYLVANIA
Philadelphia 
The Dominion of New England The Puritans’
 troubles had only begun, thanks to the accession of King James II (r. 1685–1688), an aggressive and inflexible ruler. During the reign of Oliver Cromwell, James had grown up in exile in France, and he admired its authoritarian king, Louis XIV. James wanted stricter control over the colonies and targeted New England for his reforms. In 1686, the Lords of Trade revoked the charters of Connecticut and Rhode Island and merged them with Massachusetts Bay and Plymouth to form a new royal province, the Dominion of New England. As governor of the Dominion, James II appointed Sir Edmund Andros, a hard-edged former military officer. Two years later, James II added New York and New Jersey to the Dominion, creating a vast colony that stretched from Maine to Pennsylvania (Map 3.1).

FRAN CE

Connecticu
 t R.

St.
La
 w

N E W


 re R. wa ela

 England are bounded within the seas [surrounding it] and do not reach America.” Outraged by this insolence, customs official Edward Randolph called for troops to “reduce Massachusetts to obedience.” Instead, the Lords of Trade — the administrative body charged with colonial affairs — chose a less violent, but no less confrontational, strategy. In 1679, it denied the claim of Massachusetts Bay to New Hampshire and eventually established a separate royal colony there. Then, in 1684, the Lords of Trade persuaded an English court to annul the Massachusetts Bay charter by charging the Puritan government with violating the Navigation Acts and virtually outlawing the Church of England.

!


EAST JERSEY

S


A T LA N T I C
O C EA N


WEST JERSEY

E




 100 miles

 100 kilometers

Dominion of New England
 Royal colonies

 VIRGINIA

 St. Mary’s City

 Proprietary colonies Political revolts in 1689 Boston: Overthrow of Governor Andros New York: Leisler’s Rebellion Maryland: Protestant Association

 MAP 3.1 The Dominion of New England, 1686–1689 In the Dominion, James II created a vast royal colony that stretched nearly 500 miles along the Atlantic coast. During the Glorious Revolution in England, politicians and ministers in Boston and New York City led revolts that ousted Dominion officials and repudiated their authority. King William and Queen Mary replaced the Dominion with governments that balanced the power held by imperial authorities and local political institutions.





 PART 2

BRITISH NORTH AMERICA AND THE ATLANTIC WORLD, 1660–1763

 The Dominion extended to America the authoritarian model of colonial rule that the English government had imposed on Catholic Ireland. James II ordered Governor Andros to abolish the existing legislative assemblies. In Massachusetts, Andros banned town meetings, angering villagers who prized local self-rule, and advocated public worship in the Church of England, offending Puritan Congregationalists. Even worse, from the colonists’ perspective, the governor invalidated all land titles granted under the original Massachusetts Bay charter. Andros offered to provide new deeds, but only if the colonists would pay an annual fee.

The Glorious Revolution in
England and America
 Fortunately for the colonists, James II angered English political leaders as much as Andros alienated colonists. The king revoked the charters of English towns, rejected the advice of Parliament, and aroused popular opposition by openly practicing Roman Catholicism. Then, in 1688, James’s Spanish Catholic wife gave birth to a son. To forestall the outcome of having a Catholic heir to the English throne, Protestant bishops and parliamentary leaders in the Whig Party invited William of Orange, a staunchly Protestant Dutch prince who was married to James’s Protestant daughter, Mary Stuart, to come to England at the head of an invading army. With their support, William led a quick and nearly bloodless coup, and King James II was overthrown in an event dubbed the Glorious Revolution by

 its supporters. Whig politicians forced King William and Queen Mary to accept the Declaration of Rights, creating a constitutional monarchy that enhanced the powers of the House of Commons at the expense of the crown. The Whigs wanted political power, especially the power to levy taxes, to reside in the hands of the gentry, merchants, and other substantial property owners. To justify their coup, the members of Parliament relied on political philosopher John Locke. In his Two Treatises on Government (1690), Locke rejected the divine-right monarchy celebrated by James II, arguing that the legitimacy of government rests on the consent of the governed and that individuals have inalienable natural rights to life, liberty, and property. Locke’s celebration of individual rights and representative government had a lasting influence in America, where many political leaders wanted to expand the powers of the colonial assemblies.

Rebellions in America The Glorious Revolution
 sparked rebellions by Protestant colonists in Massachusetts, Maryland, and New York. When news of the coup reached Boston in April 1689, Puritan leaders and 2,000 militiamen seized Governor Andros and shipped him back to England. Heeding American complaints of authoritarian rule, the new monarchs broke up the Dominion of New England. However, they refused to restore the old Puritan-dominated government of Massachusetts Bay, instead creating in 1692 a new royal colony (which included Plymouth and Maine). The new charter empowered the king to

The Leviathan Absolutist State
 This detail from the title-page engraving of Thomas Hobbes’s Leviathan (1651) conveys Hobbes’s belief that peace and security required submission to a powerful sovereign. In this image, a giant king looms over his domain, his staff and sword symbolizing his civil and religious powers. He is the head of a body made up of the multitudes of his faceless and voiceless subjects, as they carry out his commands. What Hobbes celebrated, a majority of English politicians and people rejected. Fearing the claims of absolute power by Stuart kings, they revolted twice, executing Charles I in 1649 and deposing James II in 1688. Title page from the first edition of Thomas Hobbes’s Leviathan, published in 1651.

 CHAPTER 3

 appoint the governor and customs officials, gave the vote to all male property owners (not just Puritan church members), and eliminated Puritan restrictions on the Church of England. In Maryland, the uprising had economic as well as religious causes. Since 1660, falling tobacco prices had hurt poorer farmers, who were overwhelmingly Protestant, while taxes and fees paid to mostly Catholic proprietary officials continued to rise. When Parliament ousted James II, a Protestant association mustered 700 men and forcibly removed the Catholic governor. The Lords of Trade supported this Protestant initiative: they suspended Lord Baltimore’s proprietorship, imposed royal government, and made the Church of England the legal religion in the colony. This arrangement lasted until 1715, when Benedict Calvert, the fourth Lord Baltimore, converted to the Anglican faith and the king restored the proprietorship to the Calvert family. In New York, a Dutchman named Jacob Leisler led the rebellion against the Dominion of New England.

King William III and Mary II
 Rejecting Hobbes’s vision of Leviathan and James II’s attempts to impose absolutism, a group of England’s most powerful politicians invited William of Orange — a prince of the Dutch Republic — to invade England, depose James II, and occupy the throne jointly with his wife Mary. William’s army quickly overthrew James in the so-called Glorious Revolution of 1688, an event that reverberated across the Atlantic in rebellions in Massachusetts, Maryland, and New York. This portrait, from the Guild Book of the Barber Surgeons of York, was probably painted to celebrate the coronation of William and Mary in 1689. HIP/Art Resource, NY.

The British Atlantic World, 1660–1750




 Initially he enjoyed broad supEXPLAIN port, but he soon alienated many CONSEQUENCES English-speaking New Yorkers How did the Glorious and well-to-do Dutch residents. Revolution affect relations Leisler’s heavy-handed tactics between England and its made him vulnerable; when colonies? William and Mary appointed Henry Sloughter as governor in 1691, Leisler was indicted for treason, hanged, and decapitated — an act of ethnic vengeance that corrupted New York politics for a generation. The Glorious Revolution of 1688–1689 began a new era in the politics of both England and its American colonies. In England, William and Mary ruled as constitutional monarchs; overseas, they promoted an empire based on commerce. They accepted the overthrow of James’s disastrous Dominion of New England and allowed Massachusetts (under its new charter) and New York to resume self-government. In 1696, Parliament created a new body, the Board of Trade, to oversee



 PART 2

BRITISH NORTH AMERICA AND THE ATLANTIC WORLD, 1660–1763

 colonial affairs. While the Board of Trade continued to pursue the mercantilist policies that made the colonies economically beneficial, otherwise it permitted local elites to maintain a strong hand in colonial affairs. As England plunged into a new era of European warfare, its leaders had little choice but to allow its colonies substantial autonomy.

 alliances with neighboring Native Americans, who tried to turn the fighting to their own advantage. Although war brought money to the American colonies in the form of war contracts, it also placed new demands on colonial governments to support the increasingly militant British Empire. To win wars in Western Europe, the Caribbean, and far-flung oceans, British leaders created a powerful central state that spent three-quarters of its revenue on military and naval expenses.

Imperial Wars and
Native Peoples


Tribalization


 The price that England paid for bringing William of Orange to the throne was a new commitment to warfare on the continent. England wanted William because of his unambiguous Protestant commitments; William wanted England because of the resources it could bring to bear in European wars. Beginning with the War of the League of Augsburg in 1689, England embarked on an era sometimes called the Second Hundred Years’ War, which lasted until the defeat of Napoleon at Waterloo in 1815. In that time, England (Britain after 1707) fought in seven major wars; the longest era of peace lasted only twenty-six years (Table 3.3). Imperial wars transformed North America. Prior to 1689, American affairs were distant from those of Europe, but the recurrent wars of the eighteenth century spilled over repeatedly into the colonies. Governments were forced to arm themselves and create new

 For Native Americans, the rise of war intersected with a process scholars have called tribalization: the adaptation of stateless peoples to the demands imposed on them by neighboring states. In North America, tribalization occurred in catastrophic circumstances. Eurasian diseases rapidly killed off broad swaths of native communities, disproportionately victimizing the old and the very young. In oral cultures, old people were irreplaceable repositories of knowledge, while the young were quite literally the future. With populations in free fall, many polities disappeared altogether. By the eighteenth century, the groups that survived had all been transformed. Many were polyglot peoples: Some new tribes, like the Catawbas, had not existed before and were pieced together from remnants of formerly large groups. Other nations, like the Iroquois, declined in numbers but sustained themselves by adopting many

 TABLE 3.3 English Wars, 1650–1750 War

Date


Purpose


Result


Anglo-Dutch


1652–1654


 Control markets and African slave trade

Stalemate


Anglo-Dutch




 Markets; conquest

 England takes New Amsterdam

Anglo-Dutch




 Commercial markets

 England makes maritime gains

 King William’s

1689–1697


 Maintain European balance of power

Stalemate in North America


 Queen Anne’s

1702–1713


 Maintain European balance of power

 British acquire Hudson Bay and Nova Scotia

 Jenkins’s Ear

1739–1741


 Expand markets in Spanish America

 English merchants expand influence

 King George’s

1740–1748


 Maintain European balance of power

 Capture and return of Louisbourg

 CHAPTER 3

 war captives. In the Carolina borderlands, a large number of Muskogean-speaking communities came together as a nation known to the British as the “Creek” Indians, so named because some of them lived on Ochese Creek. Similarly, the Cherokees, the Delawares, and other groups that were culturally linked but politically fragmented became coherent “tribes” to deal more effectively with their European neighbors. The rise of imperial warfare exposed Native American communities to danger, but it also gave them newfound leverage. The Iroquois were radically endangered by imperial conflict: a promised English alliance failed them, and in 1693 a combined force of French soldiers, militiamen, and their Indian allies burned all three Mohawk villages to the ground. Thereafter, the Iroquois devised a strategy for playing French and English interests off against each other. In 1701, they made alliances with both empires, declaring their intention to remain neutral in future conflicts between

The “Four Indian Kings” in London, 1710
 After a failed invasion of Canada in 1709, a colonial delegation went to London to ask the queen to try again. They brought four Indians with them — three Mohawks and a Mahican — and presented them in London as the “Four Indian Kings” of the Iroquois. The four kings met Queen Anne, dined with nobility, attended the theater, and toured the sites. They sat for several portraits, which were engraved for prints like this one. The queen agreed to make another try for Canada, but the 1711 invasion failed again. Albany Institute of History and Art, Gift of the Estate of Cornelia Cogswell (Mrs. Henry M. Sage) 1972.65.7.

The British Atlantic World, 1660–1750


 them. This did not mean that the Iroquois stayed on the sideline: Iroquois warriors often participated in raids during wartime, and Iroquois spokesmen met regularly with representatives of New York and New France to affirm their alliances and receive diplomatic gifts that included guns, powder, lead, clothing, and rum (from the British) or brandy (from the French). Their neutrality, paradoxically, made them more sought after as allies. For example, their alliance with New York, known as the Covenant Chain, soon became a model for relations between the British Empire and other Native American peoples. Imperial warfare also reshaped Indian relations in the Southeast. During the War of the Spanish Succession (1702–1713), which pitted Britain against France and Spain, English settlers in the Carolinas armed the Creeks, whose 15,000 members farmed the fertile lands along the present-day border of Georgia and Alabama. A joint English-Creek expedition attacked Spanish





 PART 2

BRITISH NORTH AMERICA AND THE ATLANTIC WORLD, 1660–1763

 Florida, burning the town of St. Augustine but failing to capture the fort. To protect Havana in nearby Cuba, the Spanish reinforced St. Augustine and unsuccessfully attacked Charleston, South Carolina.

 of Gibraltar at the entrance to the Mediterranean and a thirty-year contract to supply slaves to Spanish America. These gains advanced Britain’s quest for commercial supremacy and brought peace to eastern North America for a generation (Map 3.2).

Indian Goals
 The Creeks had their own agenda: to become the dominant tribe in the region, they needed to vanquish their longtime enemies, the pro-French Choctaws to the west and the Spanish-allied Apalachees to the south. Beginning in 1704, a force of Creek and Yamasee warriors destroyed the remaining Franciscan missions in northern Florida, attacked the Spanish settlement at Pensacola, and captured a thousand Apalachees, whom they sold to South Carolinian slave traders for sale in the West Indies. Simultaneously, a Carolina-supported Creek expedition attacked the Iroquois-speaking Tuscarora people of North Carolina, killing hundreds, executing 160 male captives, and sending 400 women and children into slavery. The surviving Tuscaroras joined the Iroquois in New York (who now became the Six Nations of the Iroquois). The Carolinians, having used the Creeks to kill Spaniards, now died at the hands of their former allies: when English traders demanded payment for trade debts in 1715, the Creeks and Yamasees revolted, killing 400 colonists before being overwhelmed by the Carolinians and their new Indian allies, the Cherokees. Native Americans also joined in the warfare between French UNDERSTAND POINTS Catholics in Canada and English OF VIEW Protestants in New England. What did Native Americans With French aid, Catholic have to gain by participatMohawk and Abenaki warriors ing in imperial wars? took revenge on their Puritan enemies. They destroyed English settlements in Maine and, in 1704, attacked the western Massachusetts town of Deerfield, where they killed 48 residents and carried 112 into captivity. In response, New England militia attacked French settlements and, in 1710, joined with British naval forces to seize Port Royal in French Acadia (Nova Scotia). However, a major British–New England expedition against the French stronghold at Quebec, inspired in part by the visit of four Indian “kings” to London, failed miserably. Stalemated militarily in America, Britain won major territorial and commercial concessions through its victories in Europe. In the Treaty of Utrecht (1713), Britain obtained Newfoundland, Acadia, and the Hudson Bay region of northern Canada from France, as well as access through Albany to the western Indian trade. From Spain, Britain acquired the strategic fortress

The Imperial Slave Economy
 Britain’s focus on America reflected the growth of a new agricultural and commercial order — the South Atlantic System — that produced sugar, tobacco, rice, and other tropical and subtropical products for an international market. Its plantation societies were ruled by European planter-merchants and worked by hundreds of thousands of enslaved Africans (Figure 3.1).

The South Atlantic System
 The South Atlantic System had its center in Brazil and the West Indies, and sugar was its primary product. Before 1500, there were few sweet foods in Europe — mostly honey and fruits — so when European planters developed vast sugarcane plantations in America, they found a ready market for their crop. (The craving for the potent new sweet food was so intense that, by 1900, sugar accounted for an astonishing 20 percent of the calories consumed by the world’s people.) European merchants, investors, and planters garnered the profits of the South Atlantic System. Following mercantilist principles, they provided the plantations with tools and equipment to grow and process the sugarcane and ships to carry it to Europe. But it was the Atlantic slave trade that made the system run. Between 1520 and 1650, Portuguese traders carried about 820,000 Africans across the Atlantic — about 4,000 slaves a year before 1600 and 10,000 annually thereafter. Over the next half century, the Dutch dominated the Atlantic slave trade; then, between 1700 and 1800, the British transported about 2.5 million of the total of 6.1 million Africans carried to the Americas.

 England and the West Indies England was a latecomer to the plantation economy, but from the beginning the prospect of a lucrative cash crop drew large numbers of migrants. On St. Kitts, Nevis, Montserrat, and Barbados, most early settlers were small-scale English farmers (and their indentured servants) who exported tobacco and livestock hides; on this basis, they created small but thriving colonies. In 1650, there were more English residents in the West Indies (some 44,000) than in the Chesapeake (20,000) and New England (23,000) colonies combined.

 CHAPTER 3

The British Atlantic World, 1660–1750


 The date of the map is important. The Treaty of Utrecht, which ended Queen Anne’s War in 1713, transferred Acadia (Nova Scotia) and Newfoundland from France to Britain. an dF ran ce

Hudson
Bay


 nd

HUDSON’S BAY COMPANY

 me clai

 i cla

 MEXICO

 b

E


S


 SH

 d an

 West Indian islands Southern mainland Northern mainland

Corporate


27,000
114,000
177,000


Exports
 per White (shillings)*

£700,000
£220,000
£135,000


122,000
37,000
3,000


 538s. 39s. 15s.

 *(20 shillings = £1 [1 English pound]; £1 in 1715 = about $400 in 2010)

 TI

 nd gla

Proprietary


Population
Average Annual
White
Black
Exports,
1698–1717


 NI

 c an Fr

 e

 ed m

British Colonies: Comparisons
Royal


Nova
Scotia


 CO

W


 n yE

E


 RI

E


Newfoundland
 claimed by England and France

B


N


 la

C


N


A


R


 g En

 LO

F


 y db

 This map has three main elements. First, it shows the geographic extent of Britain’s American possessions. Next, it provides a table showing the racial composition and value of exports of the three main regions. Third, it depicts the form of government in the various colonies.

 claimed by England and Spain FLORIDA (Sp.)

BA H A

AT L A N T I C OCEAN

M
 AS

Gulf of Mexico


 r.) (B

SANTO DOMINGO

N


(Sp.)


Guadeloupe


 CUBA

(Fr.)


(Sp.)


 BELIZE

 JAMAICA

ST. DOMINIQUE

(Br.)


Caribbean Sea


(Fr.)


Puerto
Rico
(Sp.)


(Fr.)


S


Barbados
(Br.)


 Sugar and slavery are key to a full understanding of this map. They explain the high value of exports produced by the tiny Caribbean islands.

E


W


Martinique






 500 miles 500 kilometers

 MAP 3.2 Britain’s American Empire, 1713 Many of Britain’s possessions in the West Indies were tiny islands, mere dots on the Caribbean Sea. However, in 1713, these small pieces of land were by far the most valuable parts of the empire. Their sugar crops brought wealth to English merchants, commerce to the northern colonies, and a brutal life and early death to the hundreds of thousands of African slaves working on the plantations.

 After 1650, sugar transformed Barbados and the other islands into slave-based plantation societies, a change facilitated by English capital combined with the knowledge and experience of Dutch merchants. By 1680, an elite group of 175 planters, described by one antislavery writer of the time as “inhumane and barbarous,” dominated Barbados’s economy; they owned more than half of the island, thousands of indentured servants, and half of its more than 50,000 slaves. In 1692, exploited Irish servants and island-born African slaves staged a major uprising, which was brutally suppressed. The “leading principle” in a slave society, declared one West Indian planter, was to instill “fear”

 among workers and a commitment to “absolute coercive” force among masters. As social inequality and racial conflict increased, hundreds of English farmers fled to South Carolina and the large island of Jamaica. But the days of Caribbean smallholders were numbered. English sugar merchants soon invested heavily in Jamaica; by 1750, it had seven hundred large sugar plantations, worked by more than 105,000 slaves, and had become the wealthiest British colony. Sugar was a rich man’s crop because it could be produced most efficiently on large plantations. Scores of slaves planted and cut the sugarcane, which was then processed by expensive equipment — crushing mills,





 PART 2

BRITISH NORTH AMERICA AND THE ATLANTIC WORLD, 1660–1763

 Number of Africans arriving alive in the Americas and Europe 9,645,000

British North America
500,000


Europe
175,000


Dutch America
500,000


West Indies


Spanish Central America
1,500,000


Portuguese
Brazil


British
1,660,000


French
1,660,000


3,650,000


 Approx. 14% died on slave ships

 FIGURE 3.1 The Transit of Africans to the Americas Though approximately 11 million enslaved Africans boarded ships to the Americas, about 1.5 million (14 percent) of them died en route. Two-thirds of the survivors ended up in Brazil (3.65 million) and the West Indies (3.32 million), where they worked primarily on sugar plantations. Half a million arrived directly from Africa in the present-day United States, while many thousands more were traded to the mainland from the West Indies.

 boiling houses, distilling apparatus — into raw sugar, molasses, and rum. The affluent planter-merchants who controlled the sugar industry drew annual profits of more than 10 percent on their investment. As Scottish economist Adam Smith noted in his famous treatise The Wealth of Nations (1776), sugar was the most profitable crop grown in America or Europe.

The Impact on Britain The South Atlantic System
 brought wealth to the entire British and European economy and helped Europeans achieve world economic leadership. Most British West Indian plantations belonged to absentee owners who lived in England, where they spent their profits and formed a powerful sugar lobby. The EXPLAIN Navigation Acts kept the British CONSEQUENCES sugar trade in the hands of How did the South Atlantic British merchants, who exported System affect the British it to foreign markets, and by 1750 economy? reshipments of American sugar

 and tobacco to Europe accounted for half of British exports. Enormous profits also flowed into Britain from the slave trade. The value of the guns, iron, rum, and cloth that were used to buy slaves was only about one-tenth (in the 1680s) to one-third (by the 1780s) of the value of the crops those slaves produced in America, allowing English traders to sell slaves in the West Indies for three to five times what they paid for them in Africa. These massive profits drove the slave trade. At its height in the 1790s, Britain annually exported three hundred thousand guns to Africa, and a British ship carrying 300 to 350 slaves left an African port every other day. This commerce stimulated the entire British economy. English, Scottish, and American shipyards built hundreds of vessels, and thousands of people worked in trade-related industries: building port facilities and warehouses, refining sugar and tobacco, distilling rum from molasses, and manufacturing textiles and iron products for the growing markets in Africa and America. More than one thousand British merchant ships were plying the Atlantic by 1750, providing a supply of experienced sailors and laying the foundation for the supremacy of the Royal Navy.

Africa, Africans, and the Slave Trade
 As the South Atlantic System enhanced European prosperity, it imposed enormous costs on West and Central Africa. Between 1550 and 1870, the Atlantic slave trade uprooted 11 million Africans, draining lands south of the Sahara of people and wealth and changing African society (Map 3.3). By directing commerce away from the savannas and the Islamic world on the other side of the Sahara, the Atlantic slave trade changed the economic and religious dynamics of the African interior. It also fostered militaristic, centralized states in the coastal areas.

 Africans and the Slave Trade Warfare and slaving had been part of African life for centuries, but the South Atlantic System made slaving a favorite tactic of ambitious kings and plundering warlords. “Whenever the King of Barsally wants Goods or Brandy,” an observer noted, “the King goes and ransacks some of his enemies’ towns, seizing the people and selling them.” Supplying slaves became a way of life in the West African state of Dahomey, where the royal house monopolized the sale of slaves and used European guns to create a military despotism. Dahomey’s army, which included a contingent of 5,000 women, raided the interior for captives; between 1680 and 1730, Dahomey annually exported 20,000 slaves from the

 CHAPTER 3

 TRARZA

Timbuktu


 rR

.


Map
Area


White


.
 lta R Vo

R.
 ger Ni

B l ac k


 BORGU

ASANTE EMPIRE
Wh 
 HAUSA

MAHI OLD OYO

R.
 nue Be

YORUBA DAHOMEY TIV !
Allada BENIN AROCHUKWU ! ! ! !Lagos V E SLA ! Calabar COAST ! ! s Bight of do ss ! ! Bonny a c Benin F or Bra 
 ah yd

SUSU
Sherbro ! MENDE Ca Kumasi W pe ! A IN GOLA c DW Ax Elm Coa cra KRU i i AR m na st ! 110,000 Little Sestos D ! ! ! CO D AS ! Y COAST GOL T T IVOR S COA 
 Numbers denote slaves shipped, 1700–1810

 HAUSA

 MOSSI

R.
Volta


 Îles de Los ! 1.1 million Bance Is. !

 ge

 GHANA

 FULA

SIERRA LEONE

!


Ni


 Senegal R. BRAKNA St. Louis ! WALO Cape Verde CAYOR WOLOF BAOL JOLOF 110,000 ! SINE SERER SALUM WULI Gorée (Dakar) BUNDU MANDING



The British Atlantic World, 1660–1750


 BOBANGI ________

 i R. ang Ub

Bight of
Biafra


500,000
 1.5 million +

R.
Congo


 São Tomé

NEW SPAIN

UNITED STATES OF AMERICA #
Charleston 
________
 LOANGO

Loango !
Bay
Malemba !
!
Cabinda


 1.5 million + 1.5 million +

New#
Orleans


ATLANTIC OCEAN

#


Luanda


 1.5 million +

Mexico City


 o ngo R .

TEKE K
as a 
C


 i R.

 LUANDA

 KONGO _______ !

KASANJE NDONGO
________ MBUNDU 
NEW GRANADA

Benguela


 OVIMBUNDU

Recife#


PACIFIC OCEAN

 Tropical rain forest Savanna Desert Major slave depots ! GHANA Kingdoms KONGO _______ Important suppliers HAUSA Peoples

 BRAZIL

 PERU

N


#Rio de Janeiro


 Slave importation areas in the New World, c. 1800

!


W


RIO DE LA PLATA #

Buenos Aires


E
S






 1,000 miles

 500 1,000 kilometers







 600 miles 600 kilometers

 MAP 3.3 Africa and the Atlantic Slave Trade, 1700–1810 The tropical rain forest of West Africa was home to scores of peoples and dozens of kingdoms. With the rise of the slave trade, some of these kingdoms became aggressive slavers. Dahomey’s army, for example, seized tens of thousands of captives in wars with neighboring peoples and sold them to European traders. About 14 percent of the captives died during the grueling Middle Passage, the transatlantic voyage between Africa and the Americas. Most of the survivors labored on sugar plantations in Brazil and the British and French West Indies.

 ports of Allada and Whydah. The Asante kings likewise used slaving to conquer states along the Gold Coast as well as Muslim kingdoms in the savanna. By the 1720s, they had created a prosperous empire of 3 to 5 million people. Yet participation in the transatlantic slave trade remained a choice for Africans, not a necessity. The powerful kingdom of Benin, famous for its cast bronzes

 and carved ivory, prohibited for decades the export of all slaves, male and female. Other Africans atoned for their guilt for selling neighbors into slavery by building hidden shrines, often in the household granary. The trade in humans produced untold misery. Hundreds of thousands of young Africans died, and millions more endured a brutal life in the Americas. In



 PART 2

BRITISH NORTH AMERICA AND THE ATLANTIC WORLD, 1660–1763

 Africa itself, class divisions hardened as people of noble birth enslaved and sold those of lesser status. Gender relations shifted as well. Two-thirds of the slaves sent across the Atlantic were men, partly because European planters paid more for men and “stout men boys” and partly because Africans sold enslaved women locally and across the Sahara as agricultural workers, house servants, and concubines. The resulting sexual imbalance prompted African men to take several wives, changing the meaning of marriage. Finally, the expansion of the Atlantic slave trade increased the extent of slavery in Africa. Sultan Mawlay Ismail of Morocco (r. 1672–1727) owned 150,000 black slaves, obtained by trade in Timbuktu and in wars he waged in Senegal. In

 Africa, as in the Americas, slavery eroded the dignity of human life.

 The Middle Passage and Beyond Africans sold into the South Atlantic System suffered the bleakest fate. Torn from their villages, they were marched in chains to coastal ports, their first passage in slavery. Then they endured the perilous Middle Passage to the New World in hideously overcrowded ships. The captives had little to eat or drink, and some died from dehydration. The feces, urine, and vomit belowdecks prompted outbreaks of dysentery, which took more lives. “I was so overcome by the heat, stench, and foul air that I nearly fainted,” reported a European doctor.

Two Views of the Middle Passage
 An 1846 watercolor (on the right) shows the cargo hold of a slave ship en route to Brazil, which imported large numbers of African slaves until the 1860s. Painted by a ship’s officer, the work minimizes the brutality of the Middle Passage — none of the slaves are in chains — and captures the Africans’ humanity and dignity. The illustration on the left, which was printed by England’s Abolitionist Society, shows the plan of a Liverpool slave ship designed to hold 482 Africans, packed in with no more respect than that given to hogsheads of sugar and tobacco. Records indicate that the ship actually carried as many as 609 Africans at once. Private Collection/© Michael Graham-Stewart/The Bridgeman Art Library / © National Maritime Museum, London.

AMERICA C O M PA R E D
Olaudah Equiano: The Brutal “Middle Passage” 
 Olaudah Equiano claimed to have been born in Igboland (present-day southern Nigeria). But Vincent Carretta of the University of Maryland has discovered strong evidence that Equiano was born in South Carolina. He suggests that Equiano drew on conversations with African-born slaves to create a fictitious account of his kidnapping at the age of eleven and a traumatic passage across the Atlantic. After being purchased by an English sea captain, Equiano bought his freedom in 1766. In London, he became an antislavery activist, and in 1789 he published the memoir from which the following selections are drawn.

 My father, besides many slaves, had a numerous family. . . . I was trained up from my earliest years in the art of war, . . . and my mother adorned me with emblems after the manner of our greatest warriors. One day, when all our people were gone out to their works as usual and only I and my dear sister were left to mind the house, two men and a woman got over our walls, and in a moment seized us both. . . . I was . . . sold and carried through a number of places till . . . at the end of six or seven months after I had been kidnapped I arrived at the sea coast. . . . I now saw myself deprived of all chance of returning to my native country. . . . I was soon put down under the decks, and there I received such a salutation in my nostrils as I had never experienced in my life; so that with the loathsomeness of the stench and crying together, I became so sick and low that I was not able to eat, nor had I the least desire to taste anything. I now wished for the last friend, death, to relieve me; but soon, to my grief, two of the white men offered me eatables, and on my refusing to eat, one of them held me fast by the hands and . . . tied my feet while the other flogged me severely. I had never experienced anything of this kind before, and . . . could I have got over the nettings, I would have jumped over

 Some slaves jumped overboard to drown rather than endure more suffering. Others staged violent shipboard revolts. Slave uprisings occurred on two thousand voyages, roughly one of every ten Atlantic passages. Nearly 100,000 slaves died in these insurrections, and nearly 1.5 million others — about 14 percent of those who were transported — died of disease or illness on the month-long journey (America Compared, above). For those who survived the Atlantic crossing, things only got worse as they passed into endless slavery. Life on the sugar plantations of northwestern Brazil and the West Indies was one of relentless

 the side. . . . One day, when we had a smooth sea and moderate wind, two of my wearied countrymen who were chained together . . . , preferring death to such a life of misery, somehow made it through the nettings and jumped into the sea. . . . At last we came in sight of the island of Barbados; the white people got some old slaves from the land to pacify us. They told us we were not to be eaten but to work, and were soon to go on land where we should see many of our country people. This report eased us much; and sure enough soon after we were landed there came to us Africans of all languages. Source: The Interesting Narrative of the Life of Olaudah Equiano, or Gustavus Vassa, the African, Written by Himself (London, 1789), 15, 22–23, 28–29.

QUESTIONS FOR ANALYSIS 1.
What elements of Equiano’s account might explain the average slave mortality rate of about 14 percent during the Atlantic crossing? 2. Assuming that Carretta is correct, and Equiano was not born in Africa, why do you think he composed this fictitious narrative of his childhood instead of describing his own childhood in slavery? 
 exploitation. Slaves worked ten hours a day under the hot tropical sun; slept in flimsy huts; and lived on a starchy diet of corn, yams, and dried fish. They were subjected to brutal discipline: “The fear of punishment is the principle [we use] . . . to keep them in awe and order,” one planter declared. When punishments came, they were brutal. Flogging was commonplace; some planters rubbed salt, lemon juice, or urine into the resulting wounds. Planters often took advantage of their power by raping enslaved women. Sexual exploitation was a largely unacknowledged but ubiquitous feature of



 PART 2

BRITISH NORTH AMERICA AND THE ATLANTIC WORLD, 1660–1763

 master-slave relations: something that many slave masters considered to be an unquestioned privilege of their position. “It was almost a constant practice with our clerks, and other whites,” Olaudah Equiano wrote, “to commit violent depredations on the chastity of the female slaves.” Thomas Thistlewood was a Jamaica planter who kept an unusually detailed journal in which he noted every act of sexual exploitation he committed. In thirty-seven years as a Jamaica planter, Thistlewood recorded 3,852 sex acts with 138 enslaved women. With sugar prices high and the cost of slaves low, many planters simply worked their slaves to death and then bought more. Between 1708 and 1735, British planters on Barbados imported about 85,000 Africans; however, in that same time the island’s black population increased by only 4,000 (from 42,000 to 46,000). The constant influx of new slaves kept the population thoroughly “African” in its languages, religions, and culture. “Here,” wrote a Jamaican observer, “each different nation of Africa meet and dance after the manner of their own country . . . [and] retain most of their native customs.”

Slavery in the Chesapeake
 and South Carolina West Indian–style slavery came to Virginia and Maryland following Bacon’s Rebellion. Taking advantage of the expansion of the British slave trade (following the end of the Royal African Company’s monopoly in 1698), elite planter-politicians led a “tobacco revolution” and bought more Africans, putting these slaves to work on ever-larger plantations. By 1720, Africans made up 20 percent of the Chesapeake population; by 1740, nearly 40 percent. Slavery had become a core institution, no longer just one of several forms of unfree labor. Moreover, slavery was now defined in racial terms. Virginia legislators prohibited sexual intercourse between English and Africans and defined virtually all resident Africans as slaves: “All servants imported or brought into this country by sea or land who were not Christians in their native country shall be accounted and be slaves.” On the mainland as in the islands, slavery was a system of brutal exploitation. Violence was common, and the threat of violence always hung over masterslave relationships. In 1669, Virginia’s House of Burgesses decreed that a master who killed a slave in the process of “correcting” him could not be charged with a felony, since it would be irrational to destroy his own property. From that point forward, even the most extreme punishments were permitted by law. Slaves

 could not carry weapons or gather in large numbers. Slaveholders were especially concerned to discourage slaves from running away. Punishments for runaways commonly included not only brutal whipping but also branding or scarring to make recalcitrant slaves easier to identify. Virginia laws spelled out the procedures for capturing and returning runaway slaves in detail. If a runaway slave was killed in the process of recapturing him, the county would reimburse the slave’s owner for his full value. In some cases, slave owners could choose to put runaway slaves up for trial; if they were found guilty and executed, the owner would be compensated for his loss (Thinking Like a Historian, p. 98). Despite the inherent brutality of the institution, slaves in Virginia and Maryland worked under better conditions than those in the West Indies. Many lived relatively long lives. Unlike sugar and rice, which were “killer crops” that demanded strenuous labor in a tropical climate, tobacco cultivation required steadier and less demanding labor in a more temperate environment. Workers planted young tobacco seedlings in spring, hoed and weeded the crop in summer, and in fall picked and hung the leaves to cure over the winter. Nor did diseases spread as easily in the Chesapeake, because plantation quarters were less crowded and more dispersed than those in the West Indies. Finally, because tobacco profits were lower than those from sugar, planters treated their slaves less harshly than West Indian planters did. Many tobacco planters increased their workforce by buying female slaves and encouraging them to have children. In 1720, women made up more than onethird of the Africans in Maryland, and the black population had begun to increase naturally. “Be kind and indulgent to the breeding wenches,” one slave owner told his overseer, “[and do not] force them when with child upon any service or hardship that will be injurious to them.” By midcentury, more than three-quarters of the enslaved workers in the Chesapeake were American-born. Slaves in South Carolina labored under much more oppressive conditions. The colony grew slowly until 1700, when planters began to plant and export rice to southern Europe, where it was in great demand. Between 1720 and 1750, rice production increased fivefold. To expand production, planters imported thousands of Africans, some of them from rice-growing societies. By 1710, Africans formed a majority of the total population, eventually rising to 80 percent in ricegrowing areas (Figure 3.2). Most rice plantations lay in inland swamps, and the work was dangerous and exhausting. Slaves planted, weeded, and harvested the rice in ankle-deep mud.

 CHAPTER 3

40,000


Blacks


Whites


30,000
Black
 majority

20,000


10,000












 FIGURE 3.2 A Black Majority Emerges in South Carolina, 1700–1740 Between disease and the toll taken by the Indian wars, South Carolina’s white population hardly grew at all between 1690 and 1720. But white planters imported thousands of enslaved Africans to grow rice, an extremely profitable plantation crop. As early as 1705, the colony had a black majority, which allowed the development among slaves of a strongly African-influenced language and culture.

 Pools of stagnant water bred mosquitoes, which transmitted diseases that claimed hundreds of African lives. Other slaves, forced to move tons of dirt to build irrigation works, died from exhaustion. “The labour required [for growing rice] is only fit for slaves,” a Scottish traveler remarked, “and I think the hardest work I have seen them engaged in.” In South Carolina, as in the West Indies and Brazil, there were many slave deaths and few births, and the arrival of new slaves continually “re-Africanized” the black population.

An African American
Community Emerges
 Slaves came from many peoples in West Africa and the Central African regions of Kongo and Angola. White planters welcomed ethnic diversity to deter slave revolts. “The safety of the Plantations,” declared a widely read English pamphlet, “depends upon having Negroes from all parts of Guiny, who do not understand each other’s languages and Customs and cannot agree to Rebel.” By accident or design, most plantations drew laborers of many languages, including Kwa, Mande, and Kikongo. Among Africans imported after

The British Atlantic World, 1660–1750




 1730 into the upper James River region of Virginia, 41 percent came from ethnic groups in present-day Nigeria, and another 25 percent from West-Central Africa. The rest hailed from the Windward and Gold coasts, Senegambia, and Sierra Leone. In South Carolina, plantation owners preferred laborers from the Gold Coast and Gambia, who had a reputation as hardworking farmers. But as African sources of slaves shifted southward after 1730, more than 30 percent of the colony’s workers later came from Kongo and Angola. Initially, the slaves did not think of themselves as Africans or blacks but as members of a specific family, clan, or people — Wolof, Hausa, Ibo, Yoruba, Teke, Ngola — and they sought out those who shared their language and customs. In the upper James River region, Ibo men and women arrived in equal numbers, married each other, and maintained their Ibo culture. In most places, though, this was impossible. Slaves from varying backgrounds were thrown together and only gradually discovered common ground.

 Building Community Through painful trial and error, slaves eventually discovered what limited freedoms their owners would allow them. Those who were not too rebellious or too recalcitrant were able to carve out precarious family lives — though they were always in danger of being disrupted by sale or life-threatening punishment — and build the rudiments of a slave community. One key to the development of families and communities was a more or less balanced sex ratio that encouraged marriage and family formation. In South Carolina, the high death rate among slaves undermined ties of family and kinship; but in the Chesapeake, after 1725 some slaves, especially on larger plantations, were able to create strong nuclear families and extended kin relations. On one of Charles Carroll’s estates in Maryland, 98 of the 128 slaves were members of two extended families. These African American kin groups passed on family names, traditions, and knowledge to the next generation, and thus a distinct culture gradually developed. As one observer suggested, blacks had created a separate world, “a Nation within a Nation.” As the slaves forged a new identity, they carried on certain African practices but let others go. Many Africans arrived in America with ritual scars that white COMPARE AND planters called “country mark- CONTRAST ings”; these signs of ethnic iden- How did the experiences of slaves in the Chesatity fell into disuse on culturally peake differ from their diverse plantations. (Ironically, experiences in South on some plantations these Afri- Carolina? can markings were replaced by

THINKING LIKE A HISTORIAN
Servitude and Slavery 
 Britain’s American colonies relied heavily on bound labor. Two forms predominated: indentured servitude and African slavery. The idea of being bound to a master is alien to most of us today; the following texts allow us to glimpse some aspects of the experience. In what ways were these two institutions similar, and how did they differ?

 1. Slave advertisement from Charlestown, Virginia, July 24, 1769.

A
Poor Unhappy Transported Felon’s Sorrowful Account of His Fourteen Years’ Transportation at Virginia, in America (1680). 
 At last to my new master’s house I came, At the town of Wicocc[o]moco call’d by name, Where my Europian clothes were took from me, Which never after I again could see. A canvas shirt and trowsers then they gave, With a hop-sack frock in which I was to slave: No shoes nor stockings had I for to wear, Nor hat, nor cap, both head and feet were bare. Thus dress’d into the Field I nex[t] must go, Amongst tobacco plants all day to hoe, At day break in the morn our work began, And so held to the setting of the Sun. My fellow slaves were just five Transports more, With eighteen Negroes, which is twenty four . . . We and the Negroes both alike did fare, Of work and food we had an equal share.

Source: Courtesy American Antiquarian Society.


 4. Mechanisms used to control slaves, from Thomas Branagan, The Penitential Tyrant; or, slave trader reformed, 1807. The shackles and spurs (lower left) were intended to prevent escape; the faceguard with spiked collar (top and lower right) kept its wearer from either eating or lying down.

 2. Indentured servant advertisement from the Pennsylvania Gazette, 1770. This advertisement offers to sell the remainder of a servant girl’s indenture.

TO BE SOLD, A HEALTHY
servant GIRL’S Time, about 17 Years old, who has between 3 and 4 years to serve. She is sold for no other Reason, only there being more Servants than are needful in the family where she is. N. B. She has had the Small pox, can wash, and do all Sorts of Housework. Enquire of the Printers. 3. Poem by James Revel, c. 1680. James Revel was an Englishman convicted of theft and transported to Virginia, where he served fourteen years as an indentured servant. Upon returning he published 


Source: Library of Congress.


 5. Court deposition of Joseph Mulders, July 31, 1649. In a court case in Lower Norfolk County, Virginia indentured servant Joseph Mulders testified that his mistress, Deborah Fernehaugh, brutally beat her maidservant, Charity Dallen.

 [Mulders testified] That Deborah Fernehaugh, the Mistress of this deponent, did beate her mayd Sarvant in the quartering house before the dresser more Liken a dogge then a Christian, and that at a Certaine time, I felt her head, which was beaten as soft as a sponge, in one place, and that as there shee was a weeding, shee complained and sayd, her backe bone as shee thought was broken with beating, and that I did see the mayds arme naked which was full of blacke and blew bruises and pinches, and her necke Likewise and that after wards, I tould my Mistress of it and said, that two or three blowes, could not make her in such a Case, and after this my speeches shee Chidge [i.e., chided] the said mayd, for shewing her body to the men, and very often afterwards she [the maid] would have shoen mee, how shee had been beaten, but I refused to have seene it, saying it concernes me not, I will doe my worke and if my Mistress abuse you; you may complaine, and about 8 dayes since, being about the time shee last went to Complaine, I knew of her goeing, but would not tell my mistress of it, although shee asked mee, and sayd I could not chuse but know of it. 6. Runaway slave advertisement, Chestertown, Maryland, March 12, 1755. Absconding from their masters was a common method of resistance for both slaves and servants, and masters frequently posted runaway advertisements in local newspapers.

 Chestertown, Maryland, March 12, 1755. TEN PISTOLES Reward. RAN away last night, from James Ringgold, of Eastern Neck, in Kent county, in the province of Maryland, the two following servant men; one named James Francis, an indented servant for five years, a middle siz’d young fellow, about 26 years of age, of a smooth fair complexion, his hair cut off, is an Englishman, and speaks a little in the west country dialect; was brought up to farming and husbandry: Had on, a country kersey jacket and breeches, blue fearnought jacket, and an old dark colour’d coat. The other a lusty young Mulatto fellow, named Toby, a slave about the same age, he is a well set, clean limb’d, stout fellow neither a very bright or very dark Mulatto, has large nostrils, is a likely fellow, and when he talks drawls his words out in a very slow manner, is no other way remarkable; he had on the same sort of clothes with

 the other servant, and one of them has a check or striped green and red everlasting jacket on or with them; and perhaps the Mulatto may set up for a cooper or carpenter, having work at both those business, and also understands plantation affairs. Whoever takes up and secures the above persons, and gives notice, so as their master gets them again, shall have Four Pistoles reward for the white servant, and Six Pistoles for the Mulatto. . . . That this slave should runaway, and attempt getting his liberty, is very alarming, as he has always been too kindly used, if any thing by his master, and one in whom his master has put great confidence, and depended on him to overlook the rest of his slaves, and he had no kind of provocation to go off. It seems to be the interest at least of every gentleman that has slaves, to be active in the beginning of these attempts . . . THOMAS RINGGOLD. Sources: (2) Pennsylvania Gazette, May 3, 1770; (3) John Melville Jennings, ed., The Virginia Magazine of History and Biography 56 (April 1948), 187–194; (5) Second to None: A Documentary History of American Women, Vol. 1 (University of Nebraska Press, 1993), 67–68; (6) Pennsylvania Gazette, March 12, 1755.

ANALYZING THE EVIDENCE 1.
What information do the traders in sources 1 and 2 want to convey to prospective buyers, and why? What similarities and differences do you see in the way sellers might choose to market servants and slaves? 2. What aspects of servitude did James Revel object to (source 3)? How did he compare the experiences of servants and slaves? 3. Source 4 appeared in an abolitionist work published in New York in 1807. How does that fact influence your interpretation of the images? 4. How does Mulders grapple with his position as a fellow servant as he testifies against his mistress (source 5)? Based on Mulders’s testimony, the court removed Dallen from Fernehaugh’s household. How might things have worked differently if either Mulders or Dallen had been a slave? 5. In source 6, what characteristics of each man does the ad emphasize? How does Ringgold view himself as a master, and what does his special plea to other slaveholders tell us about slaveholding culture? 
PUTTING IT ALL TOGETHER
Using the sources above, along with what you learned in class and in Chapter 3, write a short essay that compares servitude and slavery. In what ways did African slavery in the British colonies grow out of servitude and bear close similarities to it, and in what ways were slaves set apart and treated fundamentally differently than their servant counterparts? 




 PART 2

BRITISH NORTH AMERICA AND THE ATLANTIC WORLD, 1660–1763

Hulling Rice in West Africa and Georgia
 Cultural practices often extend over time and space. The eighteenth-century engraving on the left shows West African women using huge wooden mortars and pestles to strip the tough outer hull from rice kernels. In the photo on the right, taken a century and a half later, African American women in Georgia use similar tools to prepare rice for their families. Library of Congress. / Courtesy Georgia Vanishing Archives Collection, sap093.

 brands or scars that identified them with their owners.) But other tangible markers of African heritage persisted, including hairstyles, motifs used in wood carvings and pottery, the large wooden mortars and pestles used to hull rice, and the design of houses, in which rooms were arranged from front to back in a distinctive “I” pattern, not side by side as was common in English dwellings. Musical instruments — especially drums, gourd rattles, and a stringed instrument called a “molo,” forerunner to the banjo — helped Africans preserve cultural traditions and, eventually, shape American musical styles. African values also persisted. Some slaves passed down Muslim beliefs, and many more told their children of the spiritual powers of conjurers, called obeah or ifa, who knew the ways of the African gods. Enslaved Yorubas consulted Orunmila, the god of fate, and other Africans (a Jamaican planter noted) relied on obeah “to revenge injuries and insults, discover and punish thieves and adulterers; [and] to predict the future.”

 Resistance and Accommodation Slaves’ freedom of action was always dramatically circumscribed. It became illegal to teach slaves to read and write, and most slaves owned no property of their own. Because the institution of slavery rested on fear, planters had to learn a ferocious form of cruelty. Slaves might be whipped, restrained, or maimed for any infraction, large or small. A female cook in a Virginia household “was cruelly loaded with various kinds of iron machines; she had one particularly on her head, which locked her mouth so fast that she could scarcely speak; and could not eat nor drink.” Thomas Jefferson, who witnessed such punishments on his father’s Virginia plantation, noted that each generation of whites was “nursed, educated, and daily exercised in tyranny,” and he concluded that the relationship “between master and slave is a perpetual exercise of the most unremitting despotism on the one part, and degrading submission on the other.” A fellow Virginian, planter George Mason, agreed: “Every Master is born a petty tyrant.”

 CHAPTER 3

The British Atlantic World, 1660–1750




Virginian Luxuries, c. 1810
 This painting by an unknown artist depicts the brutality and sexual exploitation inherent in a slave society. On the right, an owner chastises a male slave by beating him with a cane; on the left, a white master asserts his sexual prerogative with a female slave. Abby Aldrich Rockefeller Folk Art Museum, Williamsburg, VA.

 The extent of white violence often depended on the size and density of the slave population. As Virginia planter William Byrd II complained of his slaves in 1736, “Numbers make them insolent.” In the northern colonies, where slaves were few, white violence was sporadic. But plantation owners and overseers in the sugar- and rice-growing areas, where Africans outnumbered Europeans eight or more to one, routinely whipped assertive slaves. They also prohibited their workers from leaving the plantation without special passes and called on their poor white neighbors to patrol the countryside at night. Despite the constant threat of violence, some slaves ran away, a very small number of them successfully. In some parts of the Americas — for example, in Jamaica — runaway slaves were able to form large, independent Maroon communities. But on the mainland, planters had the resources necessary to reclaim runaways, and such communities were unusual and precarious. More often, slaves who spoke English and possessed artisanal skills fled to colonial towns, where they tried to pass as free; occasionally they succeeded. Slaves who did not run away were engaged in a constant tug-of-war with their owners over the terms of their enslavement. Some blacks bartered extra work for better food and clothes; others seized a small privilege and dared the master to revoke it. In this way, Sundays gradually became a day of rest — asserted as a right, rather than granted as a privilege. When bargaining failed, slaves protested silently by working slowly or stealing.

 Slave owners’ greatest fear TRACE CHANGE OVER was that their regime of terror TIME would fail and slaves would rise How much autonomy up to murder them in their could slaves attain, and beds. Occasionally that fear was what did slave owners do realized. In the 1760s, in Amherst to control them? County, Virginia, a slave killed four whites; in Elizabeth City County, eight slaves strangled their master in bed. But the circumstances of slavery made any larger-scale uprising all but impossible. To rebel against their masters, slaves would have to be able to communicate secretly but effectively across long distances; choose leaders they could trust; formulate and disseminate strategy; accumulate large numbers of weapons; and ensure that no one betrayed their plans. This was all but impossible: in plantation slavery, the preponderance of force was on the side of the slave owners, and blacks who chose to rise up did so at their peril.

 The Stono Rebellion The largest slave uprising in the mainland colonies, South Carolina’s Stono Rebellion of 1739, illustrates the impossibility of success. The Catholic governor of Spanish Florida instigated the revolt by promising freedom to fugitive slaves. By February 1739, at least 69 slaves had escaped to St. Augustine, and rumors circulated “that a Conspiracy was formed by Negroes in Carolina to rise and make their way out of the province.” When war between England and Spain broke out in September, 75 Africans rose in revolt and killed a number of whites near the



 PART 2

BRITISH NORTH AMERICA AND THE ATLANTIC WORLD, 1660–1763

 Stono River. According to one account, some of the rebels were Portuguese-speaking Catholics from the Kingdom of Kongo who hoped to escape to Florida. Displaying their skills as soldiers — decades of brutal slave raiding in Kongo had militarized the society there — the rebels marched toward Florida “with Colours displayed and two Drums beating.” Though their numbers and organization were impressive, the Stono rebels were soon met by a wellarmed, mounted force of South Carolina militia. In the ensuing battle, 44 slaves were killed and the rebellion was suppressed, preventing any general uprising. In response, frightened South Carolinians cut slave imports and tightened plantation discipline.

The Rise of the Southern Gentry
 As the southern colonies became full-fledged slave societies, life changed for whites as well as for blacks. Consider the career of William Byrd II (1674–1744). Byrd’s father, a successful planter-merchant in Virginia, hoped to marry his children into the English gentry. To smooth his son’s entry into landed society, Byrd sent him to England for his education. But his statusconscious classmates shunned young Byrd, calling him a “colonial,” a first bitter taste of the gradations of rank in English society. Other English rejections followed. Lacking aristocratic conIDENTIFY CAUSES nections, Byrd was denied a How did the planter elite post with the Board of Trade, maintain alliances with their smallholder passed over three times for the neighbors? royal governorship of Virginia, and rejected as a suitor by a rich Englishwoman. In 1726, at age fifty-two, Byrd finally gave up and moved back to Virginia, where he sometimes felt he was “being buried alive.” Accepting his lesser destiny as a member of the colony’s elite, Byrd built an elegant brick mansion on the family’s estate at Westover, sat in “the best pew in the church,” and won an appointment to the governor’s council. William Byrd II’s experience mirrored that of many planter-merchants, trapped in Virginia and South Carolina by their inferior colonial status. They used their wealth to rule over white yeomen families and tenant farmers and relied on violence to exploit enslaved blacks. Planters used Africans to grow food, as well as tobacco; to build houses, wagons, and tobacco casks; and to make shoes and clothes. By making their plantations self-sufficient, the Chesapeake elite survived the depressed tobacco market between 1670 and 1720.

 White Identity and Equality To prevent uprisings like Bacon’s Rebellion, the Chesapeake gentry found ways to assist middling and poor whites. They gradually lowered taxes; in Virginia, for example, the annual head tax (on each adult man) fell from 45 pounds of tobacco in 1675 to just 5 pounds in 1750. They also encouraged smallholders to improve their economic lot by using slave labor, and many did so. By 1770, 60 percent of English families in the Chesapeake owned at least one slave. On the political front, planters now allowed poor yeomen and some tenants to vote. The strategy of the leading families — the Carters, Lees, Randolphs, and Robinsons — was to bribe these voters with rum, money, and the promise of minor offices in county governments. In return, they expected the yeomen and tenants to elect them to office and defer to their rule. This horse-trading solidified the authority of the planter elite, which used its control of the House of Burgesses to limit the power of the royal governor. Hundreds of yeomen farmers benefitted as well, tasting political power and garnering substantial fees and salaries as deputy sheriffs, road surveyors, estate appraisers, and grand jurymen. Even as wealthy Chesapeake gentlemen formed political ties with smallholders, they took measures to set themselves apart culturally. As late as the 1720s, leading planters were boisterous, aggressive men who lived much like the common folk — hunting, drinking, gambling on horse races, and demonstrating their manly prowess by forcing themselves on female servants and slaves. As time passed, however, the planters began, like William Byrd II, to model themselves on the English aristocracy, remaining sexual predators but learning from advice books how to act like gentlemen in other regards: “I must not sit in others’ places; Nor sneeze, nor cough in people’s faces. Nor with my fingers pick my nose, Nor wipe my hands upon my clothes.” Cultivating gentility — a refined but elaborate lifestyle — they replaced their modest wooden houses with mansions of brick and mortar. Planters educated their sons in London as lawyers and gentlemen. But unlike Byrd’s father, they expected them to return to America, marry local heiresses, and assume their fathers’ roles: managing plantations, socializing with fellow gentry, and running the political system. Wealthy Chesapeake and South Carolina women likewise emulated the English elite. They read English newspapers and fashionable magazines, wore the finest English clothes, and dined in the English fashion, including an elaborate afternoon tea. To enhance their daughters’ gentility (and improve their marriage prospects), parents hired English tutors. Once married,

 CHAPTER 3

 planter women deferred to their husbands, reared pious children, and maintained elaborate social networks, in time creating a new ideal: the southern gentlewoman. Using the profits generated by enslaved Africans in the South Atlantic System of commerce, wealthy planters formed an increasingly well-educated, refined, and stable ruling class.

The Northern Maritime
Economy
 The South Atlantic System had a broad geographical reach. As early as the 1640s, New England farmers supplied the sugar islands with bread, lumber, fish, and meat. As a West Indian explained, planters “had rather buy foode at very deare rates than produce it by labour, soe infinite is the profitt of sugar works.” By 1700, the economies of the West Indies and New England were closely interwoven. Soon farmers and merchants in New York, New Jersey, and Pennsylvania were also shipping wheat, corn, and bread to the Caribbean. By the 1750s, about two-thirds of New England’s exports and half of those from the Middle Atlantic colonies went to the British and French sugar islands. The sugar economy linked Britain’s entire Atlantic empire. In return for the sugar they sent to England, West Indian planters received credit, in the form of bills of exchange, from London merchants. The planters used these bills to buy slaves from Africa and to pay North American farmers and merchants for their provisions and shipping services. The mainland colonists then exchanged the bills for British manufactures, primarily textiles and iron goods.

The Urban Economy
 The West Indian trade created the first American merchant fortunes and the first urban industries. Merchants in Boston, Newport, Providence, Philadelphia, and New York invested their profits in new ships; some set up manufacturing enterprises, including twenty-six refineries that processed raw sugar into finished loaves. Mainland distilleries turned West Indian molasses into rum, producing more than 2.5 million gallons in Massachusetts alone by the 1770s. Merchants in Salem, Marblehead, and smaller New England ports built a major fishing industry by selling salted mackerel and cod to the sugar islands and to southern Europe. Baltimore merchants transformed their town into a major

The British Atlantic World, 1660–1750




 port by developing a bustling export business in wheat, while traders in Charleston shipped deerskins, indigo, and rice to European markets (Map 3.4). As transatlantic commerce expanded — from five hundred voyages a year in the 1680s to fifteen hundred annually in the 1730s — American port cities grew in size and complexity. By 1750, the populations of Newport and Charleston were nearly 10,000; Boston had 15,000 residents; and New York had almost 18,000. The largest port was Philadelphia, whose population by 1776 had reached 30,000, the size of a large European provincial city. Smaller coastal towns emerged as centers of the lumber and shipbuilding industries. Seventy sawmills lined the Piscataqua River in New Hampshire, providing low-cost wood for homes, warehouses, and especially shipbuilding. Hundreds of shipwrights turned out oceangoing vessels, while other artisans made ropes, sails, and metal fittings for the new fleet. By the 1770s, colonial-built ships made up one-third of the British merchant fleet. The South Atlantic System extended far into the interior. A EXPLAIN fleet of small vessels sailed back CONSEQUENCES and forth on the Hudson and How did the rise of the Delaware rivers, delivering car- South Atlantic System goes of European manufactures impact economic development in the northern and picking up barrels of flour colonies? and wheat to carry to New York and Philadelphia for export to the West Indies and Europe. By the 1750s, hundreds of professional teamsters in Maryland were transporting 370,000 bushels of wheat and corn and 16,000 barrels of flour to urban markets each year — more than 10,000 wagon trips. To service this traffic, entrepreneurs and artisans set up taverns, horse stables, and barrel-making shops in towns along the wagon roads. Lancaster (the town that hosted the Iroquois conference described in the chapter opening), in a prosperous wheat-growing area of Pennsylvania, boasted more than 200 German and English artisans and a dozen merchants.

Urban Society
 Wealthy merchants dominated the social life of seaport cities. In 1750, about 40 merchants controlled more than 50 percent of Philadelphia’s trade. Like the Chesapeake gentry, urban merchants imitated the British upper classes, importing architectural design books from England and building Georgian-style mansions to display their wealth. Their wives strove to create a genteel culture by buying fine furniture and entertaining guests at elegant dinners.



 PART 2

BRITISH NORTH AMERICA AND THE ATLANTIC WORLD, 1660–1763

 With the map title in mind, look carefully at the two types of transoceanic trade: one controlled by British ships and the other open to colonial vessels. The latter soon dominated this ocean commerce. N

 The bold, colorful arrows on this map give it a dynamic quality that reflects the nature of the Atlantic trade. But the title suggests we should look for something particular: the rise of the American merchant.

W


E


 t o ba

 cco

 igo , ind

#
GREAT BRITAIN

Glasgow


 r mbe r, lu , flou

# #


London


Bristol


S


 EUROPE

 ar

 u fa man

Boston
Newport #
New York # #
Philadelphia#
Baltimore#
Chesapeake#
 ports

NORTH AMERICA

 salt, wine, bills of exchang e

 s la v

 fish rice

 es

 ds,

 oo dg

 bil

 f ls o

ATLANTIC OC E A N

 nge

 ha

 exc

 e

 tur

 fac

 m

 rum

 ods

 u an

NEW SPAIN

#
 SPAIN

 PORTUGAL

 flour, lumber, fish, molasses, sugar, manufactures, bills of exchange

WEST INDIES

 FRANCE

 las

 mo

 ds d goo cture

 o red g rum, manufactu

Charleston
#
Savannah#


 g , su ses

Madrid


Lisbon#


#


Cadiz


 Think of the bold, straight arrows as a diagram rather than as routes that are accurate in a geographical sense. The width of the arrows suggests the relative importance of each leg. Compare this diagram-type map with the accurately scaled widths of the arrows on Map 3.3.

 AFRICA

 slaves

#


James Fort


#


Sierra Leone


 British-controlled trade American-controlled trade







 1,000 miles

##Accra#


Cape Coast
Castle


 1,000 kilometers

Lagos


 MAP 3.4 The Growing Power of American Merchants, 1750 Throughout the colonial era, British merchant houses dominated the transatlantic trade in manufactures, sugar, tobacco, and slaves. However, by 1750, American-born merchants in Boston, New York, and Philadelphia had seized control of the commerce between the mainland and the West Indies. In addition, Newport traders played a small role in the slave trade from Africa, and Boston and Charleston merchants grew rich carrying fish and rice to southern Europe.

 Artisan and shopkeeper families, the middle ranks of seaport society, made up nearly half the population. Innkeepers, butchers, seamstresses, shoemakers, weavers, bakers, carpenters, masons, and dozens of other skilled workers toiled to gain an income sufficient to maintain their families in modest comfort. Wives and husbands often worked as a team and taught the “mysteries of the craft” to their children. Some artisans aspired to wealth and status, an entrepreneurial ethic that prompted them to hire apprentices and expand production. However, most artisans were not well-todo. During his working life, a tailor was lucky to accumulate £30 worth of property, far less than the £2,000 owned at death by an ordinary merchant or the £300 listed in the probate inventory of a successful blacksmith.

 Laboring men and women formed the lowest ranks of urban society. Merchants needed hundreds of dockworkers to unload manufactured goods and molasses from inbound ships and reload them with barrels of wheat, fish, and rice. For these demanding jobs, merchants used enslaved blacks and indentured servants, who together made up 30 percent of the workforce in Philadelphia and New York City until the 1750s; otherwise, they hired unskilled wageworkers. Poor white and black women eked out a living by washing clothes, spinning wool, or working as servants or prostitutes. To make ends meet, laboring families sent their children out to work. Periods of stagnant commerce threatened the financial security of merchants and artisans alike. For laborers, seamen, and seamstresses — whose

 CHAPTER 3

The British Atlantic World, 1660–1750




The Greenwood-Lee Family, 1747
 Born in Massachusetts and apprenticed as an engraver, John Greenwood (1727–1792) painted dozens of commissioned works there before moving to Surinam in 1752. He painted this scene of his own family at the age of twenty. Group portraits with so many people were rare in the colonies, and it is a technically impressive composition. Greenwood himself is at the right rear, wigless (he wears a velvet cap to keep his head warm) and holding a palette and brushes. The table displays a basket of needlework and a volume of The Spectator, the popular London periodical published by Joseph Addison and Richard Steele. Photograph © 2014 Museum of Fine Arts, Boston. Bequest of Henry Lee Shattuck in memory of the late Morris Gray, 1983.34.

 household budgets left no margin for sickness or unemployment — depressed trade meant hunger, dependence on public charity, and (for the most desperate) petty thievery or prostitution. The sugar- and slave-based South Atlantic System, and cycles of imperial warfare, brought economic uncertainty as well as opportunity to the people of the northern colonies.

The New Politics of Empire,
1713–1750
 The South Atlantic System also changed the politics of empire. British ministers, pleased with the wealth produced by the trade in slaves, sugar, rice, and tobacco, ruled the colonies with a gentle hand. The colonists took advantage of that leniency to strengthen their political institutions and eventually to challenge the rules of the mercantilist system.

The Rise of Colonial Assemblies
 After the Glorious Revolution, representative assemblies in America copied the English Whigs and limited the powers of crown officials. In Massachusetts during the 1720s, the assembly repeatedly ignored the king’s instructions to provide the royal governor with a permanent salary, and legislatures in North Carolina,

 New Jersey, and Pennsylvania did the same. Using such tactics, the legislatures gradually took control of taxation and appointments, angering imperial bureaucrats and absentee proprietors. “The people in power in America,” complained William Penn during a struggle with the Pennsylvania assembly, “think nothing taller than themselves but the Trees.” Leading the increasingly powerful assemblies were mem- IDENTIFY CAUSES bers of the colonial elite. Although What explains the increasing political autonomy of most property-owning white men the colonies in the eighhad the right to vote, only men teenth century? of wealth and status stood for election. In New Jersey in 1750, 90 percent of assemblymen came from influential political families (Figure 3.3). In Virginia, seven members of the wealthy Lee family sat in the House of Burgesses and, along with other powerful families, dominated its major committees. In New England, affluent descendants of the original Puritans formed a core of political leaders. “Go into every village in New England,” John Adams wrote in 1765, “and you will find that the office of justice of the peace, and even the place of representative, have generally descended from generation to generation, in three or four families at most.” However, neither elitist assemblies nor wealthy property owners could impose unpopular edicts on the people. Purposeful crowd actions were a fact of colonial life. An uprising of ordinary citizens overthrew the



 PART 2

BRITISH NORTH AMERICA AND THE ATLANTIC WORLD, 1660–1763

 Number of relatives per assemblyman:

7+
3–6
1–2


None


100%
























1770 1776


 FIGURE 3.3 Family Connections and Political Power, New Jersey, 1700–1776 As early as 1700, more than 50 percent of the members of the New Jersey assembly came from families with a history of political leadership. By 1750, the percentage whose fathers or other relatives had served in the assembly reached 90 percent; indeed, some members had seven relatives who were (or had been) political leaders, clear testimony of the emergence of powerful political families and an experienced governing elite. However, as the conflict with Britain increased after 1765, voters in New Jersey and elsewhere ousted lukewarm patriots, and new families entered the political ranks.

Dominion of New England in 1689. In New York,
 mobs closed houses of prostitution; in Salem, Massachusetts, they ran people with infectious diseases out of town; and in New Jersey in the 1730s and 1740s, mobs of farmers battled with proprietors who were forcing tenants off disputed lands. When officials in Boston restricted the sale of farm produce to a single public market, a crowd destroyed the building, and its members defied the authorities to arrest them. “If you touch One you shall touch All,” an anonymous letter warned the sheriff, “and we will show you a Hundred Men where you can show one.” These expressions of popular discontent, combined with the growing authority of the assemblies, created a political system that was broadly responsive to popular pressure and increasingly resistant to British control.

Salutary Neglect
 British colonial policy during the reigns of George I (r. 1714–1727) and George II (r. 1727–1760) allowed for this rise of American self-government as royal bureaucrats, pleased by growing trade and import duties, relaxed their supervision of internal colonial affairs. In 1775, British political philosopher Edmund Burke would praise this strategy as salutary neglect. Salutary neglect was a by-product of the political system developed by Sir Robert Walpole, the Whig leader in the House of Commons from 1720 to 1742. By providing supporters with appointments and pensions, Walpole won parliamentary approval for his policies. However, his patronage appointments filled the British government, including the Board of Trade and the colonial bureaucracy, with do-nothing political hacks. When Governor Gabriel Johnson arrived in North Carolina in the 1730s, he vowed to curb the powers of the assembly and “make a mighty change in the face of affairs.” Receiving little support from the Board of Trade, Johnson renounced reform and decided “to do nothing which can be reasonably blamed, and leave the rest to time, and a new set of inhabitants.” Walpole’s tactics also weakened the empire by undermining the legitimacy of the political system. Radical Whigs protested that Walpole had betrayed the Glorious Revolution by using patronage — the practice of giving offices and salaries to political allies — and bribery to create a strong Court (or Kingly) Party. The Country Party, whose members were landed gentlemen, likewise warned that Walpole’s policies of high taxes and a bloated royal bureaucracy threatened British liberties. Heeding these arguments, colonial legislators complained that royal governors abused their patronage powers. To preserve American liberty, the colonists strengthened the powers of the representative assemblies, unintentionally laying the foundation for the American independence movement (American Voices, p. 108).

Protecting the Mercantile System
 In 1732, Walpole provided a parliamentary subsidy for the new colony of Georgia. While Georgia’s reformminded trustees envisioned the colony as a refuge for Britain’s poor, Walpole had little interest in social reform; he subsidized Georgia to protect the valuable rice-growing colony of South Carolina. The subsidy, however, did exactly the opposite. Britain’s expansion into Georgia outraged Spanish officials, who were

 CHAPTER 3

The British Atlantic World, 1660–1750


 Succession (1740–1748). Massive French armies battled British-subsidized German forces in Europe, and French naval forces roamed the West Indies, vainly trying to conquer a British sugar island. Three thousand New England militiamen, supported by a British naval squadron, in 1745 captured Louisbourg, the French fort guarding the entrance to the St. Lawrence River. To the dismay of New England Puritans, who feared invasion from Catholic Quebec, the Treaty of Aix-la-Chapelle (1748) returned Louisbourg to France. The treaty made it clear to colonial leaders that England would act in its own interests, not theirs.

Mercantilism and the
American Colonies


 Sir Robert Walpole, the King’s Minister All eyes are on the secretary of the Treasury, Sir Robert Walpole (left), as he offers advice to the Speaker of the House of Commons. A brilliant politician, Walpole used patronage to command a majority in the Commons and also won the confidence of George I and George II, the German-speaking monarchs from the duchy of Hanover. Walpole’s personal motto, “Let sleeping dogs lie,” helps explain his colonial policy of salutary neglect. Clandon Park, Surrey, UK/National Trust Photographic Library/Hawksley Studios/The Bridgeman Art Library.

 already angry about the rising tide of smuggled British manufactures in New Spain. To counter Britain’s commercial imperialism, Spanish naval forces stepped up their seizure of illegal traders, in the process mutilating an English sea captain, Robert Jenkins. Yielding to parliamentary pressure, Walpole declared war on Spain in 1739. The so-called War of Jenkins’s Ear (1739–1741) was a fiasco for Britain. In 1740, British regulars failed to capture St. Augustine because South Carolina whites, still shaken by the Stono Rebellion, refused to commit militia units to the expedition. A year later, an assault on the prosperous seaport of Cartagena (in present-day Colombia) also failed; 20,000 British sailors and soldiers and 2,500 colonial troops died in the attack, mostly from tropical diseases. The War of Jenkins’s Ear quickly became part of a general European conflict, the War of the Austrian

 Though Parliament prohibited Americans from manufacturing textiles (Woolen Act, 1699), hats (Hat Act, 1732), and iron products such as plows, axes, and skillets (Iron Act, 1750), it could not prevent the colonies from maturing economically. American merchants soon controlled over 75 percent of the transatlantic trade in manufactures and 95 percent of the commerce between the mainland and the British West Indies (see Map 3.4, p. 104). Moreover, by the 1720s, the British sugar islands could not absorb all the flour, fish, and meat produced by mainland settlers. So, ignoring Britain’s intense rivalry with France, colonial merchants sold their produce to the French sugar islands. When American rum distillers began to buy cheap molasses from the French islands, the West Indian sugar lobby in London persuaded Parliament to pass the Molasses Act of 1733. The act placed a high tariff on French molasses, so high that it would no longer be profitable for American merchants to import it. Colonists protested that the Molasses Act would cripple the distilling industry; cut farm exports; and, by slashing colonial income, reduce the mainland’s purchases of British goods. When Parliament ignored these arguments, American merchants smuggled in French molasses by bribing customs officials. The lack of currency in the colonies prompted another conflict with British officials. To pay for British manufactures, American merchants used the bills of exchange and the gold and silver coins earned in the West Indian trade. These payments drained the colonial economy of money, making it difficult for Americans to borrow funds or to buy and sell goods among themselves. To remedy the problem, ten colonial assemblies established public land banks, which lent paper money



AMERICAN VOICES

The Rise of Colonial
Self-Government


 Between 1700 and 1760, members of the representative assemblies in British North America gradually expanded their authority and power. Their success was the result of greater popular participation in politics and their own political skills. However, the shift in power from imperial appointees to colonial legislators occurred in a piecemeal fashion, as the almost unconscious product of a series of small, seemingly inconsequential struggles. As you read the following correspondence among legislators, governors, and British officials, look closely at the character of the disputes and how they were resolved.

Alexander Spotswood


Confronting the House of Burgesses
 As a reward for his military service fighting the forces of Louis XIV of France, Alexander Spotswood became governor of Virginia in 1710. A contentious man, Spotswood was a controversial governor. He told the House of Burgesses to its face that the voters had mistakenly chosen “a set of representatives whom heaven has not generally endowed with the ordinary [intellectual or social] qualifications requisite to legislators.” Spotswood set out to reform the voting system that, in his judgment, produced such mediocre representatives. His efforts to oust popular members of the gentry from the House of Burgesses created few friends; in 1722, his enemies in Virginia used their influence in London to have him removed from office.

To ye Council of Trade, Virginia, October 15, 1712
MY LORDS: . . .
The Indians continue their Incursions in North Carolina, and the Death of Colo. Hyde, their Gov’r, which happened the beginning of last Month, increases the misery of that province. . . . This Unhappy State of her Maj’t’s Subjects in my Neighbourhood is ye more Affecting to me because I have very little hopes of being enabled to relieve them by our Assembly, which I have called to meet next Week; for the Mob of this Country, having tried their Strength in the late Election and finding themselves able to carry whom they please, have generally chosen representatives of their own Class, who as their principal Recommendation have declared their resolution to raise no Tax on the people, let the occasion be what it will. This is owing to a defect in the Constitution, which allows to every one, tho’ but just out of the Condition of a Servant, and that can but purchase half an acre of Land, an equal Vote with the Man of the best Estate in the Country. The Militia of this Colony is perfectly useless without Arms or ammunition, and by an unaccountable infatuation, no arguments I have used can prevail on these 
 people to make their Militia more Serviceable, or to fall into any other measures for the Defence of their Country. [From the Journal of the Virginia Council] December the 17th, 1714 The Governor this day laying before the Council a letter from the Right Honorable the Lords Commissioners for Trade dated the 23d of April 1713 directing him to advise with the Council & to recommend to the Generall Assembly to pass a law for qualifying the Electors & the persons Elected Burgesses to serve in the Generall Assembly of this Colony in a more just & equal manner than the Laws now in force do direct. . . . The Council declare that they cannot advise the Governor to move for any alteration in the present method of Electing of Burgesses, some being of opinion that this is not a proper time, & others that the present manner of electing of Burgesses & the qualifications of the elected is sufficiently provided for by the Laws now in force. To Mr. Secretary James Stanhope, July 15, 1715 . . . I cannot forbear regretting yt I must always have to do with ye Representatives of ye Vulgar People, and mostly with such members as are of their Stamp and Understanding, for so long as half an Acre of Land (which is of small value in this Country) qualifys a man to be an Elector, the meaner sort of People will ever carry ye Elections, and the humour generally runs to choose such men as are their most familiar Companions, who very eagerly seek to be Burgesses merely for the lucre of the Salary, and who, for fear of not being chosen again, dare in Assembly do nothing that may be disrelished [disapproved] out of the House by ye Common People. Hence it often happens yt what appears prudent and feasible to his Majesty’s Governors and Council here will not pass with the House of Burgesses, upon whom they must depend for the means of putting their designs in Execution. To the Lords Commissioners of Trade, May 23, 1716 . . . The behaviour of this Gentleman [Philip Ludwell Jr., the colony’s Auditor] in constantly opposing whatever I have offered for ye due collecting the Quitt rents [annual

 feudal dues on land] and regulating the Acc’ts; his stirring up ye humours of the people before the last election of Burgesses; tampering with the most mutinous of that house, and betraying to them the measures resolved on in Council for his Majesty’s Service, would have made me likewise suspend him from ye Council, but I find by the late Instructions I have received from his Majesty that Power is taken from ye Governor and transferred upon the majority of that Board [of Councilors], and while there are no less than seven of his Relations there, it is impossible to get a Majority to consent to the Suspension of him. Sources: R. A. Brock, ed., The Official Letters of Alexander Spotswood (Richmond: Virginia Historical Society, 1885), 2: 1–2, 124, 154–155; H. R. MacIlwaine, ed., Executive Journals of the Council of Colonial Virginia (Richmond: Virginia State Library, 1928), 3: 392.

George Clinton


A
Plea for Assistance  George Clinton served as governor of New York from 1744 to 1752. Like many governors during the era of salutary neglect, Clinton owed his appointment to political connections in England. As the second son of the seventh Earl of Lincoln, he would inherit neither the family’s estate nor his father’s position in the House of Lords; those went to his elder brother. To provide an income for Clinton, his family traded its votes in Parliament for patronage appointments. However, once Clinton was installed as governor of New York, he found himself dependent on the assembly for the payment of his salary — and the salaries of all members of his administration.

My Lords,
 I have in my former letters inform’d Your Lordships what Incroachments the Assemblys of this province have from time to time made on His Majesty’s Prerogative & Authority in this Province in drawing an absolute dependence of all the Officers upon them for their Saleries & Reward of their services, & by their taking in effect the Nomination to all Officers. . . . 1stly, That the Assembly refuse to admit of any amendment to any money bill, in any part of the Bill; so

 that the Bill must pass as it comes from the Assembly, or all the Supplies granted for the support of Government, & the most urgent services must be lost. 2ndly, It appears that they take the Payment of the [military] Forces, passing of Muster Rolls into their own hands by naming the Commissaries for those purposes in the Act. 3rdly, They by granting the Saleries to the Officers personally by name & not to the Officer for the time being, intimate that if any person be appointed to any Office his Salery must depend upon their approbation of the Appointment. . . . I must now refer it to Your Lordships’ consideration whether it be not high time to put a stop to these usurpations of the Assembly on His Majesty’s Authority in this Province and for that purpose may it not be proper that His Majesty signify his Disallowance of the Act at least for the payment of Saleries. Source: E. B. O’Callaghan, ed., Documents Relative to the Colonial History of the State of New York (Albany, 1860 on), 2: 211.

QUESTIONS FOR ANALYSIS 1.
What policies does Spotswood wish to pursue? Why can’t he persuade the House of Burgesses to implement them? According to Spotswood, what is wrong with Virginia’s political system? How does he propose to reform it? 2. Unlike the House of Burgesses, which was elected by qualified voters, the members of the Governor’s Council in Virginia were appointed by the king, usually on the governor’s recommendation. What is the council’s response to the plan to reform the political system? Given Spotswood’s description of the incident involving Philip Ludwell, where did the political sympathies of the council lie? 3. What were Clinton’s complaints about the actions of the New York assembly? Did these actions represent a more or less serious threat to imperial power than the activities of the Virginia Burgesses? Based on their correspondence with the Board of Trade, which governor — Spotswood or Clinton — was the stronger representative of the interests of the crown? 




 PART 2

BRITISH NORTH AMERICA AND THE ATLANTIC WORLD, 1660–1763

The Siege and Capture of
Louisbourg, 1745
 In 1760, as British and colonial troops moved toward victory in the French and Indian War (1754– 1763), the London artist J. Stevens sought to bolster imperial pride by celebrating an earlier AngloAmerican triumph. In 1745, a British naval squadron led a flotilla of colonial ships and thousands of New England militiamen in an attack on the French fort at Louisbourg, on Cape Breton Island, near the mouth of the St. Lawrence River. After a siege of forty days, the Anglo-American force captured the fort, long considered impregnable. The victory was bittersweet because the Treaty of Aix-la-Chapelle (1748) returned the island to France. Anne S. K. Brown Military Collection, Brown University Library.

 to farmers who pledged their land as collateral for the loans. Farmers used the currency to buy tools or livestock or to pay creditors, thereby stimulating trade. However, some assemblies, particularly the legislature in Rhode Island, issued huge quantities of paper money (which consequently decreased in value) and required merchants to accept it as legal tender. English merchants and other creditors rightly complained about being forced to accept devalued money. So in 1751, Parliament passed the Currency Act, which barred the New England colonies from establishing new land banks and prohibited the use of publicly issued paper money to pay private debts. These conflicts over trade and paper money angered a new generation of English political leaders. In 1749, Charles Townshend of the Board of Trade charged that the American assemblies had assumed many of the “ancient and established prerogatives wisely preserved in the Crown,” and he vowed to replace salutary neglect with more rigorous imperial control. The wheel of empire had come full circle. In the 1650s, England had set out to create a centrally managed Atlantic empire and, over the course of a century, achieved the military and economic aspects of that goal. Mercantilist legislation, maritime warfare, commercial expansion, and the forced labor of a million African slaves brought prosperity to Britain. However, internal unrest (the Glorious Revolution) and a policy of salutary neglect had weakened Britain’s political

 authority over its American colonies. Recognizing the threat self-government posed to the empire, British officials in the late 1740s vowed to reassert their power in America — an initiative with disastrous results.

SUMMARY
In this chapter, we examined processes of change in politics and society. The political story began in the 1660s as Britain imposed controls on its American possessions. Parliament passed the Acts of Trade and Navigation to keep colonial products and trade in English hands. Then King James II abolished representative institutions in the northern colonies and created the authoritarian Dominion of New England. Following the Glorious Revolution, the Navigation Acts remained in place and tied the American economy to that of Britain. But the uprisings of 1688–1689 overturned James II’s policy of strict imperial control, restored colonial self-government, and ushered in an era of salutary political neglect. It also initiated a long era of imperial warfare, in which Native American peoples allied themselves to the colonies and often served as proxy warriors against Frenchand Spanish-allied peoples, pursuing their own goals in the process. The social story centers on the development of the South Atlantic System of production and trade, which 
 CHAPTER 3

 involved an enormous expansion in African slave raiding; the Atlantic slave trade; and the cultivation of sugar, rice, and tobacco in America. This complex system created an exploited African American labor force in the southern mainland and West Indian colonies, while it allowed European American farmers,

CHAPTER REVIEW

 merchants, and artisans on the North American mainland to prosper. How would the two stories play out? In 1750, slavery and the South Atlantic System seemed firmly entrenched, but the days of salutary neglect appeared numbered.

C H A P T E R


R E V I E W


M A K E I T S T I C K
Go to LearningCurve to retain what you’ve read. 
TERMS TO KNOW

 Identify and explain the significance of each term below.

Key Concepts and Events
 proprietorship (p. 82) Quakers (p. 82) Navigation Acts (p. 83) Dominion of New England (p. 85) Glorious Revolution (p. 86) constitutional monarchy (p. 87) Second Hundred Years’ War (p. 88)

Key People
 tribalization (p. 88) Covenant Chain (p. 89) South Atlantic System (p. 90) Middle Passage (p. 94) Stono Rebellion (p. 101) gentility (p. 102) salutary neglect (p. 106) patronage (p. 106) land banks (p. 110)

William Penn (p. 82)
Edmund Andros (p. 85)
William of Orange (p. 86)
John Locke (p. 86)
Jacob Leisler (p. 87)
William Byrd II (p. 102)
Robert Walpole (p. 106)


REVIEW QUESTIONS
Answer these questions to demonstrate your understanding of the chapter’s main ideas. 
 1. What strategies did Charles II and James II employ

 to try to gain more centralized control over England’s American colonies? What did James hope to accomplish by creating the Dominion of New England?

 2. How did the long era of imperial warfare beginning

 in 1689 affect the colonies, Native Americans, and relations between them?

3. What was the South Atlantic System, and how did


 it shape colonial society?

 4. How did the institution of slavery develop, and why

 did it develop differently in the Chesapeake, the Carolina low country, and the West Indies?

 5. THEMATIC

UNDERSTANDING
Trace the 
 developments outlined in the section entitled “Politics and Power” from 1660 to 1750 on the thematic timeline on page 79. What pattern of political evolution do you see in colonial interactions with Britain?





 PART 2

CHAPTER REVIEW

MAKING CONNECTIONS

 Recognize the larger developments and continuities within and across chapters by answering these questions.

ACROSS TIME AND PLACE
In Chapter 2, we 
 traced the emergence of three distinct colonial types in the Americas during the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries: tribute, plantation, and neoEuropean colonies. In Chapter 3, we have seen how Britain’s plantation and neo-European colonies became more closely interconnected after 1700. What developments caused them to become more closely tied to each other? How did they benefit from these ties? Can you see any disadvantages to the colonies in a more fully integrated Atlantic system?

MORE TO EXPLORE

VISUAL EVIDENCE
Consider the illustrations 
 of women hulling rice in West Africa and Georgia on page 100. Historians have long debated the role Africans played in developing rice cultivation in the South Carolina and Georgia low country. These debates have focused primarily on methods of cultivation: Did Africans who had prior experience with rice teach English planters how to grow it? How can these two images contribute to the debate and expand our perspective on the question of African influences in American rice production?

 Start here to learn more about the events discussed in this chapter.

Ira Berlin, Many Thousands Gone (2000). Explores the
 varieties of slave experience in North America. Olaudah Equiano, The Interesting Narrative of the Life of Olaudah Equiano (1789; reprint 2006). A compelling and influential eighteenth-century slave autobiography. Paul Mapp, The Elusive West and the Contest for Empire, 1713–1763 (2011). Offers a continental perspective on the contest for European control of North America.

Owen Stanwood, The Empire Reformed (2011). Tells
 the story of the Glorious Revolution in the American colonies. Africans in America, Part 1: Terrible Transformation, 1450–1750 (PBS video, 1998) and the related Web site (pbs.org/wgbh/aia/part1/title.html). Treats the early African American experience. “The Atlantic Slave Trade and Slave Life in the Americas: A Visual Record” (hitchcock.itc.virginia .edu/Slavery). An extensive collection of slave images.

 CHAPTER 3

 TIMELINE

CHAPTER REVIEW

 Ask yourself why this chapter begins and ends with these dates and then identify the links among related events.



First Navigation Act


1660–1685


 Reign of Charles II, king of England



 Charles II grants Carolina proprietorship



 English capture New Netherland, rename it New York



 Virginia law declares that the murder of a slave cannot be treated as a felony



 William Penn founds Pennsylvania

1685–1688


 Reign of James II, king of England

1686–1689


Dominion of New England


1688–1689


Glorious Revolution in England




 William and Mary ascend throne in England Revolts in Massachusetts, Maryland, and New York

1689–1713


England, France, and Spain at war




 Parliament creates Board of Trade

1714–1750


 British policy of salutary neglect American assemblies gain power

1720–1742


 Robert Walpole leads Parliament

1720–1750


 African American communities form Rice exports from South Carolina soar Planter aristocracy emerges Seaport cities expand



 Parliament charters Georgia, challenging Spain Hat Act limits colonial enterprise



 Molasses Act threatens distillers



Stono Rebellion in South Carolina


1739–1748


 War with Spain in the Caribbean and France in Canada and Europe



 Iron Act restricts colonial iron production



 Currency Act prohibits land banks and paper money

KEY TURNING POINTS:
The Glorious Revolution (1688–1689), salutary neglect and the rise 
 of the assemblies (1714–1750), and the Hat, Molasses, Iron, and Currency Acts (1732–1751). How do these developments reflect Britain’s new attitude toward its colonies? In what matters did Parliament seek to control the colonies, and in what did it grant them autonomy?





Growth, Diversity, and Conflict
1720–1763


C H A P T E R
NEW ENGLAND’S FREEHOLD SOCIETY
Farm Families: Women in the Household Economy Farm Property: Inheritance Freehold Society in Crisis 
DIVERSITY IN THE MIDDLE COLONIES
Economic Growth, Opportunity, and Conflict Cultural Diversity Religion and Politics 
COMMERCE, CULTURE, AND IDENTITY
Transportation and the Print Revolution The Enlightenment in America American Pietism and the Great Awakening Religious Upheaval in the North Social and Religious Conflict in the South 
THE MIDCENTURY CHALLENGE: WAR, TRADE, AND SOCIAL CONFLICT, 1750–1765
The French and Indian War The Great War for Empire British Industrial Growth and the Consumer Revolution The Struggle for Land in the East Western Rebels and Regulators 


I


 n 1736, Alexander MacAllister left the IDENTIFY THE BIG IDEA Highlands of Scotland for the backIn what ways were Britain’s Americountry of North Carolina, where his can colonies affected by events wife and three sisters soon joined him. across the Atlantic, and how were MacAllister prospered as a landowner and their societies taking on a life of mill proprietor and had only praise for his their own? new home. Carolina was “the best poor man’s country,” he wrote to his brother Hector, urging him to “advise all poor people . . . to take courage and come.” In North Carolina, there were no landlords to keep “the face of the poor . . . to the grinding stone,” and so many Highlanders were arriving that “it will soon be a new Scotland.” Here, on the far margins of the British Empire, people could “breathe the air of liberty, and not want the necessarys of life.” Some 300,000 European migrants — primarily Highland Scots, Scots-Irish, and Germans — heeded MacAllister’s advice and helped swell the population of Britain’s North American settlements from 400,000 in 1720 to almost 2 million by 1765. MacAllister’s “air of liberty” did not last forever, as the rapid increase in white settlers and the arrival of nearly 300,000 enslaved Africans transformed life throughout mainland British North America. Long-settled towns in New England became overcrowded, and antagonistic ethnic and religious communities jostled uneasily with one another in the Middle Atlantic colonies; in 1748, there were more than a hundred German Lutheran and Reformed congregations in Quaker-led Pennsylvania. By then, the MacAllisters and thousands of other Celtic and German migrants had altered the social landscape and introduced religious conflict into the southern backcountry. Everywhere, two European cultural movements, the Enlightenment and Pietism, changed the tone of intellectual and spiritual life. Advocates of “rational thought” viewed human beings as agents of moral self-determination and urged Americans to fashion a better social order. Religious Pietists outnumbered them and had more influence. Convinced of the weakness of human nature, evangelical ministers told their followers to seek regeneration through divine grace. Amidst this intellectual and religious ferment, migrants and the landless children of long-settled families moved inland and sparked wars with the native peoples and with France and Spain. A generation of dynamic growth produced a decade of deadly warfare that would set the stage for a new era in American history.

 John Collet, George Whitefield Preaching No painting could capture English minister George Whitefield’s charismatic appeal, although this image conveys his open demeanor and religious intensity. When Whitefield spoke to a crowd near Philadelphia, an observer noted that his words were “sharper than a two-edged sword. . . . Some of the people were pale as death; others were wringing their hands . . . and most lifting their eyes to heaven and crying to God for mercy.” An astute businessman as well as a charismatic preacher, Whitefield tirelessly promoted the sale of his sermons and books. © Private Collection/The Bridgeman Art Library.





 PART 2

BRITISH NORTH AMERICA AND THE ATLANTIC WORLD, 1660–1763

 New England’s Freehold Society In the 1630s, the Puritans had fled England, where a small elite of nobles and gentry owned 75 percent of the arable land, while tenants (renters) and propertyless workers farmed it. In New England, the Puritans created a yeoman society of relatively equal landowning farm families. But by 1750, the migrants’ numerous descendants had parceled out the best farmland, threatening the future of the freehold ideal.

Farm Families: Women in the
Household Economy
 The Puritans’ vision of social equality did not extend to women, and their ideology placed the husband firmly at the head of the household. In The Well-Ordered Family (1712), the Reverend Benjamin Wadsworth of Boston advised women, “Since he is thy Husband, God has made him the head and set him above thee.” It was a wife’s duty “to love and reverence” her husband. Women learned this subordinate role throughout their lives. UNDERSTAND Small girls watched their mothers POINTS OF VIEW defer to their fathers, and as What ideas, instituyoung women, they were told to tions, and responsibilities be “silent in company.” They saw shaped New England farm the courts prosecute more women women’s lives? than men for the crime of fornication (sex outside of marriage), and they found that their marriage portions would be inferior to those of

 their brothers. Thus Ebenezer Chittendon of Guilford, Connecticut, left his land to his sons, decreeing that “Each Daughter [shall] have half so much as Each Son, one half in money and the other half in Cattle.” Throughout the colonies, women assumed the role of dutiful helpmeets (helpmates) to their husbands. In addition to tending gardens, farmwives spun thread and yarn from flax and wool and then wove it into cloth for shirts and gowns. They knitted sweaters and stockings, made candles and soap, churned milk into butter, fermented malt for beer, preserved meats, and mastered dozens of other household tasks. “Notable women” — those who excelled at domestic arts — won praise and high status (Thinking Like a Historian, p. 118). Bearing and rearing children were equally important tasks. Most women in New England married in their early twenties and by their early forties had given birth to six or seven children, delivered with the help of a female neighbor or a midwife. One Massachusetts mother confessed that she had little time for religious activities because “the care of my Babes takes up so large a portion of my time and attention.” Yet most Puritan congregations were filled with women: “In a Church of between Three and Four Hundred Communicants,” the eminent minister Cotton Mather noted, “there are but few more than One Hundred Men; all the Rest are Women.” Women’s lives remained tightly bound by a web of legal and cultural restrictions. Ministers praised women for their piety but excluded them from an equal role in the church. When Hannah Heaton, a Connecticut farmwife, grew dissatisfied with her Prudence Punderson (1758–1784), The First, Second and Last Scenes of Mortality This powerful image reveals both the artistic skills of colonial women in the traditional medium of needlework and the Puritans’ continuing cultural concern with the inevitability of death. Prudence Punderson, the Connecticut woman who embroidered this scene, rejected a marriage proposal and followed her Loyalist father into exile on Long Island in 1778. Sometime later, she married a cousin, Timothy Rossiter, and bore a daughter, Sophia, who may well be the baby in the cradle being rocked by “Jenny,” a slave owned by Prudence’s father. Long worried by “my ill state of health” and perhaps now anticipating her own death, Prudence has inscribed her initials on the coffin — and, in creating this embroidery, transformed her personal experience into a broader meditation on the progression from birth, to motherhood, to death. Connecticut Historical Society.

 CHAPTER 4

 Congregationalist minister, thinking him unconverted and a “blind guide,” she sought out equality-minded Quaker and evangelist Baptist churches that welcomed questioning women such as herself and treated “saved” women equally with men. However, by the 1760s, many evangelical congregations had reinstituted men’s dominance over women. “The government of Church and State must be . . . family government” controlled by its “king,” declared the Danbury (Connecticut) Baptist Association.

Farm Property: Inheritance
 By contrast, European men who migrated to the colonies escaped many traditional constraints, including the curse of landlessness. “The hope of having land of their own & becoming independent of Landlords is what chiefly induces people into America,” an official noted in the 1730s. Owning property gave formerly dependent peasants a new social identity. Unlike the adventurers seeking riches in other parts of the Americas, most New England migrants wanted farms that would provide a living for themselves and ample land for their children. In this way, they hoped to secure a competency for their families: the ability to keep their households solvent and independent and to pass that ability on to the next generation. Parents who could not give their offspring land placed these children as indentured servants in more prosperous households. When the indentures ended at age eighteen or twenty-one, propertyless sons faced a decadeslong climb up the agricultural ladder, from laborer to tenant and finally to freeholder. Sons and daughters in well-to-do farm families were luckier: they received a marriage portion when they were in their early twenties. That portion — land, livestock, or farm equipment — repaid them for their past labor and allowed parents to choose their marriage partners. Parents’ security during old age depended on a wise choice of son- or daughter-in-law. Although the young people could refuse an unacceptable match, they did not have the luxury of falling in love with and marrying whomever they pleased. Marriage under eighteenth-century English common law was not a contract between equals. A bride relinquished to her husband the legal ownership of all her property. After his death, she received a dower right, the right to use (though not sell) one-third of the family’s property. On the widow’s death or remarriage, her portion was divided among the children. Thus the widow’s property rights were subordinate to those of the family line, which stretched across the generations.

Growth, Diversity, and Conflict, 1720–1763




 A father’s duty was to provide inheritances for his children so that one day they could “be for themselves.” Men who failed to do so lost status in the community. Some fathers willed the family farm to a single son and provided other children with money, an apprenticeship, or uncleared frontier tracts. Other yeomen moved their families to the frontier, where life was hard but land was cheap and abundant. “The Squire’s House stands on the Bank of the Susquehannah,” traveler Philip Fithian reported from the Pennsylvania backcountry in the early 1760s. “He tells me that he will be able to settle all his sons and his fair Daughter Betsy on the Fat of the Earth.”

Freehold Society in Crisis
 Because of rapid natural increase, New England’s population doubled each generation, from 100,000 in 1700, to nearly 200,000 in 1725, to almost 400,000 in 1750. Farms had been divided and then subdivided, making them so small — 50 acres or less — that parents could provide only one child with an adequate inheritance. In the 1740s, the Reverend Samuel Chandler of Andover, Massachusetts, was “much distressed for land for his children,” seven of them young boys. A decade later, in nearby Concord, about 60 percent of the farmers owned less land than their fathers had. Because parents had less to give their sons and daughters, they had less control over their children’s lives. The traditional system of arranged marriages broke down, as young people engaged in premarital sex and then used the urgency of pregnancy to win permission to marry. Throughout New England, premarital conceptions rose dramatically, from about 10 percent of firstborn children in the 1710s to more than 30 percent in the 1740s. Given another chance, young people “would do the same again,” an Anglican minister observed, “because otherwise they could not obtain their parents’ consent to marry.” Even as New England families changed, they maintained the freeholder ideal. Some parents chose to have smaller families and used birth control to do so: abstention, IDENTIFY CAUSES coitus interruptus, or primitive What factors threatened condoms. Other families peti- the freeholder ideal in tioned the provincial government midcentury New England, for frontier land grants and hacked and what strategies did new farms out of the forests of farming families use to central Massachusetts, western preserve this ideal? Connecticut, and eventually New Hampshire and Vermont. Still others improved their farms’ productivity by replacing the traditional English crops of wheat and barley with high-yielding potatoes

THINKING LIKE A HISTORIAN
Women’s Labor 
 As these documents show, women bore the responsibility for a wide variety of work, from keeping up households to supporting themselves independently.

 1. Thomas Tusser, Five Hundred Pointes of Good Husbandrie, 1557. Advice manuals like Tusser’s circulated for generations and offered guidance on household management. In this couplet, Tusser stresses the virtues of a wife’s economy and hard work.

 Wife, make thine own candle, Spare penny to handle. Provide for thy tallow ere frost cometh in, And make thine own candle ere winter begin. 2. Eliza Lucas, letters, 1740–1742. George Lucas owned three South Carolina plantations, but, as lieutenant governor of Antigua, he was frequently absent. When his daughter was sixteen, he gave her responsibility for managing them. She introduced indigo cultivation in South Carolina, and it soon became the colony’s second-leading cash crop. These letters were written when she was between the ages of eighteen and twenty.

May 2, 1740
 “I have the business of 3 plantations to transact, which requires much writing and more business and fatigue of other sorts than you can imagine. But least you should imagine it too burthensom to a girl at my early time of life, give me leave to answer you: I assure you I think myself happy that I can be useful to so good a father, and by rising very early I find I can go through much business.” July 1740 “Wrote my Father a very long letter on his plantation affairs and on . . . the pains I had taken to bring the Indigo, Ginger, Cotton and Lucerne and Casada to perfection, and had greater hopes from the Indigo . . . than any of the rest of the things I tried.” February 6, 1741 “. . . I have a Sister to instruct and a parcel of little Negroes whom I have undertaken to teach to read.” April 23, 1741 “Wrote to my Father informing him of the loss of a Negro man — also the boat being overset in Santilina [Saint Helena] Sound and 20 barrels of Rice lost.” [1742] “Wont you laugh at me if I tell you I am so busey in providing for Posterity I hardly allow my self time to Eat or sleep. . . . I am making a large plantation of Oaks which I look upon as my own property, whether my

 father gives me the land or not; and therefore I design many years hence when oaks are more valueable than they are now — which you know they will be when we come to build fleets.” [c. June 1742] “I am engaged with the rudiments of the law to which I am yet but a stranger. . . . If You will not laugh too immoderately at me I’ll Trust you with a secrett. I have made two wills already.” 3. Mary Vial Holyoke, diary excerpts, 1761. Mary Vial Holyoke, wife of a prominent physician in Salem, Massachusetts, kept a diary that offers a glimpse of the range of household tasks women faced.

[1761]
 Jan. 16: Began upon the firkin of butter of 40 lb. . . . 22: Bo’t hog, weighed 182 pounds, at 2/5. Salted hog with half Lisbon & half saltertudas [Tortugas] salt. . . . Mar. 4: Ironing. . . . 7: Scower’d pewter. . . . 17: Made the Dr. six Cravats marked H. . . . Apr. 17: Made soap. . . . 23: Dressed a Calves Head turtle fashion. . . . May 20: Began to whitewash. . . . 28: Ironed. . . . 30: Scower’d pewter. . . . July 7: Scowered rooms. . . . 4. Colonial house interiors in Germantown, Pennsylvania, and Augusta, Maine. These images show the dining room of Benjamin Chew, a wealthy Philadelphia lawyer (below), and the kitchen of the Howards, an extended family of soldiers and merchants on the Maine frontier (opposite).

Source: Photo by Ron Blunt, Courtesy of Cliveden, a
National Trust Historic Site, Philadelphia, PA.


Source: Old Fort Western, Augusta, Maine.


 5. Business advertisement in the Pennsylvania Gazette, 1758. Not all women’s work was done in the home. Hannah Breintnall, a Philadelphia widow, ran a tavern before opening a shop specializing in eyeglasses.

MOLL PLACKET-HOLE
was born in a Bawdy House in a Lane in the City of Brotherly Love. . . . [A]t the Age of twelve (Shocking to consider!) . . . [her] Mother sold her Virginity — sold it for the Trifling Consideration of Ten Pounds. Her Purchaser was soon cloyed and abandoned her. Virtue lost and good Reputation (if ever she had it) gone, she commenced open Prostitute and dealt out her Favours to the highest Bidder. . . . [S]he understood the Trade and set up a Bawdy-House. . . . It was necessary, however, that a Man should live with her, that they might appear to the Publick, as honest Housekeepers. . . . The Trade became at last so publick, that it gave Offence to her sober Neighbours. . . . [T]he Town tired out with her Insolence, and her Escape from Justice in a regular Manner, set a Mob (many of whom had been her Beneficiaries) upon her. They pulled down her House, and destroyed her Furniture &c. She stormed and raged and swore if her Customers would not build her a better House, she would expose them. . . . They opened a Subscription, and a hundred Pounds were subscribed in one Day. Sources: (1) Alice Morse Earle, Home Life in the Colonial Days (New York: The Macmillan Company, 1898), 35; (2) From The Letterbook of Eliza Lucas Pinckney, 1739–1762, edited by Elise Pinckney, University of North Carolina Press, 1972. Based on original documents from the South Carolina Historical Society. Courtesy of the South Carolina Historical Society; (3) George Francis Dow, ed., The Holyoke Diaries, 1709–1856 (Salem, MA: The Essex Institute, 1911), 49–51; (6) Hilliad Magna: Being the Life and Adventures of Moll Placket-Hole ([Philadelphia]: Printed [by Anthony Armbruster], 1765). 
ANALYZING THE EVIDENCE

Source: Library Company of Philadelphia.


 1. Compare the advice manual (source 1) with Eliza Lucas’s letters and Mary Vial Holyoke’s diary. What themes do they share in common, and how do these women’s experiences deviate from the expectations of the advice book authors? 2. Eliza Lucas supervised slave labor, and Mary Vial Holyoke very likely employed servants. How do these facts affect the way you interpret sources 2 and 3? 3. Compare the two house interiors (source 4). What work would women have done in these spaces? The Chews were a slaveholding family, and the Howards probably employed servants. With that in mind, consider the relationship between supervisory and manual labor. 4. Hannah Breintnall was a well-to-do widow, while Moll Placket-Hole was a fictional stereotype. What does Breintnall’s experience tell us about the prospects of a woman living without a male protector? How does Moll Placket-Hole shed light on popular attitudes toward such women?

PUTTING IT ALL TOGETHER 6.
Hilliad Magna: Being the Life and Adventures of Moll Placket-Hole, 1765. Moll Placket-Hole was a satirical, seven-page pamphlet that purported to describe the life of a Philadelphia prostitute. Moll was an eighteenth-century term for a loose woman or prostitute, while placket-hole referred to a slit that might be found in a woman’s skirt. 
 With all these sources in mind, write a short essay that considers the role of hierarchy and social power in women’s work. How did economic and social status affect the work that was expected of women? How did the women whose lives are documented here navigate the challenges and opportunities they faced? And how does the satire of Moll Placket-Hole illuminate popular attitudes toward women’s work and its place in colonial society?



BRITISH NORTH AMERICA AND THE ATLANTIC WORLD, 1660–1763

 Tenancy in New York In New York’s fertile Hudson River Valley, wealthy Dutch and English families presided over the huge manors created by the Dutch West India Company and English governors (Map 4.1). Like Chesapeake planters, the New York landlords aspired to live in the manner of the European gentry but found that few migrants wanted to labor as peasants. To





 20 miles 20 kilometers M oh a wk

ⓦ
Schenectady


S


UN MO

 IRE

W


E
S


 MASSACHUSETTS

Livingston
Manor


Little Nine
Partners
Kingstonⓦ


 c t icu

Beekman
Patent


 CONNECTICUT

Newburgh ⓦ


Conn
 e

Poughkeepsie ⓦ


 t R.

Great Nine
Partners


.


 Previously home to New Netherland and New Sweden, the Mid-Atlantic region was already ethnically diverse before England gained control of it. The founding of Pennsylvania and New Jersey amplified this pattern. Fertile land seemed abundant, and grain exports to Europe and the West Indies financed the colonies’ rapid settlement (America Compared, p. 121). Between 1720 and 1770, a growing demand for wheat, corn, and flour doubled their prices and brought people and prosperity to the region. Yet that very growth led to conflict, both within the Middle colonies and in their relations with Native American neighbors.

 KSH

ⓦ Hudson


 ic R ton

Economic Growth, Opportunity,
 and Conflict

N


 TA

Rensselaerswyck
Manor


 us a Ho

 The Middle colonies — New York, New Jersey, and Pennsylvania — became home to peoples of differing origins, languages, and religions. Scots-Irish Presbyterians, English and Welsh Quakers, German Lutherans and Moravians, Dutch Reformed Protestants, and others all sought to preserve their cultural and religious identities as they pursued economic opportunity. At the same time, rapid population growth throughout the region strained public institutions, pressured Indian lands, and created a dynamic but unstable society.

ⓦ Troy


 IN

Albany ⓦ


NEW YORK

Diversity in the
Middle Colonies


 VERMONT

 (claimed by New York, Massachusetts, and New Hampshire)

R.


 and maize (Indian corn). Corn was an especially wise choice: good for human consumption, as well as for feeding cattle and pigs, which provided milk and meat. Gradually, New England changed from a grain to a livestock economy, becoming a major exporter of salted meat to the plantations of the West Indies. As the population swelled, New England farmers developed the full potential of what one historian has called the “household mode of production,” in which families swapped labor and goods. Women and children worked in groups to spin yarn, sew quilts, and shuck corn. Men loaned neighbors tools, draft animals, and grazing land. Farmers plowed fields owned by artisans and shopkeepers, who repaid them with shoes, furniture, or store credit. Partly because currency was in short supply, no cash changed hands. Instead, farmers, artisans, and shopkeepers recorded debits and credits and “balanced” the books every few years. This system helped New Englanders to maximize agricultural output and preserve the freehold ideal.

 BER

 PART 2

Hudson R.




Philipse
Patent


Oblong
Patent


Cortlandt
Manor


NEW JERSEY

Philipsburg
Manor White Plains
ⓦ


Long Island Sound


Saint George Manor
New York Cityⓦ


Morissania
Manor


Long Island


 Manor boundary Disputed colonial boundary

 MAP 4.1 The Hudson River Manors Dutch and English manorial lords owned much of the fertile east bank of the Hudson River, where they leased farms on perpetual contracts to German tenants and refused to sell land to freehold-seeking migrants from overcrowded New England. This powerful landed elite produced aristocratic-minded Patriot leaders such as Gouverneur Morris and Robert Livingston, as well as prominent American families such as the Roosevelts.

AMERICA C O M PA R E D
Transatlantic Migration, 1500–1760 
 The following graph compares the number of European and African migrants who arrived in the American colonies of Spain, Portugal, Britain, France, and the Netherlands. It also charts change over time: while immigrants in the sixteenth and early seventeenth centuries went predominantly to the colonies of Spain and Portugal, Britain’s colonies became the principal destination for both Europeans and Africans between 1640 and 1760.

 FIGURE 4.1

2,000,000


Transatlantic Migration


1,910,000


 Source of data: Stanley L. Engerman and Kenneth L. Sokoloff, “Factor Endowments, Institutions, and Differential Paths of Growth Among New World Economies: A View from Economic Historians of the United States,” in How Latin America Fell Behind: Economic Histories of Brazil and Mexico, 1800–1914, ed. Stephen Haber (Palo Alto, CA: Stanford University Press, 1997), 264.

1,500,000
1,313,000


1,000,000


QUESTIONS FOR ANALYSIS

763,000
661,000
547,000


500,000


397,000


190,000
130,000
3,000




Spain


Portugal
1500–1640
1641–1760


Britain


France


10,000


Netherlands


Africans
Europeans


 attract tenants, the manorial lords granted long leases, with the right to sell improvements such as houses and barns to the next tenant. They nevertheless struggled to populate their estates. Most tenant families hoped that with hard work and ample sales they could eventually buy their own farmsteads. But preindustrial technology limited output. A worker with a hand sickle could reap only half an acre of wheat, rye, or oats a day. The cradle scythe, a tool introduced during the 1750s, doubled or tripled the amount of grain one worker could cut. Even so, a family with two adult workers could reap only about 12 acres of grain, or roughly 150 to 180 bushels of wheat. After saving enough grain for food and seed, the surplus might be worth £15 — enough to buy salt and sugar, tools, and cloth, but little else. The road to landownership was not an easy one.

 Conflict in the Quaker Colonies In Quakerdominated Pennsylvania and New Jersey, wealth was initially distributed more evenly than in New York,

 1. What relationship do you see between the number of European emigrants and the importation of African slaves? Which nation’s colonies had the highest percentage of Africans relative to Europeans? Which had the lowest? Which time periods had the highest and lowest percentages of Africans? 2. Compare France and the Netherlands to Spain, Portugal, and Britain. Why do you suppose that the ratio of Africans to Europeans is so much higher in French and Dutch colonies than in the other nations? Which type of colony — tribute, plantation, or neo-European — was likely to have been most important to the French and Dutch?

 but the proprietors of each colony, like the manor lords of New York, had enormous land claims. The first migrants lived simply in small, one- or two-room houses with a sleeping loft, a few benches or stools, and some wooden platters and cups. Economic growth brought greater prosperity, along with conflicts between ordinary settlers and the proprietors who tried to control their access to land, resources, and political power. William Penn’s early appeals to British Quakers and continental Protestants led to a boom in immigrants. When these first arrivals reported that Pennsylvania and New Jersey were “the best poor man’s country in the world,” thousands more followed. Soon the proprietors of both colonies were overwhelmed by the demand for land. By the 1720s, many new migrants were forced to become squatters, settling illegally on land they hoped eventually to be able to acquire on legal terms. Frustration over the lack of land led the Penn family to perpetrate one of the most infamous land frauds of the eighteenth century, the so-called Walking Purchase of 1737, in which they exploited an old (and probably





 PART 2

BRITISH NORTH AMERICA AND THE ATLANTIC WORLD, 1660–1763

 fraudulent) Indian deed to claim more than a million acres of prime farmland north of Philadelphia. This purchase, while opening new lands to settlement, poisoned Indian relations in the colony. Delaware and Shawnee migration to western Pennsylvania and the Ohio Valley, which was already under way, accelerated rapidly in response. Immigrants flooded into Philadelphia, which grew from 2,000 people in 1700 to 25,000 by 1760. Many families came in search of land; for them, Philadelphia was only EXPLAIN a temporary way station. Other CONSEQUENCES migrants came as laborers, includHow did rapid immigration and economic growth triging a large number of indentured ger conflict in the Middle servants. Some were young, colonies? unskilled men, but the colony’s explosive growth also created a strong demand for all kinds of skilled laborers, especially in the construction trades. Pennsylvania and New Jersey grew prosperous but contentious. New Jersey was plagued by contested land titles, and ordinary settlers rioted against the proprietors in the 1740s and the 1760s. By the 1760s, eastern Pennsylvania landowners with large farms were using slaves and poor Scots-Irish migrants to grow wheat. Other ambitious men were buying up land and dividing it into small tenancies, which they lent out on profitable leases. Still others sold farming equipment and

 manufactured goods or ran mills. These large-scale farmers, rural landlords, speculators, storekeepers, and gristmill operators formed a distinct class of agricultural capitalists. They built large stone houses for their families, furnishing them with four-poster beds and expensive mahogany tables, on which they laid elegant linen and imported Dutch dinnerware. By contrast, one-half of the Middle colonies’ white men owned no land and little personal property. Some were the sons of smallholding farmers and would eventually inherit some land. But many were Scots-Irish or German “inmates” — single men or families, explained a tax assessor, “such as live in small cottages and have no taxable property, except a cow.” In the predominantly German township of Lancaster, Pennsylvania, a merchant noted an “abundance of Poor people” who “maintain their Families with great difficulty by day Labour.” Although these workers hoped eventually to become landowners, rising land prices prevented many from realizing their dreams.

Cultural Diversity
 The Middle Atlantic colonies were not a melting pot. Most European migrants held tightly to their traditions, creating a patchwork of ethnically and religiously diverse communities (Figure 4.2). In 1748, a Swedish traveler counted no fewer than twelve religious denominations FIGURE 4.2 Estimated European Migration to the British Mainland Colonies, 1700–1780

1700–


1720–


1740–


1760–


Total
(1700–1780)


Germany


4,000


17,900


52,700


23,700


98,300


N.
Ireland 

2,000


6,900


25,400


36,200


70,500


S.
Ireland 

2,500


10,400


18,200


13,400


44,500


England


1,700


7,100


16,300


19,000


44,100


Scotland




2,800


6,800


25,000


35,300


Wales


1,200


4,700


10,700


12,400


29,000


Other




1,000


2,300


2,300


5,900


All


12,400


50,800


132,400


132,000


327,600


1700–1719 1720–1739


1740–1759


1760–1779


 After 1720, European migration to British North America increased dramatically, peaking between 1740 and 1780, when more than 264,000 settlers arrived in the mainland colonies. Emigration from Germany peaked in the 1740s, but the number of migrants from Ireland, Scotland, England, and Wales continued to increase during the 1760s and early 1770s. Most migrants, including those from Ireland, were Protestants.

 CHAPTER 4

 in Philadelphia, including Anglicans, Baptists, Quakers, Swedish and German Lutherans, Mennonites, ScotsIrish Presbyterians, and Roman Catholics. Migrants preserved their cultural identity by marrying within their ethnic groups. A major exception was the Huguenots, Calvinists who had been expelled from Catholic France in the 1680s and resettled in Holland, England, and the British colonies. Huguenots in American port cities such as Boston, New York, and Charleston quickly lost their French identities by intermarrying with other Protestants. More typical were the Welsh Quakers in Chester County, Pennsylvania: 70 percent of the children of the original Welsh migrants married other Welsh Quakers, as did 60 percent of the third generation. In Pennsylvania and western New Jersey, Quakers shaped the culture because of their numbers, wealth, and social cohesion. Most Quakers came from English counties with few landlords and brought with them

Growth, Diversity, and Conflict, 1720–1763


 traditions of local village governance, popular participation in politics, and social equality. But after 1720, the growth of German and Scots-Irish populations challenged their dominance.

 The German Influx The Quaker vision of a “peaceable kingdom” attracted 100,000 German migrants who had fled their homelands because of military conscription, religious persecution, and high taxes. First to arrive, in 1683, were the Mennonites, religious dissenters drawn by the promise of freedom of worship. In the 1720s, a larger wave of German migrants arrived from the overcrowded villages of southwestern Germany and Switzerland. “Wages were far better” in Pennsylvania, Heinrich Schneebeli reported to his friends in Zurich, and “one also enjoyed there a free unhindered exercise of religion.” A third wave of Germans and Swiss — nearly 40,000 strong — landed in Philadelphia between 1749 and 1756. To help pay

A
Quaker Meeting for Worship  Quakers dressed plainly and met for worship in unadorned buildings, sitting in silence until inspired by an “inner light.” Women spoke during meetings on terms of near-equality to men, a tradition that prepared Quaker women to take a leading part in the nineteenth-century women’s rights movement. In this English work, titled Quaker Meeting, an elder (his hat on a peg above his head) conveys his thoughts to the congregation. Museum of Fine Arts, Boston. M. and M. Karolik Collection.





 PART 2

BRITISH NORTH AMERICA AND THE ATLANTIC WORLD, 1660–1763

The Demory House, c. 1780
 The Demory House lies near the Shenandoah Valley in northwestern Virginia and was probably built by a migrant from Pennsylvania according to a German design used by both German and Scots-Irish settlers. The house is small but sturdy. It measures 20 feet by 14 feet deep and has one and a half stories. The two first-floor rooms, a kitchen and a parlor, are separated by an 18 × 18–inch square chimney set in the center of the house, as well as the stairs leading up to the sleeping chamber. Clay and small stones fill the gaps in the exterior walls, which consist of timber planking about 12 inches tall and 6 to 8 inches wide. © 2003 Copyright and All Rights Reserved by Christopher C. Fennell.

 the costs of the expensive trip from the Rhine Valley, German immigrants pioneered the redemptioner system, a flexible form of indentured servitude that allowed families to negotiate their own terms upon arrival. Families often indentured one or more children while their parents set up a household of their own. Germans soon dominated many districts in eastern Pennsylvania, and thousands more moved down the fertile Shenandoah Valley into the western backcountry of Maryland, Virginia, and the Carolinas (Map 4.2). Many migrants preserved their cultural identity by settling in IDENTIFY CAUSES German-speaking Lutheran and What attracted German Reformed communities that and Scots-Irish migrants to Pennsylvania in such large endured well beyond 1800. A numbers? minister in North Carolina admonished young people “not to contract any marriages with the English or Irish,” arguing that “we owe it to our native country to do our part that German blood and the German language be preserved in America.” These settlers were willing colonial subjects of Britain’s German-born and German-speaking Protestant monarchs, George I (r. 1714–1727) and George II (r. 1727–1760). They generally avoided politics except to protect their cultural practices; for example, they insisted that married women have the legal right to hold property and write wills, as they did in Germany.

 Scots-Irish Settlers Migrants from Ireland, who numbered about 115,000, were the most numerous of the incoming Europeans. Some were Irish and Catholic, but most were Scots and Presbyterian, the descendants of the Calvinist Protestants sent to Ireland during the

 seventeenth century to solidify English rule there. Once in Ireland, the Scots faced hostility from both Irish Catholics and English officials and landlords. The Irish Test Act of 1704 restricted voting and office holding to members of the Church of England, English mercantilist regulations placed heavy import duties on linens made by Scots-Irish weavers, and farmers paid heavy taxes. This persecution made America seem desirable. “Read this letter, Rev. Baptist Boyd,” a migrant to New York wrote back to his minister, “and tell all the poor folk of ye place that God has opened a door for their deliverance . . . all that a man works for is his own; there are no revenue hounds to take it from us here.” Lured by such reports, thousands of Scots-Irish families sailed for the colonies. By 1720, most migrated to Philadelphia, attracted by the religious tolerance there. Seeking cheap land, they moved to central Pennsylvania and to the fertile Shenandoah Valley to the south. Governor William Gooch of Virginia welcomed the Scots-Irish presence to secure “the Country against the Indians.” An Anglican planter, however, thought them as dangerous as “the Goths and Vandals of old” had been to the Roman Empire. Like the Germans, the Scots-Irish retained their culture, living in ethnic communities and holding firm to the Presbyterian Church.

Religion and Politics
 In Western Europe, the leaders of church and state condemned religious diversity. “To tolerate all [religions] without controul is the way to have none at all,” declared an Anglican clergyman. Orthodox church

 CHAPTER 4

Growth, Diversity, and Conflict, 1720–1763


 MAP 4.2 Ethnic and Racial Diversity in the British Colonies, 1775

 Scots and Scots Irish made up 15 percent of the population.

L.
Michigan 

 uron L. H

ME. (MASS.) VT.
(part of N.Y.) N.H. 
N.Y.


 ABENAKI

 o L. Ontari

 MASS.

 IROQUOIS

 PENN.

R.I.


S


 r ie L. E

N


 IN

 OTTAWA

 CONN.

 TA

 DELAWARE

N


 MIAMI

U


S


 MD.

M


E


W


N.J.


O


 Those of German ancestry made up about 7 percent of the population.

 DEL.

ATLANTIC OCEAN

N
IA CH

 In 1700, most colonists in British North America were of English origin; by 1775, settlers of English descent constituted only about 50 percent of the total population. African Americans now accounted for onethird of the residents of the South, while tens of thousands of German and Scots-Irish migrants added ethnic and religious diversity in the Middle colonies, the southern backcountry, and northern New England (see Figure 4.2).

 QUEBEC

 ALGONQUIN



 VA.

 LA

 People of African origin accounted for 20 percent of the total population and were particularly numerous in the South.

 AP

 PA

 SHAWNEE

 CHEROKEE

N.C.


 CATAWBA

S.C.
 CHICKASAW

 GA.

Predominant Ethnic Group
 CHOCTAW

 CREEK

 FLORIDA

 officials carried such sentiments to Pennsylvania. “The preachers do not have the power to punish anyone, or to force anyone to go to church,” complained Gottlieb Mittelberger, an influential German minister. As a result, “Sunday is very badly kept. Many people plough, reap, thresh, hew or split wood and the like.” He concluded: “Liberty in Pennsylvania does more harm than good to many people, both in soul and body.” Mittelberger was mistaken. Although ministers in Pennsylvania could not invoke government authority to uphold religious values, the result was not social anarchy. Instead, religious sects enforced moral behavior through communal self-discipline. Quaker families attended a weekly meeting for worship and a monthly meeting for business; every three months, a committee reminded parents to provide proper religious instruction. The committee also supervised adult behavior; a Chester County meeting, for example, disciplined a member “to reclaim him from drinking to excess and keeping vain company.” Significantly, Quaker meetings allowed couples to marry only if they had land and livestock sufficient to support a family. As a result, the





 200 miles 200 kilometers

African
Dutch
English
German


Scots-Irish
Scots
Swedish
Welsh


 children of well-to-do Friends usually married within the sect, while poor Quakers remained unmarried, wed later in life, or married without permission — in which case they were often ousted from the meeting. These marriage rules helped the Quakers build a selfcontained and prosperous community. In the 1740s, the flood of new migrants reduced Quakers to a minority — a mere 30 percent of Pennsylvanians. Moreover, Scots-Irish settlers in central Pennsylvania demanded an aggressive Indian policy, challenging the pacifism of the assembly. To retain power, UNDERSTAND Quaker politicians sought an alli- POINTS OF VIEW ance with those German religious What issues divided the groups that also embraced paci- various ethnic and relifism and voluntary (not compul- gious groups of the Middle sory) militia service. In response, colonies? What core values German leaders demanded more did they agree upon? seats in the assembly and laws that respected their inheritance customs. Other Germans — Lutherans and Baptists — tried to gain control of the assembly by forming a “general confederacy”



 PART 2

BRITISH NORTH AMERICA AND THE ATLANTIC WORLD, 1660–1763

 with Scots-Irish Presbyterians. An observer predicted that the scheme was doomed to failure because of “mutual jealousy” (Map 4.3). By the 1750s, politics throughout the Middle colonies roiled with conflict. In New York, a Dutchman declared that he “Valued English Law no more than a Turd,” while in Pennsylvania, Benjamin Franklin disparaged the “boorish” character and “swarthy complexion” of German migrants. Yet there was broad agreement on the importance of economic opportunity and liberty of conscience. The unstable balance between shared values and mutual mistrust prefigured tensions that would pervade an increasingly diverse American society in the centuries to come.

VT. (N.Y.)

ME. (MASS.)

%
 MASS. % % && & % && %% & % CONN.& & % & % & & & & R.I. % % % %% % % %% & %% & % PENNSYLVANIA % &%% & % N & % % % % % %%%&&%%& & % &%% % N.J. E & & W % & % &% & & & % S & MD. & & DEL. % && & ATLANTIC OCEAN NEW YORK

 ie Er

 VIRGINIA

&


&
NORTH CAROLINA

Anglican


&


&
&
&


SOUTH CAROLINA %

 GA.

&


&


Congregational
Lutheran
Presbyterian
Baptist
Roman Catholic
Jewish


Reformed Churches


%&
&




 200 miles 200 kilometers

 After 1720, transatlantic shipping grew more frequent and Britain and its colonies more closely connected, while a burgeoning print culture flooded the colonies with information and ideas. Two great European cultural movements — the Enlightenment, which emphasized the power of human reason to understand and shape the world; and Pietism, an evangelical Christian movement that stressed the individual’s personal relationship with God — reached America as a result. At the same time, an abundance of imported goods began to reshape material culture, bringing new comforts into the lives of the middling sort while allowing prosperous merchants and landowners to set themselves apart from their neighbors in new ways.

N.H.


L.
Ontario 

L.


Commerce, Culture,
 and Identity

%
%
%
%


Dutch
German
French
Quaker


 MAP 4.3 Religious Diversity in 1750 By 1750, religious diversity was on the rise, not only in the multiethnic Middle colonies but also in all of British North America. Baptists had increased their numbers in New England, long the stronghold of Congregationalists, and would soon become important in Virginia. Already there were considerable numbers of Presbyterians, Lutherans, and German Reformed in the South, where Anglicanism was the established religion.

Transportation and the
Print Revolution
 In the eighteenth century, improved transportation networks opened Britain’s colonies in new ways, and British shipping came to dominate the north Atlantic. In 1700, Britain had 40,000 sailors; by 1750, the number had grown to 60,000, while many more hailed from the colonies. An enormous number of vessels plied Atlantic waters: in the late 1730s, more than 550 ships arrived in Boston annually. About a tenth came directly from Britain or Ireland; the rest came mostly from other British colonies, either on the mainland or in the West Indies. A road network slowly took shape as well, though roadbuilding was expensive and difficult. In 1704, Sarah Kemble Knight traveled from Boston to New York on horseback. The road was “smooth and even” in some places, treacherous in others; it took eight days of hard riding to cover 200 miles. Forty years later, a physician from Annapolis, Maryland, traveled along much better roads to Portsmouth, New Hampshire, and back — more than 1,600 miles in all. He spent four months on the road, stopping frequently to meet the locals and satisfy his curiosity. By the mid-eighteenth century, the “Great Wagon Road” carried migrating families down the Shenandoah Valley as far as the Carolina backcountry. All of these water and land routes carried people, produce, and finished merchandise. They also carried information, as letters, newspapers, pamphlets, and crates of books began to circulate widely. The trip across the Atlantic took seven to eight weeks on average, so

 CHAPTER 4

 the news arriving in colonial ports was not fresh by our standard, but compared to earlier years, the colonies were awash in information. Until 1695, the British government had the power to censor all printed materials. In that year, Parliament let the Licensing Act lapse, and the floodgates opened. Dozens of new printshops opened in London and Britain’s provincial cities. They printed newspapers and pamphlets; poetry, ballads, and sermons; and handbills, tradesman’s cards, and advertisements. Larger booksellers also printed scientific treatises, histories, travelers’ accounts, and novels. The result was a print revolution. In Britain and throughout Europe, print was essential to the transmission of new ideas, and both the Enlightenment and Pietism took shape in part through its growing influence. All this material crossed the Atlantic and filled the shops of colonial booksellers. The colonies also began printing their own newspapers. In 1704, the Boston Newsletter was founded; by 1720, Boston had five printing presses and three newspapers; and by 1776, the thirteen colonies that united in declaring independence had thirty-seven newspapers among them. This world of print was essential to their ability to share grievances and join in common cause.

The Enlightenment in America
 To explain the workings of the natural world, some colonists relied on folk wisdom. Swedish migrants in Pennsylvania attributed magical powers to the great white mullein, a common wildflower, and treated fevers by tying the plant’s leaves around their feet and arms. Traditionally, Christians believed that the earth stood at the center of the universe, and God (and Satan) intervened directly and continuously in human affairs. The scientific revolution of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries challenged these ideas, and educated people — most of them Christians — began to modify their views accordingly.

The European Enlightenment In 1543, the Polish
 astronomer Copernicus published his observation that the earth traveled around the sun, not vice versa. Copernicus’s discovery suggested that humans occupied a more modest place in the universe than Christian theology assumed. In the next century, Isaac Newton, in his Principia Mathematica (1687), used the sciences of mathematics and physics to explain the movement of the planets around the sun (and invented calculus in the process). Though Newton was himself profoundly religious, in the long run his work

Growth, Diversity, and Conflict, 1720–1763




 undermined the traditional Christian understanding of the cosmos. In the century between the Principia Mathematica and the French Revolution of 1789, the philosophers of the European Enlightenment used empirical research and scientific reasoning to study all aspects of life, including social institutions and human behavior. Enlightenment thinkers advanced four fundamental principles: the lawlike order of the natural world, the power of human reason, the “natural rights” of individuals (including the right to self-government), and the progressive improvement of society. English philosopher John Locke was a major contributor to the Enlightenment. In his Essay Concerning Human Understanding (1690), Locke stressed the impact of environment and experience on human behavior and beliefs, arguing that the character of individuals PLACE EVENTS and societies was not fixed but IN CONTEXT could be changed through edu- What conditions and ideas cation, rational thought, and lay behind the emergence purposeful action. Locke’s Two of the Enlightenment in Treatises of Government (1690) America? advanced the revolutionary theory that political authority was not given by God to monarchs, as James II had insisted (see Chapter 3). Instead, it derived from social compacts that people made to preserve their natural rights to life, liberty, and property. In Locke’s view, the people should have the power to change government policies — or even their form of government. Some clergymen responded to these developments by devising a rational form of Christianity. Rejecting supernatural interventions and a vengeful Calvinist God, Congregationalist minister Andrew Eliot maintained that “there is nothing in Christianity that is contrary to reason.” The Reverend John Wise of Ipswich, Massachusetts, used Locke’s philosophy to defend giving power to ordinary church members. Just as the social compact formed the basis of political society, Wise argued, so the religious covenant among the lay members of a congregation made them — not the bishops of the Church of England or even ministers like himself — the proper interpreters of religious truth. The Enlightenment influenced Puritan minister Cotton Mather as well. When a measles epidemic ravaged Boston in the 1710s, Mather thought that only God could end it; but when smallpox struck a decade later, he used his newly acquired knowledge of inoculation — gained in part from a slave, who told him of the practice’s success in Africa — to advocate this scientific preventive for the disease.



 PART 2

BRITISH NORTH AMERICA AND THE ATLANTIC WORLD, 1660–1763

Enlightenment Philanthropy: Pennsylvania Hospital, Philadelphia
 Using public funds and private donations, Philadelphia reformers built this imposing structure in 1753. The new hospital embodied two principles of the Enlightenment: that purposeful actions could improve society, and that the products of these actions should express reason and order, exhibited here in the building’s symmetrical facade. Etchings like this one from the 1760s (A Perspective View of the Pennsylvania Hospital, by John Streeper and Henry Dawkins) circulated widely and bolstered Philadelphia’s reputation as the center of the American Enlightenment. Historical Society of Pennsylvania.

 Franklin’s Contributions Benjamin Franklin was the exemplar of the American Enlightenment. Born in Boston in 1706 to devout Calvinists, he grew to manhood during the print revolution. Apprenticed to his brother, a Boston printer, Franklin educated himself through voracious reading. At seventeen, he fled to Philadelphia, where he became a prominent printer, and in 1729 he founded the Pennsylvania Gazette, which became one of the colonies’ most influential newspapers. Franklin also formed a “club of mutual improvement” that met weekly to discuss “Morals, Politics, or Natural Philosophy.” These discussions, as well as Enlightenment literature, shaped his thinking. As Franklin explained in his Autobiography (1771), “From the different books I read, I began to doubt of Revelation [God-revealed truth].” Like a small number of urban artisans, wealthy Virginia planters, and affluent seaport merchants, Franklin became a deist. Deism was a way of thinking, not an established religion. “My own mind is my own church,” said deist Thomas Paine. “I am of a sect by

 myself,” added Thomas Jefferson. Influenced by Enlightenment science, deists such as Jefferson believed that a Supreme Being (or Grand Architect) created the world and then allowed it to operate by natural laws but did not intervene in people’s lives. Rejecting the divinity of Christ and the authority of the Bible, deists relied on “natural reason,” their innate moral sense, to define right and wrong. Thus Franklin, a onetime slave owner, came to question the morality of slavery, repudiating it once he recognized the parallels between racial bondage and the colonies’ political bondage to Britain. Franklin popularized the practical outlook of the Enlightenment in Poor Richard’s Almanack (1732– 1757), an annual publication that was read by thousands. He also founded the American Philosophical Society (1743–present) to promote “useful knowledge.” Adopting this goal in his own life, Franklin invented bifocal lenses for eyeglasses, the Franklin stove, and the lightning rod. His book on electricity, published in England in 1751, won praise as the greatest contribution to science since Newton’s discoveries. Inspired by

 CHAPTER 4

Growth, Diversity, and Conflict, 1720–1763


 with God, Pietism appealed to believers’ hearts rather than their minds (American Voices, p. 130). In the 1720s, German migrants carried Pietism to America, sparking a religious revival (or renewal of religious enthusiasm) in Pennsylvania and New Jersey, where Dutch minister Theodore Jacob Frelinghuysen preached passionate sermons to German settlers and encouraged church members to spread the message of spiritual urgency. A decade later, William Tennent and his son Gilbert copied Frelinghuysen’s approach and led revivals among Scots-Irish Presbyterians throughout the Middle Atlantic region.

 Benjamin Franklin’s Rise This portrait of Benjamin Franklin, attributed to Robert Feke and executed around 1746, portrays Franklin as a successful businessman. His ruffled collar and cuffs, his fashionably curly wig, and his sober but expensive suit reveal his social ambitions. In later portraits, after he gained fame as an Enlightenment sage, he dispensed with the wig and chose more unaffected poses; but in 1746, he was still establishing his credentials as a young Philadelphia gentleman on the rise. Harvard University Art Museum, Fogg Art Museum, Bequest of Dr. John Collins Warren, 1856, H47 Photo: Imaging Department © President and Fellows of Harvard College.

 Franklin, ambitious printers in America’s seaport cities published newspapers and gentlemen’s magazines, the first significant nonreligious periodicals to appear in the colonies. The European Enlightenment, then, added a secular dimension to colonial cultural life, foreshadowing the great contributions to republican political theory by American intellectuals of the Revolutionary era: John Adams, James Madison, and Thomas Jefferson.

American Pietism and the
Great Awakening
 As some colonists turned to deism, thousands of others embraced Pietism, a Christian movement originating in Germany around 1700 and emphasizing pious behavior (hence the name). In its emotional worship services and individual striving for a mystical union

New England Revivalism Simultaneously, an
 American-born Pietist movement appeared in New England. Revivals of Christian zeal were built into the logic of Puritanism. In the 1730s, Jonathan Edwards, a minister in Northampton, Massachusetts, encouraged a revival there that spread to towns throughout the Connecticut River Valley. Edwards guided and observed the process and then published an account entitled A Faithful Narrative of the Surprising Work of God, printed first in London (1737), then in Boston (1738), and then in German and Dutch translations. Its publication history highlights the transatlantic network of correspondents that gave Pietism much of its vitality. Whitefield’s Great Awakening English minister George Whitefield transformed the local revivals of Edwards and the Tennents into a Great Awakening. After Whitefield had his personal awakening upon reading the German Pietists, he became a follower of John Wesley, the founder of English Methodism. In 1739, Whitefield carried Wesley’s fervent message to America, where he attracted huge crowds from Georgia to Massachusetts. Whitefield had a compelling presence. “He looked almost angelical; a young, slim, slender youth . . . cloathed with authority from the Great God,” wrote a Connecticut farmer. Like most evangelical preachers, Whitefield did not read his sermons but spoke from memory. More like an actor than a theologian, he gestured eloquently, raised his voice for dramatic effect, and at times assumed a female persona — as a woman in labor struggling to deliver the word of God. When the young preacher told his spellbound listeners that they had sinned and must seek salvation, some suddenly felt a “new light” within them. As “the power of god come down,” Hannah Heaton recalled, “my knees smote together . . . [and] it seemed to me I was a sinking down into hell . . . but then I resigned my distress and was perfectly easy quiet and calm . . . [and] it seemed as



AMERICAN VOICES
Evangelical Religion and Enlightenment Rationalism 
 Two great historical movements, Enlightenment thought and Pietistic religion, swept across British North America in the eighteenth century and offered radically different — indeed, almost completely contradictory — worldviews. Pietism sparked religious revivals based on passion and emotion, while Enlightenment rationalism encouraged personal restraint and intellectual logic. Both movements shaped American cultural development: Pietism transformed American religious life, and Enlightenment thinking influenced the principles of the American government.

Sarah Lippet


Death as a Passage to Life
 Sarah Lippet was a longtime member of the Baptist church of Middletown in eastern New Jersey. She died in October 1767 at the age of sixty-one; fellow parishioners reported her sentiments as she lay, for four days, on her deathbed.

 All my lifetime I have been in fears and doubts, but now am delivered. He hath delivered them who through fear of death were all their lifetime subject to bondage. For the love I have for Christ I am willing to part with all my friends to be with Him, for I love Him above all; yet it is nothing in me, for I know if I had my desert I should be in Hell. I believe in Christ, and I know that I put my whole trust in Him, and he that believeth in Him shall not be ashamed nor be confounded. . . . Why do you mourn when I rejoice? You should not; it is no more for me to die and leave my friends for the great love I have for Christ than for me to go to sleep. I have no fears of death in my mind. Christ has the keys of death and hell, and blessed are the dead that die in the Lord. I can’t bear to see a tear shed. You should not mourn. Source: “The Triumphant Christian,” in Historical and Genealogical Miscellany, ed. John E. Stillwell (New York, 1964), 3: 465–466.

 Poor Me — Miserable me. . . . I was loaded with the guilt of Sin. . . . Hell fire was most always in my mind; and I have hundreds of times put my fingers into my pipe when I have been smoaking to feel how fire felt: And to see how my Body could bear to lye in Hell fire for ever and ever. . . . And while these thoughts were in my mind God appeared unto me and made me Skringe: before whose face the heavens and the earth fled away; and I was Shrinked into nothing; I knew not whether I was in the body or out, I seemed to hang in open Air before God, and he seemed to Speak to me in an angry and Sovereign way[:] What? Won’t you trust your Soul with God?; My heart answered O yes, yes, yes. . . . When God disappeared or in some measure withdrew, every thing was in its place again and I was on my Bed. . . . I was set free, my distress was gone, and I was filled with a pineing desire to see Christs own words in the bible; . . . I got the bible up under my Chin and hugged it; it was sweet and lovely; the word was nigh [near] me in my hand, then I began to pray and to praise God. Source: “The Spiritual Travels of Nathan Cole, 1741” in The Great Awakening: Documents on the Revival of Religion, 1740–1745, ed. Richard L. Bushman (New York: Atheneum, 1970), 68–70.

Nathan Cole


The Struggle for Salvation


Benjamin Franklin


 Connecticut farmer Nathan Cole found God after listening to a sermon by George Whitefield, the great English evangelist. But Cole’s spiritual quest was not easy. He struggled for two years before coming to believe that he was saved.

 Franklin stood at the center of the American Enlightenment. In his Autobiography, he outlined his religious views and his human-centered moral principles.

 [After hearing Whitefield] I began to think I was not Elected, and that God made some for heaven and me for hell. And I thought God was not Just in so doing. . . . My heart then rose against God exceedingly, for his making me for hell; Now this distress lasted Almost two years —

The Importance of a Virtuous Life


 My Parents had early given me religious Impressions, and brought me through my Childhood piously in the Dissenting Way. But I was scarce 15 when, after doubting by turns of several Points as I found them disputed in the different Books I read, I began to doubt of Revelation

 itself. Some Books against Deism fell into my Hands. . . . It happened that they wrought an Effect on me quite contrary to what was intended by them: For the Arguments of the Deists [that were quoted in those books] appeared to me much Stronger than the Refutations. In short I soon became a thorough Deist. . . . I grew convinc’d that Truth, Sincerity & Integrity in Dealings between Man & Man, were of the utmost Importance to the Felicity of Life, and I form’d written Resolutions, (which still remain in my Journal Book) to practice them ever while I lived. . . . About the Year 1734. There arrived among us from Ireland, a young Presbyterian Preacher named Hemphill, who delivered with a good Voice, & apparently extempore, most excellent Discourses, which drew together considerable Numbers of different Persuasions, who join’d in admiring them. Among the rest I became one of his constant Hearers, his Sermons pleasing me as they had little of the dogmatical kind, but inculcated strongly the Practice of Virtue, or what in the religious Stile are called Good Works. Those however, of our Congregation, who considered themselves as orthodox Presbyterians, disapprov’d his Doctrine, and were join’d by most of the old Clergy, who arraign’d him of Heterodoxy before the Synod, in order to have him silenc’d. I became his zealous Partisan. . . . I never was without some religious Principles; I never doubted, for instance, the Existance of the Deity, that he made the World, & govern’d it by his Providence; that the most acceptable Service of God was the doing Good to Man; that our Souls are immortal; and that all Crime will be punished & Virtue rewarded either here or hereafter; these I esteem’d the Essentials of every Religion.

 and Government. . . . I shall consider Man in a state of Natural Being, as a Free-Born Subject under the Crown of Heaven, and owing Homage to none but God himself. It is certain Civil Government in General, is a very Admirable Result of Providence, and an Incomparable Benefit to Mankind, yet must needs be acknowledged to be the Effect of Humane Free-Compacts and not of Divine Institution; it is the Produce of Mans Reason, of Humane and Rational Combinations, and not from any direct Orders of Infinite Wisdom. . . . The Prime Immunity in Mans State, is that he is most properly the Subject of the Law of Nature. He is the Favourite Animal on Earth; in that this Part of Gods Image, viz. Reason is Congenate with his Nature, wherein by a Law Immutable, Instampt upon his Frame, God has provided a Rule for Men in all their Actions; obliging each one to the performance of that which is Right, not only as to Justice, but likewise as to all other Moral Vertues, which is nothing but the Dictate of Right Reason founded in the Soul of Man. . . . The Second Great Immunity of Man is an Original Liberty Instampt upon his Rational Nature. He that intrudes upon this Liberty, Violates the Law of Nature. . . . The Third Capital Immunity belonging to Mans Nature, is an equality amongst Men; Which is not to be denyed by the Law of Nature, till Man has Resigned himself with all his Rights for the sake of a Civil State; and then his Personal Liberty and Equality is to be cherished, and preserved to the highest degree. Source: John Wise, A Vindication of the Government of New England Churches (Boston: J. Allen, for N. Boone, 1717), 32–40.

 Source: Louis P. Masur, ed., The Autobiography of Benjamin Franklin, with Related Documents, 2nd ed. (Boston: Bedford/St. Martin’s, 2003), 73–74, 93–94, 108.

QUESTIONS FOR ANALYSIS
John Wise 
The Primacy of Human Reason
 and Natural Laws Reverend John Wise (1652–1725) served for many years as a pastor in Ipswich, Massachusetts. A graduate of Harvard College, Wise used the Enlightenment doctrines of John Locke and Samuel von Pufendorf to justify the democratic structure of New England Congregational churches.

I
Shall disclose several Principles of Natural Knowledge; plainly discovering the Law of Nature; or the true sentiments of Natural Reason, with Respect to Mans Being 
 1. All of these writers declare a belief in God. How do their beliefs and outlooks differ? 2. These writers were variously influenced by the Great Awakening, the Enlightenment, and rational Christianity. How are these movements reflected in the passages above? 3. What roles do fear and anxiety play in the experiences of Sarah Lippet and Nathan Cole? What difference does it make that neither Franklin nor Wise expresses fear, either of God or of his own sinfulness? 4. Benjamin Franklin and John Wise stress the importance of reason and virtue as guides to human conduct. How would Nathan Cole and Sarah Lippet react to that emphasis?





 PART 2

BRITISH NORTH AMERICA AND THE ATLANTIC WORLD, 1660–1763

The Print Revolution and the Great
Awakening
 George Whitefield made his first trip to North America in 1738, when he traveled to Savannah, Georgia. Benjamin Franklin published the first edition of this journal of his voyage in Philadelphia in 1739; the copy pictured here was printed a year later. Texts like this one highlight the importance of the print revolution to eighteenth-century culture: Whitefield was utterly unknown in North America until he began publicizing his ministry and his travels through such works. Enlightenment ideas, too, were conveyed to large and far-flung audiences in books, magazines, and newspapers. Library Company of Philadelphia.

 if I had a new soul & body both.” Strengthened and self-confident, these converts, the so-called New Lights, were eager to spread Whitefield’s message. The rise of print intersected with this enthusiasm. “Religion is become the Subject of most Conversations,” the Pennsylvania Gazette reported. “No books are in Request but those of Piety and Devotion.” Whitefield and his circle did their best to answer the demand for devotional reading. As he traveled, Whitefield regularly sent excerpts of his journal to be printed in newspapers. Franklin printed Whitefield’s sermons and journals by subscription and found them to be among his best-selling titles. Printed accounts of Whitefield’s travels, conversion narratives, sermons, and other devotional literature helped to confirm Pietists in their faith and strengthen the communication networks that sustained them.

Religious Upheaval in the North
 Like all cultural explosions, the Great Awakening was controversial. Conservative ministers — passionless Old Lights, according to the evanCOMPARE AND gelists — condemned the “cryings CONTRAST out, faintings and convulsions” In what ways was the in revivalist meetings and the New spread of ideas during the Lights’ claims of “working Miracles Enlightenment and the or speaking with Tongues.” BosGreat Awakening similar, ton minister Charles Chauncy and how did it differ? attacked the Pietist New Lights

 for allowing women to speak in public: it was “a plain breach of that commandment of the lord, where it is said, Let your women keep silence in the churches.” In Connecticut, Old Lights persuaded the legislature to prohibit evangelists from speaking to a congregation without the minister’s permission. But the New Lights refused to be silenced. Dozens of farmers, women, and artisans roamed the countryside, condemning the Old Lights as “unconverted” and willingly accepting imprisonment: “I shall bring glory to God in my bonds,” a dissident preacher wrote from jail. The Great Awakening undermined legally established churches and their tax-supported ministers. In New England, New Lights left the Congregational Church and founded 125 “separatist” churches that supported their ministers through voluntary contributions (Figure 4.3). Other religious dissidents joined Baptist congregations, which also condemned government support of churches: “God never allowed any civil state upon earth to impose religious taxes,” declared Baptist preacher Isaac Backus. In New York and New Jersey, the Dutch Reformed Church split in two as New Lights refused to accept doctrines imposed by conservative church authorities in Holland. The Great Awakening also appealed to Christians whose established churches could not serve their needs. By 1740, Pennsylvania’s German Reformed and Lutheran congregations suffered from a severe lack of university-trained pastors. In the colony’s Dutch Reformed, Dutch and Swedish Lutheran, and even its

 CHAPTER 4

Growth, Diversity, and Conflict, 1720–1763


 FIGURE 4.3 Church Growth by Denomination, 1700–1780 In 1700, and again in 1740, the Congregationalist and Anglican churches had the most members. By 1780, however, largely because of their enthusiastic evangelical message, Presbyterian and Baptist congregations outnumbered those of the Anglicans. The growth of immigrant denominations, such as the German Reformed and Lutheran, was equally impressive.

 Anglican congregations, half the pulpits were empty. In this circumstance, itinerant preachers who stressed the power of “heart religion” and downplayed the importance of formal ministerial training found a ready audience. The Great Awakening challenged the authority of all ministers, whose status rested on respect for their education and knowledge of the Bible. In an influential pamphlet, The Dangers of an Unconverted Ministry (1740), Gilbert Tennent asserted that ministers’ authority should come not from theological knowledge but from the conversion experience. Reaffirming Martin Luther’s belief in the priesthood of all Christians, Tennent suggested that anyone who had felt God’s redeeming grace could speak with ministerial authority. Sarah Harrah Osborn, a New Light “exhorter” in Rhode Island, refused “to shut up my mouth . . . and creep into obscurity” when silenced by her minister. As religious enthusiasm spread, churches founded new colleges to educate their young men and to train ministers. New Light Presbyterians established the College of New Jersey (Princeton) in 1746, and New York Anglicans founded King’s College (Columbia) in 1754. Baptists set up the College of Rhode Island (Brown) in 1764; two years later, the Dutch Reformed Church subsidized Queen’s College (Rutgers) in New Jersey. However, the main intellectual legacy of the Great Awakening was not education for the privileged few but a new sense of authority among the many. A European visitor to Philadelphia remarked in surprise, “The poorest day-laborer . . . holds it his right to

 advance his opinion, in religious as well as political matters, with as much freedom as the gentleman.”

Social and Religious Conflict
 in the South In the southern colonies, where the Church of England was legally established, religious enthusiasm triggered social conflict. Anglican ministers generally ignored the spiritual needs of African Americans and landless whites, who numbered 40 percent and 20 percent of the population, respectively. Middling white freeholders (35 percent of the residents) formed the core of most Church of England congregations. But prominent planters (just 5 percent) held the real power, using their control of parish finances to discipline ministers. One clergyman complained that dismissal awaited any minister who “had the courage to preach against any Vices taken into favor by the leading Men of his Parish.”

 The Presbyterian Revival Soon, a democratization of religion challenged the dominance of both the Anglican Church and the planter elite. In 1743, bricklayer Samuel Morris, inspired by reading George Whitefield’s sermons, led a group of Virginia Anglicans out of their congregation. Seeking a deeper religious experience, Morris invited New Light Presbyterian Samuel Davies to lead their prayer meetings. Davies’s sermons, filled with erotic devotional imagery and urging Christians to feel “ardent Passion,” sparked Presbyterian revivals across the Tidewater region,





 PART 2

BRITISH NORTH AMERICA AND THE ATLANTIC WORLD, 1660–1763

 threatening the social authority of the Virginia gentry. Traditionally, planters and their well-dressed families arrived at Anglican services in fancy carriages drawn by well-bred horses and flaunted their power by sitting in the front pews. Such ritual displays of the gentry’s superiority were meaningless if freeholders attended other churches. Moreover, religious pluralism threatened the tax-supported status of the Anglican Church. To halt the spread of New Light ideas, Virginia governor William Gooch denounced them as “false teachings,” and Anglican justices of the peace closed Presbyterian churches. This harassment kept most white yeomen and poor tenant families in the Church of England.

 The Baptist Insurgency During the 1760s, the vigorous preaching and democratic message of New Light Baptist ministers converted thousands of white farm families. The Baptists were radical Protestants whose central ritual was adult (rather than infant) baptism. Once men and women had experienced the infusion of grace — had been “born again” — they were baptized in an emotional public ceremony, often involving complete immersion in water. Slaves were welcome at Baptist revivals. During the 1740s, George Whitefield had urged Carolina planters

 to bring their slaves into the Christian fold, but white opposition and the Africans’ commitment to their ancestral religions kept the number of converts low. However, in the 1760s, native-born African Americans in Virginia welcomed the Baptists’ message that all people were equal in God’s eyes. Sensing a threat to the system of racial slavery, the House of Burgesses imposed heavy fines on Baptists who preached to slaves without their owners’ permission. Baptists threatened gentry authority because they repudiated social distinctions and urged followers to call one another “brother” and “sister.” They also condemned the planters’ decadent lifestyle. As planter Landon Carter complained, the Baptists were “destroying pleasure in the Country; for they encourage ardent Prayer . . . & an intire Banishment of Gaming, Dancing, & Sabbath-Day Diversions.” The gentry responded with violence. In Caroline County, an Anglican posse attacked Brother John Waller at a prayer meeting. Waller “was violently jerked off the stage; they caught him by the back part of his neck, beat his head against the ground, and a gentleman gave him twenty lashes with his horsewhip.” Despite these attacks, Baptist congregations multiplied. By 1775, about 15 percent of Virginia’s whites and hundreds of enslaved blacks had joined Baptist

Baptism in the Schuylkill River
 The Baptist movement, which made adult baptism central to its religious practice, gained enormous influence during the Great Awakening. Baptists presented a challenge to the social order in New England, where Isaac Backus and other leaders vigorously opposed the power of established Congregationalist churches. They presented an even graver threat to established authority in Virginia, where they ministered to African American slaves and ridiculed the pretensions of the gentry. This woodcut, from an eighteenth-century history of the Baptist movement, shows a congregation gathered on the banks of the Schuylkill River in Pennsylvania to witness the baptism of a new convert. Historical Society of Pennsylvania.

 CHAPTER 4

 churches. To signify their state of grace, some Baptist men “cut off their hair, like Cromwell’s round-headed chaplains.” Others forged a new evangelical masculinity, “crying, weeping, lifting up the eyes, groaning” when touched by the Holy Spirit. The Baptist revival in the Chesapeake challenged customary authority in families and society but did not overturn it. Rejecting the pleas of evangelical women, Baptist men kept church authority in the hands of “free born male members”; and Anglican slaveholders retained control of the political system. Still, the Baptist insurgency infused the lives of poor tenant families with spiritual meaning and empowered yeomen to defend their economic interests. Moreover, as Baptist ministers spread Christianity among slaves, the cultural gulf between blacks and whites shrank, undermining one justification for slavery and giving some blacks a new religious identity. Within a generation, African Americans would develop distinctive versions of Protestant Christianity.

The Midcentury Challenge:
War, Trade, and Social
Conflict, 1750–1763
 Between 1750 and 1763, three significant events transformed colonial life. First, Britain went to war against the French in America, sparking a worldwide conflict: the Great War for Empire. Second, a surge in trade boosted colonial consumption but caused Americans to become deeply indebted to British creditors. Third, westward migration sparked warfare with Indian peoples, violent disputes between settlers and land speculators, and backcountry rebellions against easterncontrolled governments.

The French and Indian War
 In 1754, overlapping French and British claims in North America came to a head (Map 4.4). The French maintained their vast claims through a network of forts and trading posts that sustained alliances with neighboring Indians. The soft underbelly of this sprawling empire was the Ohio Valley, where French claims were tenuous. Native peoples were driven out of the valley by Iroquois attacks in the seventeenth century, but after 1720 displaced Indian populations — especially Delawares and Shawnees from Pennsylvania — resettled there in large numbers. In the 1740s, British traders from Pennsylvania began traveling down the Ohio

Growth, Diversity, and Conflict, 1720–1763


 River. They traded with Delawares and Shawnees in the upper valley and began to draw French-allied Indians into their orbit and away from French posts. Then, in 1748, the Ohio Company of Virginia, a partnership of prominent colonial planters and London merchants, received a 200,000-acre grant from the crown to establish a new settlement on the upper Ohio, threatening French claims to the region.

 Conflict in the Ohio Valley By midcentury, Britain relied on the Iroquois Confederacy as its partner in Indian relations throughout the Northeast. By extending the Covenant Chain, the Iroquois had become a kind of Indian empire in their own right, claiming to speak for other groups throughout the region based on their seventeenth-century conquests. The Delawares, Shawnees, and other groups who repopulated the Ohio Valley did so in part to escape the Iroquois yoke. To maintain influence on the Ohio, the Iroquois sent two “half-kings,” Tanaghrisson (an adopted Seneca) and Scarouady (an Oneida), to the native settlement of Logstown, a trading town on the upper Ohio, where Britain recognized them as leaders. French authorities, alarmed by British inroads, built a string of forts from Lake Erie to the headwaters of the Ohio, culminating with Fort Duquesne on the site of present-day Pittsburgh. To reassert British claims, Governor Dinwiddie dispatched an expedition led by Colonel George Washington, a twenty-twoyear-old Virginian whose half-brothers were Ohio Company stockholders. Washington discovered that most of the Ohio Indians had decided to side with the French; only the Iroquois half-kings and a few of their followers supported his efforts. After Washington’s party fired on a French detachment, Tanaghrisson rushed in and killed a French officer to ensure war — a prospect that would force British arms to support Iroquois interests in the valley. Washington’s party was soon defeated by a larger French force. The result was an international incident that prompted Virginian and British expansionists to demand war. But war in North America was a worrisome prospect: the colonies were notoriously incapable of cooperating in their own defense, and the Covenant Chain was badly in need of repair. The Albany Congress The Iroquois Confederacy was unhappy with its British alliance and believed that the British were neglecting the Iroquois while settlers from New York pressed onto their lands. Moreover, the Ohio Indians, France, and Britain were all acting in the Ohio Valley without consulting them. To mend



Labrador
Sea


Y


Hudson
Bay


 CREE

M


C
R


F
 ALGONQUIN

 FOX

Law


ME. (MASS.)

La


 ie Er ke

S t.


 PENN.

 DELAWARE

N.H.


Ft. Stanwix


N.Y.
Albany N.J.


Boston


New York


AT L A N T I C OCEAN

 CHEROKEE

N.C.


 IT

 BR

S.C.




 CATAWBA

COMANCHE CHICKASAW

 WICHITA

 PUEBLO

 RT

H


Santa Fe


S


Philadelphia


 NO

I


E
W


 IS

U


S


A


L


O


I


N


N


MASS. R.I. CONN.

Ft. Duquesne
MD. DEL. OHIO
Ft. Cumberland COMPANY OF SHAWNEE VIRGINIA . VA. Williamsburg R io Oh 
H


 OSAGE

A


Port Royal


 ABENAKI

 MIAMI

 PAWNEE

 MICMAC

Ft. Ticonderoga


 IROQUOIS

OTTAWA
Detroit 
Quebec


 RICA

Lake Michigan


 SIOUX

.
 iR ipp iss iss

 CHEYENNE

 on ur

M


 Ft. Beauséjour

N


Montreal


Ft. Frontenac
Ft. Oswego
 tario L. On

Lak
 eH

 ANISHINAABEG

E


N


Superior
 ke La

W


A


 ren ce R .

 ASSINIBOINE

 MANDAN

Ft. Louisbourg


E


Y
B A


O


N


 AME

S
N ’
S O
D
H U


C


A


P


Savannah


 CREEK

CADDO
Natchez 
Charleston


 GA.

 CHOCTAW

San Antonio


A
ID OR FL

New Orleans


SH NI

 APACHE

St. Augustine


SP A





 French claims British claims Spanish claims Disputed British-French claims Disputed British-Spanish claims Major fort

Rio


Gr


 French outposts and settlements

 a

 nde

Gulf of Mexico


N E W
S P A I N


Mexico City


 MAP 4.4 European Spheres of Influence in North America, 1754 In the mid-eighteenth century, France, Spain, and the British-owned Hudson Bay Company laid claim to the vast areas of North America still inhabited primarily by Indian peoples. British settlers had already occupied much of the land east of the Appalachian Mountains. To safeguard their lands west of the mountains, Native Americans played off one European power against another. As a British official remarked: “To preserve the Ballance between us and the French is the great ruling Principle of Modern Indian Politics.” When Britain expelled France from North America in 1763, Indians had to face encroaching Anglo-American settlers on their own.



 500 miles 500 kilometers

 CHAPTER 4

Growth, Diversity, and Conflict, 1720–1763


 continental assembly to manage trade, Indian policy, and the colonies’ defense. Though it was attractive to a few reform-minded colonists and administrators, the plan would have compromised the independence of colonial assemblies and the authority of Parliament. It never received serious consideration, but that did not stop the push toward war. To see a longer excerpt of the Albany Plan of Union, along with other primary sources from this period, see Sources for America’s History.

Hendrick Peters Theyanoguin, Chief of the
Mohawks
 Great Britain’s alliance with the Iroquois Confederacy — the Covenant Chain — was central to its Indian policy in the mid-eighteenth century, and the Mohawk warrior and sachem Hendrick Peters Theyanoguin emerged as its most powerful spokesman. His speech at the Albany Congress of 1754, in which he urged Great Britain toward war, was reported in newspapers in Britain and the colonies and made him a transatlantic celebrity. This print was advertised for sale in London bookstalls just as his death at the Battle of Lake George (1755) was being reported in newspapers there. Hendrick wears a rich silk waistcoat, an overcoat trimmed with gold lace, a ruffled shirt, and a tricorn hat — gifts from his British allies — while he holds a wampum belt in one hand and a tomahawk in the other. Courtesy of the John Carter Brown Library at Brown University.

 relations with the Iroquois, the British Board of Trade called a meeting at Albany in June 1754. There, a prominent Mohawk leader named Hendrick Peters Theyanoguin challenged Britain to defend its interests more vigorously, while Benjamin Franklin proposed a “Plan of Union” among the colonies to counter French expansion. The Albany Plan of Union proposed that “one general government . . . be formed in America, including all the said colonies.” It would have created a

 The War Hawks Win In Parliament, the fight for the Ohio prompted a debate over war with France. Henry Pelham, the British prime minister, urged calm: “There is such a load of debt, and such heavy taxes already laid upon the people, that nothing but an absolute necessity can justifie our engaging in a new War.” But two expansionist-minded war hawks — rising British statesman William Pitt and Lord Halifax, the new head of the Board of Trade — persuaded Pelham to launch an American war. In June 1755, British and New England troops captured Fort Beauséjour in the disputed territory of Nova Scotia (which the French called Acadia). Soldiers from Puritan Massachusetts then forced nearly 10,000 French settlers from their lands, arguing they were “rebels” without property rights, and deported them to France, the West Indies, and Louisiana (where “Acadians” became “Cajuns”). English and Scottish Protestants took over the farms the French Catholics left behind. This Anglo-American triumph was quickly offset by a stunning defeat. In July 1755, General Edward Braddock advanced on Fort Duquesne with a force of 1,500 British regulars and Virginia militiamen. Braddock alienated potential allies by treating Indians (including Tanaghrisson) dismissively and denying the privilege of rank to colonial officers like George Washington. Persuaded that British arms could easily triumph in the American backcountry, he was instead routed by a French and Indian force. Braddock was killed, and more than half his troops were killed or wounded. “We have been beaten, most shamefully beaten, by a handfull of Men,” George Washington complained bitterly as he led the survivors back to Virginia.

The Great War for Empire
 By 1756, the American conflict had spread to Europe, where it was known as the Seven Years’ War, and pitted Britain and Prussia against France, Spain, and Austria.





 PART 2

BRITISH NORTH AMERICA AND THE ATLANTIC WORLD, 1660–1763

 Braddock’s Defeat and Death, July 1755 In May 1755 General Edward Braddock led a force of 1,500 British regulars and Virginia militiamen out of Fort Cumberland in western Maryland, intending to oust the French from Fort Duquesne, 50 miles to the west. As Braddock neared the fort, the French garrison of 200 troops and about 600 Indian allies — mostly Potawatomis, Ottawas, Shawnees, and Delawares — set out to ambush his force. Instead, they unexpectedly met the British along a narrow roadway. As the French and Indians fanned out to attack from the woods, the British troops (George Washington reported) “were struck with such a panic that they behaved with more cowardice than it is possible to conceive. The officers behaved gallantly, in order to encourage their men, for which they suffered greatly.” The British casualties — 450 killed, 500 wounded — included General Braddock, pictured above, who later died from his wounds. © Chicago History Museum, USA/The Bridgeman Art Library.

 When Britain mounted major offensives in India, West Africa, and the West Indies as well as in North America, the conflict became the Great War for Empire. William Pitt emerged as the architect of the British war effort. Pitt was a committed expansionist with a touch of arrogance. “I know that I can save this country and that I alone can,” he boasted. A master strategist, he planned to cripple France by seizing its colonies. In North America, he enjoyed a decisive demographic advantage, since George II’s 2 million subjects outnumbered the French 14 to 1. To mobilize the colonists, Pitt paid half the cost of their troops and supplied them with arms and equipment, at a cost of £1 million a year. He also committed a fleet of British ships and 30,000 British soldiers to the conflict in America.

 Beginning in 1758, the powerful Anglo-American forces moved from one triumph to the next, in part because they brought Indian allies back into the fold. They forced the French to abandon Fort Duquesne (renamed Fort Pitt) and then captured Fort Louisbourg, a stronghold at the mouth of the St. Lawrence. In 1759, an armada led by British general James Wolfe sailed down the St. Lawrence and took Quebec, the heart of France’s American empire. The Royal Navy prevented French reinforcements from crossing the Atlantic, allowing British forces to complete the conquest of Canada in 1760 by capturing Montreal (Map 4.5). Elsewhere, the British likewise had great success. From Spain, the British won Cuba and the Philippine Islands. Fulfilling Pitt’s dream, the East India Company

 CHAPTER 4

Growth, Diversity, and Conflict, 1720–1763




 e, 1 olf W

Gulf of
St. Lawrence


NEW FRANCE

Cape
Breton
Island
Ft. Louisbourg
July 26, 1758


Quebec
Sept. 13, 1759


Erie


R.
 ny he

S
 TI

Philadelphia
RI
Ft. Cumberland mac R. Baltimore oto 
P


 v

N
E


W


 ABENAKI

S


 t, 1 ers h Am

Portsmouth


ATLANTIC OCEAN

Boston


New York


B


Ft. Necessity
July 3–4, 1754
 SHAWNEE

H


 ON

Port
Royal


 Ft. Beauséjour MICMAC ia ot c S a Halifax

.


Ohio
R.


Ft. Duquesne
July 9, 1755


L
 CO

IES D
ela w are R 
 DELAWARE

Al
 leg

 e Lak

 IROQUOIS

R


No


S


Ft. Oswego


Ft. Niagara
July 25, 1759


Mo
 haw k R. Albany

St. John


 t Montreal Sept. 8, 1760

Amher
 st, 1760 Connecti cut R .

Lake Ontario


Ft. Ticonderoga
July 8, 1758


Hudson R.


 on e Hur Lak

Ft. Frontenac
Aug. 27, 1758


.
 ce R ren aw L .

.


R.


 ALGONQUIN

Otta
 wa





 200 miles 200 kilometers

 British movement British victories French victories Fort Settlement

 MAP 4.5 The Anglo-American Conquest of New France After full-scale war with France began in 1756, it took almost three years for the British ministry to equip colonial forces and dispatch a sizable army to far-off America. In 1758, British and colonial troops attacked the heartland of New France, capturing Quebec in 1759 and Montreal in 1760. This conquest both united and divided the allies. Colonists celebrated the great victory: “The Illuminations and Fireworks exceeded any that had been exhibited before,” reported the South Carolina Gazette. However, British officers had little respect for colonial soldiers. Said one, “[They are] the dirtiest, most contemptible, cowardly dogs you can conceive.”

 ousted French traders from India, and British forces seized French Senegal in West Africa. They also captured the rich sugar islands of Martinique and Guadeloupe in the French West Indies, but at the insistence of the West Indian sugar lobby (which wanted to protect its monopoly), the ministry returned the islands to France in the Treaty of Paris of 1763. Despite that controversial decision, the treaty confirmed Britain’s triumph. It granted Britain sovereignty over half of North America, including French Canada, all French territory east of the Mississippi River, Spanish Florida, and the recent conquests in Africa and India. Britain had forged a commercial and colonial empire that was nearly worldwide. Though Britain had won cautious support from some Native American groups in the late stages of the war, its territorial acquisitions alarmed many native peoples from New York to the Mississippi, who

 preferred the presence of a few French traders to an influx of thousands of Anglo-American settlers. To encourage the French to return, the Ottawa chief Pontiac declared, “I am French, and I want to die French.” Neolin, a Delaware prophet, went further, calling for EXPLAIN the expulsion of all white-skinned CONSEQUENCES invaders: “If you suffer the English How did the Seven Years’ among you, you are dead men. War reshape Britain’s Sickness, smallpox, and their empire in North America poison [rum] will destroy you and affect native peoples? entirely.” In 1763, inspired by Neolin’s nativist vision, Pontiac led a major uprising at Detroit. Following his example, Indians throughout the Great Lakes and Ohio Valley seized nearly every British military garrison west of Fort Niagara, besieged Fort Pitt, and killed or captured more than 2,000 settlers.



 PART 2

BRITISH NORTH AMERICA AND THE ATLANTIC WORLD, 1660–1763

 British military expeditions defeated the Delawares near Fort Pitt and broke the siege of Detroit, but it took the army nearly two years to reclaim all the posts it had lost. In the peace settlement, Pontiac and his allies accepted the British as their new political “fathers.” The British ministry, having learned how expensive it was to control the trans-Appalachian west, issued the Royal Proclamation of 1763, which confirmed Indian control of the region and declared it off-limits to colonial settlement. It was an edict that many colonists would ignore.

British Industrial Growth
 and the Consumer Revolution Britain owed its military and diplomatic success to its unprecedented economic resources. Since 1700, when it had wrested control of many oceanic trade routes from the Dutch, Britain had become the dominant commercial power in the Atlantic and Indian oceans. By 1750, it was also becoming the first country to use new manufacturing technology and work discipline to expand output. This combination of commerce and industry would soon make Britain the most powerful nation in the world. Mechanical power was key to Britain’s Industrial Revolution. British artisans designed and built water mills and steam engines that efficiently powered a wide array of machines: lathes for shaping wood, jennies and looms for spinning and weaving textiles, and hammers for forging iron. Compared with traditional manufacturing methods, the new power-driven machinery produced woolen and linen textiles, iron tools, furniture, and chinaware in greater quantities — and at lower cost. Moreover, the entrepreneurs running the new workshops drove their employees hard, forcing them to keep pace with the machines and work long hours. To market the abundant factory-produced goods, English and Scottish merchants extended credit to colonial shopkeepers for a full year instead of the traditional six months. Americans soon were purchasing 30 percent of all British exports. To pay for British manufactures, mainland colonists increased their exports of tobacco, rice, indigo, and wheat. Using credit advanced by Scottish merchants, planters in Virginia bought land, slaves, and equipment to grow tobacco, EXPLAIN which they exported to expandCONSEQUENCES ing markets in France and central How did the prosperity of Europe. In South Carolina, rice the British Empire improve planters used British government and endanger the lives and subsidies to develop indigo and interests of colonists? rice plantations. New York,

Nicholas Boylston, c. 1769
 Merchants in the coastal and transatlantic trades gained enormous wealth in the mid-eighteenth century and displayed it in new ways. Among the most flamboyant was Nicholas Boylston. Of Boylston’s home John Adams wrote, “A Seat it is for a noble Man, a Prince.” In this portrait, painted by John Singleton Copley in 1769, Boylston flaunts his exotic possessions. In place of the wig he would have worn outside his home, Boylston wears a red velvet turban to keep his shaved head warm. His morning gown of heavy silk damask covers a rich waistcoat, casually unbuttoned in the middle to reveal his elegant ruffled shirt. Boylston rests his left elbow on two thick account books, an unmistakable reminder of the source of his wealth. Photograph © 2014 Museum of Fine Arts, Boston. Bequest of David P. Kimball, 23.504.

 Pennsylvania, Maryland, and Virginia became the breadbasket of the Atlantic World, supplying Europe’s exploding population with wheat. Americans used their profits and the generous credit extended from overseas to buy English manufactures. When he was practicing law in Boston, John Adams visited the home of Nicholas Boylston, one of the city’s wealthiest merchants, “to view the Furniture, which alone cost a thousand Pounds sterling,” he wrote. “[T]he Marble Tables, the rich Beds with Crimson Damask Curtains and Counterpins, the Beautiful Chimny Clock, the Spacious Garden, are the most magnificent of any Thing I have ever seen.” Through their possessions, well-to-do colonists set themselves apart from their humbler — or, as they might have said, more vulgar — neighbors.

 CHAPTER 4

 basis of Connecticut’s “sea-to-sea” royal charter of 1662. However, Charles II had also granted the Wyoming Valley to William Penn, and the Penn family had sold farms there to Pennsylvania residents. By the late 1750s, settlers from Connecticut and Pennsylvania were at war, burning down their rivals’ houses and barns. Delawares with their own claim to the valley were caught in the crossfire. In April 1763, the Delaware headman Teedyuscung was burned to death in his cabin; in retaliation, Teedyuscung’s son Captain Bull led a war party that destroyed a community of Connecticut settlers. Simultaneously, three distinct but related land disputes broke out in the Hudson River Valley (Map 4.6). Dutch tenant farmers, Wappinger Indians, and migrants from Massachusetts asserted ownership rights to lands long claimed by manorial families such as the Van Rensselaers and the Livingstons. When the manor lords turned to the legal system to uphold their claims, Dutch and English farmers in Westchester, Dutchess, and Albany counties rioted to close the courts. In response, New York’s royal governor ordered British troops to assist local sheriffs and manorial bailiffs: they suppressed the tenant uprisings, intimidated the Wappingers, and evicted the Massachusetts squatters. Other land disputes erupted in New Jersey and the southern colonies, where landlords and English aristocrats had successfully revived legal claims based on long-dormant seventeenth-century charters. One

 Although Britain’s consumer revolution raised living standards, it landed many consumers — and the colonies as a whole — in debt (Figure 4.4). Even during the wartime boom of the 1750s, exports paid for only 80 percent of British imports. Britain financed the remaining 20 percent — the Americans’ trade deficit — through the extension of credit and Pitt’s military expenditures. When the military subsidies ended in 1763, the colonies fell into an economic recession. Merchants looked anxiously at their overstocked warehouses and feared bankruptcy. “I think we have a gloomy prospect before us,” a Philadelphia trader noted in 1765. The increase in transatlantic trade had made Americans more dependent on overseas credit and markets.

The Struggle for Land in the East
 In good times and bad, the population continued to grow, intensifying the demand for arable land. Consider the experience of Kent, Connecticut. Like earlier generations, Kent’s residents had moved inland to establish new farms, but Kent stood at the colony’s western boundary. To provide for the next generation, many Kent families joined the Susquehanna Company (1749), which speculated in lands in the Wyoming Valley in present-day northeastern Pennsylvania. As settlers took up farmsteads there, the company urged the Connecticut legislature to claim the region on the

Population


Growth, Diversity, and Conflict, 1720–1763


 British imports (in £)

 Average yearly balance of payments, 1768–1772

 4.5 million

Earnings


Payments


 (£ sterling, millions)

4.0
3.5
3.0
2.5
2.0


 Debt-fueled consumption

1.5


Commodities: Exports
 Foreign earnings: Ship sales Foreign earnings: Shipping British military expenditures

2,870,000
140,000
820,000
365,000


Commodities: Imports
 Purchases of slaves & servants Imperial government: Taxes

3,920,000
280,000
40,000


Total


4,195,000
4,240,000


 Avg. annual Colonial deficit Deficit over 5 years

45,000
225,000


1.0
0.5














 FIGURE 4.4 Mainland Population and British Imports Around 1750, British imports were growing at a faster rate than the American population, indicating that the colonists were consuming more per capita. But Americans went into debt to pay for these goods, running an annual trade deficit with their British suppliers that by 1772 had created a cumulative debt of £2 million.



 PART 2

BRITISH NORTH AMERICA AND THE ATLANTIC WORLD, 1660–1763

 ALGONQUIN

O
IR NEW YORK

 New England migrants vs. Hudson Valley manor lords

 PENNSYLVANIA

SH A N EN AN DO AH M O VA LLE U N Y T

A


 DELAWARE

 MARYLAND

Paxton Boys
 SHAWNEE

 Virginia speculators: Ohio Company

RHODE ISLAND

 Connecticut settlers in Wyoming Valley

I N


L.


 ie Er

 CONN.

E
S


 MASS.

S


 uron L. H

L.


N
VT. ABENAKI (N.Y.) NEW W HAMP.

 IS

O
 QU

 ario Ont

Western Rebels and Regulators


MAINE (MASS.)

 Massachusetts settlers in New York

NEW JERSEY
New Jersey land riots DEL. Revival of charter claims in Virginia and North Carolina 
H


I


 VIRGINIA

AT L AN TIC OC E AN

C
A


 EE

E


 CH

NORTH CAROLINA

P


P


A


L


K
 RO

North Carolina
Regulators


A




 CATAWBA

SOUTH CAROLINA

Area of Settlement
Up to 1700
Up to 1750
Up to 1775


 CREEK

 GEORGIA

South Carolina
Regulators




 300 miles 300 kilometers

 MAP 4.6 Westward Expansion and Land Conflicts, 1750–1775 Between 1750 and 1775, the mainland colonial population more than doubled — from 1.2 million to 2.5 million — triggering westward migrations and legal battles over land, which had become increasingly valuable. Violence broke out in eastern areas, where tenant farmers and smallholders contested landlords’ property claims based on ancient titles; and in the backcountry, where migrating settlers fought with Indians, rival claimants, and the officials of easterndominated governments.

 court decision allowed Lord Granville, the heir of an original Carolina proprietor, to collect an annual tax on land in North Carolina; another decision awarded ownership of the entire northern neck of Virginia (along the Potomac River) to Lord Fairfax. The revival of these proprietary claims by manorial lords and English nobles testified to the rising value of land along the Atlantic coastal plain. It also underscored the increasing similarities between rural societies in Europe and America. To avoid the status of European peasants, native-born yeomen and tenant families joined the stream of European migrants searching for cheap land near the Appalachian Mountains.

 As would-be landowners moved west, they sparked conflicts over Indian policy, political representation, and debts. During the war with France, Delaware and Shawnee warriors had exacted revenge for Thomas Penn’s land swindle of 1737 by destroying frontier farms in Pennsylvania and killing hundreds of residents. Scots-Irish settlers demanded the expulsion of all Indians, but Quaker leaders refused. So in 1763, a group of Scots-Irish frontiersmen called the Paxton Boys massacred twenty Conestoga Indians, an assimilated community that had lived alongside their colonist neighbors peacefully for many years. When Governor John Penn tried to bring the murderers to justice, 250 armed Scots-Irishmen advanced on Philadelphia. Benjamin Franklin intercepted the angry mob at Lancaster and arranged a truce, averting a battle with the militia. Prosecution of the Paxton Boys failed for lack of witnesses, and the episode gave their defenders the opportunity to excoriate Pennsylvania’s government for protecting Indians while it neglected the interests of backcountry colonists.

 The South Carolina Regulators Violence also broke out in the backcountry of South Carolina, where landhungry Scottish and Anglo-American settlers clashed repeatedly with Cherokees during the war with France. After the fighting ended in 1763, a group of landowning vigilantes known as the Regulators demanded that the eastern-controlled government provide western districts with more courts, fairer taxation, and greater representation in the assembly. “We are Free-Men — British Subjects — Not Born Slaves,” declared a Regulator manifesto. Fearing slave revolts, the lowland rice planters who ran the South Carolina assembly compromised. In 1767, the assembly created western courts and reduced the fees for legal documents; but it refused to reapportion the legislature or lower western taxes. Like the Paxton Boys in Pennsylvania, the South Carolina Regulators won attention to backcountry needs but failed to wrest power from the eastern elite. Civil Strife in North Carolina In 1766, a more radical Regulator movement arose in North Carolina. When the economic recession of the early 1760s brought a sharp fall in tobacco prices, many farmers could not pay their debts. When creditors sued these farmers for payment, judges directed sheriffs to seize the debtors’ property. Many backcountry farmers lost their property or ended up in jail for resisting court orders.

 CHAPTER 4

 To save their farms, North Carolina’s debtors defied the government’s authority. Disciplined mobs intimidated judges, closed courts, and freed their comrades from jail. The Regulators proposed a series of reforms, including lower legal fees and tax payments in the “produce of the country” rather than in cash. They also demanded greater representation in the assembly and a just revenue system that would tax each person “in proportion to the profits arising from his estate.” All to no avail. In May 1771, Royal Governor William Tryon mobilized British troops and the eastern militia, which defeated a large Regulator force at the Alamance River. When the fighting ended, thirty men lay dead, and Tryon summarily executed seven insurgent leaders. Not since Bacon’s Rebellion in Virginia in 1675 and the colonial uprisings during the Glorious Revolution of 1688 (see Chapter 2) had a colonial dispute caused so much political agitation. In 1771, as in 1675 and 1688, colonial conflicts became linked with imperial politics. In Connecticut, the Reverend Ezra Stiles defended the North Carolina Regulators. “What shall an injured & oppressed people do,” he asked, “[when faced with] Oppression and tyranny?” Stiles’s remarks reflected growing resistance to recently imposed British policies of taxation and control. The American colonies still depended primarily on Britain for their trade and military defense. However, by the 1760s, the mainland settlements had evolved into complex societies with the potential to exist independently. British policies would

CHAPTER REVIEW

 play a crucial role in determining the direction the maturing colonies would take.

SUMMARY
In this chapter, we observed dramatic changes in British North America between 1720 and 1765. An astonishing surge in population — from 400,000 to almost 2 million — was the combined result of natural increase, European migration, and the African slave trade. The print revolution and the rise of the British Atlantic brought important new influences: the European Enlightenment and European Pietism transformed the world of ideas, while a flood of British consumer goods and the genteel aspirations of wealthy colonists reshaped the colonies’ material culture. Colonists confronted three major regional challenges. In New England, crowded towns and eversmaller farms threatened the yeoman ideal of independent farming, prompting families to limit births, move to the frontier, or participate in an “exchange” economy. In the Middle Atlantic colonies, Dutch, English, German, and Scots-Irish residents maintained their religious and cultural identities while they competed for access to land and political power. Across the backcountry, new interest in western lands triggered conflicts with Indian peoples, civil unrest among whites, and, ultimately, the Great War for Empire. In the aftermath of the fighting, Britain stood triumphant in Europe and America. 
C H A P T E R


R E V I E W


M A K E I T S T I C K
Go to LearningCurve to retain what you’ve read. 
TERMS TO KNOW

 Identify and explain the significance of each term below.

Key Concepts and Events
 tenancy (p. 116) competency (p. 117) household mode of production (p. 120) squatters (p. 121) redemptioner (p. 124) Enlightenment (p. 126) Pietism (p. 126)

Key People
 natural rights (p. 127) deism (p. 128) revival (p. 129) Old Lights (p. 132) New Lights (p. 132) consumer revolution (p. 141) Regulators (p. 142)

Isaac Newton (p. 127)
John Locke (p. 127)
Benjamin Franklin (p. 128)
Jonathan Edwards (p. 129)
George Whitefield (p. 129)
Tanaghrisson (p. 135)
William Pitt (p. 138)
Pontiac (p. 139)






 PART 2

CHAPTER REVIEW

REVIEW QUESTIONS
Answer these questions to demonstrate your understanding of the chapter’s main ideas. 
 1. Compare colonists’ “pursuits of happiness” in New

 England, the Middle colonies, the backcountry, and the South. How did poorer colonists in each of these regions seek to maintain their autonomy from powerful landlords and institutions, and how did this effort shape the formation of regional identities?

 2. How did the print and transportation revolutions

 transform colonial culture and the economy in the eighteenth century?

MAKING CONNECTIONS

 half of North America into British hands. How did that massive territorial acquisition affect ordinary colonists? What impact did it have on Native Americans’ strategies for coexisting with their European neighbors?

Review the
 events listed under “Work, Exchange, and Technology” and “Identity” for the period 1720–1750 on the thematic timeline on page 79. How did economic developments in the colonies influence the formation of new cultural identities in this era?

THEMATIC UNDERSTANDING

 Recognize the larger developments and continuities within and across chapters by answering these questions.

ACROSS TIME AND PLACE
In Chapter 3 we 
 saw the rise of the South Atlantic System, an engine of economic growth that tied Britain’s colonies more closely together and generated prosperity throughout the British Atlantic world. What consequences of that integration and prosperity are evident in the topics discussed in this chapter? How was the Great War for Empire grounded in earlier economic developments? And how did the postwar debt crisis grow out of the South Atlantic System?

MORE TO EXPLORE

 3. The Great War for Empire delivered the eastern

VISUAL EVIDENCE
Return to the John Collet 
 painting of George Whitefield that opened the chapter (p. 115). How does Collet portray Whitefield’s audience? Consider the postures and facial expressions of individual members of the crowd and imagine what might have been running through their minds as they listened. What do the various elements of this painting (the crowd, tankard of ale, sleeping dog, setting) suggest about the Great Awakening’s appeal? About Collet’s attitude toward evangelical preaching?

 Start here to learn more about the events discussed in this chapter.

Fred Anderson, The War That Made America
 (2005). A compelling narrative of the Seven Years’ War in America. Also see The War That Made America (PBS video) and its Web site: thewarthatmadeamerica.org. Colin G. Calloway, White People, Indians, and Highlanders (2008). Makes suggestive comparisons between Britain’s encounters in Scotland and America. Aaron Spencer Fogleman, Hopeful Journeys (1996). Covers German migrations to America.

 Patrick Griffin, The People with No Name (2001). Treats the experience of the Scots-Irish in Ireland and America. Susan E. Klepp and Billy G. Smith, eds., The Infortunate (1992). A compelling narrative of one indentured servant immigrant’s experience in the Middle colonies. Laurel Thatcher Ulrich, A Midwife’s Tale (1990). A vivid account of one woman’s experiences on the Maine frontier. See also A Midwife’s Tale (PBS video) and two related Web sites: pbs.org/wgbh/amex /midwife and DoHistory.org.

 CHAPTER 4

 TIMELINE

CHAPTER REVIEW

 Ask yourself why this chapter begins and ends with these dates and then identify the links among related events.



 Licensing Act lapses in England, triggering the print revolution

 1710s–1730s

 Enlightenment ideas spread from Europe to America Germans and Scots-Irish settle in Middle colonies Theodore Jacob Frelinghuysen preaches Pietism to German migrants

 1720s–1730s

 William and Gilbert Tennent lead Presbyterian revivals among Scots-Irish Jonathan Edwards preaches in New England



 Benjamin Franklin founds the Pennsylvania Gazette



 George Whitefield sparks Great Awakening

 1740s–1760s

 Conflict between Old Lights and New Lights Shortage of farmland in New England threatens freehold ideal Growing ethnic and religious pluralism in Middle Atlantic colonies Religious denominations establish colleges



 Benjamin Franklin founds American Philosophical Society Samuel Morris starts Presbyterian revivals in Virginia



 Ohio Company receives grant of 200,000 acres from the crown



 Connecticut farmers form Susquehanna Company

 1750s

 Industrial Revolution begins in England British shipping dominates North Atlantic Consumer purchases increase American imports and debt



 French and Indian War begins Iroquois and colonists meet at Albany Congress Franklin’s Plan of Union



 Britain begins Great War for Empire

1759–1760


 Britain completes conquest of Canada

 1760s

 Land conflict along New York and New England border Baptist revivals win converts in Virginia



 Pontiac’s Rebellion leads to Proclamation of 1763 Treaty of Paris ends Great War for Empire Scots-Irish Paxton Boys massacre Indians in Pennsylvania



 Royal governor puts down Regulator revolt in North Carolina

KEY TURNING POINTS:
The Ohio Company grant (1748), the formation of the Susquehanna Company (1749), land conflict along New York and New England border (1760s), and the defeat of the North Carolina Regulators (1771). How do these events reveal tensions over the question of who would control the development of frontier lands in Britain’s mainland North American colonies? What were the effects of these conflicts on Native American populations? 




Revolution and
Republican Culture
1763–1820


P A R T


