 continued on his way toward India. Others soon followed and changed the region’s name to Brazil after the indigenous tree that yielded a valuable red dye; for several decades, Portuguese sailors traded with the Tupi Indians for brazilwood. Then in the 1530s, to secure Portugal’s claim, King Dom João III sent settlers who began the long, painstaking process of carving out sugar plantations in the coastal lowlands. For several decades, Native Americans supplied most of the labor for these operations, but African slaves gradually replaced them. Brazil would soon become the world’s leading producer of sugar; it would also devour African lives. By introducing the plantation system to the Americas — a form of estate agriculture using slave labor that was pioneered by Italian merchants and crusading knights in the twelfth century and transplanted to the islands off the coast of Africa in the fifteenth century — the Portuguese set in motion one of the most significant developments of the early modern era. By the end of the sixteenth century, the European colonization of the Americas had barely begun. Yet several of its most important elements were already taking shape. Spanish efforts demonstrated that densely populated empires were especially vulnerable to conquest and were also especially valuable sources of wealth. The Portuguese had discovered the viability of sugar plantations in the tropical regions of the Americas and pioneered the transatlantic slave trade as a way of manning them. And contacts with native peoples revealed their devastating vulnerabilities to Eurasian diseases — one part of the larger phenomenon of the Columbian Exchange (discussed in Chapter 2).

SUMMARY
Native American, European, and African societies developed independently over thousands of years before they experienced direct contacts with one another. In the Americas, residents of Mesoamerica and the Andes were fully sedentary (with individual ownership of land and intensive agriculture), but elsewhere societies were semisedentary (with central fields and villages that were occupied seasonally) or nonsedentary (hunter-gatherers). West and Central Africa also had a mix of sedentary, semisedentary, and nonsedentary settlements. Western Europe, by contrast, was predominantly sedentary. All three continents had a complex patchwork of political organization, from empires, to kingdoms and chiefdoms, to principalities, duchies, and ministates; everywhere, rulership was imbued with notions of spiritual power. Ruling classes relied on 




 PART 1

TRANSFORMATIONS OF NORTH AMERICA, 1450–1700

 warfare, trade, and tribute (or taxes) to dominate those around them and accumulate precious goods that helped to set them apart from ordinary laborers, but they also bore responsibility for the well-being of their subjects and offered them various forms of protection. As Portuguese and Castilian (later Spanish) seafarers pushed into the Atlantic, they set in motion a chain of events whose consequences they could scarcely imagine. From a coastal trade with Africa that was secondary to their efforts to reach the Indian Ocean, from the miscalculations of Columbus and the happy accident of Cabral, developed a pattern of transatlantic

 exploration, conquest, and exploitation that no one could have foretold or planned. In the tropical zones of the Caribbean and coastal Brazil, invading Europeans enslaved Native Americans and quickly drove them into extinction or exile. The demands of plantation agriculture soon led Europeans to import slaves from Africa, initiating a transatlantic trade that would destroy African lives on both sides of the ocean. And two of the greatest empires in the world — the Aztec and Incan empires — collapsed in response to unseen biological forces that acted in concert with small invading armies. European Map of Brazil, c. 1519 This lavishly illustrated map of Brazil is drawn from the Miller Atlas, made by order of King Manuel I of Portugal around 1519. It features images of Indians harvesting brazilwood; macaws and other colorful birds; a monkey; and — improbably — a fire-breathing dragon. Note, too, the dense annotations and place names along the coast — a reminder that Portuguese familiarity with Brazil was confined almost entirely to the seaboard. Bibliotheque Nationale de France.

 CHAPTER 1

C H A P T E R


CHAPTER REVIEW

R E V I E W


M A K E I T S T I C K
Go to LearningCurve to retain what you’ve read. 
TERMS TO KNOW

 Identify and explain the significance of each term below.

Key Concepts and Events
 tribute (p. 8) matriarchy (p. 15) animism (p. 17) patriarchy (p. 18) primogeniture (p. 18) peasants (p. 18) republic (p. 19) civic humanism (p. 20) Renaissance (p. 20) guilds (p. 20)

Christianity (p. 21)
 heresy (p. 22) Islam (p. 22) Crusades (p. 22) predestination (p. 22) Protestant Reformation (p. 22) Counter-Reformation (p. 22) trans-Saharan trade (p. 23) reconquista (p. 31)

Key People
Hiawatha (p. 13)
Martin Luther (p. 22)
Mansa Musa (p. 23)
Vasco da Gama (p. 29)


Christopher Columbus (p. 31)
 Hernán Cortés (p. 34) Moctezuma (p. 34) Pedro Alvares Cabral (p. 35)

REVIEW QUESTIONS
Answer these questions to demonstrate your understanding of the chapter’s main ideas. 
 1. How did the rulers of Native American, European,

 4. Compare the societies of the eastern woodlands of

 2. What role did religious and spiritual ideas play in

THEMATIC UNDERSTANDING

 and African empires and kingdoms secure and sustain their power? How did ordinary people benefit from, or suffer under, their rule? shaping the experience of ordinary people on the three continents?

 3. Why was long-distance trade in exotic goods such

 an important phenomenon in North America, Europe, and Africa?

 North America with the kingdoms of Western Europe. What similarities do you see? Differences? How do you weigh their relative importance?

Review the
 events listed under “Peopling” and “Work, Exchange, and Technology” on the thematic timeline on page 5. How did contacts among Europeans, Native Americans, and Africans alter the economies of the three continents?





 PART 1

CHAPTER REVIEW

MAKING CONNECTIONS

 Recognize the larger developments and continuities within and across chapters by answering these questions.

ACROSS TIME AND PLACE
The century 
 following the first contacts among Europe, subSaharan Africa, and the Americas brought some of the most momentous changes in world history: a dramatic reconfiguration of human populations across the globe, new patterns of trade and warfare, and immense challenges to peoples’ worldviews. Thinking about our contemporary world, what monumental changes are currently affecting our lives? How would you compare them with the events described in this chapter?

MORE TO EXPLORE

VISUAL EVIDENCE
Return to the image of The 
 Last Judgment on page 21. How does the emphasis on universal truth and everlasting punishment and reward make Christianity different from animism? How might faith in such a religious system shape the values and priorities of believers?

 Start here to learn more about the events discussed in this chapter.

Philip D. Curtin, The Rise and Fall of the Plantation
 Complex, 2nd ed. (1998). Traces the long evolution of plantations and slavery in world history.

 David Northrup, Africa’s Discovery of Europe: 1450– 1850, 2nd ed. (2008). European-African interactions from an African perspective.

 Peter C. Mancall, ed., Travel Narratives from the Age of Discovery (2006). Travelers’ accounts from Asia, Africa, the Americas, and Europe.

 Timothy R. Pauketat, Cahokia (2009). An evocative account of North America’s great city and archaeologists’ efforts to unearth it.

Charles C. Mann, 1491 (2005) and 1493 (2011). These
 two books explore the Americas before Columbus and the global changes unleashed by his voyages.

 “1492: An Ongoing Voyage” (loc.gov/exhibits/1492 /intro.html). Offers images and analysis of the native cultures of the Western Hemisphere.

 CHAPTER 1

 TIMELINE

CHAPTER REVIEW

 Ask yourself why this chapter begins and ends with these dates and then identify the links among related events.

 c. 13,000–3000 B.C.

 Asian migrants reach North America

 c. 6000 B.C.

 Domestication of maize begins in Mesoamerica



 Roman emperor Constantine converts to Christianity

 c. 600

 Pueblo cultures emerge



Death of Muhammad


632–1100


 Arab people adopt Islam and spread its influence

 c. 800

 Ghana Empire emerges

 c. 1000

 Irrigation developed by Hohokam, Mogollon, and Anasazi peoples

 c. 1000–1350

 Development of Mississippian culture

 c. 1050

 The founding of Cahokia

1096–1291


 Crusades link Europe with Arab trade routes

 c. 1150

 Chaco Canyon abandoned

 c. 1200

 Mali Empire emerges

1300–1450


The Renaissance in Italy


 c. 1325

 Aztecs establish capital at Tenochtitlán



 Mansa Musa’s pilgrimage to Mecca

 c. 1350

 The Black Death sweeps Europe; Cahokia goes into rapid decline

 c. 1400

 Songhai Empire emerges



 Portuguese trade begins along West and Central African coasts



 Christopher Columbus makes first voyage to America

1497–1498


 Portugal’s Vasco da Gama reaches East Africa and India



 Pedro Alvares Cabral encounters Brazil

 c. 1500

Founding of the Iroquois Confederacy




 Juan Ponce de León explores Florida



 Martin Luther sparks Protestant Reformation

1519–1521


 Hernán Cortés conquers Aztec Empire

1532–1535


 Francisco Pizarro vanquishes Incas



 John Calvin publishes Institutes of the Christian Religion



 De Soto meets the Lady of Cofachiqui; founding of the Jesuit order



 Duarte Lopez visits the Kongo capital

KEY TURNING POINTS:
The domestication of maize (6000 b.c.), the founding of Tenochtitlán (1325), and the conquest of the Aztec empire (1519–1521). How did the domestication of maize make the city of Tenochtitlán possible? What characteristics of the Aztec empire and its capital city made it vulnerable to conquest? 




American Experiments
1521–1700


C H A P T E R
SPAIN’S TRIBUTE COLONIES A
New American World The Columbian Exchange The Protestant Challenge to Spain 
PLANTATION COLONIES
Brazil’s Sugar Plantations England’s Tobacco Colonies The Caribbean Islands Plantation Life 
NEO-EUROPEAN COLONIES
New France New Netherland The Rise of the Iroquois New England 
INSTABILITY, WAR, AND REBELLION
New England’s Indian Wars Bacon’s Rebellion, 1675–1676 


B


 eginning in the 1660s, legislators in IDENTIFY THE BIG IDEA Virginia and Maryland hammered In what ways did European out the legal definition of chattel migrants transfer familiar patterns slavery: the ownership of human beings and institutions to their colonies in as property. The institution of slavery — the Americas, and in what ways did which would profoundly affect African they create new American worlds? Americans and shape much of American How did Native Americans adapt to history — had been obsolete in England the growing presence of Europeans for centuries, and articulating its logic among them? required lawmakers to reverse some of the most basic presumptions of English law. For example, in 1662 a Virginia statute declared, “all children borne in this country shalbe held bond or free only according to the condition of the mother.” This idea — that a child’s legal status derived from the mother, rather than the father — ran contrary to the patriarchal foundations of English law. The men who sat in Virginia’s House of Burgesses would not propose such a thing lightly. Why would they decide that the principle of patriarchal descent, which was so fundamental to their own worlds, was inappropriate for their slaves? The question needed to be addressed, according to the statute’s preamble, since “doubts have arisen whether children got by an Englishman upon a negro woman should be slave or free.” One such case involved Elizabeth Key, a woman whose father was a free Englishman and mother was an African slave. She petitioned for her freedom in 1656, based on her father’s status. Her lawyer was an Englishman named William Greensted. He not only took Key’s case, but he also fathered two of her children and, eventually, married her. Key won her case and her freedom from bondage. Elizabeth Key escaped her mother’s fate — a life in slavery — because her father and her husband were both free Englishmen. The 1662 statute aimed to close Key’s avenue to freedom. The process by which the institution of chattel slavery was molded to the needs of colonial planters is just one example of the way Europeans adapted the principles they brought with them to the unfamiliar demands of their new surroundings. In the showdown between people like Elizabeth Key and William Greensted, on the one hand, and the members of Virginia’s House of Burgesses on the other, we see how people in disorienting circumstances — some in positions in power, others in various states of subjection to their social and political superiors — scrambled to make sense of their world and bend its rules to their advantage. Through countless contests of power and authority like this one, the outlines of a new world gradually began to emerge from the collision of cultures. By 1700, three distinct types of colonies had developed in the Americas: the tribute colonies created in Mexico and Peru, which relied initially on the wealth and labor of indigenous peoples; plantation colonies, where sugar and other tropical and subtropical crops could be produced with bound labor; and neo-Europes, where colonists sought to replicate, or at least approximate, economies and social structures they knew at home.

 Power and Race in the Chesapeake In this 1670 painting by Gerard Soest, proprietor Lord

 Baltimore holds a map of Maryland, the colony he owned and which would soon belong to his grandson Cecil Calvert, shown in the painting as already grasping his magnificent inheritance. The presence of a young African servant foretells the importance of slave labor in the post-1700 economy of the Chesapeake colonies. Enoch Pratt Free Library, Maryland’s State Library Resource Center. All Rights reserved.





 PART 1

TRANSFORMATIONS OF NORTH AMERICA, 1450–1700

 Spain’s Tribute Colonies European interest in the Americas took shape under the influence of Spain’s conquest of the Aztec and Inca empires. There, Spanish colonizers capitalized on preexisting systems of tribute and labor discipline to tap the enormous wealth of Mesoamerica and the Andes. Once native rulers were overthrown, the Spanish monarchs transferred their institutions — municipal councils, the legal code, the Catholic Church — to America; the empire was centrally controlled to protect the crown’s immensely valuable holdings. The Spanish conquest also set in motion a global ecological transformation through a vast intercontinental movement of plants, animals, and diseases that historians call the Columbian Exchange. And the conquest triggered hostile responses from Spain’s European rivals, especially the Protestant Dutch and English (Figure 2.1).

A
New American World  After Cortés toppled Moctezuma and Pizarro defeated Atahualpa (see pages 34–35), leading conquistadors received encomiendas from the crown, which allowed them to claim tribute in labor and goods from Indian communities. Later these grants were repartitioned, but the pattern was set early: prominent men controlled vast resources and monopolized Indian labor. The value of these grants was dramatically enhanced by the discovery of gold and, especially, silver deposits in both Mexico and the Andes. In the decades after the conquest, mines were developed in Zacatecas, in Guanajuato, and — most famously — at Potosí, high in the Andes. Spanish officials co-opted the mita system, which made laborers available to the Inca Empire, to force Indian workers into the mines. At its peak, Potosí

 alone produced 200 tons of silver per year, accounting for half the world’s supply. The two great indigenous empires of the Americas thus became the core of an astonishingly wealthy European empire. Vast amounts of silver poured across the Pacific Ocean to China, where it was minted into money; in exchange, Spain received valuable Chinese silks, spices, and ceramics. In Europe, the gold that had formerly honored Aztec and Inca gods now flowed into the countinghouses of Spain and gilded the Catholic churches of Europe. The Spanish crown benefitted enormously from all this wealth — at least initially. In the long run, it triggered ruinous inflation. As a French traveler noted in 1603: “Everything is dear [expensive] in Spain, except silver.” A new society took shape on the conquered lands. Between 1500 and 1650, at least 350,000 Spaniards migrated to Mesoamerica and the Andes. About twothirds were males drawn from a cross section of Spanish society, many of them skilled tradesmen. Also arriving were 250,000–300,000 Africans. Racial mixture was widespread, and such groups as mestizos (Spaniard-Indian) and mulattos (Spaniard-African) grew rapidly. Zambo (Indian-African) populations developed gradually as well. Over time, a system of increasingly complex racial categories developed — the “casta system” — buttressed by a legal code that differentiated among the principal groups. Indians were always in the majority in Mexico and Peru, but profound changes came as their numbers declined and peoples of Spanish and mixed-race descent grew in number. Spaniards initially congregated in cities, but gradually they moved into the countryside, creating large estates (known as haciendas) and regional networks of market exchange. Most Indians remained in their native communities, under the authority of native rulers and speaking native



New Netherland


Portuguese Brazil




Spanish Peru


New Spain






New France


New Sweden




English Virginia


Rhode Island


Plymouth Colony




Massachusetts Bay


Connecticut


Maryland


 FIGURE 2.1 Chronology of European Colonies in the Americas

 CHAPTER 2

 languages. However, Spanish priests suppressed religious ceremonies and texts and converted natives to Christianity en masse. Catholicism was transformed in the process: Catholic parishes took their form from Indian communities; indigenous ideas and expectations reshaped Church practices; and new forms of Native American Christianity emerged in both regions.

The Columbian Exchange
 The Spanish invasion permanently altered the natural as well as the human environment. Smallpox, influenza, measles, yellow fever, and other silent killers carried from Europe and Africa ravaged Indian communities, whose inhabitants had never encountered these diseases before and thus had no immunity to them. In the densely populated core areas, populations declined by 90 percent or more in the first century of contact with Europeans. On islands and in the tropical lowlands, the toll was even heavier; native populations were often wiped out altogether. Syphilis was the only significant illness that traveled in the opposite direction: Columbus’s sailors carried a virulent strain of the sexually transmitted disease back to Europe with them. The movement of diseases and peoples across the Atlantic was part of a larger pattern of biological transformation that historians call the Columbian Exchange (Map 2.1). Foods of the Western Hemisphere — especially maize, potatoes, manioc, sweet potatoes, and tomatoes —

Smallpox Victims
 Hans Staden, a German soldier who was shipwrecked in Brazil in 1552, was captured by a Tupinambá Indian named Jeppipo Wasu. Shortly thereafter, Wasu and his family traveled to a neighboring village as smallpox ravaged the population; when they returned, they were very sick. Wasu recovered, but he lost his mother, two brothers, and two children. This engraving, which depicts Wasu’s return amid his townspeople’s grief, appeared in the third volume of Theodor de Bry’s monumental America, published in Frankfurt in 1593. Courtesy of the John Carter Brown Library at Brown University.

American Experiments, 1521–1700




 significantly increased agricultural yields and population growth in other continents. Maize and potatoes, for example, reached China around 1700; in the follow- PLACE EVENTS ing century, the Chinese popula- IN CONTEXT tion tripled from 100 million to How did the ecological 300 million. At the same time, context of colonization many animals, plants, and germs shape interactions bewere carried to the Americas. tween Europeans and European livestock transformed Native Americans? American landscapes. While Native Americans domesticated very few animals — dogs and llamas were the principal exceptions — Europeans brought an enormous Old World bestiary to the Americas, including cattle, swine, horses, oxen, chickens, and honeybees. Eurasian grain crops — wheat, barley, rye, and rice — made the transatlantic voyage along with inadvertent imports like dandelions and other weeds.

The Protestant Challenge to Spain
 Beyond the core regions of its empire, Spain claimed vast American dominions but struggled to hold them. Controlling the Caribbean basin, which was essential for Spain’s transatlantic shipping routes, was especially difficult, since the net of tiny islands spanning the eastern Caribbean — the Lesser Antilles — provided many safe harbors for pirates and privateers. Fortified outposts in Havana and St. Augustine provided some



 PART 1

TRANSFORMATIONS OF NORTH AMERICA, 1450–1700

 s, pigs, wheat, rye, Cattle, horasned other diseases smallpox

 w feve Yello

 ice Sugar, r

Tropic of Cancer


A S I A


 uts, bananas r, cocon

 Maize, potatoes squash, pepper , tobacco, beans, s, cacao, syphi lis

 Iron bars, pigs

NORTH AMERICA

E U R OP E


 fever ia, yellow Malar

Suga
 r, pl

 a g ue

 , rice , tea

 AFRICA

Equator
 oc, cacao Cassava, mani

SOUTH AMERICA
Tropic of Capricorn 
AUSTRALIA N

 S u g a r , rice W



1,000
1,000


 2,000 miles

 2,000 kilometers

E
S


 MAP 2.1 The Columbian Exchange As European traders and adventurers traversed the world between 1430 and 1600, they began what historians call the Columbian Exchange, a vast intercontinental movement of plants, animals, and diseases that changed the course of historical development. The nutritious, highyielding American crops of corn and potatoes enriched the diets of Europeans, Africans, and Asians. However, the Eurasian and African diseases of smallpox, diphtheria, malaria, and yellow fever nearly wiped out the native inhabitants of the Western Hemisphere and virtually ensured that they would lose control of their lands.

 protection, but they were never sufficient to keep enemies at bay. And Spain had powerful enemies, their animosity sharpened by the Protestant Reformation and the resulting split in European Christendom (see p. 22). In the wake of Martin Luther’s attack on the Catholic Church, the Protestant critique of Catholicism broadened and deepened. Gold and silver from Mexico and Peru made Spain the wealthiest nation in Europe, and King Philip II (r. 1556–1598) — an ardent Catholic — its most powerful ruler. Philip was determined to root out challenges to the Catholic Church wherever they appeared. One such place was in the Spanish Netherlands, a collection of Dutch- and Flemishspeaking provinces that had grown wealthy from textile manufacturing and trade with Portuguese outposts in Africa and Asia. To protect their Calvinist faith and political liberties, they revolted against Spanish rule in

 1566. After fifteen years of war, the seven northern provinces declared their independence, becoming the Dutch Republic (or Holland) in 1581. The English king Henry VIII (r. 1509–1547) initially opposed Protestantism. However, when the pope refused to annul his marriage to the Spanish princess Catherine of Aragon in 1534, Henry broke with Rome and placed himself at the head of the new Church of England, which promptly granted an annulment. Although Henry’s new church maintained most Catholic doctrines and practices, Protestant teachings continued to spread. Faced with popular pressure for reform, Henry’s daughter and successor, Queen Elizabeth I (r. 1558–1603), approved a Protestant confession of faith. At the same time, however, Elizabeth retained the Catholic ritual of Holy Communion and left the Church in the hands of Anglican bishops and archbishops. Elizabeth’s compromises angered radical

 CHAPTER 2

American Experiments, 1521–1700




Queen Elizabeth Receiving Dutch
Ambassadors
 This sixteenth-century Dutch painting by an anonymous artist depicts a pair of Dutch ambassadors being received by England’s Queen Elizabeth I. The seventeen provinces that constituted the Dutch Republic were in rebellion against Spanish rule in the later decades of the sixteenth century and hoped for Elizabeth’s support. In 1585 she signed the Treaty of Nonsuch, pledging her support for the Dutch cause. An undeclared war with Spain ensued, punctuated by the defeat of the Spanish Armada in 1588. © Museumslandschaft Hessen Kassel/ The Bridgeman Art Library.

 Protestants, but the independent Anglican Church was anathema to the Spanish king, Philip II. Elizabeth supported a generation of English seafarers who took increasingly aggressive actions against Spanish control of American wealth. The most famous of these Elizabethan “sea dogs” was Francis Drake, a rough-hewn, devoutly Protestant farmer’s son from Devon who took to the sea and became a scourge to Philip’s American interests. In 1577, he ventured into the Pacific to disrupt Spanish shipping to Manila. Drake’s fleet lost three ships and a hundred men, but the survivors completed the first English circumnavigation of the globe and captured two Spanish treasure ships. When Drake’s flagship, the Golden Hind, returned to England in 1580, it brought enough silver, gold, silk, and spices to bring his investors a 4,700 percent return on their investment. At the same time, Elizabeth supported military expeditions that imposed English rule over Gaelicspeaking Catholic Ireland. Calling the Irish “wild savages” who were “more barbarous and more brutish in their customs . . . than in any other part of the world,” English soldiers brutally massacred thousands, prefiguring the treatment of Indians in North America. To meet Elizabeth’s challenges, Philip sent a Spanish Armada — 130 ships and 30,000 men — against England in 1588. Philip intended to restore the Roman Church in England and then to wipe out Calvinism in Holland. But he failed utterly: a fierce storm and English ships destroyed the Spanish fleet. Philip continued to spend his American gold and silver on religious wars, an ill-advised policy that

 diverted workers and resources from Spain’s fledgling industries. The gold was like a “shewer of Raine,” complained one critic, that left “no benefite behind.” Oppressed by high taxes on agriculture and fearful of military service, more than 200,000 residents of Castile, once the most prosperous region of Spain, migrated to America. By the time of Philip’s death in 1598, Spain was in serious economic decline. By contrast, England grew significantly during the sixteenth century, its economy stimulated, as colonial advocate Richard Hakluyt noted, by a “wounderful increase of our people.” As England’s population soared from 3 million in 1500 to 5 million in 1630, its monarchs supported the expansion of commerce and manufacturing. English merchants had long supplied European weavers with highquality wool; around 1500, they TRACE CHANGE created their own outwork tex- OVER TIME tile industry. Merchants bought Why did Spain’s economy wool from the owners of great deteriorate and England’s estates and sent it “out” to land- economy improve in the less peasants in small cottages sixteenth century? to spin and weave into cloth. The government aided textile entrepreneurs by setting low wage rates and helped merchants by giving them monopolies in foreign markets. This system of state-assisted manufacturing and trade became known as mercantilism. By encouraging textile production, Elizabeth reduced imports and increased exports. The resulting favorable balance of trade caused gold and silver to flow into England and stimulated further economic expansion. Increased trade



 PART 1

TRANSFORMATIONS OF NORTH AMERICA, 1450–1700

 turn, to survive the present and carve out pathways to the future.

 with Turkey and India also boosted import duties, which swelled the royal treasury and the monarch’s power. By 1600, Elizabeth’s mercantile policies had laid the foundations for overseas colonization. Now the English had the merchant fleet and wealth needed to challenge Spain’s control of the Western Hemisphere.

 Brazil’s Sugar Plantations Portuguese colonists transformed the tropical lowlands of coastal Brazil into a sugar plantation zone like the ones they had recently created on Madeira, the Azores, the Cape Verdes, and São Tomé. The work proceeded slowly, but by 1590 more than a thousand sugar mills had been established in Pernambuco and Bahia. Each large plantation had its own milling operation: because sugarcane is extremely heavy and rots quickly, it must be processed on site. Thus sugar plantations combined backbreaking agricultural labor with milling, extracting, and refining processes that made sugar plantations look like Industrial Revolution–era factories. Initially, Portuguese planters hoped that Brazil’s indigenous peoples would supply the labor required to

Plantation Colonies
 As Spain hammered out its American empire and struggled against its Protestant rivals, Portugal, England, France, and the Netherlands created successful plantation settlements in Brazil, Jamestown, Maryland, and the Caribbean islands (Map 2.2). Worldwide demand for sugar and tobacco fuelled the growth of these new colonies, and the resulting influx of colonists diminished Spain’s dominance in the New World. At the same time, they imposed dramatic new pressures on native populations, who scrambled, in

 EUROPE

NORTH AMERICA
Boston MARYLAND VIRGINIA 
PORTUGAL SPAIN

Jamestown


 AZORES

Lisbon
Seville


MADEIRA IS.

AT L A N T I C

St. Augustine
FLORIDA MEXICO

Havana
Veracruz


SAINT DOMINGUE

CUBA JAMAICA

Caribbean
Sea


CANARY IS.

 OCEAN

 AFRICA

ST. KITTS

 NEVIS

Cartegena


CAPE VERDE IS.

MARTINIQUE BARBADOS

MANDESP S T A T EE A K I N G S

 GUYANA

AKAN STATES
Bight of Benin SÃO TOMÉ 
Quito


SOUTH AMERICA PERNAMBUCO PERU

PAC IFI C O C E AN

BRAZIL BAHIA

 KONGO

Recife


 ANGOLA

Salvador
BRAZIL
Plantation colony 
Rio de Janeiro




1,000
1,000


 2,000 miles 2,000 kilometers

 MAP 2.2 The Plantation Colonies The plantation zone in the Americas extended from the tropical coast of Brazil northwestward through the West Indies and into the tropical and subtropical lowlands of southeastern North America. Sugar was the most important plantation crop in the Americas, but where the soil or climate could not support it planters experimented with a wide variety of other possibilities, including tobacco, indigo, cotton, cacao, and rice.

 CHAPTER 2

 operate their sugar plantations. But, beginning with a wave of smallpox in 1559, unfamiliar diseases soon ravaged the coastal Indian population. As a result, planters turned to African slaves in ever-growing numbers; by 1620, the switch was complete. While Spanish colonies in Mexico and Peru took shape with astonishing speed following conquest, Brazil’s occupation and development progressed more gradually; it required both trial and error and hard work to build a paying colony.

 England’s Tobacco Colonies England was slow to embrace the prospect of planting colonies in the Americas. There were fumbling attempts in the 1580s in Newfoundland and Maine, privately organized and poorly funded. Sir Walter Raleigh’s three expeditions to North Carolina likewise ended in

Carolina Indians Fishing, 1585
 Though maize was a mainstay of the Indian diet, native peoples along the Atlantic coast also harvested protein-rich fish, crabs, and oysters. In this watercolor by the English adventurer John White, Indians gather fish (in their “cannow,” or dugout canoe) in the shallow waters of the Albemarle Sound, off present-day North Carolina. On the left, note the weir used both to catch fish and to store them live for later consumption. © Trustees of the British Museum/Art Resource, NY.

American Experiments, 1521–1700


 disaster when 117 settlers on Roanoke Island, left unsupplied for several years, vanished. The fate of Roanoke — the “lost colony” — remains a compelling puzzle for modern historians.

 The Jamestown Settlement Merchants then took charge of English expansion. In 1606, King James I (r. 1603–1625) granted to the Virginia Company of London all the lands stretching from present-day North Carolina to southern New York. To honor the memory of Elizabeth I, the never-married “Virgin Queen,” the company’s directors named the region Virginia (Map 2.3). Influenced by the Spanish example, in 1607 the Virginia Company dispatched an all-male group with no ability to support itself — no women, farmers, or ministers were among the first arrivals — that expected to extract tribute from the region’s Indian



 PART 1

TRANSFORMATIONS OF NORTH AMERICA, 1450–1700

 population while it searched out valuable commodities like pearls and gold. Some were young gentlemen with personal ties to the company’s shareholders: a bunch of “unruly Sparks, packed off by their Friends to escape worse Destinies at home.” Others hoped to make a quick profit. All they wanted, one of them said, was to “dig gold, refine gold, load gold.” But there was no gold, and the men fared poorly in their new environment. Arriving in Virginia after an exhausting four-month voyage, they settled on a swampy peninsula, which they named Jamestown to honor the king. There the adventurers lacked access to fresh water, refused to plant crops, and quickly died off; only

N


NEW FRANCE

E


W
S


Quebec


St.
La


Three Rivers
Montreal


R.
 ce en r w

 ABENAKI

 NEW

 NS

IROQUOIS
Fort Orange 
 NT

OU M

Oh
 io

R.


Salem


Boston


Plymouth


Providence
Hartford
New Haven


New Amsterdam


 AI

LENAPE/ DELAWARE
om Pot ac R . 
Connecticut R.
Hudson R.


ABENAKI ENGLAND
Pemaquid 
 MARYLAND

ATLANTIC OCEAN

 St. Mary’s City

 VIRGINIA

Chesapeake Bay


AC AL

 PP

 sse

 HI

 AN

Jamestown


 TUSCARORA

 va Sa

Te


.
 eR

A


 nn e



 nn

 This map, drawn by Roanoke colonist John White, may hold a clue to the fate of the so-called lost colony. The island of Roanoke is right of center, just off the mainland and within the barrier islands. Directly west, on the point where the Roanoke and Chowan rivers join, is a (barely visible) paper patch. When lit from behind, a red fort is clearly visible beneath the patch, suggesting that the Roanoke colonists may already have identified a settlement site there: when he left the colony, John White wrote that the remaining colonists “were prepared to remove from Roanoak 50 miles into the maine[land].” Archaeologists and historians plan to use this discovery to guide further explorations in the area. The Art Archive at Art Resource, NY.

 200 miles

 200 kilometers

 CATAWBA

Areas Colonized by 1660


R.
 ah

 John White’s Map of Virginia



 CREEK

St. Augustine


TIMUCUAN CHIEFDOMS

Spain
France
England
Netherlands
 Key settlements Not yet explored by Europeans Explored but not settled by Europeans

 MAP 2.3 Eastern North America, 1650 By 1650, four European nations had permanent settlements along the eastern coast of North America, but only England had substantial numbers of settlers, some 25,000 in New England and another 15,000 in the Chesapeake region. French, Dutch, Swedish, and English colonists were also trading European manufactures to Native Americans in exchange for animal furs and skins, with far-reaching implications for Indian societies.

 CHAPTER 2

American Experiments, 1521–1700


John Smith and Opechancanough
 The powerful Indian warrior Opechancanough towers over English explorer John Smith in this engraving. In December 1607, Smith led a party of Jamestown colonists upriver in search of Indian food supplies. Two hundred warriors intercepted them, captured Smith, and took him to the Powhatan village of Werowacomoco. It was on this occasion that Pocahontas supposedly interceded to save his life (see Thinking Like a Historian, p. 50). The note at the bottom of the engraving is doubly mistaken, as it was Opechancanough (not Powhatan) who took Smith captive. Library of Congress.

 38 of the 120 men were alive nine months later. Death rates remained high: by 1611, the Virginia Company had dispatched 1,200 colonists to Jamestown, but fewer than half remained alive. “Our men were destroyed with cruell diseases, as Swellings, Fluxes, Burning Fevers, and by warres,” reported one of the settlement’s leaders, “but for the most part they died of meere famine.” Their plan to dominate the local Indian population ran up against the presence of Powhatan, the powerful chief who oversaw some thirty tribal chiefdoms between the James and Potomac rivers. He was willing to treat the English traders as potential allies who could provide valuable goods, but — just as the Englishmen expected tribute from the Indians — Powhatan expected tribute from the English. He provided the hungry English adventurers with corn; in return, he demanded “hatchets . . . bells, beads, and copper” as well as “two great guns” and expected Jamestown to become a dependent community within his chiefdom. Subsequently, Powhatan arranged a marriage between

 his daughter Pocahontas and John Rolfe, an English colonist (Thinking Like a Historian, p. 50). But these tactics failed. The inability to decide who would pay tribute to whom led to more than a decade of uneasy relations, followed by a long era of ruinous warfare. The war was precipitated by the discovery of a cash crop that — like sugar in Brazil — offered colonists a way to turn a profit but required steady expansion onto Indian lands. Tobacco was a plant native to the Americas, long used by Indians as a medicine and a stimulant. John Rolfe found a West Indian strain that could flourish in Virginia soil and produced a small crop — “pleasant, sweet, and strong” — that fetched a high price in England and spurred the migration of thousands of new settlers. The English soon came to crave the nicotine that tobacco contained. James I initially condemned the plant as a “vile Weed” whose “black stinking fumes” were “baleful to the nose, harmful to the brain, and dangerous to the lungs.” But the king’s attitude changed as taxes on imported tobacco



THINKING LIKE A HISTORIAN

Who Was Pocahontas?


 Matoaka — nicknamed Pocahontas — was born around 1596 in the region the English would soon name Virginia. A daughter of Chief Powhatan, her interactions with colonists were important at the time and have been mythologized ever since. Pocahontas left no writings, so what we know of her comes from others. From these accounts, we know that she acted as a mediator with the Jamestown settlers; she was the first Native American to marry an Englishman; and she traveled to England with her husband and son. Pocahontas fell ill and died in Gravesend, England, in June 1617.

1. John Smith, Generall Historie of Virginia, 1624.
 Smith’s description of being a captive of Powhatan in 1607.

 Having feasted [Smith] after their best barbarous manner they could, a long consultation was held, but the conclusion was, two great stones were brought before Powhatan: then as many as could layd hands on him, dragged him to them, and thereon laid his head, and being ready with their clubs, to beate out his braines, Pocahontas the Kings dearest daughter, when no entreaty could prevaile, got his head in her armes, and laid her owne upon his to save him from death: whereat the Emperour was contented he should live to make him hatchets, and her bells, beads, and copper. 2. Robert Vaughn’s engraving of Pocahontas saving Smith’s life, from John Smith’s Generall Historie of Virginia, 1624.

3. John Smith, Generall Historie of Virginia, 1624.
 Pocahontas visited Jamestown regularly in the years following Smith’s capture. Smith returned to England in 1609; four years later Captain Samuel Argall kidnapped Pocahontas and held her captive in Jamestown.

 [S]he too James towne [was brought.] A messenger forthwith was sent to her father, that his daughter Pocahontas he loved so dearely, he must ransome with our men, swords, peeces, tooles, &c. he treacherously had stolen. . . . [H]e . . . sent us word, that when we would deliver his daughter, he would make us satisfaction for all injuries done to us, and give us five hundred bushels of Corne, and for ever be friends with us. . . . [W]e could not believe the rest of our armes were either lost or stolen from him, and therefore till he sent them, we would keep his daughter. . . . [W]e heard no more from him a long time after. . . . . [Long before this, Master John Rolfe, an honest Gentleman of good behavior had been in love with Pocahontas, and she with him. . . . T]his marriage came soone to the knowledge of Powhatan, a thing acceptable to him, as appeared by his sudden consent, for within ten daies he sent Opachisco, an old Uncle of hers, and two of his sons, to see the manner of the marriage, and to do in that behalf what they were requested . . . which was accordingly done about the first of April: And ever since we have had friendly trade and commerce. 4. John Rolfe, Letter to Sir Thomas Dale, 1614. Pocahontas and John Rolfe married in April 1614. In June, Rolfe defended his motives in this letter to Virginia’s deputy-governor.

Source: © British Library Board / Robana / Art Resource, NY.




 I freely subject my selfe to your grave and mature judgment, deliberation, approbation and determination. . . . [I am not led by] the unbridled desire of carnal affection: but for the good of this plantation, for the honour of our countrie, for the glory of God, for my owne salvation, and for the converting to the true knowledge of God and Jesus

 Christ, an unbeleeving creature, namely Pocahontas. To whom my hartie and best thoughts are, and have [for] a long time bin so intangled, and inthralled in so intricate a labyrinth, that I was even awearied to unwinde my selfe thereout. . . . [I have often thought]: surely these are wicked instigations, hatched by him who seeketh and delighteth in man’s destruction[.] I say the holy spirit of God has often demanded of me, why I was created . . . but to labour in the Lord’s vineyard. . . . Likewise adding hereunto her great appearance of love to me, her desire to be taught and instructed in the knowledge of God, her capableness of understanding, her aptness and willingness to receive any good impression, and also the spirituall, besides her owne incitements stirring me up hereunto. . . . Now if the vulgar sort, who square all men’s actions by the base rule of their owne filthiness, shall tax or taunt me in this my godly labour: let them know, it is not any hungry appetite, to gorge my selfe with incontinency; sure (if I would, and were so sensually inclined) I might satisfy such desire, though not without a seared conscience. 5. Portrait of Pocahontas by Simon Van De Pass, 1616. In 1616, the Virginia Company of London sent Pocahontas, John Rolfe, and their son Thomas to England, where she met King James and sat for this portrait, the only surviving image of Pocahontas.

 [H]earing shee was at Branford with divers of my friends, I went to see her: After a modest salutation, without any word, she turned about, obscured her face, as not seeming well contented; and in that humour her husband, with divers others, we all left her two or three houres. . . . But not long after, she began to talke, and remembred mee well what courtesies she had done: saying, [“]You did promise Powhatan what was yours should bee his, and he the like to you; you called him father being in his land a stranger, and by the same reason so must I doe you:[”] which though I would have excused, I durst not allow of that title, because she was a Kings daughter; with a well set countenance she said, [“]Were you not afraid to come into my fathers Countrie, and caused feare in him and all his people (but mee) and feare you here I should call you father; I tell you then I will, and you shall call mee childe, and so I will bee for ever and ever your Countrieman. They did tell us [always] you were dead, and I knew no other till I came to [Plymouth]; yet Powhatan did command Uttamatomakkin to seeke you, and know the truth, because your Countriemen will lie much.[”] Sources: (1, 3, 6) John Smith, Generall Historie of Virginia (Glasgow: James MacLehose and Sons, 1907), 101, 218, 220, 238–239; (4) J. Franklin Jameson, Narratives of Early Virginia (New York: Charles Scribner’s Sons, 1907), 237–244.

ANALYZING THE EVIDENCE 1.
Most historians now believe that the event described and shown in sources 1 and 2 was a Powhatan ritual to make Smith an ally and that his life was not actually in danger. What elements of these sources suggest the validity of this interpretation? Why would Pocahontas — a child of eleven or twelve at the time — have had a role in such a ritual? 2. How does Vaughn (source 2) depict power relations and social hierarchy among the Powhatans? Where does Pocahontas fit within this hierarchy? What messages about Pocahontas do you think Van De Pass (source 5) intended to convey? How do these images contribute to the Pocahontas myth? 3. How does Rolfe explain his interest in Pocahontas (source 4)? What is his view of her? How do you interpret the letter? 4. Assess the reliability of sources 1, 3, and 6 and consider Smith’s motive in including them in his Historie. Source 6 purports to record an actual conversation between Pocahontas and Smith. What is the tone of this encounter, and what might explain Pocahontas’s remarks? 
PUTTING IT ALL TOGETHER
Source: National Portrait Gallery, Smithsonian Institution/ Art Resource, NY. 
6. John Smith, Generall Historie of Virginia, 1624. In
 1624, John Smith recalled a meeting he had with Pocahontas during her 1616 tour of England.

 Imagine the various encounters Pocahontas experienced with the Jamestown Englishmen from her point of view. Reflect on who Pocahontas was as described in these documents — savior and friend, captive, baptized wife, Virginia Company prize, and betrayed ally — and in a brief essay, use Pocahontas’s experience to explore the uncertain nature of English-Powhatan relations in the first decade of contact.





 PART 1

TRANSFORMATIONS OF NORTH AMERICA, 1450–1700

 bolstered the royal treasury. Powhatan, however, now accused the English of coming “not to trade but to invade my people and possess my country.” To foster the flow of migrants, the Virginia Company allowed individual settlers to own land, granting 100 acres to every freeman and more to those who imported servants. The company also created a system of representative government: the House of Burgesses, first convened in 1619, could make laws and levy taxes, although the governor and the company council in England could veto its acts. By 1622, landownership, self-government, and a judicial system based on “the lawes of the realme of England” had attracted some 4,500 new recruits. To encourage the transition to a settler colony, the Virginia Company recruited dozens of “Maides young and uncorrupt to make wifes to the Inhabitants.”

 The Indian War of 1622 The influx of migrants sparked an all-out conflict with the neighboring Indians. The struggle began with an assault led by Opechancanough, Powhatan’s younger brother and successor. In 1607, Opechancanough had attacked some of the first English invaders; subsequently, he “stood aloof ” from the English settlers and “would not be drawn to any Treaty.” In particular, he resisted English proposals to place Indian children in schools to be “brought upp in Christianytie.” Upon becoming the paramount chief in 1621, Opechancanough told the leader of the neighboring Potomack Indians: “Before the end of two moons, there should not be an Englishman in all their Countries.” Opechancanough almost succeeded. In 1622, he coordinated a surprise attack by twelve Indian chiefdoms that killed 347 English settlers, nearly one-third of the population. The English fought back by seizing the fields EXPLAIN and food of those they now CONSEQUENCES called “naked, tanned, deformed How did the proximity of the Powhatan Chiefdom Savages” and declared “a peraffect developments in petual war without peace or early Virginia? truce” that lasted for a decade. They sold captured warriors into slavery, “destroy[ing] them who sought to destroy us” and taking control of “their cultivated places.” Shocked by the Indian uprising, James I revoked the Virginia Company’s charter and, in 1624, made Virginia a royal colony. Now the king and his ministers appointed the governor and a small advisory council, retaining the locally elected House of Burgesses but stipulating that the king’s Privy Council (a committee of political advisors) must ratify all legislation. The king

 also decreed the legal establishment of the Church of England in the colony, which meant that residents had to pay taxes to support its clergy. These institutions — an appointed governor, an elected assembly, a formal legal system, and an established Anglican Church — became the model for royal colonies throughout English America.

Lord Baltimore Settles Catholics in Maryland A
 second tobacco-growing colony developed in neighboring Maryland. King Charles I (r. 1625–1649), James’s successor, was secretly sympathetic toward Catholicism, and in 1632 he granted lands bordering the vast Chesapeake Bay to Catholic aristocrat Cecilius Calvert, Lord Baltimore. Thus Maryland became a refuge for Catholics, who were subject to persecution in England. In 1634, twenty gentlemen, mostly Catholics, and 200 artisans and laborers, mostly Protestants, established St. Mary’s City at the mouth of the Potomac River. To minimize religious confrontations, the proprietor instructed the governor to allow “no scandall nor offence to be given to any of the Protestants” and to “cause All Acts of Romane Catholicque Religion to be done as privately as may be.” Maryland grew quickly because Baltimore imported many artisans and offered ample lands to wealthy migrants. But political conflict threatened the colony’s stability. Disputing Baltimore’s powers, settlers elected a representative assembly and insisted on the right to initiate legislation, which Baltimore grudgingly granted. Anti-Catholic agitation by Protestants also threatened his religious goals. To protect his coreligionists, Lord Baltimore persuaded the assembly to enact the Toleration Act (1649), which granted all Christians the right to follow their beliefs and hold church services. In Maryland, as in Virginia, tobacco quickly became the main crop, and that similarity, rather than any religious difference, ultimately made the two colonies very much alike in their economic and social systems.

The Caribbean Islands
 Virginia’s experiment with a cash crop that created a land-intensive plantation society ran parallel to developments in the Caribbean, where English, French, and Dutch sailors began looking for a permanent toehold. In 1624, a small English party under the command of Sir Thomas Warner established a settlement on St. Christopher (St. Kitts). A year later, Warner allowed a French group to settle the other end of the island so they could better defend their position from the Spanish.

 CHAPTER 2

American Experiments, 1521–1700


A
Sugar Mill in the French West Indies, 1655  Making sugar required both hard labor and considerable expertise. Field slaves labored strenuously in the hot tropical sun to cut the sugarcane and carry or cart it to an oxen- or wind-powered mill, where it was pressed to yield the juice. Then skilled slave artisans took over. They carefully heated the juice and, at the proper moment, added ingredients that granulated the sugar and separated it from the molasses, which was later distilled into rum. The Granger Collection, New York.

 Within a few years, the English and French colonists on St. Kitts had driven the native Caribs from the island, weathered a Spanish attack, and created a common set of bylaws for mutual occupation of the island. After St. Kitts, a dozen or so colonies were founded in the Lesser Antilles, including the French islands of Martinique, Guadeloupe, and St. Bart’s; the English outposts of Nevis, Antigua, Montserrat, Anguilla, Tortola, and Barbados; and the Dutch colony of St. Eustatius. In 1655, an English fleet captured the Spanish island of Jamaica — one of the large islands of the Greater Antilles — and opened it to settlement as well. A few of these islands were unpopulated before Europeans settled there; elsewhere, native populations were displaced, and often wiped out, within a decade or so. Only on the largest islands did native populations hold out longer.

 Colonists experimented with a wide variety of cash crops, including tobacco, indigo, cotton, cacao, and ginger. Beginning in the 1640s — and drawing on the example of Brazil — planters on many of the islands shifted to sugar cultivation. Where conditions were right, as they were in Barbados, Jamaica, Nevis, and Martinique, these colonies were soon producing substantial crops of sugar and, as a consequence, claimed some of the world’s most valuable real estate.

Plantation Life
 In North America and the Caribbean, plantations were initially small freeholds, farms of 30 to 50 acres owned and farmed by families or male partners. But the logic of plantation agriculture soon encouraged consolidation: large planters engrossed as much land as they





 PART 1

TRANSFORMATIONS OF NORTH AMERICA, 1450–1700

 could and experimented with new forms of labor discipline that maximized their control over production. In Virginia, the headright system guaranteed 50 acres of land to anyone who paid the passage of a new immigrant to the colony; thus, by buying additional indentured servants and slaves, the colony’s largest planters also amassed ever-greater claims to land. European demand for tobacco set off a forty-year economic boom in the Chesapeake. “All our riches for the present do consist in tobacco,” a planter remarked in 1630. Exports rose from 3 million pounds in 1640 to 10 million pounds in 1660. After 1650, wealthy migrants from gentry or noble families established large estates along the coastal rivers. Coming primarily from southern England, where tenants and wage laborers farmed large manors, they copied that hierarchical system by buying English indentured servants and enslaved Africans to work their lands. At about the same time, the switch to sugar production in Barbados caused the price of land there to quadruple, driving small landowners out. For rich and poor alike, life in the plantation colonies of North America and the Caribbean was harsh. The scarcity of towns deprived settlers of community (Map 2.4). Families were equally scarce because there were few women, and marriages often ended with the early death of a spouse. Pregnant women were especially vulnerable to malaria, spread by mosquitoes that flourished in tropical and subtropical climates. Many mothers died after bearing a first or second child, so orphaned children (along with unmarried young men)

 formed a large segment of the society. Sixty percent of the children born in Middlesex County, Virginia, before 1680 lost one or both parents before they were thirteen. Death was pervasive. Although 15,000 English migrants arrived in Virginia between 1622 and 1640, the population rose only from 2,000 to 8,000. It was even harsher in the islands, where yellow fever epidemics killed indiscriminately. On Barbados, burials outnumbered baptisms in the second half of the seventeenth century by four to one.

 Indentured Servitude Still, the prospect of owning land continued to lure settlers. By 1700, more than 100,000 English migrants had come to Virginia and Maryland and over 200,000 had migrated to the islands of the West Indies, principally to Barbados; the vast majority to both destinations traveled as indentured servants (Figure 2.2). Shipping registers from the English port of Bristol reveal the backgrounds of 5,000 servants embarking for the Chesapeake. Three-quarters were young men. They came to Bristol searching for work; once there, merchants persuaded them to sign contracts to labor in America. Indentured servitude contracts bound the men — and the quarter who were women — to work for a master for four or five years, after which they would be free to marry and work for themselves. For merchants, servants were valuable cargo: their contracts fetched high prices from Chesapeake and West Indian planters. For the plantation owners, indentured servants were a bargain if they survived the

Chesapeake
Bay


 h

Riv
 er

 r ve Ri ck

 hi cka ho

 Note the location of the Indian villages. How do you explain their position in relation to the English settlements?

H


T


A


 r ve Ri

Shirley Hundred
Berkeley Hundred


Werowacomoco


A


 rk Yo

Henrico


N


Appamatuck
Flowerdew
Hundred


Lawnes
Plantation


 Use the scale of miles to estimate the distance between Jamestown and the outlying settlements (or Hundreds). What does this suggest about the nature of early Virginia society?

 r Rive

 Smith‘s Hundred Martin‘s James Jamestown Brandon Smith‘s Martin‘s Fort Hundred Note the lack of roads and the

 dependence of the settlements on river transportation. Why was river transport particularly important for the tobacco trade?





 20 miles 20 kilometers

 Dale‘s Gift

Cape Charles
Point Comfort


Kecoughtan


Hampton
Roads


S


Machot


P O


W
 min y Riv er

River Plantations in Virginia, c. 1640
E


W


 no an

Riv
 er

C


Arrohateck


Bermuda
Hundred


 ap on i

Orapax


Fort West
Falling
Creek


Ra
 pp a

 t at M

Pa
 m un ke y

 MAP 2.4

N


 Why was Fort West located here and what was its major function?

Fort
Algernon


Smith Is.


ATLANTIC OCEAN
English settlement English fort Indian village Fresh-salt transition zone 
 The first migrants settled in widely dispersed plantations along the James River, a settlement pattern promoted by the tobacco economy. From their riverfront plantations wealthy planter-merchants could easily load heavy hogsheads of tobacco onto oceangoing ships and offload supplies that they then sold to smallholding planters. Consequently, few substantial towns or trading centers developed in the Chesapeake region.

 CHAPTER 2

White
 population

White
 labor force

 White servant population

90,000


70,000


50,000


30,000


 46% of white population in labor force



10,000














 10 % of labor force



 FIGURE 2.2 Chesapeake Whites: Workers, Dependents, and Indentured Servants, 1640–1700 The Chesapeake’s white population grew tenfold in the years after 1640, and it also changed significantly in character. As more women migrated to Virginia and Maryland and bore children, the percentage of the population who worked in the fields daily fell dramatically, from 75 percent to 46 percent. The proportion of indentured servants in the labor force likewise declined, from 30 percent to 10 percent.

 voyage and their first year in a harsh new disease environment, a process called “seasoning.” During the Chesapeake’s tobacco boom, a male servant could produce five times his purchase price in a single year. To maximize their gains, many masters ruthlessly exploited servants, forcing them to work long hours, beating them without cause, and withholding permission to marry. If servants ran away or became pregnant, masters went to court to increase the term of their service. Female servants were especially vulnerable to abuse. A Virginia law of 1692 stated that “dissolute masters have gotten their maids with child; and yet claim the benefit of their service.” Planters got rid of uncooperative servants by selling their contracts. In Virginia, an Englishman remarked in disgust that “servants were sold up and down like horses.” Few indentured servants escaped poverty. In the Chesapeake, half the men died before completing the term of their contract, and another quarter remained landless. Only one-quarter achieved their quest for property and respectability. Female servants generally fared better. Because men had grown “very sensible of the Misfortune of Wanting Wives,” many propertied planters married female servants. Thus a few — very

American Experiments, 1521–1700




 fortunate — men and women escaped a life of landless poverty.

 African Laborers The rigors of indentured servitude paled before the brutality that accompanied the large-scale shift to African slave labor. In Barbados and the other English islands, sugar production devoured laborers, and the supply of indentured servants quickly COMPARE AND became inadequate to planters’ CONTRAST needs. By 1690, blacks outnum- How were the experiences bered whites on Barbados nearly of indentured servants and three to one, and white slave slaves in the Chesapeake owners were developing a code and the Caribbean similar? of force and terror to keep sugar In what ways were they flowing and maintain control of different? the black majority that surrounded them. The first comprehensive slave legislation for the island, adopted in 1661, was called an “Act for the better ordering and governing of Negroes.” In the Chesapeake, the shift to slave labor was more gradual. In 1619, John Rolfe noted that “a Dutch man of warre . . . sold us twenty Negars” — slaves originally shipped by the Portuguese from the port of Luanda in Angola. For a generation, the number of Africans remained small. About 400 Africans lived in the Chesapeake colonies in 1649, just 2 percent of the population. By 1670, that figure had reached 5 percent. Most Africans served their English masters for life. However, since English common law did not acknowledge chattel slavery, it was possible for some Africans to escape bondage. Some were freed as a result of Christian baptism; some purchased their freedom from their owners; some — like Elizabeth Key, whose story was related at the beginning of the chapter — won their freedom in the courts. Once free, some ambitious Africans became landowners and purchased slaves or the labor contracts of English servants for themselves. Social mobility for Africans ended in the 1660s with the collapse of the tobacco boom and the increasing political power of the gentry. Tobacco had once sold for 30 pence a pound; now it fetched less than onetenth of that. The “low price of Tobacco requires it should bee made as cheap as possible,” declared Virginia planter-politician Nicholas Spencer, and “blacks can make it cheaper than whites.” As they imported more African workers, the English-born political elite grew more race-conscious. Increasingly, Spencer and other leading legislators distinguished English from African residents by color (white-black) rather than by religion (Christian-pagan). By 1671, the Virginia House of Burgesses had forbidden Africans to



 PART 1

TRANSFORMATIONS OF NORTH AMERICA, 1450–1700

 own guns or join the militia. It also barred them — “tho baptized and enjoying their own Freedom” — from owning English servants. Being black was increasingly a mark of inferior legal status, and slavery was fast becoming a permanent and hereditary condition. As an English clergyman observed, “These two words, Negro and Slave had by custom grown Homogeneous and convertible.”

Neo-European Colonies
 While Mesoamerica and the Andes emerged at the heart of a tribute-based empire in Latin America, and tropical and subtropical environments were transformed into plantation societies, a series of colonies that more closely replicated European patterns of economic and social organization developed in the temperate zone along North America’s Atlantic coast (America Compared, opposite page). Dutch, French, and English sailors probed the continent’s northern coastline, initially searching for a Northwest Passage through the continent to Asia. Gradually, they developed an interest in the region on its own terms. They traded for furs with coastal Native American populations, fished for cod on the Grand Banks off the coast of Newfoundland, and established freehold family farms and larger manors where they reproduced European patterns of agricultural life. Many migrants also came with aspirations to create godly communities, places of refuge where they could put religious ideals into practice. New France, New Netherland, and New England were the three pillars of neo-European colonization in the early seventeenth century.

New France
 In the 1530s, Jacques Cartier ventured up the St. Lawrence River and claimed it for France. Cartier’s claim to the St. Lawrence languished for three-quarters of a century, but in 1608 Samuel de Champlain returned and founded the fur-trading post of Quebec. Trade with the Cree-speaking Montagnais; Algonquianspeaking Micmacs, Ottawas, and Ojibwas; and Iroquois-speaking Hurons gave the French access to furs — mink, otter, and beaver — that were in great demand in Europe. To secure plush beaver pelts from the Hurons, who controlled trade north of the Great Lakes, Champlain provided them with manufactured goods. Selling pelts, an Indian told a French priest, “makes kettles, hatchets, swords, knives, bread.” It also made guns, which Champlain sold to the Hurons. The Hurons also became the first focus of French Catholic missionary activity. Hundreds of priests, most of them Jesuits, fanned out to live in Indian communities. They mastered Indian languages and came to understand, and sometimes respect, their values. Many Indian peoples initially welcomed the French “Black Robes” as spiritually powerful beings, but when prayers to the Christian god did not protect them from disease, the Indians grew skeptical. A Peoria chief charged that a priest’s “fables are good only in his own country; we have our own [beliefs], which do not make us die as his do.” When a drought struck, Indians blamed the missionaries. “If you cannot make rain, they speak of nothing less than making away with you,” lamented one Jesuit. While New France became an expansive center of fur trading and missionary work, it languished as a

The Fur Trade
 Luxuriant pelts like ermine and silver fox were always desirable, but the humble beaver dominated the early trade between Europeans and Indians in the Northeast. It had thick, coarse hair, but beneath that outer layer was soft “underfur.” Those fine hairs were covered in microscopic barbs that allowed them to mat into a dense mass. European hatmakers pressed this fur into felt so strong and pliable that even broad-brimmed hats would hold their shape. As such hats became fashionable in Europe and the colonies, beavers were hunted to near-extinction in North America. National Archives of Canada.

AMERICA C O M PA R E D
Plantation Colonies Versus Neo-Europes 
 The prospects for Europeans who traveled to tropical plantations like Barbados differed dramatically from those traveling to neo-European colonies like Massachusetts Bay. In the former, planters employed small armies of servants and slaves; in the latter, the first generation of colonists worked hard, often in cold climates and rocky soils, to eke out a living.

 Henry Whistler’s Journal, 1655

This Island [Barbados] is one of the Richest Spots of
 ground in the world and fully inhabited. . . . The gentry here doth Hue [appear] far better than ours do in England : they have most of them 100 or 2 or 3 of slaves[,] apes who they command as they please. . . . This Island is inhabited with all sorts : with English, French, Dutch, Scots, Irish, Spaniards they being Jews : with Indians and miserable Negroes borne to perpetual slavery they and their seed : these Negroes they do allow as many wives as they will have, some will have 3 or 4, according as they find their body able : our English here doth think a negro child the first day it is born to be worth £5, they cost them nothing the bringing up, they go all ways naked : some planters will have 30 more or les about 4 or 5 years old : they sell them from one to the other as we do sheep. This Island is the Dunghill whereon England doth cast forth its rubbish. . . . A rogue in England will hardly make a cheater here : a Bawd brought over puts on a demure comportment, a whore if handsome makes a wife for some rich planter. Source: The Narrative of General Venables (New York: Longmans, Green, and Co., 1900), 145–146.

 William Wood, New England’s Prospect, 1634

 But it may be objected that it is too cold a country for our English men, who have been accustomed to a warmer climate. To which it may be answered . . . , there is wood

 farming settlement. In 1662, King Louis XIV (r. 1643– 1714) turned New France into a royal colony and subsidized the migration of indentured servants. French servants labored under contract for three years, received a salary, and could eventually lease a farm — far more generous terms than those for indentured servants in the English colonies. Nonetheless, few people moved to New France, a cold and forbidding country “at the end of the world,” as one migrant put it. And some state policies

 good store and better cheap to build warm houses and make good fires, which makes the winter less tedious. . . . [T]rue it is that some venturing too nakedly in extremity of cold, being more foolhardy than wise, have for a time lost the use of their feet, others the use of their fingers; but time and surgery afterwards recovered them. Some have had their overgrown beards so frozen together that they could not get their strong-water bottles into their mouths. . . . [W]hereas many do disparage the land, saying a man cannot live without labor, in that they more disparage and discredit themselves in giving the world occasion to take notice of their dronish disposition that would live off the sweat of another man’s brows. . . . For all in New England must be workers of some kind. . . . And howsoever they are accounted poor, they are well contented and look not so much at abundance as at competency. Source: William Wood, New England’s Prospect (Boston: The University of Massachusetts Press, 1993), 28–29, 68.

QUESTIONS FOR ANALYSIS 1.
Henry Whistler was a soldier who briefly visited Barbados on a military expedition to the West Indies, while William Wood lived for four years in Massachusetts Bay. How might that difference influence the tone of these two descriptions? 2. What core values does each author ascribe to the colony he writes about? What kinds of people are most likely to end up in each of these two colonies? 
 discouraged migration. Louis XIV drafted tens of thousands of men into military service and barred Huguenots (French Calvinist Protestants) from migrating to New France, fearing they might win converts and take control of the colony. Moreover, the French legal system gave peasants strong rights to their village lands, whereas migrants to New France faced an oppressive, aristocracy- and church-dominated feudal system. In the village of Saint Ours in Quebec, for example, peasants paid 45 percent of their wheat crop





 PART 1

TRANSFORMATIONS OF NORTH AMERICA, 1450–1700

 to nobles and the Catholic Church. By 1698, only 15,200 Europeans lived in New France, compared to 100,000 in England’s North American colonies. Despite this small population, France eventually claimed a vast inland arc, from the St. Lawrence Valley through the Great Lakes and down the course of the Ohio and Mississippi rivers. Explorers and fur traders drove this expansion. In 1673, Jacques Marquette reached the Mississippi River in present-day Wisconsin; then, in 1681, Robert de La Salle traveled down the majestic river to the Gulf of Mexico. To honor Louis XIV, La Salle named the region Louisiana. By 1718, French merchants had founded the port of New Orleans at the mouth of the Mississippi. Eventually a network of about two dozen forts grew up in the Great Lakes and Mississippi. Soldiers and missionaries used them as bases of operations, while Indians, traders, and their métis (mixed-race) offspring created trading communities alongside them.

New Netherland
 By 1600, Amsterdam had become the financial and commercial hub of northern Europe, and Dutch financiers dominated the European banking, insurance, and textile industries. Dutch merchants owned more ships and employed more sailors than did the combined fleets of England, France, and Spain. Indeed, the Dutch managed much of the world’s commerce. During their struggle for independence from Spain and Portugal

 (ruled by Spanish monarchs, 1580–1640), the Dutch seized Portuguese forts in Africa and Indonesia and sugar plantations in Brazil. These conquests gave the Dutch control of the Atlantic trade in slaves and sugar and the Indian Ocean commerce in East Indian spices and Chinese silks and ceramics (Map 2.5). In 1609, Dutch merchants dispatched the English mariner Henry Hudson to locate a navigable route to the riches of the East Indies. What he found as he probed the rivers of northeast America was a fur bonanza. Following Hudson’s exploration of the river that now bears his name, the merchants built Fort Orange (Albany) in 1614 to trade for furs with the Munsee and Iroquois Indians. Then, in 1621, the Dutch government chartered the West India Company, which founded the colony of New Netherland, set up New Amsterdam (on Manhattan Island) as its capital, and brought in farmers and artisans to make the enterprise self-sustaining. The new colony did not thrive. The population of the Dutch Republic was too small to support much emigration — just 1.5 million people, compared to 5 million in Britain and 20 million in France — and its migrants sought riches in Southeast Asia rather than fur-trading profits in America. To protect its colony from rival European nations, the West India Company granted huge estates along the Hudson River to wealthy Dutchmen who promised to populate them. But by 1664, New Netherland had only 5,000 residents, and fewer than half of them were Dutch.

New Amsterdam, c. 1640
 As the wooden palisade suggests, New Amsterdam was a fortlike trading post at the edge of a vast land populated by alien Indian peoples feared by the Dutch. The city was also a pale miniature imitation of Amsterdam, with its many canals. The first settlers built their houses in the Dutch style, with gable ends facing the street (note the two middle houses), and excavated a canal across lower Manhattan Island (New York City’s Canal Street today). Library of Congress.

 CHAPTER 2



American Experiments, 1521–1700


ARCTIC OCE AN

 Wheat, timber, fur, tar, pitch

Fish,


 NETHERLANDS pottery Amsterdam

N O R T H A M E RI C A
 k Sil W

E


Cartagena
 Panama SPANISH MAIN GUIANA

Sla


 ves

NEW GRANADA

S


Lima
 PERU

PACIFIC OCEAN

 es lav

S


BRAZIL
Bahia 
Cairo


Sla


 ves

AF RIC A

Luanda


 ANGOLA

SOUTH A M E RI C A

Mozambique
Sofala
Rio de Janeiro


S


 pi

 ce

 i Sp

 ce s

 s

Cape
Town


 PERSIA

 ARABIA

Mombasa
Slaves


 JAPAN

Nagasaki Silver


Rugs


 ves

Sla


Slaves


CAPE VERDE GOLD COAST

Sugar


 Curaçao (Neth.)

Tripoli
Alexandria


Seville


 mola

PUERTO RICO JAMAICA

Veracruz


 k Sil

N


 old,

 ar, g

 sug Silk,

 ASIA

Constantinople


 Tools, cloth

Sea


Silver
Acapulco


FLORIDA HAITI

 CUBA

 sses

Venice


Red


NEW SPAIN
Mexico City 
Madrid
 SPAIN

Lisbon


A TL A N TI C
O C EA N


 ves Sla

EURO PE

PORTUGAL
Tools, cloth 
Ormuz


 INDIA

GUJARAT
Arabian Sea ves sla ld, o g ry, th Ivo clo er, hells p p s s Pe ie lave wr S Co 
Aden


Goa


CHINA
Ningbo Porcelain, Canton silk Macao 


1,000


Slav
 es

 1,000 2,000 kilometers

Silver


PHILIPPINES
Malacca 
Sumatra


MOLUCCAS
Borneo INDONESIA NEW GUINEA Java 
MADAGASCAR MAURITIUS (NETH.)

AU S T R A L I A

INDIAN OCE AN

 Portuguese trade routes Spanish trade routes Dutch trade routes Other major trade routes

 2,000 miles

PACIFIC OCEAN
Manila 
Ceylon


Main Eurasian Trade Routes, 1650
Strait of Magellan
Cape Horn


Silk


European-Controlled Areas
 Portuguese control Spanish control Dutch control

 MAP 2.5 The Eurasian Trade System and European Spheres of Influence, 1650 Between 1550 and 1650, Spanish, Portuguese, and Dutch merchants took control of the maritime trade routes between Europe and India, Indonesia, and China. They also created two new trading connections. The South Atlantic System carried slaves, sugar, and manufactured goods between Europe, Africa, and the valuable plantation settlements in Brazil and the Caribbean islands. And a transpacific trade carried Spanish American silver to China in exchange for silks, ceramics, and other manufactures. (To trace long-term changes in trade and empires, see Map 1.4 on p. 24 and Map 5.1 on p. 154.)

 Like New France, New Netherland flourished as a fur-trading enterprise. Trade with the powerful Iroquois, though rocky at first, gradually improved. But Dutch settlers had less respect for their Algonquian-speaking neighbors. They seized prime farming land from the Algonquian peoples and took over their trading network, which exchanged corn and wampum from Long Island for furs from Maine. In response, in 1643 the Algonquians launched attacks that nearly destroyed the colony. “Almost every place is abandoned,” a settler lamented, “whilst the Indians daily threaten to overwhelm us.” To defeat the Algonquians, the Dutch waged vicious warfare — maiming, burning, and killing hundreds of men, women, and children — and formed an alliance with the Mohawks, who were no less brutal. The grim progression of Euro-Indian

 relations — an uneasy welcome, followed by rising tensions and war — afflicted even the Dutch, who had few designs on Indian lands or on their “unregenerate” souls and were only looking to do business. After the crippling Indian war, the West India Company ignored New Netherland and expanded its profitable trade in African slaves and Brazilian sugar. In IDENTIFY CAUSES New Amsterdam, Governor Why did New France and Peter Stuyvesant ruled in an New Netherland struggle authoritarian fashion, rejecting to attract colonists? demands for a representative system of government and alienating the colony’s diverse Dutch, English, and Swedish residents. Consequently, the residents of New Netherland offered little resistance when England invaded the colony in



 PART 1

TRANSFORMATIONS OF NORTH AMERICA, 1450–1700

 1664. New Netherland became New York and fell under English control.

The Rise of the Iroquois
 Like other native groups decimated by European diseases and warfare, the Five Nations of the Iroquois suffered as a result of colonization, but they were able to capitalize on their strategic location in central New York to dominate the region between the French and Dutch colonies. Obtaining guns and goods from Dutch merchants at Fort Orange, Iroquois warriors inflicted terror on their neighbors. Partly in response to a virulent smallpox epidemic in 1633, which cut their number by one-third, the Iroquois waged a series of devastating wars against the Hurons (1649), Neutrals (1651), Eries (1657), and Susquehannocks (1660) — all Iroquoian-speaking peoples. They razed villages, killing many residents and taking many more captive. The conquered Hurons ceased to exist as a distinct people; survivors trekked westward with displaced Algonquian peoples and formed a new nation, the Wyandots. Iroquois warriors pressed still farther — eastward into New England, south to the Carolinas, north to Quebec, and west via the Great Lakes to the Mississippi — dominating Indian groups along the way. Collectively known as the Beaver Wars, these Iroquois campaigns dramatically altered the map of northeastern North America. Many Iroquois raids came at the expense of Frenchallied Algonquian Indians, and in the 1660s New France committed to all-out war against the Iroquois. In 1667, the Mohawks were the last of the Five Nations to admit defeat. As part of the peace settlement, the Five Nations accepted Jesuit missionaries into their communities. A minority of Iroquois — perhaps 20 percent of the population — converted to Catholicism and moved to the St. Lawrence Valley, where they settled in mission communities near Montreal (where their descendants still live today). The Iroquois who remained in New York did not collapse, however. Forging a new alliance with the Englishmen who had taken over New Netherland, they would continue to be a dominant force in the politics of the Northeast for generations to come.

New England
 In 1620, 102 English Protestants landed at a place they called Plymouth, near Cape Cod. A decade later, a much larger group began to arrive just north of Plymouth, in the newly chartered Massachusetts Bay

 Colony. By 1640, the region had attracted more than 20,000 migrants (Map 2.6). Unlike the early arrivals in Virginia and Barbados, these were not parties of young male adventurers seeking their fortunes or bound to labor for someone else. They came in family groups to create communities like the ones they left behind, except that they intended to establish them according to Protestant principles, as John Calvin had done in Geneva. Their numbers were small compared to the Caribbean and the Chesapeake, but their balanced sex ratio and organized approach to community formation allowed them to multiply quickly. By distributing land broadly, they built a society of independent farm families. And by establishing a “holy commonwealth,” they gave a moral dimension to American history that survives today.

 The Pilgrims The Pilgrims were religious separatists — Puritans who had left the Church of England. When King James I threatened to drive Puritans “out of the land, or else do worse,” some Puritans chose to live among Dutch Calvinists in Holland. Subsequently, 35 of these exiles resolved to maintain their English identity by moving to America. Led by William Bradford and joined by 67 migrants from England, the Pilgrims sailed to America aboard the Mayflower. Because they lacked a royal charter, they combined themselves “together into a civill body politick,” as their leader explained. This Mayflower Compact used the Puritans’ self-governing religious congregation as the model for their political structure. Only half of the first migrant group survived until spring, but thereafter Plymouth thrived; the cold climate inhibited the spread of mosquito-borne disease, and the Pilgrims’ religious discipline encouraged a strong work ethic. Moreover, a smallpox epidemic in 1618 devastated the local Wampanoags, minimizing the danger they posed. By 1640, there were 3,000 settlers in Plymouth. To ensure political stability, they established representative self-government, broad political rights, property ownership, and religious freedom of conscience. Meanwhile, England plunged deeper into religious turmoil. When King Charles I repudiated certain Protestant doctrines, including the role of grace in salvation, English Puritans, now powerful in Parliament, accused the king of “popery” — of holding Catholic beliefs. In 1629, Charles dissolved Parliament, claimed the authority to rule by “divine right,” and raised money through royal edicts and the sale of monopolies. When Charles’s Archbishop William Laud began to purge dissident ministers, thousands of

 CHAPTER 2

American Experiments, 1521–1700


N
W


 ENGLAND

E
S


E
TO NEW

NEW ENGLAND MARYLAND

TO CHE

 VIRGINIA

NG L A

5 ,0 0
NIES O L CO AKE SAPE

ATLANTIC OCEAN

 ND 2

W
 TO

E


0 ,0 0 0


I
 ST

N
IA ND

DS AN L IS



,0 0




 BERMUDA

ORIGINS OF MASSACHUSETTS PURITANS EAST ANGLIA
(Norfolk, Suffolk, Essex, Hartford counties) 
 BAHAMAS

WEST COUNTRY
(Wiltshire, Hampshire, Dorset counties) YORKSHIRE (Yorkshire, Lincoln counties) Rowley Newbury Ipswich Cambridge Hingham Plymouth 
ST. CROIX ST. KITTS

Caribbean Sea


 NEVIS

 BARBADOS

York






 500 miles

 250 500 kilometers

Hull


EAST ANGLIA
Boston Hingham 
Ipswich
Dedham
Chelmsford Braintree
Cambridge


MASSACHUSETTS BAY AND PLYMOUTH COLONIES
Exeter 


YORKSHIRE
Rowley 




 100 miles

Dartmouth


 50 100 kilometers

Andover


Newbury
Salisbury


WEST COUNTRY

 ENGLAND

 MAP 2.6 The Puritan Migration to America, 1620–1640 Forty-five thousand Puritans left England for America and the West Indies between 1620 and 1640. About half traveled to the New England colonies of Plymouth, Massachusetts Bay, and Connecticut, where they created durable societies with deep religious identities. Migrants from the three major centers of Puritanism in England — Yorkshire, East Anglia, and the West Country — commonly settled among those from their own region. Often they named American communities after their English towns of origin and tried to live as they had in Old England. For example, settlers from Rowley in Yorkshire transplanted their customary system of open-field agriculture to Rowley in Massachusetts Bay.

 Puritans — Protestants who did not separate from the

 Church of England but hoped to purify it of its ceremony and hierarchy — fled to America.

John Winthrop and Massachusetts Bay The
 Puritan exodus began in 1630 with the departure of 900 migrants led by John Winthrop, a well-educated country squire who became the first governor of the Massachusetts Bay Colony. Calling England morally

 corrupt and “overburdened with people,” Winthrop sought land for his children and a place in Christian history for his people. “We must consider that we shall be as a City upon a Hill,” Winthrop told the migrants. “The eyes of all people are upon us.” Like the Pilgrims, To see a longer excerpt of Winthrop’s “City Upon a Hill” sermon, along with other primary sources from this period, see Sources for America’s History.





 PART 1

TRANSFORMATIONS OF NORTH AMERICA, 1450–1700

 the Puritans envisioned a reformed Christian society with “authority in magistrates, liberty in people, purity in the church,” as minister John Cotton put it. By their example, they hoped to inspire religious reform throughout Christendom. Winthrop and his associates governed the Massachusetts Bay Colony from the town of Boston. They transformed their joint-stock corporation — a commercial agreement that allows investors to pool their resources — into a representative political system with a governor, council, and assembly. To ensure rule by the COMPARE AND godly, the Puritans limited the CONTRAST right to vote and hold office to What made New England different from New France men who were church memand New Netherland? bers. Rejecting the Plymouth Colony’s policy of religious tolerance, the Massachusetts Bay Colony established Puritanism as the state-supported religion, barred other faiths from conducting services, and used the Bible as a legal guide. “Where there is no Law,” they said, magistrates should rule “as near the law of God as they can.” Over the next decade, about 10,000 Puritans migrated to the colony, along with 10,000 others fleeing hard times in England. The New England Puritans sought to emulate the simplicity of the first Christians. Seeing bishops as “traitours unto God,” they placed power in the congregation of members — hence the name Congregationalist for their churches. Inspired by John Calvin, many Puritans embraced predestination, the idea that God saved only a few chosen people. Church members often lived in great anxiety, worried that God had not placed them among the “elect.” Some hoped for a conversion experience, the intense sensation of receiving God’s grace and being “born again.” Other Puritans relied on “preparation,” the confidence in salvation that came from spiritual guidance by their ministers. Still others believed that they were God’s chosen people, the new Israelites, and would be saved if they obeyed his laws.

 Roger Williams and Rhode Island To maintain God’s favor, the Massachusetts Bay magistrates purged their society of religious dissidents. One target was Roger Williams, the Puritan minister in Salem, a coastal town north of Boston. Williams opposed the decision to establish an official religion and praised the Pilgrims’ separation of church and state. He advocated toleration, arguing that political magistrates had authority over only the “bodies, goods, and outward estates of men,” not their spiritual lives. Williams also

 questioned the Puritans’ seizure of Indian lands. The magistrates banished him from the colony in 1636. Williams and his followers settled 50 miles south of Boston, founding the town of Providence on land purchased from the Narragansett Indians. Other religious dissidents settled nearby at Portsmouth and Newport. In 1644, these settlers obtained a corporate charter from Parliament for a new colony — Rhode Island — with full authority to rule themselves. In Rhode Island, as in Plymouth, there was no legally established church, and individuals could worship God as they pleased.

 Anne Hutchinson The Massachusetts Bay magistrates saw a second threat to their authority in Anne Hutchinson. The wife of a merchant and mother of seven, Hutchinson held weekly prayer meetings for women and accused various Boston clergymen of placing undue emphasis on good behavior. Like Martin Luther, Hutchinson denied that salvation could be earned through good deeds. There was no “covenant of works” that would save the well-behaved; only a “covenant of grace” through which God saved those he predestined for salvation. Hutchinson likewise declared that God “revealed” divine truth directly to individual believers, a controversial doctrine that the Puritan magistrates denounced as heretical. The magistrates also resented Hutchinson because of her sex. Like other Christians, Puritans believed that both men and women could be saved. But gender equality stopped there. Women were inferior to men in earthly affairs, said leading Puritan divines, who told married women: “Thy desires shall bee subject to thy husband, and he shall rule over thee.” Puritan women could not be ministers or lay preachers, nor could they vote in church affairs. In 1637, the magistrates accused Hutchinson of teaching that inward grace freed an individual from the rules of the Church and found her guilty of holding heretical views. Banished, she followed Roger Williams into exile in Rhode Island. Other Puritan groups moved out from Massachusetts Bay in the 1630s and settled on or near the Connecticut River. For several decades, the colonies of Connecticut, New Haven, and Saybrook were independent of one another; in 1660, they secured a charter from King Charles II (r. 1660–1685) for the selfgoverning colony of Connecticut. Like Massachusetts Bay, Connecticut had a legally established church and an elected governor and assembly; however, it granted voting rights to most property-owning men, not just to church members as in the original Puritan colony.

 CHAPTER 2

The Puritan Revolution in England Meanwhile, a
 religious civil war engulfed England. Archbishop Laud had imposed the Church of England prayer book on Presbyterian Scotland in 1637; five years later, a rebel Scottish army invaded England. Thousands of English Puritans (and hundreds of American Puritans) joined the Scots, demanding religious reform and parliamentary power. After years of civil war, parliamentary forces led by Oliver Cromwell emerged victorious. In 1649, Parliament beheaded King Charles I, proclaimed a republican Commonwealth, and banished bishops and elaborate rituals from the Church of England.

The Protestant Almanack, 1700
 The conflict between Protestants and Catholics took many forms. To reinforce the religious identity of English Protestants, a writer using the pseudonym Philopretes published this almanac that charted not only the passage of the seasons (and the influence of the pagan signs of the “Zodiack”) but also the “Pernicious Revolutions of the Papacy against the Lord and his Anointed.” Cambridge University Library.

American Experiments, 1521–1700


 The Puritan triumph in England was short-lived. Popular support for the Commonwealth ebbed after Cromwell took dictatorial control in 1653. Following his death in 1658, moderate Protestants and a resurgent aristocracy restored the monarchy and the hierarchy of bishops. With Charles II (r. 1660–1685) on the throne, England’s experiment in radical Protestant government came to an end. For the Puritans in America, the restoration of the monarchy began a new phase of their “errand into the wilderness.” They had come to New England expecting to return to Europe in triumph. When the failure of the English Revolution dashed that sacred mission, ministers exhorted congregations to create a godly republican society in America. The Puritan colonies now stood as outposts of Calvinism and the Atlantic republican tradition.

Puritanism and Witchcraft Like Native Americans,
 Puritans believed that the physical world was full of supernatural forces. Devout Christians saw signs of God’s (or Satan’s) power in blazing stars, birth defects, and other unusual events. Noting after a storm that the houses of many ministers “had been smitten with Lightning,” Cotton Mather, a prominent Puritan theologian, wondered “what the meaning of God should be in it.” Puritans were hostile toward people who they believed tried to manipulate these forces, and many were willing to condemn neighbors as Satan’s “wizards” or “witches.” People in the town of Andover “were much addicted to sorcery,” claimed one observer, and “there were forty men in it that could raise the Devil as well as any astrologer.” Between 1647 and 1662, civil authorities in New England hanged fourteen people for witchcraft, most of them older women accused of being “double-tongued” or of having “an unruly spirit.” The most dramatic episode of witch-hunting occurred in Salem in 1692. Several girls who had experienced strange seizures accused neighbors of bewitching them. When judges at the accused witches’ trials allowed the use of “spectral” evidence — visions of evil beings and marks seen only by the girls — the accusations spun out of control. Eventually, Massachusetts Bay authorities tried 175 people for witchcraft and executed 19 of them. The causes of this mass hysteria were complex and are still debated. Some historians point to group rivalries: many accusers were the daughters or servants of poor farmers, whereas many of the alleged witches were wealthier church members or their friends. Because 18 of those put to death were women, other historians see the episode as part of a broader





 PART 1

TRANSFORMATIONS OF NORTH AMERICA, 1450–1700

 Puritan effort to subordinate women. Still others focus on political instability in Massachusetts Bay in the early 1690s and on fears raised by recent Indian attacks in nearby Maine, which had killed the parents of some of the young accusers. It is likely that all of these causes played some role in the executions. Whatever the cause, the Salem episode marked a major turning point. Shaken by the number of deaths, government officials now discouraged legal prosecutions for witchcraft. Moreover, many influential people embraced the outlook of the European Enlightenment, a major intellectual movement that began around 1675 and promoted a rational, scientific view of the world. Increasingly, educated men and women explained strange happenings and sudden deaths by reference to “natural causes,” not witchcraft. Unlike Cotton Mather (1663–1728), who believed that lightning was a supernatural sign, Benjamin Franklin (1706–1790) and other well-read men of his generation would investigate it as a natural phenomenon.

A
Yeoman Society, 1630–1700 In building their communities, New England Puritans consciously rejected the feudal practices of English society. Many Puritans came from middling families in East Anglia, a region of pasture lands and few manors, and had no desire to live as tenants of wealthy aristocrats or submit to oppressive taxation by a distant government. They 
 had “escaped out of the pollutions of the world,” the settlers of Watertown in Massachusetts Bay declared, and vowed to live “close togither” in self-governing communities. Accordingly, the General Courts of Massachusetts Bay and Connecticut bestowed land on groups of settlers, who then distributed it among the male heads of families. Widespread ownership of land did not mean equality of wealth or status. “God had Ordained different degrees and orders of men,” proclaimed Boston merchant John Saffin, “some to be Masters and Commanders, others to be Subjects, and to be commanded.” Town proprietors normally awarded the largest plots to men of high social status who often became selectmen and justices of the peace. However, all families received some land, and most adult men had a vote in the town meeting, the main institution of local government (Map 2.7). In this society of independent households and selfgoverning communities, ordinary farmers had much more political power than Chesapeake yeomen and European peasants did. Although Nathaniel Fish was one of the poorest men in the town of Barnstable — he owned just a two-room cottage, 8 acres of land, an ox, and a cow — he was a voting member of the town meeting. Each year, Fish and other Barnstable farmers levied taxes; enacted ordinances governing fencing, roadbuilding, and the use of common fields; and chose The Mason Children This 1670 portrait of David, Joanna, and Abigail Mason by an unknown painter illustrates the growing prosperity of well-to-do Boston households. All three wear white linen edged with fine lace and expensive ribbons. Eight-year-old David is dressed like a gentleman; his slashed sleeves, kid gloves, and silvertipped walking stick represent the height of English fashion. Puritans, with their plain style, were uneasy about such finery. As minister Samuel Torrey complained, “a spirit of worldliness, a spirit of sensuality” was gaining strength in the younger generation. The Fine Arts Museums of San Francisco, M. H. de Young Memorial Museum, Gift of Mr. and Mrs. John D. Rockefeller III, 1979.7.3. © Fine Arts Museums of San Francisco.

 CHAPTER 2

Andover, 1650–1692






 New houses By 1650 By 1692 Meeting House

 er M

 rim



 ack



 The key to the right indicates that a central purpose of this map is to show the geographic distribution of nucleated and dispersed villages. Why are there so many nucleated towns in the Connecticut River Valley and so many dispersed settlements in eastern Massachusetts?

 Indian settlements Continuous English settlements by 1700 Roads Field boundaries

 UN

Andover


Sudbury


NI PM

UC K

Worcester


M


IRE SH BE

Connecticut River


 RK

Hadley


Oxford


OT QU

RHODE ISLAND

N
 AGA

 PE

R
 NAR

Woodstock


Hartford


 CONNECTICUT

T
 SET

Wethersfield


Farmington


Dedham


Wallingford


E


W
S


Medfield
Plymouth


 WAMPANOAG

Barnstable


 Wethersfield in 1640 is an example of a nucleated village, with house lots clustered around the meeting house and fields arranged in geometric patterns in the surrounding countryside.

 SAKONNET

AN EG

Waterbury


Newtown


N


H
O


 i on sa t ou H

M


 cR ive r

ATLANTIC OCEAN

Newton


M A S S A C H U S E T T S


Windsor


Manchester
Salem


Sunderland


Hatfield


 MO

Ipswich


OK CO A NN PE

AS SA CH US ET

TA IN

S


 MAH

 ICAN

Haverhill


Westfield


 20 kilometers

 Village types

AB EN A
Hampton 
Deerfield




 20 miles

 The map of Andover shows how an originally nucleated settlement changed over time into a dispersed town. New farms tended to be located farther and farther from the meeting house and town center, represented by a triangle on the town plan.

 (after Vaughn)

Northfield




Nucleated
 Initially nucleated, dispersed by 1700 Dispersed

 KI

Meeting House


Greenfield


Guilford




Derby


0.5


 1 mile

Wethersfield,


Meeting House


Long Island


 (after Wood)



 4 miles

River


 Nucleated to dispersed in fifty years

American Experiments, 1521–1700


 The field boundaries in Wethersfield indicate that the land is flat in the Connecticut River Valley. In contrast, the pattern of roads and paths in Andover suggests a hilly topography. These uplands gave the Merrimack River a strong current and many rapids, which were later harnessed for industrial development. (See Map 9.1 on page 288.)

 MAP 2.7 Settlement Patterns in New England Towns, 1630–1700 Throughout New England, colonists pressed onto desirable Indian lands. Initially, most Puritan towns were compact: families lived close to one another in village centers and traveled daily to work in the surrounding fields. This 1640 map of Wethersfield, Connecticut, a town situated on the broad plains of the Connecticut River Valley, shows this pattern clearly. The first settlers in Andover, Massachusetts, also chose to live in the village center. However, the rugged topography of eastern Massachusetts encouraged the townspeople to disperse. By 1692 (as the varied location of new houses shows), many Andover residents were living on farms distant from the village center.

 (after Andrews)



 PART 1

TRANSFORMATIONS OF NORTH AMERICA, 1450–1700

 the selectmen who managed town affairs. The farmers also selected the town’s representatives to the General Court, which gradually displaced the governor as the center of political authority. For Fish and thousands of other ordinary settlers, New England had proved to be a new world of opportunity.

Instability, War, and Rebellion
 Everywhere in the colonies, conflicts arose over the control of resources, the legitimacy of colonial leaders’ claims to power, and attempts to define social and cultural norms. Periodically, these conflicts flared spectacularly into episodes of violence. Each episode has its own story — its own unique logic and narrative — but taken together, they also illustrate the way that, in their formative stages, colonial societies pressured people to accept new patterns of authority and new claims to power. When these claims were contested, the results could quickly turn deadly.

 New England’s Indian Wars Relations between colonists and Indians in early New England were bewilderingly complex. Many rival Indian groups lived there before Europeans arrived; by the 1630s, these groups were bordered by the Dutch colony of New Netherland to their west and the various English settlements to the east: Plymouth, Massachusetts Bay, Rhode Island, Connecticut, New Haven, and Saybrook. The region’s Indian leaders created various alliances for the purposes of trade and defense: Wampanoags with Plymouth; Mohegans with Massachusetts and Connecticut; Pequots with New Netherland; Narragansetts with Rhode Island.

 Puritan-Pequot War Because of their alliance with the Dutch, the Pequots became a thorn in the side of English traders. A series of violent encounters began in July 1636 with the killing of English trader John Oldham and escalated until May 1637, when a combined force of Massachusetts and Connecticut The Hurons’ Feast of the Dead Hurons buried their dead in temporary raised tombs so they could easily care for their spirits. When they moved their villages in search of fertile soil and better hunting, the Hurons held a Feast of the Dead and reburied the bones of their own deceased (and often bones from other villages) in a common pit lined with beaver robes. This solemn ceremony united living as well as dead clan members, strengthening the bonds of the Huron Confederacy. It also was believed to release the spirits of the dead, allowing them to travel to the land where the first Huron, Aataentsic, fell from the sky, “made earth and man,” and lived with her son and assistant, Iouskeha. Library of Congress.

 CHAPTER 2

 militiamen, accompanied by Narragansett and Mohegan warriors, attacked a Pequot village and massacred some five hundred men, women, and children. In the months that followed, the New Englanders drove the surviving Pequots into oblivion and divided their lands. Believing they were God’s chosen people, Puritans considered their presence to be divinely ordained. Initially, they pondered the morality of acquiring Native American lands. “By what right or warrant can we enter into the land of the Savages?” they asked themselves. Responding to such concerns, John Winthrop detected God’s hand in a recent smallpox epidemic: “If God were not pleased with our inheriting these parts,” he asked, “why doth he still make roome for us by diminishing them as we increase?” Experiences like the Pequot War confirmed New Englanders’ confidence in their enterprise. “God laughed at the Enemies of his People,” one soldier boasted after the 1637 massacre, “filling the Place with Dead Bodies.” Like Catholic missionaries, Puritans believed that their church should embrace all peoples. However, their strong emphasis on predestination — the idea that God saved only a few chosen people — made it hard for them to accept that Indians could be counted among the elect. “Probably the devil” delivered these “miserable savages” to America, Cotton Mather suggested, “in hopes that the gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ would never come here.” A few Puritan ministers committed themselves to the effort to convert Indians. On Martha’s Vineyard, Jonathan Mayhew helped to create an Indian-led community of Wampanoag Christians. John Eliot translated the Bible into Algonquian and created fourteen Indian praying towns. By 1670, more than 1,000 Indians lived in these settlements, but relatively few Native Americans were ever permitted to become full members of Puritan congregations.

 Metacom’s War, 1675–1676 By the 1670s, Europeans in New England outnumbered Indians by three to one. The English population had multiplied to 55,000, while native peoples had diminished from an estimated 120,000 in 1570 to barely 16,000. To the Wampanoag leader Metacom (also known as King Philip), the prospects for coexistence looked dim. When his people copied English ways by raising hogs and selling pork in Boston, Puritan officials accused them of selling at “an under rate” and restricted their trade. When Indians killed wandering hogs that devastated their cornfields, authorities prosecuted them for violating English property rights (American Voices, p. 68). Metacom concluded that the English colonists had to be expelled. In 1675, the Wampanoags’ leader forged

American Experiments, 1521–1700




Metacom (King Philip), Chief of the Wampanoags
 The Indian War of 1675–1676 left an indelible mark on the history of New England. This painting from the 1850s, done on semitransparent cloth and lit from behind for effect, was used by traveling performers to tell the story of King Philip’s War. Notice that Metacom is pictured not as a savage but as a dignified man. No longer in danger of Indian attack, nineteenth-century whites in New England adopted a romanticized version of their region’s often brutal history. © Shelburne Museum, Shelburne, Vermont.

 a military alliance with the Narragansetts and Nipmucks and attacked white settlements throughout New England. Almost every day, settler William Harris fearfully reported, UNDERSTAND POINTS he heard new reports of the OF VIEW Indians’ “burneing houses, take- How did New Englanders’ ing cattell, killing men & women religious ideas influence & Children: & carrying others their relations with neighcaptive.” Bitter fighting continued boring Native American into 1676, ending only when the peoples? Indian warriors ran short of gunpowder and the Massachusetts Bay government hired Mohegan and Mohawk warriors, who killed Metacom. Metacom’s War of 1675–1676 (which English settlers called King Philip’s War) was a deadly affair. Indians destroyed one-fifth of the English towns in

AMERICAN VOICES

The Causes of
 Metacom’s War

 The causes of — and responsibility for — every American war are much debated, and the war of 1675–1676 between Puritans and Native Americans is no exception. The English settlers called it King Philip’s War, suggesting that the Wampanoag chief Metacom (King Philip) instigated it. Was that the case? We have no firsthand Indian accounts of its origins, but three English accounts offer different versions of events. Given the variation among the accounts and their fragmentary character, how can historians reconstruct what “really happened”?

John Easton


A
Relacion of the Indyan Warre  John Easton was the deputy governor of Rhode Island and a Quaker. Like many Quakers, Easton was a pacifist and tried to prevent the war. He wrote this “Relacion” shortly after the conflict ended.

 In [January 1675], an Indian was found dead; and by a coroner inquest of Plymouth Colony judged murdered. . . . The dead Indian was called Sassamon, and a Christian that could read and write. . . . The report came that . . . three Indians had confessed and accused Philip [of employing them to kill Sassamon, and that consequently] . . . the English would hang Philip. So the Indians were afraid, and reported that . . . Philip [believed that the English] . . . might kill him to have his land. . . . So Philip kept his men in arms. Plymouth governor [Josiah Winslow] required him to disband his men, and informed him his jealousy [his worry about land seizure] was false. Philip answered he would do no harm, and thanked the Governor for his information. The three Indians were hung [on June 8, 1675]. . . . And it was reported [that] Sassamon, before his death had informed [the English] of the Indian plot, and that if the Indians knew it they would kill him, and that the heathen might destroy the English for their wickedness as God had permitted the heathen to destroy the Israelites of old. So the English were afraid and Philip was afraid and both increased in arms; but for forty years’ time reports and jealousies of war had been very frequent that we did not think that now a war was breaking forth. But about a week before it did we had cause to think it would; then to endeavor to prevent it, we sent a man to Philip. . . . He called his council and agreed to come to us; [Philip] came himself, unarmed, and about forty of his men, armed. Then five of us went over [to speak to the Indians]. Three were magistrates. We sat very friendly together [June 14–18]. We told him our business was to

 endeavor that they might not . . . do wrong. They said that was well; they had done no wrong; the English wronged them. We said we knew the English said that the Indians wronged them, and the Indians said the English wronged them, but our desire was the quarrel might rightly be decided in the best way, and not as dogs decide their quarrels. The Indians owned that fighting was the worst way; then they propounded how right might take place; we said by arbitration. They said all English agreed against them; and so by arbitration they had had much wrong, many square miles of land so taken from them, for the English would have English arbitrators. . . . Another grievance [of the Indians]: the English cattle and horses still increased [and that] . . . they could not keep their corn from being spoiled [by the English livestock]. . . . So we departed without any discourtesies; and suddenly [c. June 25] had [a] letter from [the] Plymouth governor, [that] they intended in arms to [subjugate] Philip . . . and in a week’s time after we had been with the Indians the war thus begun. Source: John Easton, “A Relacion of the Indyan Warre, by Mr. Easton, of Roade Isld., 1675,” in Narratives of the Indian Wars, 1675–1699, ed. Charles H. Lincoln (New York: Charles Scribner’s Sons, 1913), 7–17.

Edward Randolph


Short Narrative of My Proceedings
 Edward Randolph, an English customs official in Boston, denounced the independent policies of the Puritan colonies and tried to subject them to English control. His “Short Narrative,” written in 1675, was a report to his superiors in London.

 Various are the reports and conjectures of the causes of the present Indian war. Some impute it to an impudent zeal in the magistrates of Boston to Christianize those heathen before they were civilized and enjoining them the

 strict observation of their laws, which, to a people so rude and licentious, hath proved even intolerable. . . . While the magistrates, for their profit, put the laws severely in execution against the Indians, the people, on the other side, for lucre and gain, entice and provoke the Indians . . . to drunkenness, to which those people are so generally addicted that they will strip themselves to their skin to have their fill of rum and brandy. . . . Some believe there have been vagrant and jesuitical [French] priests, who have made it their business, for some years past, to go from Sachem to Sachem [chief to chief], to exasperate the Indians against the English and to bring them into a confederacy, and that they were promised supplies from France and other parts to extirpate the English nation out of the continent of America. . . . Others impute the cause to some injuries offered to the Sachem Philip; for he being possessed of a tract of land called Mount Hope . . . some English had a mind to dispossess him thereof, who never wanting one pretence or other to attain their end, complained of injuries done by Philip and his Indians to their stock and cattle, whereupon Philip was often summoned before the magistrate, sometimes imprisoned, and never released but upon parting with a considerable part of his land. But the government of the Massachusetts . . . do declare [that because of the sins of the people] . . . God hath given the heathen commission to rise against them. . . . For men wearing long hair and periwigs made of women’s hair; for women . . . cutting, curling and laying out the hair. . . . For profaneness in the people not frequenting their [church] meetings. Source: Albert B. Hart, ed., American History Told by Contemporaries (New York: Macmillan, 1897), 1: 458–460.

Benjamin Church


Entertaining Passages
 Captain Benjamin Church fought in the war and helped end it by capturing Metacom’s wife and son and leading the expedition that killed the Indian chieftain. Forty years later, in 1716, Church’s son Thomas wrote an account of the war based on his father’s notes and recollections.

 where they lived]. . . . They plundered the nearest houses that the inhabitants had deserted [on the rumor of a war], but as yet offered no violence to the people, at least none were killed. . . . However, the alarm was given by their numbers, and hostile equipage, and by the prey they made of what they could find in the forsaken houses. An express came the same day to the governor [c. June 25], who immediately gave orders to the captains of the towns to march the greatest part of their companies [of militia], and to rendezvous at Taunton. . . . The enemy, who began their hostilities with plundering and destroying cattle, did not long content themselves with that game. They thirsted for English blood, and they soon broached it; killing two men in the way not far from Mr. Miles’s garrison. And soon after, eight more at Mattapoisett, upon whose bodies they exercised more than brutish barbarities. . . . These provocations drew out the resentment of some of Capt. Prentice’s troop, who desired they might have liberty to go out and seek the enemy in their own quarters [c. June 26]. Source: Benjamin Church, Entertaining Passages Relating to Philip’s War Which Began in the Month of June, 1675, ed. Thomas Church (Boston: B. Green, 1716).

QUESTIONS FOR ANALYSIS 1.
Compare what these documents say about the causes of the war. Where do the documents agree and disagree about these causes? 2. According to Randolph, what did the magistrates of Massachusetts Bay believe to be a major cause of the war? Could historians verify or disprove their explanation? How? What additional sources of evidence might be useful? 3. Drawing from these sources, who was the prime instigator of the war? Which documents provide the most compelling evidence for your conclusion? Why? 
 While Mr. Church was diligently settling his new farm . . . Behold! The rumor of a war between the English and the natives gave a check to his projects. . . . Philip, according to his promise to his people, permitted them to march out of the neck [of the Mount Hope peninsula,



 PART 1

TRANSFORMATIONS OF NORTH AMERICA, 1450–1700

 Massachusetts and Rhode Island and killed 1,000 settlers, nearly 5 percent of the adult population; for a time the Puritan experiment hung in the balance. But the natives’ losses — from famine and disease, death in battle, and sale into slavery — were much larger: about 4,500 Indians died, one-quarter of an already diminished population. Many of the surviving Wampanoag, Narragansett, and Nipmuck peoples moved west, intermarrying with Algonquian tribes allied to the French. Over the next century, these displaced Indian peoples would take their revenge, joining with French Catholics to attack their Puritan enemies. Metacom’s War did not eliminate the presence of Native Americans in southern New England, but it effectively destroyed their existence as independent peoples.

 Bacon’s Rebellion At the same time that New England fought its war with Metacom, Virginia was wracked by a rebellion that nearly toppled its government. It, too, grew out of a conflict with neighboring Indians, but this one inspired a popular uprising against the colony’s royal governor. Like Metacom’s War, it highlighted the way that a landintensive settler colony created friction with Native American populations; in addition, it dramatized the way that ordinary colonists could challenge the right of a new planter elite to rule over them. By the 1670s, economic and political power in Virginia was in the hands of a small circle of men who amassed land, slaves, and political offices. Through headrights and royal grants, they controlled nearly half of all the settled land in Virginia; what they could not plant themselves, they leased to tenants. Freed indentured servants found it ever harder to get land of their own; many were forced to lease lands, or even sign new indentures, to make ends meet. To make matters worse, the price of tobacco fell until planters received only a penny a pound for their crops in the 1670s. At the top of Virginia’s narrow social pyramid was William Berkeley, governor between 1642 and 1652 and again after 1660. To consolidate power, Berkeley bestowed large land grants on members of his council. The councilors exempted these lands from taxation and appointed friends as justices of the peace and county judges. To win support in the House of Burgesses, Berkeley bought off legislators with land grants and lucrative appointments as sheriffs and tax collectors. But social unrest erupted when the Burgesses took the vote away from landless freemen, who by now constituted half the adult white men. Although property-

 holding yeomen retained their voting rights, they were angered by falling tobacco prices, political corruption, and “grievous taxations” that threatened the “utter ruin of us the poor commonalty.” Berkeley and his allies were living on borrowed time.

 Frontier War An Indian conflict ignited the flame of social rebellion. In 1607, when the English intruded, 30,000 Native Americans resided in Virginia; by 1675, the native population had dwindled to only 3,500. By then, Europeans numbered some 38,000 and Africans another 2,500. Most Indians lived on treaty-guaranteed territory along the frontier, where poor freeholders and landless former servants now wanted to settle, demanding that the natives be expelled or exterminated. Their demands were ignored by wealthy planters, who wanted a ready supply of tenants and laborers, and by Governor Berkeley and the planter-merchants, who traded with the Occaneechee Indians for beaver pelts and deerskins. Fighting broke out late in 1675, when a vigilante band of Virginia militiamen murdered thirty Indians. Defying Berkeley’s orders, a larger force then surrounded a fortified Susquehannock village and killed five leaders who came out to negotiate. The Susquehannocks retaliated by attacking outlying plantations and killing three hundred whites. In response, Berkeley proposed a defensive strategy: a series of frontier forts to deter Indian intrusions. The settlers dismissed this scheme as a militarily useless plot by planter-merchants to impose high taxes and take “all our tobacco into their own hands.” Challenging the Government Enter Nathaniel Bacon, a young, well-connected migrant from England who emerged as the leader of the rebels. Bacon held a position on the governor’s council, but he was shut out of Berkeley’s inner circle and differed with Berkeley on Indian policy. When the governor refused to grant him a military commission, Bacon mobilized his neighbors and attacked any Indians he could find. Condemning the frontiersmen as “rebels and mutineers,” Berkeley expelled Bacon from the council and had him arrested. But Bacon’s army forced the governor to release their leader and hold legislative elections. The newly elected House of Burgesses enacted far-reaching reforms that curbed the powers of the governor and council and restored voting rights to landless freemen. These much-needed reforms came too late. Poor farmers and servants resented years of exploitation by wealthy planters, arrogant justices of the peace, and

 CHAPTER 2

American Experiments, 1521–1700




 power and sway is got into the hands of the rich,” Bacon proclaimed as his army burned Jamestown to the ground and plundered the plantations of Berkeley’s allies. When Bacon died suddenly of dysentery in October 1676, the governor took revenge, dispersing the rebel army, seizing the estates of well-to-do rebels, and hanging 23 men. In the wake of Bacon’s Rebellion, Virginia’s leaders worked harder to appease their humble neighbors. But the rebellion also coincided with the time when Virginia planters were switching from indentured servants, PLACE EVENTS who became free after four IN CONTEXT years, to slaves, who labored for In what ways was Bacon’s life. In the eighteenth century, Rebellion symptomatic wealthy planters would make of social tensions in the common cause with poorer colony of Virginia? whites, while slaves became the colony’s most exploited workers. That fateful change eased tensions within the free population but committed subsequent generations of Americans to a labor system based on racial exploitation. Bacon’s Rebellion, like Metacom’s War, reminds us that these colonies were unfinished worlds, still searching for viable foundations.

SUMMARY
Nathaniel Bacon Condemned as a rebel and a traitor in his own time, Nathaniel Bacon emerged in the late nineteenth century as a southern hero, a harbinger of the Confederate rebels of 1860–1865. The Association for the Preservation of Virginia Antiquities, founded in 1888, commissioned this stained-glass window depicting Bacon in dual guises of a well-dressed gentleman and a rebel in body armor. Installing Bacon’s portrait in a window of the Powder Magazine in Williamsburg (built by Governor Alexander Spotswood in 1715), explained a leading member of the association, would connect “present Virginia with her great and noble past” and commemorate those who shed their “blood for Virginia and the South.” Preservation Virginia. 
 “wicked & pernicious Counsellors.” As one yeoman rebel complained, “A poor man who has only his labour to maintain himself and his family pays as much [in taxes] as a man who has 20,000 acres.” Backed by 400 armed men, Bacon issued a “Manifesto and Declaration of the People” that demanded the removal of Indians and an end to the rule of wealthy “parasites.” “All the

 During the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, three types of colonies took shape in the Americas. In Mesoamerica and the Andes, Spanish colonists made indigenous empires their own, capitalizing on preexisting labor systems and using tribute and the discovery of precious metals to generate enormous wealth, which Philip II used to defend the interests of the Catholic Church in Europe. In tropical and subtropical regions, colonizers transferred the plantation complex — a centuries-old form of production and labor discipline — to places suited to growing exotic crops like sugar, tobacco, and indigo. The rigors of plantation agriculture demanded a large supply of labor, which was first filled in English colonies by indentured servitude and later supplemented and eclipsed by African slavery. The third type of colony, neo-European settlement, developed in North America’s temperate zone, where European migrants adapted familiar systems of social and economic organization in new settings. Everywhere in the Americas, colonization was, first and foremost, a process of experimentation. As resources



 PART 1

TRANSFORMATIONS OF NORTH AMERICA, 1450–1700

 from the Americas flowed to Europe, monarchies were strengthened and the competition among them — sharpened by the schism between Protestants and Catholics — gained new force and energy. Establishing colonies demanded political, social, and cultural innovations that threw Europeans, Native Americans, and Africans together in bewildering circumstances, triggered massive ecological change through the

C H A P T E R


 Columbian Exchange, and demanded radical adjustments. In the Chesapeake and New England — the two earliest regions of English settlement on mainland North America — the adjustment to new circumstances sparked conflict with neighboring Indians and waves of instability within the colonies. These external and internal crises were products of the struggle to adapt to the rigors of colonization.

R E V I E W


M A K E I T S T I C K
Go to LearningCurve to retain what you’ve read. 
TERMS TO KNOW

 Identify and explain the significance of each term below.

Key Concepts and Events
 chattel slavery (p. 40) neo-Europes (p. 40) encomienda (p. 42) Columbian Exchange (p. 43) outwork (p. 45) mercantilism (p. 45) House of Burgesses (p. 52) royal colony (p. 52) freeholds (p. 53) headright system (p. 54)

Key People
 indentured servitude (p. 54) Pilgrims (p. 60) Puritans (p. 61) joint-stock corporation (p. 62) predestination (p. 62) toleration (p. 62) covenant of works (p. 62) covenant of grace (p. 62) town meeting (p. 64)

Philip II (p. 44)
Francis Drake (p. 45)
Opechancanough (p. 52)
Lord Baltimore (p. 52)
John Winthrop (p. 61)
Roger Williams (p. 62)
Anne Hutchinson (p. 62)
Metacom (p. 67)


REVIEW QUESTIONS
Answer these questions to demonstrate your understanding of the chapter’s main ideas. 
 1. How did Spain’s conquest of central Mexico and the

 Andes shape European competition in the Americas? How did the Protestant Reformation affect this competition?

 2. How did environmental and ecological factors

 shape colonial enterprise, and how did the process of colonization impact American ecology and environments?

 CHAPTER 2

 3. What “push factors” caused people to leave England

 for its colonies in the seventeenth century? What “pull factors” drew them to particular colonies or regions?

CHAPTER REVIEW

 Beliefs, and Culture” on the thematic timeline on page 5. How did political developments in seventeenth-century England impact the development of its American colonies?

Review the
 events listed under “Politics and Power” and “Ideas,

THEMATIC UNDERSTANDING

MAKING CONNECTIONS

 Recognize the larger developments and continuities within and across chapters by answering these questions.

In Chapter 1, we
 saw that there were many parallels between Native American, European, and African societies on the eve of contact. Yet Europeans ended up dominating both Native American and African populations in colonial American settings. Based on what you learned in Chapter 2, what factors help to explain that dominance?

ACROSS TIME AND PLACE

MORE TO EXPLORE

 Take another look at the image of John Smith and Opechancanough on page 49. It is taken from Smith’s Generall Historie of Virginia, New-England, and the Summer Isles, which was first published in 1624. What is the dominant theme of the image? How might recent events in Virginia have colored the emphases in the book’s illustrations?

VISUAL EVIDENCE

 Start here to learn more about the events discussed in this chapter.

 Virginia DeJohn Anderson, Creatures of Empire (2004). Explores the significance of animal domestication in early New England and Chesapeake colonies.

 “The Plymouth Colony Archive Project” (histarch .uiuc.edu/plymouth/). A rich array of fully searchable texts and material culture resources.

Kathleen Brown, Good Wives, Nasty Wenches, and
 Anxious Patriarchs (1996). Examines the interrelationship of gender and race in early Virginia.

 “Salem Witch Trials” (etext.virginia.edu/salem /witchcraft/home.html). Extensive materials on the Salem witchcraft trials, including a fascinating interactive map feature.

Alfred W. Crosby, Ecological Imperialism (1986).
 Introduces the term neo-Europes and asks why there are so many of them. Jenny Hale Pulsipher, Subjects unto the Same King (2005). Considers the multifaceted contest for power in seventeenth-century New England.





 PART 1

CHAPTER REVIEW

 TIMELINE

 Ask yourself why this chapter begins and ends with these dates and then identify the links among related events.

1550–1630


 English crown supports mercantilism

1556–1598


 Reign of Philip II, king of Spain

1558–1603


 Reign of Elizabeth I, queen of England

1577–1580


 Francis Drake’s Golden Hind circles the globe, captures Spanish treasure fleet

1560–1620


 Growth of English Puritan movement



 Storms and English ships destroy Spanish Armada

1603–1625


 Reign of James I, king of England



 English traders settle Jamestown (Virginia)



 Samuel de Champlain founds Quebec



 Henry Hudson explores North America for the Dutch



 Dutch set up fur-trading post at Fort Orange (Albany)



 First Africans arrive in Chesapeake region House of Burgesses convenes in Virginia



 Pilgrims found Plymouth Colony

1620–1660


 Chesapeake colonies enjoy tobacco boom



 Dutch West India Company chartered



 Opechancanough’s uprising



 Virginia becomes royal colony

1625–1649


 Reign of Charles I, king of England



 Puritans found Massachusetts Bay Colony



 Colonists arrive in Maryland



Beginning of Puritan-Pequot War
 Roger Williams founds Providence



 Anne Hutchinson banished from Massachusetts Bay

 1640s

 Iroquois initiate wars over fur trade

1642–1659


Puritan Revolution in England




 Restoration of the English monarchy tobacco prices fall and remain low



 English conquer New Netherland



 Bacon’s Rebellion in Virginia

1675–1676


 Metacom’s War in New England



 Salem witchcraft trials

 CHAPTER 2

CHAPTER REVIEW

KEY TURNING POINTS:
The Chesapeake tobacco boom (1620–1660), Opechancanough’s uprising (1622), and the takeover of Virginia by the crown (1624). How were these events related to each other? What was their cumulative result? 




P A R T


