 CHAPTER 7

Hammering Out a Federal Republic, 1787–1820




 Hamilton’s system of public credit (millions of dollars)

Debts Assets
 $75.6 million in bonds sold mostly to the wealthy, creating a permanent national debt Total debt

$42.4
 National war debt (redemption of Confederation securities)

+


$21.5
 War debts assumed from states

+ $11.7
Owed to
 foreigners

Excise and
 other revenue

$1.2 +


 $4.4 = $5.6 million gross revenue

Customs
 revenue

$4.6


 Annual interest owed to bondholders on debt

$1.0


 Net revenue for gov’t spending

 FIGURE 7.1 Hamilton’s Fiscal Structure, 1792 As treasury secretary, Alexander Hamilton established a national debt by issuing government bonds and using the proceeds to redeem Confederation securities and assume the war debts of the states. To pay the annual interest due on the bonds, he used the revenue from excise taxes and customs duties. Hamilton deliberately did not attempt to redeem the bonds because he wanted to tie the interests of the wealthy Americans who owned them to the new national government.

 British financiers. However, Hamilton’s redemption plan would give enormous profits to speculators, who had bought up depreciated securities. For example, the Massachusetts firm of Burrell & Burrell had paid $600 for Confederation notes with a face value of $2,500; it stood to reap a profit of $1,900. Such windfall gains offended a majority of Americans, who condemned the speculative practices of capitalist financiers. Equally controversial was Hamilton’s proposal to pay the Burrells and other note holders with new interest-bearing securities, thereby creating a permanent national debt. Patrick Henry condemned this plan “to erect, and concentrate, and perpetuate a large monied interest” and warned that it would prove “fatal to the existence of American liberty.” James Madison demanded that Congress recompense those who originally owned Confederation securities: the thousands of shopkeepers, farmers, and soldiers who had bought or accepted them during the dark days of the war. However, it would have been difficult to trace the original owners; moreover, nearly half the members of the House of Representatives owned Confederation securities and would profit personally from Hamilton’s plan. Melding practicality with self-interest, the House rejected Madison’s suggestion.

 Hamilton then proposed that the national government further enhance public credit by assuming the war debts of the states. This assumption plan, costing $22 mil- UNDERSTAND POINTS lion, also favored well-to-do cred- OF VIEW itors such as Abigail Adams, who Why did Hamilton believe had bought depreciated Massa- a national debt would chusetts government bonds with strengthen the United a face value of $2,400 for only a States and help to ensure few hundred dollars and would its survival? reap a windfall profit. Still, Adams was a long-term investor, not a speculator like Assistant Secretary of the Treasury William Duer. Knowing Hamilton’s intentions in advance, Duer and his associates secretly bought up $4.6 million of the war bonds of southern states at bargain rates. Congressional critics condemned Duer’s speculation. They also pointed out that some states had already paid off their war debts; in response, Hamilton promised to reimburse those states. To win the votes of congressmen from Virginia and Maryland, the treasury chief arranged another deal: he agreed that the permanent national capital would be built along the Potomac River, where suspicious southerners could easily watch its operations. Such astute bargaining gave Hamilton the votes he needed to enact his redemption and assumption plans.



 PART 3

REVOLUTION AND REPUBLICAN CULTURE, 1763–1820

Creating a National Bank In December 1790,
 Hamilton asked Congress to charter the Bank of the United States, which would be jointly owned by private stockholders and the national government. Hamilton argued that the bank would provide stability to the specie-starved American economy by making loans to merchants, handling government funds, and issuing bills of credit — much as the Bank of England had done in Great Britain. These potential benefits persuaded Congress to grant Hamilton’s bank a twenty-year charter and to send the legislation to the president for his approval. At this critical juncture, Secretary of State Thomas Jefferson joined with James Madison to oppose Hamilton’s financial initiatives. Jefferson charged that Hamilton’s national bank was unconstitutional. “The incorporation of a Bank,” Jefferson told President Washington, was not a power expressly “delegated to the United States by the Constitution.” Jefferson’s argument rested on a strict interpretation of the Constitution. Hamilton preferred a loose interpretation; he told Washington that Article 1, Section 8, empowered Congress to make “all Laws which shall be necessary and proper” to carry out the provisions of the Constitution. Agreeing with Hamilton, the president signed the legislation. Raising Revenue Through Tariffs Hamilton now sought revenue to pay the annual interest on the national debt. At his insistence, Congress imposed excise taxes, including a duty on whiskey distilled in the United States. These taxes would yield $1 million a year. To raise another $4 million to $5 million, the treasury secretary proposed higher tariffs on foreign imports. Although Hamilton’s “Report on Manufactures” (1791)

 urged the expansion of American manufacturing, he did not support high protective tariffs that would exclude foreign products. Rather, he advocated moderate revenue tariffs that would pay the interest on the debt and other government expenses. Hamilton’s scheme worked brilliantly. As American trade increased, customs revenue rose steadily and paid down the national debt. Controversies notwithstanding, the treasury secretary had devised a strikingly modern and successful fiscal system; as entrepreneur Samuel Blodget Jr. declared in 1801, “the country prospered beyond all former example.”

 Jefferson’s Agrarian Vision Hamilton paid a high political price for his success. As Washington began his second four-year term in 1793, Hamilton’s financial measures had split the Federalists into bitterly opposed factions. Most northern Federalists supported the treasury secretary, while most southern Federalists joined a group headed by Madison and Jefferson. By 1794, the two factions had acquired names. Hamiltonians remained Federalists; the allies of Madison and Jefferson called themselves Democratic Republicans or simply Republicans. Thomas Jefferson spoke for southern planters and western farmers. Well-read in architecture, natural history, agricultural science, and political theory, Jefferson embraced the optimism of the Enlightenment. He believed in the “improvability of the human race” and deplored the corruption and social divisions that threatened its progress. Having seen the poverty of laborers in British factories, Jefferson doubted that wageworkers had the economic and political independence needed to sustain a republican polity.

Two Visions of America
 Thomas Jefferson (left) and Alexander Hamilton confront each other in these portraits, as they did in the political battles of the 1790s. Jefferson was pro-French, Hamilton pro-British. Jefferson favored farmers and artisans; Hamilton supported merchants and financiers. Jefferson believed in democracy and rule by legislative majorities; Hamilton argued for strong executives and judges. Still, in the contested presidential election of 1800, Hamilton (who detested candidate Aaron Burr) threw his support to Jefferson and secured the presidency for his longtime political foe. The White House Historical Association (White House Collection). / Yale University Art Gallery/Art Resource, NY.

 CHAPTER 7

 Jefferson therefore set his democratic vision of America in a society of independent yeomen farm families. “Those who labor in the earth are the chosen people of God,” he wrote. The grain and meat from their homesteads would feed European nations, which “would manufacture and send us in exchange our clothes and other comforts.” Jefferson’s notion of an international division of labor resembled that proposed by Scottish economist Adam Smith in The Wealth of Nations (1776). To see a longer excerpt of Jefferson’s Notes on the State of Virginia, along with other primary sources from this period, see Sources for America’s History.

 Turmoil in Europe brought Jefferson’s vision closer to reality. The French Revolution began in 1789; four years later, the First French Republic (1792–1804) went to war against a British-led coalition of monarchies. As fighting disrupted European farming, wheat prices leaped from 5 to 8 shillings a bushel and remained high for twenty years, bringing substantial profits to Chesapeake and Middle Atlantic farmers. “Our farmers have never experienced such prosperity,” remarked one observer. Simultaneously, a boom in the export of raw cotton, fueled by the invention of the cotton gin and the mechanization of cloth production in Britain, boosted the economies of Georgia and South Carolina. As Jefferson had hoped, European markets brought prosperity to American agriculture.

The French Revolution
Divides Americans
 American merchants profited even more handsomely from the European war. In 1793, President Washington issued a Proclamation of Neutrality, allowing U.S. citizens to trade with all belligerents. As neutral carriers, American merchant ships claimed a right to pass through Britain’s naval blockade of French ports, and American firms quickly took over the lucrative sugar trade between France and its West Indian islands. Commercial earnings rose spectacularly, averaging $20 million annually in the 1790s — twice the value of cotton and tobacco exports. As the American merchant fleet increased from 355,000 tons in 1790 to 1.1 million tons in 1808, northern shipbuilders and merchants provided work for thousands of shipwrights, sailmakers, dockhands, and seamen. Carpenters, masons, and cabinetmakers in Boston, New York, and Philadelphia easily found work building warehouses

Hammering Out a Federal Republic, 1787–1820




 and fashionable “Federal-style” town houses for newly affluent merchants.

 Ideological Politics As Americans profited from Europe’s struggles, they argued passionately over its ideologies. Most Americans had welcomed the French Revolution (1789–1799) because it abolished feudalism and established a constitutional monarchy. The creation of the First French Republic was more controversial. Many applauded the end of the monarchy and embraced the democratic ideology of the radical Jacobins. Like the Jacobins, they formed political clubs and began to address one another as “citizen.” However, Americans with strong religious beliefs condemned the new French government for closing Christian churches and promoting a rational religion based on “natural morality.” Fearing social revolution at home, wealthy Americans condemned revolutionary leader Robespierre and his followers for executing King Louis XVI and three thousand aristocrats. Their fears were well founded, because Hamilton’s economic COMPARE AND policies quickly sparked a domes- CONTRAST tic insurgency. In 1794, western How did Jefferson’s idea of Pennsylvania farmers mounted an agrarian republic differ the so-called Whiskey Rebellion from the economic vision to protest Hamilton’s excise tax on put forward by Alexander Hamilton? spirits (Thinking Like a Historian, p. 220). This tax had cut demand for the corn whiskey the farmers distilled and bartered for eastern manufactures. Like the Sons of Liberty in 1765 and the Shaysites in 1786, the Whiskey Rebels assailed the tax collectors who sent the farmers’ hardearned money to a distant government. Protesters waved banners proclaiming the French revolutionary slogan “Liberty, Equality, Fraternity!” To deter popular rebellion and uphold national authority, President Washington raised a militia force of 12,000 troops and dispersed the Whiskey Rebels. Jay’s Treaty Britain’s maritime strategy intensified political divisions in America. Beginning in late 1793, the British navy seized 250 American ships carrying French sugar and other goods. Hoping to protect merchant property through diplomacy, Washington dispatched John Jay to Britain. But Jay returned with a controversial treaty that ignored the American claim that “free ships make free goods” and accepted Britain’s right to stop neutral ships. The treaty also required the U.S. government to make “full and complete compensation” to British merchants for pre–Revolutionary War debts owed by American citizens. In return, the

THINKING LIKE A HISTORIAN
The Social Life of Alcohol 
 Alcohol was ubiquitous in post-Revolutionary America. Expensive wines and distilled spirits traveled through the channels of Atlantic trade; molasses was imported from the West Indies and distilled into rum in American port towns; and cider, beer, and whiskey were produced on a small scale everywhere in the countryside. Taverns were centers of social and political activity. Alcohol both mirrored and reinforced the economic and geographical divisions in American life.

 1. James Newport’s ad in the Pennsylvania Gazette, 1790.

JAMES NEWPORT,
At his Wine, Spirit and Cordial Stores, in Second street, at the upper corner of Carter’s alley, has, by Wholesale and Retail, MADEIRA, Sherry, Lisbon, Teneriffe, Malaga, Fayal, and Port Wines, Jamaica spirits, Antigua rum, Philadelphia ditto, Holland gin, Philadelphia ditto, very excellent, in cases, Coniac [sic] brandy, American ditto, good flavor, choice shrub. CORDIALS, &c. Anniseed water, clove water, all-fours, Cinnamon water, prime wine and rum colouring, wine bitters. Spirits of wine. Retail Stores and Tavern-keepers will in particular, find their interest in buying here, the articles being all the best in their kind, and selling at the most reduced prices. Philadelphia, April 30, 1790. 3. Anonymous, The Toast, c. 1810–1815. 
Source: John Nugent Collection, Newburgh, Indiana.




 2. Benjamin Chew on providing alcohol to his slaves, 1794. The instructions of a prominent Philadelphia lawyer and landowner to his overseer about giving rum to his slaves during the harvest.

 I have written . . . to let you have [illegible] Rum & other necessaries for the Harvest. But as these articles are so [illegible] dear I must recommend it to you to be as sparing of them as possible. . . . I must rely on you good man [to conduct] the Business. . . . I would have you let the People have a little Rum — let them be cautious in using too much Spirits during Harvest — it will be well to mix some molasses with water to drink — it is very wholesome & much recommended. . . . I need not caution you that a great deal depends upon your own proper attention to yourself and that you are careful of good Conduct during Harvest.

4. John Lewis Krimmel, Village Tavern, 1814. This
 painting of a postman arriving at a Pennsylvania tavern with letters and newspapers reminds us that taverns were not merely places to drink.

Source: John Lewis Krimmel (American, 1786–1821) Village Tavern, 1813–1814,
 oil on canvas, 167∕8 x 22½ inches, Toledo Museum of Art (Toledo, Ohio) Purchased with funds from the Florence Scott Libbey Bequest in Memory of her Father, Maurice A. Scott. 1954.13. Photo Credit: Photography Incorporated, Toledo.

 5. Public notice from the Pennsylvania Gazette, 1794. Here, a tavern serves as the gathering place for citizens interested in nominating candidates for election to office.

THE INHABITANTS
of the County of Chester, are hereby requested to meet at the Centre house, kept by Abraham Marshall, in West Bradford, on FRIDAY the 10th Day of October next, at 10 o’clock, A. M. in order to form a TICKET for the ensuing Election. 6. Tom the Tinker demands compliance, July 23, 1794. During the Whiskey Rebellion, “Tom the Tinker” pinned this notice to a tree near John Reed’s distillery. Reed had it published in a Pittsburgh newspaper. 
 In taking a survey of the troops under my direction in the late expedition against that insolent exciseman, John Neville, I find there were a great number of delinquents, even among those who carry on distilling. It will, therefore, be observed that I, Tom the Tinker, will not suffer any certain class or set of men to be excluded [from] the service of this my district, when notified to attend on any expedition carried on in order to obstruct the execution of the excise law, and obtain a repeal thereof. And I do declare on my solemn word, that if such delinquents do not come forth on the next alarm, with equipments, and give their assistance in opposing the

 execution and obtaining a repeal of the excise law, he or they will be deemed as enemies and stand opposed to virtuous principles of republican liberty, and shall receive punishment according to the nature of the offense. And whereas, a certain John Reed, now resident in Washington, and being at his place near Pittsburgh, called Reedsburgh, and having a set of stills employed at said Reedsburgh, entered on the excise docket, contrary to the will and good pleasure of his fellow citizens, and came not forth to assist in the suppression of the execution of said law, by aiding and assisting in the late expedition, have, by delinquency, manifested his approbation to the execution of the aforesaid law, is hereby charged forthwith to cause the contents of this paper, without adding or diminishing, to be published in the Pittsburgh Gazette, the ensuing week, under the no less penalty than the consumption of his distillery. Given under my hand, this 19th day of July, one thousand seven hundred and ninety-four. Sources: (1) James Newport, Pennsylvania Gazette, May 5, 1790; (2) Chew Family Papers, Box 773, ff. 25, 10, Historical Society of Pennsylvania; (5) Pennsylvania Gazette, October 1, 1794; (6) Pennsylvania Archives, 2nd ser., 4:61–62 (Harrisburg: E. K. Meyers, State Printer, 1890).

ANALYZING THE EVIDENCE 1.
Who is the intended audience for an advertisement like James Newport’s (source 1)? How many Atlantic ports of call are represented in the products he advertises? 2. The two paintings (sources 3 and 4), set in the interiors of a private home and a tavern, depict mostly men. What have they gathered for in each case? Village Tavern is set during the War of 1812. How does that fact influence your interpretation of the scene? What do you think the woman and child are doing in the tavern? 3. Village Tavern (source 4) and the ad calling for a political gathering (source 5) both suggest the way that politics and drinking often mixed. How might the fact that taverns were gathering places for political discussion and decision making have influenced outcomes? 4. What concerns does Benjamin Chew express in his correspondence with his overseer (source 2)? Given those worries, why do you think he provides rum to his slaves at all? 5. Tom the Tinker expressed the collective will of whiskey distillers in western Pennsylvania during the Whiskey Rebellion (source 6). Why would it have been important to enforce unanimous action during the uprising? 
PUTTING IT ALL TOGETHER
Considering everything you know about the trade and consumption of alcohol, social stratification in the early republic, and differences between urban and rural communities, write a short essay that considers the ways in which taverns and alcohol helped unite people in some ways while differentiating or dividing them in others. 




 PART 3

REVOLUTION AND REPUBLICAN CULTURE, 1763–1820

The Whiskey Rebellion, 1794
 This painting of Washington reviewing the militia forces that would march against the Whiskey Rebels in western Pennsylvania expresses a Federalist vision of hierarchy (in the form of officers on horseback) and order (represented by the ranks of troops). The reality was messier: militia was called up from four states, but when volunteers were too few the states resorted to a draft, which prompted protests and riots. In the end, the militia force of more than 12,000 men was larger than the Continental army itself through much of the Revolution. Upon its approach, the rebellion evaporated. Twenty-four men were indicted for treason; two were sentenced to hang, but Washington pardoned them to encourage peaceful reconciliation. The Granger Collection, New York.

 agreement allowed Americans to submit claims for illegal seizures and required the British to remove their troops and Indian agents from the Northwest Territory. Despite Republican charges that Jay’s Treaty was too conciliatory, the Senate ratified it in 1795, but only by the two-thirds majority required by the Constitution. As long as the Federalists were in power, the United States would have a pro-British foreign policy.

The Haitian Revolution The French Revolution
 inspired a revolution closer to home that would also impact the United States. The wealthy French plantation colony of Saint-Domingue IDENTIFY CAUSES in the West Indies was deeply How did events abroad divided: a small class of elite plantduring the 1790s sharpen ers stood atop the population of political divisions in the 40,000 free whites and dominated United States? the island’s half million slaves. In

 between, some 28,000 gens de couleur — free men of color — were excluded from most professions, forbidden from taking the names of their white relatives, and prevented from dressing and carrying themselves like whites. The French Revolution intensified conflict between planters and free blacks, giving way to a massive slave uprising in 1791 that aimed to abolish slavery. The uprising touched off years of civil war, along with Spanish and British invasions. In 1798, black Haitians led by Toussaint L’Ouverture — himself a former slave-owning planter — seized control of the country. After five more years of fighting, in 1803 SaintDomingue became the independent nation of Haiti: the first black republic in the Atlantic World. The Haitian Revolution profoundly impacted the United States. In 1793, thousands of refugees — planters, slaves, and free blacks alike — fled the island and traveled to Charleston, Norfolk, Baltimore,

 CHAPTER 7

Hammering Out a Federal Republic, 1787–1820


 horrifying paradox, a perversion of the republican ideal (America Compared, p. 224).

The Rise of Political Parties


Toussaint L’Ouverture, Haitian Revolutionary
 and Statesman The American Revolution of 1776 constituted a victory for republicanism; the Haitian revolt of the 1790s represented a triumph of liberty over slavery and a demand for racial equality. After leading the black army that ousted French planters and British invaders from Haiti, Toussaint formed a constitutional government in 1801. A year later, when French troops invaded the island, he negotiated a treaty that halted Haitian resistance in exchange for a pledge that the French would not reinstate slavery. Subsequently, the French seized Toussaint and imprisoned him in France, where he died in 1803. Snark/Art Resource, NY.

 Philadelphia, and New York, while newspapers detailed the horrors of the unfolding war. Many slaveholders panicked, fearful that the “contagion” of black liberation would undermine their own slave regimes. U.S. policy toward the rebellion presented a knotty problem. The first instinct of the Washington administration was to supply aid to the island’s white population. Adams — strongly antislavery and no friend of France — changed course, aiding the rebels and strengthening commercial ties. Jefferson, though sympathetic to moral arguments against slavery, was himself a southern slaveholder; he was, moreover, an ardent supporter of France. When he became president, he cut off aid to the rebels, imposed a trade embargo, and refused to recognize an independent Haiti. For many Americans, an independent nation of liberated citizen-slaves was a

 The appearance of Federalists and Republicans marked a new stage in American politics — what historians call the First Party System. Colonial legislatures had factions based on family, ethnicity, or region, but they did not have organized political parties. Nor did the new state and national constitutions make any provision for political societies. Indeed, most Americans believed that parties were dangerous because they looked out for themselves rather than serving the public interest. But a shared understanding of the public interest collapsed in the face of sharp conflicts over Hamilton’s fiscal policies. Most merchants and creditors supported the Federalist Party, as did wheat-exporting slaveholders in the Tidewater districts of the Chesapeake. The emerging Republican coalition included southern tobacco and rice planters, debt-conscious western farmers, Germans and Scots-Irish in the southern backcountry, and subsistence farmers in the Northeast. Party identity crystallized in 1796. To prepare for the presidential election, Federalist and Republican leaders called caucuses in Congress and conventions in the states. They also mobilized popular support by organizing public festivals and processions: the Federalists held banquets in February to celebrate Washington’s birthday, and the Republicans marched through the streets on July 4 to honor the Declaration of Independence. In the election, voters gave Federalists a majority in Congress and made John Adams president. Adams continued Hamilton’s pro-British foreign policy and strongly criticized French seizures of American merchant ships. When the French foreign minister Talleyrand solicited a loan and a bribe from American diplomats to stop the seizures, Adams charged that Talleyrand’s agents, whom he dubbed X, Y, and Z, had insulted America’s honor. In response to the XYZ Affair, Congress cut off trade with France in 1798 and authorized American privateering (licensing private ships to seize French vessels). This undeclared maritime war curtailed American trade with the French West Indies and resulted in the capture of nearly two hundred French and American merchant vessels.

The Naturalization, Alien, and Sedition Acts of
 1798 As Federalists became more hostile to the French Republic, they also took a harder line against their Republican critics. When Republican-minded



AMERICA C O M PA R E D
The Haitian Revolution and the Problem of Race 
 The slave uprising on the French island of Saint-Domingue triggered international war, created a refugee crisis, and ended with the creation of a new republic. The American Revolution did all these things as well, yet the United States did not support either the rebellion or the republic of Haiti.

 Savannah City Council’s Resolution in Response to the Haitian Uprising, 1795

 Excerpts from the Constitution of 1801 Established by the Central Assembly of Saint-Domingue

 Whereas, from the mischiefs which the people of St. Domingo, and other French islands, have experienced, from the insurrection of their Negroes and People of Colour, the precautions taken by the people of South Carolina . . . to prevent the importation or landing of any such Negroes or Mulattoes amongst them, and the information the Citizens now assembled have received, that a vessel is now lying at Cockspur, recently from Kingston, with near one hundred Negroes on board, whose landing may be dangerous to the inhabitants of this state, with the daily expectation of many more; therefore, to prevent the evils that may arise from suffering people of this description, under any pretense whatever, from being introduced amongst us, the Citizens pledge themselves unanimously to support the City Council in any salutary measures they may adopt[.]

 Article 1. – Saint-Domingue in its entire expanse, and Samana, La Tortue, La Gonave, Les Cayemites, L’Ile-aVache, La Saone and other adjacent islands form the territory of a single colony, which is part of the French Empire, but ruled under particular laws. . . . Article 3. – There cannot exist slaves on this territory, servitude is therein forever abolished. All men are born, live and die free and French. Article 4. – All men, regardless of color, are eligible to all employment. Article 5. – There shall exist no distinction other than those based on virtue and talent, and other superiority afforded by law in the exercise of a public function. The law is the same for all whether in punishment or in protection.

Source: Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture, Manuscripts, Archives and
 Rare Books Division, Image ID 1243998, digitalgallery.nypl.org.

Source: Haitian Constitution of 1801 (English), The Louverture Project,
 thelouvertureproject.org.

QUESTIONS FOR ANALYSIS 1.
How does the first document express the fears of American slaveholders? Why do you suppose the Savannah City Council perceived Haitian refugees to be a danger? 
 2. How does the excerpt from the 1801 Constitution echo themes of the American Revolution? What differences do you see? Comparing the second document to the first, how would you say that the two revolutions impacted views of race in Georgia and in Haiti?

 immigrants from Ireland vehemently attacked Adams’s policies, a Federalist pamphleteer responded in kind: “Were I president, I would hang them for otherwise they would murder me.” To silence the critics, the Federalists enacted three coercive laws limiting individual rights and threatening the fledgling party system. The Naturalization Act lengthened the residency requirement for American citizenship from five to fourteen years, the Alien Act authorized the deportation of foreigners, and the Sedition Act prohibited the publication of insults or malicious attacks on the president

 or members of Congress. “He that is not for us is against us,” thundered the Federalist Gazette of the United States. Using the Sedition Act, Federalist prosecutors arrested more than twenty Republican newspaper editors and politicians, accused them of sedition, and convicted and jailed a number of them. This repression sparked a constitutional crisis. Republicans charged that the Sedition Act violated the First Amendment’s prohibition against “abridging the freedom of speech, or of the press.” However, they did not appeal to the Supreme Court because the Court’s

 CHAPTER 7

NORTHWEST TERRITORY

 NISH

 TERRITORY

Candidate


Electoral
Vote


TERR. SOUTH OF THE OHIO RIVER

 ID

OR FL A

 Presidential election maps usually show the strength of each state in the electoral college. The number of electoral votes cast by a state is the sum of the number of its senators (two) and its representatives in the U.S. Congress. States gain or lose representatives depending on their population, as determined each decade by the U.S. census. Consequently, the number of a state’s electoral votes may change over time.



SPA ERRITORY NISH T

NORTHWEST INDIANA TERR. TERR.

Candidate


Electoral
Vote


MISSISSIPPI TERRITORY

A


 ID

 OR

 FL

 The “Revolution of 1800” The campaign of 1800 degenerated into a bitter, no-holds-barred contest. The Federalists launched personal attacks on Jefferson, branding him an irresponsible pro-French radical and, because he opposed state support of religion in Virginia, “the arch-apostle of irreligion and free thought.” Both parties changed state election laws to favor their candidates, and rumors circulated of a Federalist plot to stage a military coup. The election did not end these worries. Thanks to a low Federalist turnout in Virginia and Pennsylvania and the three-fifths rule (which boosted electoral votes in the southern states), Jefferson won a narrow 73-to-65 victory over Adams in the electoral college. However, the Republican electors also gave 73 votes to Aaron Burr of New York, who was Jefferson’s vicepresidential running mate (Map 7.1). The Constitution specified that in the case of a tie vote, the House of Representatives would choose between the candidates. For thirty-five rounds of balloting, Federalists in the House blocked Jefferson’s election, prompting rumors that Virginia would raise a military force to put him into office. Ironically, arch-Federalist Alexander Hamilton ushered in a more democratic era by supporting Jefferson. Calling Burr an “embryo Caesar” and the “most unfit man in the United States for the office of president,” Hamilton persuaded key Federalists to allow Jefferson’s election. The Federalists’ concern for political stability also played a role. As Senator James Bayard of Delaware explained, “It was admitted on all

 Presidential elections quickly became a central focus of American political life. Political leaders used mental maps to envision those areas likely to support various candidates and to map their election strategies accordingly.



 SPA

 power to review congressional legislation was uncertain and because most of the justices were Federalists. Instead, Madison and Jefferson looked to the state legislatures. At their urging, the Kentucky and Virginia legislatures issued resolutions in 1798 declaring the Alien and Sedition Acts to be “unauthoritative, void, and of no force.” The Virginia and Kentucky Resolutions set forth a states’ rights interpretation of the Constitution, asserting that the states had a “right to judge” the legitimacy of national laws. The conflict over the Sedition Act set the stage for the presidential election of 1800. Jefferson, once opposed on principle to political parties, now asserted that they could “watch and relate to the people” the activities of an oppressive government. Meanwhile, John Adams reevaluated his foreign policy. Rejecting Hamilton’s advice to declare war against France (and benefit from the resulting upsurge in patriotism), Adams put country ahead of party and used diplomacy to end the maritime conflict.

Hammering Out a Federal Republic, 1787–1820


 States may cast their electoral votes either by district (as, for example, in North Carolina) or as a single statewide total. When Thomas Jefferson and Aaron Burr both received 73 electoral votes, the House of Representatives decided which one would be president.

 MAP 7.1 The Presidential Elections of 1796 and 1800 Both elections pitted Federalist John Adams of Massachusetts against Republican Thomas Jefferson of Virginia, and both saw voters split along regional lines. Adams carried every New England state and, reflecting Federalist strength in maritime and commercial areas, the eastern districts of the Middle Atlantic states; Jefferson won most of the agricultural-based states of the South and West (Kentucky and Tennessee). New York was the pivotal swing state. It gave its 12 electoral votes to Adams in 1796 and, thanks to the presence of Aaron Burr on the Republican ticket, bestowed them on Jefferson in 1800.





 PART 3

REVOLUTION AND REPUBLICAN CULTURE, 1763–1820

 hands that we must risk the Constitution and a Civil War or take Mr. Jefferson.” Why did Jefferson consider Jefferson called the election his election in 1800 to be the “Revolution of 1800,” and so it revolutionary? was. The bloodless transfer of power showed that popularly elected governments could be changed in an orderly way, even in times of bitter partisan conflict. In his inaugural address in 1801, Jefferson praised this achievement, declaring, “We are all Republicans, we are all Federalists.”

UNDERSTAND POINTS OF VIEW

A
Republican Empire Is Born  In the Treaty of Paris of 1783, Great Britain gave up its claims to the trans-Appalachian region and, said one British diplomat, left the Indian nations “to the care of their [American] neighbours.” Care was hardly the right word: many white Americans wanted to destroy native communities. “Cut up every Indian Cornfield and burn every Indian town,” proclaimed Congressman William Henry Drayton of South Carolina, so that their “nation be extirpated and the lands become the property of the public.” Other leaders, including Henry Knox, Washington’s first secretary of war, favored assimilating native peoples into Euro-American society. Knox proposed the division of tribal lands among individual Indian families, who would become citizens of the various states. Indians resisted both forms of domination and fought to retain control of their lands and cultures. In the ensuing struggle, the United States emerged as an expansive power, determined to control the future of the continent.

Sham Treaties and Indian Lands
 As in the past, the major struggle between natives and Europeans centered on land rights. Invoking the Paris treaty and regarding Britain’s Indian allies as conquered peoples, the U.S. government asserted both sovereignty over and ownership of the transAppalachian west. Indian nations rejected both claims, pointing out they had not been conquered and had not signed the Paris treaty. “Our lands are our life and our breath,” declared Creek PLACE EVENTS chief Hallowing King; “if we part IN CONTEXT with them, we part with our Why did the United States blood.” Brushing aside such go to war against western objections and threatening miliIndians so quickly after the tary action, U.S. commissioners Revolution? forced the pro-British Iroquois

 peoples — Mohawks, Onondagas, Cayugas, and Senecas — to cede huge tracts in New York and Pennsylvania in the Treaty of Fort Stanwix (1784). New York land speculators used liquor and bribes to take a million more acres, confining the once powerful Iroquois to reservations — essentially colonies of subordinate peoples. American negotiators used similar tactics to grab Ohio Valley lands. At the Treaties of Fort McIntosh (1785) and Fort Finney (1786), they pushed the Chippewas, Delawares, Ottawas, Wyandots, and Shawnees to cede most of the future state of Ohio. The tribes quickly repudiated the agreements, justifiably claiming they were made under duress. Recognizing the failure of these agreements, American negotiators arranged for a comprehensive agreement at Fort Harmar (1789), but it, too, failed. To defend their lands, these tribes joined with the Miami and Potawatomi Indians to form the Western Confederacy. Led by Miami chief Little Turtle, confederacy warriors crushed American expeditionary forces sent by President Washington in 1790 and 1791.

 The Treaty of Greenville Fearing an alliance between the Western Confederacy and the British in Canada, Washington doubled the size of the U.S. Army and ordered General “Mad Anthony” Wayne to lead a new expedition. In August 1794, Wayne defeated the confederacy in the Battle of Fallen Timbers (near present-day Toledo, Ohio). However, continuing Indian resistance forced a compromise. In the Treaty of Greenville (1795), American negotiators acknowledged Indian ownership of the land, and, in return for various payments, the Western Confederacy ceded most of Ohio (Map 7.2). The Indian peoples also agreed to accept American sovereignty, placing themselves “under the protection of the United States, and no other Power whatever.” These American advances caused Britain to agree, in Jay’s Treaty (1795), to reduce its trade and military aid to Indians in the trans-Appalachian region. The Greenville treaty sparked a wave of white migration. Kentucky already had a population of 73,000 in 1790, and in 1792 it was admitted to the Union as the fifteenth state (Vermont entered a year earlier). By 1800, more than 375,000 people had moved into the Ohio and Tennessee valleys; in 1805, the new state of Ohio alone had more than 100,000 residents. Thousands more farm families moved into the future states of Indiana and Illinois, sparking new conflicts with native peoples over land and hunting rights. Between 1790 and 1810, farm families settled as much

 CHAPTER 7

Hammering Out a Federal Republic, 1787–1820


 MAP 7.2 CANADA

 MAINE

L.
Superior 

Red River
Basin


Ft. Michilimackinac


DAKOTA (SIOUX)

 KICKAPOO

 i R. ur

Misso


NEBAGO WIN L.
Michigan 
 FOX

(


VT. L.
ron Hu 
 SAUK

 o n t a ri L. O

(Ft. Niagara


MICH. POTAWATOMI
Ft. Detroit ( 
L.


 CONN.

Lexington


 DEL.

S


N.C.


ATLANTIC OCEAN

 se

 CH

 es

 sip p

I


Te


 nn

 i R.

U


 ARK.

S.C.


I


A


 CADDO

 s sis

S


CHICKASAW MISS. ALA. 1817 '
Horseshoe CHOCTAW Bend NATCHEZ 
 WICHITA

N
A


 LA.

GA. CREEK

Indian Cessions


Natchez


Before 1784
1784–1820


MOBILE TIMUCUA

New Orleans


'


(


Gulf of Mexico
 SEMINOLE

 MEXICO

 land as they had during the entire colonial period. The United States “is a country in flux,” a visiting French aristocrat observed in 1799, and “that which is true today as regards its population, its establishments, its prices, its commerce will not be true six months from now.”

 Assimilation Rejected To dampen further conflicts, the U.S. government encouraged Native Americans to assimilate into white society. The goal, as one Kentucky Protestant minister put it, was to make the Indian “a farmer, a citizen of the United States, and a Christian.” Most Indians rejected wholesale assimilation; even those who joined Christian churches retained many ancestral values and religious beliefs. To think of themselves as individuals or members of a nuclear family, as white Americans were demanding, meant repudiating the clan, the very essence of Indian life. To preserve “the old Indian way,” many native communities expelled white missionaries and forced Christianized Indians to participate in tribal rites. As a Munsee prophet declared, “There are two ways to God, one for the whites and one for the Indians.”





E
W


 VA.

 SH

 QUAPAW

N


N.J.
 MD.

C


O


 OSAGE

N.Y.


 MASS.

 PA.

KY. AWN HI E EE . E
e R Y U OK TENN. R E 
 MO.

Ft. Stanwix


R.I.


MI AM I

St. Louis


 ARAPAHO

 IND. . oR O hi

 ILL.

N.H.


(


 ie Er

Fallen Timbers
1794'
 Harmar's Defeat' OHIO ' 1803 ERIE St. Clair's Tippecanoe ' Defeat ILLINOIS

 IOWA

 PAWNEE

L


 By virtue of the Treaty of Paris (1783) with Britain, the United States claimed sovereignty over the entire trans-Appalachian west. The Western Confederacy contested this claim, but the U.S. government upheld it with military force. By 1840, armed diplomacy had forced most Native American peoples to move west of the Mississippi River. White settlers occupied their lands, formed territorial governments, and eventually entered the Union as members of separate — and equal — states. By 1860, the trans-Appalachian region constituted an important economic and political force in American national life.

 To U.S. from Britain by Treaty of 1818

Mi


Indian Cessions and State Formation,
1776–1840


 500 miles 500 kilometers

After 1820
Battle
Fort
Treaty of Paris,
Greenville Treaty,


 A few Indian leaders sought a middle path in which new beliefs overlapped with old practices. Among the Senecas, the prophet Handsome Lake encouraged traditional animistic rituals that gave thanks to the sun, the earth, water, plants, and animals. But he included Christian elements in his teachings — the concepts of heaven and hell and an emphasis on personal morality — to deter his followers from alcohol, gambling, and witchcraft. Handsome Lake’s teachings divided the Senecas into hostile factions. Led by Chief Red Jacket, traditionalists condemned European culture as evil and demanded a complete return to ancestral ways. Most Indians also rejected the efforts of American missionaries to turn warriors into farmers and women into domestic helpmates. Among eastern woodland peoples, women grew corn, beans, and squash — the mainstays of the Indians’ diet — and land cultivation rights passed through the female line. Consequently, women exercised considerable political influence, which they were eager to retain. Nor were Indian men interested in becoming farmers. When war raiding and hunting were no longer possible, many turned to grazing cattle and sheep.





 PART 3

REVOLUTION AND REPUBLICAN CULTURE, 1763–1820

Treaty Negotiations at Greenville, 1795
 In 1785, Indian tribes in the Northwest Territory formed the Western Confederacy to prevent white settlement north of the Ohio River. After Indian triumphs in battles in the early 1790s, an American victory at the Battle of Fallen Timbers (1794) and the subsequent Treaty of Greenville (1795) opened up the region for white farmers. However, the treaty recognized many Indian rights because it was negotiated between relative equals on the battlefield. The artist suggests this equality: notice the height and stately bearing of the Indian leaders — ninety of whom signed the document — and their placement slightly in front of General Anthony Wayne and his officers. Chicago History Museum.

Migration and the Changing
Farm Economy
 Native American resistance slowed the advance of white settlers but did not stop it. Nothing “short of a Chinese Wall, or a line of Troops,” Washington declared, “will restrain . . . the Incroachment of Settlers, upon the Indian Territory.” During the 1790s, two great streams of migrants moved out of the southern states (Map 7.3).

 Southern Migrants One stream, composed primarily of white tenant farmers and struggling yeomen families, flocked through the Cumberland Gap into

 Kentucky and Tennessee. “Boundless settlements open a door for our citizens to run off and leave us,” a worried Maryland landlord lamented, “depreciating all our landed property and disabling us from paying taxes.” In fact, many migrants were fleeing from this plantercontrolled society. They wanted more freedom and hoped to prosper by growing cotton and hemp, which were in great demand. Many settlers in Kentucky and Tennessee lacked ready cash to buy land. Like the North Carolina Regulators in the 1770s, poorer migrants claimed a customary right to occupy “back waste vacant Lands” sufficient “to provide a subsistence to themselves and their Posterity.” Virginia legislators, who administered

 CHAPTER 7

Hammering Out a Federal Republic, 1787–1820




 MAP 7.3 a

St.
L


 NT

 KENTUCKY

A


R.


Te n
 nessee

 ALABAMA

 LOUISIANA

Po MD.
 t DEL. R.

N
E
W
S


 IA

C


H


N.C.


AT L A N T I C OCEAN

S.C.


 GA.



 200 miles

 200 kilometers

Cultural Core Areas
FLORIDA TERRITORY 1819–1845

Gulf of Mexico


R.I.


N.J.


 VA.

 tahoochee R. Chat

 MISS.

 PA.

MASS. CONN.

 LA

P


ARKANSAS TERRITORY 1819–1824

 PA

 TENNESSEE

R.


N.Y.


U
O


 o

R.


Cumberland
Gap


Arkansas


 NS

 OHIO

 AI

L.
Mic  hig a O hi

 i R.

 ntar i o

 r ie L. E

M


 ou r

 INDIANA

L. O


 ac om

Mi
 ss

 ME.

VT. N.H.

L.


 n

MICHIGAN TERRITORY 1818–1834

 ILLINOIS

 c

N


MISSOURI TERRITORY

 en wr

R.
 dson Hu

 iss iss ip

 ron Hu

M


 eR

 CANADA

L.
Superior 

R.
 pi

 By 1790, four core cultures had developed in the long-settled states along the Atlantic seaboard. Between 1790 and 1820, migrants from these four regions carried their cultures into the trans-Appalachian west. New England customs and institutions were a dominant influence in upstate New York and along the Great Lakes, while the Lower South’s hierarchical system of slavery and heavy concentration of African Americans shaped the character of the new states along the Gulf of Mexico. The pattern of cultural diffusion was more complex in the Ohio and Tennessee river valleys, which were settled by migrants from various core regions.

.


Regional Cultures Move West,
1790–1820


New England
Mid-Atlantic
Chesapeake
Lower South
 Direction of cultural diffusion

 the Kentucky Territory, had a more elitist vision. Although they allowed poor settlers to buy up to 1,400 acres of land at reduced prices, they sold or granted huge tracts of 100,000 acres to twenty-one groups of speculators and leading men. In 1792, this landed elite owned one-fourth of the state, while half the white men owned no land and lived as quasi-legal squatters or tenant farmers. Widespread landlessness — and opposition to slavery — prompted a new migration across the Ohio River into the future states of Ohio, Indiana, and Illinois. In a free community, thought Peter Cartwright, a Methodist lay preacher from southwestern Kentucky who moved to Illinois, “I would be entirely clear of the evil of slavery . . . [and] could raise my children to work where work was not thought a degradation.” Yet land distribution in Ohio was almost exactly as unequal as in Kentucky: in 1810, a quarter of its real estate was owned by 1 percent of the population, while more than half of its white men were landless. Meanwhile, a second stream of southern planters and slaves from the Carolinas moved along the coastal plain toward the Gulf of Mexico. Some set up new

 estates in the interior of Georgia and South Carolina, while others moved into the future states of Alabama, Mississippi, and Louisiana. “The Alabama Feaver rages here with great violence,” a North Carolina planter remarked, “and has carried off vast numbers of our Citizens.” Cotton was the key to this migratory surge. Around 1750, the demand for raw wool and cotton increased dramatically as water-powered spinning jennies, weaving mules, and other technological innovations of the Industrial IDENTIFY CAUSES Revolution boosted textile pro- Why were westward duction in England. South Caro- migration and agricullina and Georgia planters began tural improvement so growing cotton, and American widespread in the late inventors, including Connecticut- eighteenth and early nineborn Eli Whitney, built machines teenth centuries? (called gins) that efficiently extracted seeds from its strands. To grow more cotton, white planters imported about 115,000 Africans between 1776 and 1808, when Congress cut off the Atlantic slave trade. The cotton boom financed the rapid settlement of Mississippi and Alabama — in a



 PART 3

REVOLUTION AND REPUBLICAN CULTURE, 1763–1820

An Indian Log House in Georgia, 1791
 The Indian peoples of the southeastern United States — the Cherokees, Creeks, Choctaws, and Chickasaws — quickly adopted European practices that fit easily into their relatively settled, agricultural-based way of life. This sturdy Creek log cabin was based on a Scots-Irish or German design and sat adjacent to the family’s cornfields, visible in the background. Library of Congress.

 single year, a government land office in Huntsville, Alabama, sold $7 million of uncleared land — and the two states entered the Union in 1817 and 1819, respectively.

 Exodus from New England As southerners moved across the Appalachians and along the Gulf Coast, a third stream of migrants flowed out of the overcrowded communities of New England. Previous generations of Massachusetts and Connecticut farm families had moved north and east, settling New Hampshire, Vermont, and Maine. Now New England farmers moved west. Seeking land for their children, thousands of parents migrated to New York. “The town of Herkimer,” noted one traveler, “is entirely populated by families come from Connecticut.” By 1820, almost 800,000 New Englanders lived in a string of settlements stretching from Albany to Buffalo, and many others had traveled on to Ohio and Indiana. Soon, much of the Northwest Territory consisted of New England communities that had moved inland. In New York, as in Kentucky and Ohio, wellconnected speculators snapped up much of the best land, leasing farms to tenants for a fee. Imbued with the “homestead” ethic, many New England families

 preferred to buy farms. They signed contracts with the Holland Land Company, a Dutch-owned syndicate of speculators, that allowed settlers to pay for their farms as they worked them, or moved west again in an elusive search for land on easy terms.

 Innovation on Eastern Farms The new farm economy in New York, Ohio, and Kentucky forced major changes in eastern agriculture. Unable to compete with lower-priced western grains, farmers in New England switched to potatoes, which were high yielding and nutritious. To make up for the labor of sons and daughters who had moved inland, Middle Atlantic farmers bought more efficient farm equipment. They replaced metal-tipped wooden plows with cast-iron models that dug deeper and required a single yoke of oxen instead of two. Such changes in crop mix and technology kept production high. Easterners also adopted the progressive farming methods touted by British agricultural reformers. “Improvers” in Pennsylvania doubled their average yield per acre by rotating their crops. Yeomen farmers raised sheep and sold the wool to textile manufacturers. Many farmers adopted a year-round planting cycle, sowing corn in the spring for animal fodder and then

 CHAPTER 7

 planting winter wheat in September for market sale. Women and girls milked the family cows and made butter and cheese to sell in the growing towns and cities. Whether hacking fields out of western forests or carting manure to replenish eastern soils, farmers now worked harder and longer, but their increased productivity brought them a better standard of living. European demand for American produce was high in these years, and westward migration — the settlement and exploitation of Indian lands — boosted the farming economy throughout the country.

The Jefferson Presidency
 From 1801 to 1825, three Republicans from Virginia — Thomas Jefferson, James Madison, and James Monroe — each served two terms as president. Supported by farmers in the South and West and strong Republican majorities in Congress, this “Virginia Dynasty” completed what Jefferson had called the Revolution of 1800. It reversed many Federalist policies and actively supported westward expansion. When Jefferson took office in 1801, he inherited an old international conflict. Beginning in the 1780s, the Barbary States of North Africa had raided merchant ships in the Mediterranean, and like many European nations, the United States had paid an annual bribe — massive in relation to the size of the federal budget — to protect its vessels. Initially Jefferson refused to pay this “tribute” and ordered the U.S. Navy to attack the pirates’ home ports. After four years of intermittent fighting, in which the United States bombarded Tripoli and captured the city of Derna, the Jefferson administration cut its costs. It signed a peace treaty that included a ransom for returned prisoners, and Algerian ships were soon taking American sailors hostage again. At home, Jefferson inherited a national judiciary filled with Federalist appointees, including the formidable John Marshall of Virginia, the new chief justice of the Supreme Court. To add more Federalist judges, the outgoing Federalist Congress had passed the Judiciary Act of 1801. The act created sixteen new judgeships and various other positions, which President Adams filled at the last moment with “midnight appointees.” The Federalists “have retired into the judiciary as a stronghold,” Jefferson complained, “and from that battery all the works of Republicanism are to be beaten down and destroyed.” Jefferson’s fears were soon realized. When Republican legislatures in Kentucky and Virginia repudiated the Alien and Sedition Acts as unconstitutional,

Hammering Out a Federal Republic, 1787–1820


 Marshall declared that only the Supreme Court held the power of constitutional review. The Court claimed this authority for itself when James Madison, the new secretary of state, refused to deliver the commission of William Marbury, one of Adams’s midnight appointees. In Marbury v. Madison (1803), Marshall asserted that Marbury had the right to the appointment but that the Court did not have the constitutional power to enforce it. In defining the Court’s powers, Marshall voided a section of the Judiciary Act of 1789, in effect asserting the Court’s authority to review congressional legislation and interpret the Constitution. “It is emphatically the province and duty of the judicial department to say what the law is,” the chief justice declared, directly challenging the Republican view that the state legislatures had that power. Ignoring this setback, Jefferson and the Republicans reversed other Federalist policies. When the Alien and Sedition Acts expired in 1801, Congress branded them unconstitutional and refused to extend them. It also amended the Naturalization Act, restoring the original waiting period of five years for resident aliens to become citizens. Charging the Federalists with grossly expanding the national government’s size and power, Jefferson had the Republican Congress shrink it. He abolished all internal taxes, including the excise tax that had sparked the Whiskey Rebellion of 1794. To quiet Republican fears of a military coup, Jefferson reduced the size of the permanent army. He also secured repeal of the Judiciary Act of 1801, ousting forty of Adams’s midnight appointees. Still, Jefferson retained competent Federalist officeholders, removing only 69 of 433 properly appointed Federalists during his eight years as president. Jefferson likewise governed tactfully in fiscal affairs. He tolerated the economically important Bank of the United States, which he had once condemned as unconstitutional. But he chose as his secretary of the treasury Albert Gallatin, a fiscal conservative who believed that the national debt was “an evil of the first magnitude.” By limiting expenditures and using customs revenue to redeem government bonds, Gallatin reduced the debt from $83 million in 1801 to $45 million in 1812. With Jefferson and Gallatin at the helm, the nation’s fiscal affairs were no longer run in the interests of northeastern creditors and merchants.

Jefferson and the West
 Jefferson had long championed settlement of the West. He celebrated the yeoman farmer in Notes on the State of Virginia (1785); wrote one of the Confederation’s





 PART 3

REVOLUTION AND REPUBLICAN CULTURE, 1763–1820

America in the Middle East, 1804
 To protect American merchants from capture and captivity in the Barbary States, President Thomas Jefferson sent in the U.S. Navy. This 1846 lithograph, created by the famous firm of Currier & Ives, depicts one of the three attacks on the North African port of Tripoli by Commodore Edward Preble in August 1804. As the USS Constitution and other large warships lob shells into the city, small American gunboats defend the fleet from Tripolitan gunboats. “Our loss in Killed & Wounded has been considerable,” Preble reported, and “the Enemy must have suffered very much . . . among their Shipping and on shore.” The Granger Collection, New York.

 western land ordinances; and supported Pinckney’s Treaty (1795), the agreement between the United States and Spain that reopened the Mississippi River to American trade and allowed settlers to export crops via the Spanish-held port of New Orleans. As president, Jefferson pursued policies that made it easier for farm families to acquire land. In 1796, a Federalist-dominated Congress had set the price of land in the national domain at $2 per acre; by the 1830s, Jefferson-inspired Republican Congresses had enacted more than three hundred laws that cut the cost to $1.25, eased credit terms, and allowed illegal squatters to buy their farms. Eventually, in the Homestead Act of 1862, Congress gave farmsteads to settlers for free.

 The Louisiana Purchase International events challenged Jefferson’s vision of westward expansion. In

 1799, Napoleon Bonaparte seized power in France and sought to reestablish France’s American empire. In 1801, he coerced Spain into signing a secret treaty that returned Louisiana to France and restricted American access to New Orleans, violating Pinckney’s Treaty. Napoleon also launched an invasion to restore French rule in Saint-Domingue. It was once the richest sugar colony in the Americas, but its civil war had ruined the economy and cost France a fortune. Napoleon wanted to crush the rebellion, restore its planter class, and “destroy the new Algiers that has been growing up in the middle of America.” Napoleon’s actions in Haiti and Louisiana prompted Jefferson to question his pro-French foreign policy. “The day that France takes possession of New Orleans, we must marry ourselves to the British fleet and nation,” the president warned, dispatching James Monroe to

 CHAPTER 7

 Britain to negotiate an alliance. To keep the Mississippi River open to western farmers, Jefferson told Robert Livingston, the American minister in Paris, to negotiate the purchase of New Orleans. Jefferson’s diplomacy yielded a magnificent prize: the entire territory of Louisiana. By 1802, the French invasion of Saint-Domingue was faltering in the face of disease and determined black resistance, a new war threatened in Europe, and Napoleon feared an American invasion of Louisiana. Acting with characteristic decisiveness, the French ruler offered to sell the entire territory of Louisiana for $15 million (about $500 million today). “We have lived long,” Livingston remarked to Monroe as they concluded the Louisiana Purchase in 1803, “but this is the noblest work of our lives.” The Louisiana Purchase forced Jefferson to reconsider his strict interpretation of the Constitution. He had long believed that the national government possessed only the powers expressly delegated to it in the Constitution, but there was no provision for adding new territory. So Jefferson pragmatically accepted a loose interpretation of the Constitution and used its treaty-making powers to complete the deal with France. The new western lands, Jefferson wrote, would be “a means of tempting all our Indians on the East side of the Mississippi to remove to the West.”

 Secessionist Schemes The acquisition of Louisiana brought new political problems. Some New England Federalists, fearing that western expansion would hurt their region and party, talked openly of leaving the Union and forming a confederacy of northeastern states. The secessionists won the support of Aaron Burr, the ambitious vice president. After Alexander Hamilton accused Burr of planning to destroy the Union, the two fought an illegal pistol duel that led to Hamilton’s death. This tragedy propelled Burr into another secessionist scheme, this time in the Southwest. When his term as vice president ended in 1805, Burr moved west to avoid prosecution. There, he conspired with General James Wilkinson, the military governor of the Louisiana Territory, either to seize territory in New Spain or to establish Louisiana as a separate nation. But Wilkinson, himself a Spanish spy and incipient traitor, betrayed Burr and arrested him. In a highly politicized trial presided over by Chief Justice John Marshall, the jury acquitted Burr of treason. The Louisiana Purchase had increased party conflict and generated secessionist schemes in both New England and the Southwest. Such sectional differences

Hammering Out a Federal Republic, 1787–1820


 would continue, challenging Madison’s argument in “Federalist No. 10” that a large and diverse republic was more stable than a small one.



EXPLAIN CONSEQUENCES
How was Jefferson’s agrarian vision reflected in his policies affecting western lands? 
Lewis and Clark Meet the
 Mandans and Sioux A scientist as well as a statesman, Jefferson wanted information about Louisiana: its physical features, plant and animal life, and native peoples. He was also worried about intruders: the British-run Hudson’s Bay Company and Northwest Company were actively trading for furs on the upper Missouri River. So in 1804, Jefferson sent his personal secretary, Meriwether Lewis, to explore the region with William Clark, an army officer. From St. Louis, Lewis, Clark, and their party of American soldiers and frontiersmen traveled up the Missouri for 1,000 miles to the fortified, earth-lodge towns of the Mandan and Hidatsa peoples (near present-day Bismarck, North Dakota), where they spent the winter. The Mandans lived primarily by horticulture, growing corn, beans, and squash. They had acquired horses by supplying food to nomadic Plains Indians and secured guns, iron goods, and textiles by selling buffalo hides and dried meat to European traders. However, the Mandans (and neighboring Arikaras) had been hit hard by the smallpox epidemics that swept across the Great Plains in 1779–1781 and 1801–1802. Now they were threatened by Sioux peoples: Tetons, Yanktonais, and Oglalas. Originally, the Sioux had lived in the prairie and lake region of northern Minnesota. As their numbers rose and fish and game grew scarce, the Sioux moved westward, acquired horses, and hunted buffalo, living as nomads in portable skin tepees. The Sioux became ferocious fighters who tried to reduce the Mandans and other farming tribes to subject peoples. According to Lewis and Clark, they were the “pirates of the Missouri.” Soon the Sioux would dominate the buffalo trade throughout the upper Missouri region. In the spring of 1805, Lewis and Clark began an epic 1,300-mile trek into unknown country. Their party now included Toussaint Charbonneau, a French Canadian fur trader, and his Shoshone wife, Sacagawea, who served as a guide and translator. After following the Missouri River to its source on the Idaho-Montana border, they crossed the Rocky Mountains, and — venturing far beyond the Louisiana Purchase — traveled down the Columbia River to the Pacific Ocean. Nearly everywhere, Indian peoples asked for guns so they could defend themselves from other armed tribes.



 PART 3

REVOLUTION AND REPUBLICAN CULTURE, 1763–1820

A
Mandan Village  This Mandan settlement in North Dakota, painted by George Catlin around 1837, resembled those in which the Lewis and Clark expedition spent the winter of 1804– 1805. Note the palisade of logs that surrounds the village, as protection from the Sioux and other marauding Plains peoples, and the solidly built mud lodges that provided warm shelter from the bitter cold of winter. Smithsonian American Art Museum, Washington, D.C./Art Resource, NY.

 In 1806, Lewis and Clark capped off their pathbreaking expedition by providing Jefferson with the first maps of the immense wilderness and a detailed account of its natural resources and inhabitants (Map 7.4). Their report prompted some Americans to envision a nation that would span the continent.

The War of 1812 and the
Transformation of Politics
 The Napoleonic Wars that ravaged Europe after 1802 brought new attacks on American merchant ships. American leaders struggled desperately to protect the nation’s commerce while avoiding war. When this effort finally failed, it sparked dramatic political changes that destroyed the Federalist Party and split the Republicans into National and Jeffersonian factions.

Conflict in the Atlantic and the West
 As Napoleon conquered European countries, he cut off their commerce with Britain and seized American merchant ships that stopped in British ports. The British ministry responded with a naval blockade and seized American vessels carrying sugar and molasses from the French West Indies. The British navy also searched American merchant ships for British deserters and used these raids to replenish its crews, a practice

 known as impressment. Between 1802 and 1811, British naval officers impressed nearly 8,000 sailors, including many U.S. citizens. In 1807, American anger boiled over when a British warship attacked the U.S. Navy vessel Chesapeake, killing three, wounding eighteen, and seizing four alleged deserters. “Never since the battle of Lexington have I seen this country in such a state of exasperation as at present,” Jefferson declared.

 The Embargo of 1807 To protect American interests, Jefferson pursued a policy of peaceful coercion. The Embargo Act of 1807 prohibited American ships from leaving their home ports until Britain and France stopped restricting U.S. trade. A drastic maneuver, the embargo overestimated the reliance of Britain and France on American shipping and underestimated the resistance of merchants, who feared the embargo would ruin them. In fact, the embargo cut the American gross national product by 5 percent and weakened the entire economy. Exports plunged from $108 million in 1806 to $22 million in 1808, hurting farmers as well as merchants. “All was noise and bustle” in New York City before the embargo, one visitor remarked; afterward, everything was closed up as if “a malignant fever was raging in the place.” Despite popular discontent over the embargo, voters elected Republican James Madison to the presidency in 1808. A powerful advocate for the Constitution, the architect of the Bill of Rights, and a prominent congressman and party leader, Madison

 CHAPTER 7

 BRITISH

 CANADA

GROS VENTRE

ME. (MASS.)

 pe L. Su rior Colum bia R.

 CROW

 FOX

M
 is SANTEE SIOUX

R.


 KICKAPOO

 IOWA

LOUISIANA PURCHASE

Taos
Santa Fe


(


A


I


 U.S. nationals per sq. mile 18 to 45 Over 45

Explorers’ Routes


Ar
 kan s as

( El Paso


R.


N.J.
 MD.

N
W


N.C.


S


S.C.


 GA.

A TLANTI C OCEAN

 CREEK

Gulf of Mexico






 DEL.

E


S PA N I S H


 COAHUILA

Lewis and Clark, 1804–1806
Pike, 1805–1806
Pike, 1806–1807
Missions
( Forts


 PA.

I EE
CH OK YU ER CH

New Orleans


San Antonio


TIMUCUA FL O R ID

A


 SEMINOLE

 500 miles 500 kilometers

 CUBA

 MAP 7.4 U.S. Population Density in 1803 and the Louisiana Purchase When the United States purchased Louisiana from France in 1803, much of the land to its east — the vast territory between the Appalachian Mountains and the Mississippi River — remained in Indian hands. The equally vast lands beyond the Mississippi were virtually unknown to Anglo-Americans, even after the epic explorations of Meriwether Lewis and William Clark. Still, President Jefferson predicted quite accurately that the huge Mississippi River Valley “from its fertility . . . will ere long yield half of our whole produce, and contain half of our whole population.”

 had served the nation well. But John Beckley, a loyal Republican, worried that Madison would be “too timid and indecisive as a statesman,” and events proved him right. Acknowledging the embargo’s failure, Madison replaced it with new economic restrictions, which also failed to protect American commerce.

 Western War Hawks Republican congressmen from the West were certain that Britain was the primary offender. They pointed to its trade with Indians in the Ohio River Valley in violation of the Treaty of Paris and Jay’s Treaty. Bolstered by British guns and supplies, the Shawnee war chief Tecumseh revived the Western Confederacy in 1809. His brother, the prophet Tenskwatawa, provided the confederacy with a powerful nativist ideology. He urged Indian peoples to shun

 MASS.

R.I.
 CONN.

CHOCTAW NATCHEZ

Nacogdoches


Chihuahua


 TENN.

MISSISSIPPI TERRITORY

TEXAS
Rio G ra 
N.H.
N.Y.


 VA.

 CHICKASAW

 WICHITA

 e nd

Under 2
2 to 18


 KIOWA

N


Population Density, 1800


 OSAGE

Red R.


P


( San Diego


 lo Co

 io

 OHIO

St. Louis
.
 oR Ohi SH KY. AW NE E

R.


S


(Santa Barbara
( Los Angeles


W


San Luis Obispo


 do ra

 ILLINOIS

 KANSA

 ie Er L.

 ntar

 ERIE

.


E


ALTA CALIFORNIA

INDIANA TERRITORY

Mis
 sissi ppi R

N


( San Francisco


PACIFIC O CE A N

 MISSOURI

 ARAPAHO

L. O


 POTAWATOMI

MI AM I

 CHEYENNE

R.


WINNEBAGO L.
Michigan 
 SAUK

 uri so

Snake


 VT.

L.
 ron Hu

 OREGON (Claimed by Britain, Spain, and the United States)



Hammering Out a Federal Republic, 1787–1820


 Americans, “the children of the Evil Spirit . . . who have taken away your lands”; renounce alcohol; and return to traditional ways. The Shawnee leaders found their greatest support among Kickapoo, Potawatomi, Winnebago, Ottawa, and Chippewa warriors: Indians of the western Great Lakes who had so far been largely shielded from the direct effects of U.S. westward expansion. They flocked to Tenskwatawa’s holy village, Prophetstown, in the Indiana Territory. As Tecumseh mobilized the western Indian peoples for war, William Henry Harrison, the governor of the Indiana Territory, decided on a preemptive strike. In November 1811, when Tecumseh went south to seek support from the Chickasaws, Choctaws, and Creeks, Harrison took advantage of his absence and attacked Prophetstown. The governor’s 1,000 troops



 PART 3

REVOLUTION AND REPUBLICAN CULTURE, 1763–1820

Tenskwatawa, “The Prophet,” 1830
 Tenskwatawa added a spiritual dimension to Native American resistance by urging a holy war against the invading whites and calling for a return to sacred ancestral ways. His dress reflects his teachings: note the animal-skin shirt and the heavily ornamented ears. However, some of Tenskwatawa’s religious rituals reflected the influence of French Jesuits; he urged his followers to finger a sacred string of beads (such as those in his left hand) that were similar to the Catholic rosary, thereby “shaking hands with the Prophet.” Whatever its origins, Tenskwatawa’s message transcended the cultural differences among Indian peoples and helped his brother Tecumseh create a formidable political and military alliance. Smithsonian American Art Museum, Washington, D.C./Art Resource.

 and militiamen traded heavy casualties with the confederacy’s warriors at the Battle of Tippecanoe and then destroyed the holy village. With Britain assisting Indians in the western territories and seizing American ships in the Atlantic, Henry Clay of Kentucky, the new Speaker of the House of Representatives, and John C. Calhoun, a rising young congressman from South Carolina, pushed Madison toward war. Like other Republican “war hawks” from the West and South, they wanted to seize territory in British Canada and Spanish Florida. With national elections approaching, Madison issued an ultimatum to Britain. When Britain failed to respond quickly, the president asked Congress for a declaration of war. In June 1812, a sharply divided Senate voted 19 to 13 for war, and the House of Representatives concurred, 79 to 49. The causes of the War of 1812 have been much debated. Officially, the United States went to war because Britain had violated its commercial rights as a

 neutral nation. But the Federalists in Congress who represented the New England and Middle Atlantic merchants voted against the war; and in the election of 1812, those regions cast their 89 electoral votes for the Federalist presidential candidate, De Witt Clinton of New York. Madison amassed most of his 128 electoral votes in the South and West, where voters and congressmen strongly supported the war. Many historians therefore argue that the conflict was actually “a western war with eastern labels” (American Voices, p. 238).

The War of 1812
 The War of 1812 was a near disaster for the United States. An invasion of British Canada in 1812 quickly ended in a retreat to Detroit. Nonetheless, the United States stayed on the offensive in the West. In 1813, American raiders burned the Canadian capital of York (present-day Toronto), Commodore Oliver Hazard Perry defeated a small British flotilla on Lake Erie, and

 CHAPTER 7

Hammering Out a Federal Republic, 1787–1820




Counting Scalps
 Effective propaganda usually contains a grain of truth, in this case the Indian warriors’ practice of scalping their wartime victims. Entitled “A scene on the frontiers as practiced by the humane British and their worthy allies!”, this cartoon by Philadelphia artist William Charles accuses the British of paying Indians to kill — and then mutilate — American soldiers. “Bring me the scalps, and the King our master will reward you,” says the British officer in the cartoon. The verse at the bottom urges “Columbia’s Sons” to press forward their attacks; otherwise, “The Savage Indian with his Scalping knife, / Or Tomahawk may seek to take your life.” Library of Congress.

 General William Henry Harrison overcame a British and Indian force at the Battle of the Thames, taking the life of Tecumseh, now a British general. In the East, political divisions prevented a wider war. New England Federalists opposed the war and prohibited their states’ militias from attacking Canada. Boston merchants and banks refused to lend money to the federal government, making the war difficult to finance. In Congress, Daniel Webster, a dynamic young politician from New Hampshire, led Federalists opposed to higher tariffs and national conscription of state militiamen. Gradually, the tide of battle turned in Britain’s favor. When the war began, American privateers had captured scores of British merchant vessels, but by 1813 British warships were disrupting American commerce and threatening seaports along the Atlantic coast. In 1814, a British fleet sailed up the Chesapeake Bay, and troops stormed ashore to attack Washington City. Retaliating for the destruction of York, the invaders burned the U.S. Capitol and government buildings. After two years of fighting, the United States was

 stalemated along the Canadian IDENTIFY CAUSES frontier and on the defensive in What do you think is the the Atlantic, and its new capital most persuasive explanacity lay in ruins. The only U.S. tion for the United States’s victories came in the Southwest. decision to declare war on There, a rugged slave-owning Great Britain in 1812? planter named Andrew Jackson and a force of Tennessee militiamen defeated Britishand Spanish-supported Creek Indians in the Battle of Horseshoe Bend (1814) and forced the Indians to cede 23 million acres of land (Map 7.5).

 Federalists Oppose the War American military setbacks increased opposition to the war in New England. In 1814, Massachusetts Federalists called for a convention “to lay the foundation for a radical reform in the National Compact.” When New England Federalists met in Hartford, Connecticut, some delegates proposed secession, but most wanted to revise the Constitution. To end Virginia’s domination of the presidency, the Hartford Convention proposed a constitutional amendment limiting the office to a single

AMERICAN VOICES

Factional Politics and
 the War of 1812

 In the quarter-century following the ratification of the U.S. Constitution, American leaders had to deal with the wars of the French Revolution and Napoleon. These European conflicts posed two dangers to the United States. First, the naval blockades imposed by the British and the French hurt American commerce and prompted calls for a military response. Second, European ideological and political struggles intensified party conflicts in the United States. On three occasions, the American republic faced danger from the combination of an external military threat and internal political turmoil. In 1798, the Federalist administration of John Adams almost went to war with France to help American merchants and to undermine the Republican Party. In 1807, Thomas Jefferson’s embargo on American commerce shocked Federalists and sharply increased political tensions. And, as the following selections show, the political divisions during the War of 1812 threatened the very existence of the American republic.

George Washington


Farewell Address, 1796
 Washington’s support for Alexander Hamilton’s economic policies promoted political factionalism. Ignoring his own role in creating that political divide, Washington condemned factionalism and, as his presidency proceeded, tried to stand above party conflicts. In his farewell address, Washington warned Americans to stand united and avoid the “Spirit of Party.”

 A solicitude for your welfare [prompts me] . . . to offer . . . the disinterested warnings of a parting friend, who can possibly have no personal motive to bias his counsels. . . . The Unity of Government which constitutes you one people . . . is a main Pillar in the Edifice of your real independence . . . your tranquility at home; your peace abroad. . . . But it is easy to foresee, that, from different causes, and from different quarters, much pains will be taken, many artifices employed, to weaken in your minds the conviction of this truth. . . . I have already intimated to you the danger of parties in the State, with particular reference to founding them on geographical discriminations. Let me now take a more comprehensive view, and warn you, in the most solemn manner, against the baneful effects of the Spirit of Party, generally. This spirit, unfortunately, is inseparable from our nature, having its root in the strongest passions of the human mind. It exists under different shapes, in all governments, more or less stifled, controlled or repressed; but in those of the popular form, it is seen in its greatest rankness, and is truly their worst enemy.

 The alternate dominion of one faction over another, sharpened by the spirit of revenge . . . , is itself a frightful despotism; but this leads at length to a more formal and permanent despotism. Source: James D. Richardson, ed., A Compilation of the Messages and Papers of the Presidents, 1789–1896 (Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1896), 1: 213–215.

Josiah Quincy et al.


 Federalists Protest “Mr. Madison’s War” The United States — and its two political parties — divided sharply over the War of 1812. As Congress debated the issue of going to war against Great Britain, Josiah Quincy and other antiwar Federalist congressmen published a manifesto that questioned the justifications for the war offered by President Madison and the military strategy proposed by Republican war hawks.

 How will war upon the land [an invasion of British Canada] protect commerce upon the ocean? What balm has Canada for wounded honor? How are our mariners benefited by a war which exposes those who are free, without promising release to those who are impressed? But it is said that war is demanded by honor. Is national honor a principle which thirsts after vengeance, and is appeased only by blood? . . . If honor demands a war with England, what opiate lulls that honor to sleep over the wrongs done us by France? On land, robberies, seizures, imprisonments, by French authority; at sea, pillage, sinkings, burnings, under French orders. These are notorious. Are they unfelt because they are French? . . .

 There is . . . a headlong rushing into difficulties, with little calculation about the means, and little concern about the consequences. With a navy comparatively [small], we are about to enter into the lists against the greatest marine [power] on the globe. With a commerce unprotected and spread over every ocean, we propose to make a profit by privateering, and for this endanger the wealth of which we are honest proprietors. An invasion is threatened of the [British colonies in Canada, but Britain] . . . without putting a new ship into commission, or taking another soldier into pay, can spread alarm or desolation along the extensive range of our seaboard. . . . What are the United States to gain by this war? Will the gratification of some privateersmen compensate the nation for that sweep of our legitimate commerce by the extended marine of our enemy which this desperate act invites? Will Canada compensate the Middle states for [the loss of] New York; or the Western states for [the loss of] New Orleans? Let us not be deceived. A war of invasion may invite a retort of invasion. When we visit the peaceable, and as to us innocent, colonies of Great Britain with the horrors of war, can we be assured that our own coast will not be visited with like horrors? Source: Annals of Congress, 12th Cong., 1st sess., vol. 2, cols. 2219–2221.

Hezekiah Niles


A
Republican Defends the War  In 1814, what the Federalists feared had come to pass: British ships blockaded American ports, and British troops invaded American territory. In January 1815, Republican editor Hezekiah Niles used the pages of his influential Baltimore newspaper, Niles’ Weekly Register, to explain current Republican policies and blame the Federalists for American reverses.

 It is universally known that the causes for which we declared war are no obstruction to peace. The practice of blockade and impressment having ceased by the general pacification of Europe, our government is content to leave the principle as it was. . . . We have no further business in hostility, than such as is purely defensive; while that of Great Britain is to humble or subdue us. The war, on our part, has become a contest for life, liberty and property — on the part of our enemy, of revenge or ambition. . . . What then are we to do? Are we to encourage him by divisions among ourselves — to hold out the hope of a

 separation of the states and a civil war — to refuse to bring forth the resources of the country against him? . . . I did think that in a defensive war — a struggle for all that is valuable — that all parties would have united. But it is not so — every measure calculated to replenish the treasury or raise men is opposed [by Federalists] as though it were determined to strike the “star spangled banner” and exalt the bloody cross. Look at the votes and proceedings of congress — and mark the late spirit [to secede from the Union] . . . that existed in Massachusetts, and see with what unity of action every thing has been done [by New England Federalists] to harass and embarrass the government. Our loans have failed; and our soldiers have wanted their pay, because those [New England merchants] who had the greater part of the monied capital covenanted with each other to refuse its aid to the country. They had a right, legally, to do this; and perhaps, also, by all the artifices of trade or power that money gave them, to oppress others not of their “stamp” and depress the national credit — but history will shock posterity by detailing the length to which they went to bankrupt the republic. . . . To conclude — why does the war continue? It is not the fault of the government — we demand no extravagant thing. I answer the question, and say — it lasts because Great Britain depends on the exertions of her “party” in this country to destroy our resources, and compel “unconditional submission.” Thus the war began, and is continued, by our divisions. Source: Niles’ Weekly Register, January 28, 1815.

QUESTIONS FOR ANALYSIS 1.
According to Washington, what is the ultimate cause of political factionalism? Why does Washington believe that factionalism is most dangerous in “popular” — that is, republican — governments? 2. Compare and contrast the Quincy and Niles documents. What specific dangers did Josiah Quincy and the Federalists foresee with regard to Republican war policies? According to Hezekiah Niles, what were the war goals of the Republican administration? 3. Read the section on the War of 1812 on pages 236– 241, and then discuss the accuracy of the Federalists’ predictions. 4. How had Republican war goals changed since the start of the war? Niles charged the Federalists and their supporters with impeding the American war effort. What were his specific charges? Did they have any merit? How might the Federalists have defended their stance with respect to the war? 


 PART 3

REVOLUTION AND REPUBLICAN CULTURE, 1763–1820

Quebec
R.


L ak


 nc

 e

CANADA
Montreal 
(


 n ro

Lake Michig
 an

York (Toronto),
April 27, 1813


MICHIGAN TERRITORY

'


'
Ft. Detroit


Harriso
 n

Hull


(


Tippecanoe
Nov. 7, 1811 '


 ke

'


La


Pe


De a


Oh


 io

 6. British invasion stopped at Plattsburgh on Lake Champlain, Sept. 11, 1814 Boston

 rn

 MASS.

NEW YORK

CONN. N.J.

Erie


 r ry

New York


Philadelphia
Godly Wood
Sept. 12, 1814 Baltimore
'
 DEL. ' Ft. McHenry Washington, D.C.

 3. Perry defeats British, Put-In-Bay, Sept. 10, 1813

(


 OHIO

 5. British burn Washington, D.C., Aug. 24–28, 1814

R.


R.I.


 7. British siege of Baltimore, Sept. 13–14, 1814

 PENNSYLVANIA

INDIANA TERRITORY

St. Louis


 rb o

 Lundy’s Lane 'July 25, 1814

 ie Er

VT. N.H. '

Lake
Ontario


'


 4. Harrison defeats British, Battle of the Thames, Oct. 5, 1813

(


ILLINOIS TERRITORY

 Chrysler’s Farm 2. Americans burn Nov. 11, 1813'

La
 ke Hu

 1. Hull’s invasion of Canada fails, then he loses Detroit, Aug. 16, 1812

Fort
Dearborn


 MAINE (part of Mass.)

St. L
 aw re

 perior e Su

Ft. Mackinac




 MD.

ATLANTIC OCEAN

KENTUCKY NORTH CAROLINA

N


 TENNESSEE

E


 siss ipp i R.

W
S


SOUTH CAROLINA
Ja 
 8. Jackson defeats Creek Indians, Horseshoe Bend, March 27, 1814 cks

Charleston


 on

MISSISSIPPI TERRITORY
Jac ks on 
'


 GEORGIA

 300 miles 300 kilometers

 U.S. territories in 1812 British movements ' '

 FL





 American movements

H




(


 British blockade American victories British victories Forts

A
 ID

Gulf of Mexico


 OR

 10. Jackson defeats British at New Orleans, Jan. 8, 1815



 U.S. states in 1812

 IS

'




 9. Jackson invades Spanish Florida to attack the British at Pensacola, Nov. 7, 1814

Pensacola


 LOUISIANA

Savannah


AN SP

'


 kson Jac

New Orleans




Chesapeake
Bay


 VIRGINIA

M is


UNORGANIZED TERRITORY



 MAP 7.5 The War of 1812 Unlike the War of Independence, the War of 1812 had few large-scale military campaigns. In 1812 and 1813, most of the fighting took place along the Canadian border, as small American military forces attacked British targets with mixed success (nos. 1–4). The British took the offensive in 1814, launching a successful raid on Washington, but their attack on Baltimore failed, and they suffered heavy losses when they invaded the United States along Lake Champlain (nos. 5–7). Near the Gulf of Mexico, American forces moved from one success to another: General Andrew Jackson defeated the pro-British Creek Indians at the Battle of Horseshoe Bend, won a victory in Pensacola, and, in the single major battle of the war, routed an invading British army at New Orleans (nos. 8–10).

 CHAPTER 7

 four-year term and rotating it among citizens from different states. The convention also suggested amendments restricting commercial embargoes to sixty days and requiring a two-thirds majority in Congress to declare war, prohibit trade, or admit a new state to the Union. As a minority party, the Federalists could prevail only if the war continued to go badly — a very real prospect. The war had cost $88 million, raising the national debt to $127 million. And now, as Albert Gallatin warned Henry Clay in May 1814, Britain’s triumph over Napoleon in Europe meant that a “well organized and large army is [now ready] . . . to act immediately against us.” When an attack from Canada came in the late summer of 1814, only an American naval victory on Lake Champlain stopped the British from marching down the Hudson River Valley. A few months later, thousands of seasoned British troops landed outside New Orleans, threatening American control of the Mississippi River. With the nation politically divided and under attack from north and south, Gallatin feared that “the war might prove vitally fatal to the United States.”

Peace Overtures and a Final Victory Fortunately
 for the young American republic, by 1815 Britain wanted peace. The twenty-year war with France had sapped its wealth and energy, so it began negotiations with the United States in Ghent, Belgium. At first, the American commissioners — John Quincy Adams, Gallatin, and Clay — demanded territory in Canada and Florida, while British diplomats sought an Indian buffer state between the United States and Canada. Both sides quickly realized that these objectives were not worth the cost of prolonged warfare. The Treaty of Ghent, signed on Christmas Eve 1814, retained the prewar borders of the United States. That result hardly justified three years of war, but before news of the treaty reached the United States, a final military victory lifted Americans’ morale. On January 8, 1815, General Jackson’s troops crushed the British forces attacking New Orleans. Fighting from carefully constructed breastworks, the Americans rained “grapeshot and cannister bombs” on the massed British formations. The British lost 700 men, and 2,000 more were wounded or taken prisoner; just 13 Americans died, and only 58 suffered wounds. A newspaper headline proclaimed: “Almost Incredible Victory!! Glorious News.” The victory made Jackson a national hero, redeemed the nation’s battered pride, and undercut the Hartford Convention’s demands for constitutional revision.

Hammering Out a Federal Republic, 1787–1820


The Federalist Legacy
 The War of 1812 ushered in a new phase of the Republican political revolution. Before the conflict, Federalists had strongly supported Alexander Hamilton’s program of national mercantilism — a funded debt, a central bank, and tariffs — while Jeffersonian Republicans had opposed it. After the war, the Republicans split into two camps. Led by Henry Clay, National Republicans pursued Federalist-like policies. In 1816, Clay pushed legislation through Congress creating the Second Bank of the United States and persuaded President Madison to sign it. In 1817, Clay won passage of the Bonus Bill, which created a national fund for roads and other internal improvements. Madison vetoed it. Reaffirming traditional Jeffersonian Republican principles, he argued that the national government lacked the constitutional authority to fund internal improvements. Meanwhile, the Federalist Party crumbled. As one supporter explained, the National Republicans in the eastern states had “destroyed the Federalist party by the adoption of its principles” while the favorable farm policies of Jeffersonians maintained the Republican Party’s dominance in the South and West. “No Federal character can run with success,” Gouverneur Morris of New York lamented, and the election of 1818 proved him right: Republicans outnumbered Federalists 37 to 7 in the Senate and 156 to 27 in the House. Westward expansion and the success of Jefferson’s Revolution of 1800 had shattered the First Party System.

 Marshall’s Federalist Law However, Federalist policies lived on thanks to John Marshall’s long tenure on the Supreme Court. Appointed chief justice by President John Adams in January 1801, Marshall had a personality and intellect that allowed him to dominate the Court until 1822 and strongly influence its decisions until his death in 1835. Three principles informed Marshall’s jurisprudence: judicial authority, the supremacy of national laws, and traditional property rights (Table 7.1). Marshall claimed the right of judicial review for the Supreme Court in Marbury v. Madison (1803), and the Court frequently used that power to overturn state laws that, in its judgment, violated the Constitution. Asserting National Supremacy The important case of McCulloch v. Maryland (1819) involved one such law. When Congress created the Second Bank of the United States in 1816, it allowed the bank to set up state branches that competed with state-chartered banks. In response, the Maryland legislature imposed a





 PART 3

REVOLUTION AND REPUBLICAN CULTURE, 1763–1820

 TABLE 7.1 Major Decisions of the Marshall Court Date

Case


Significance of Decision


Judicial Authority




Marbury v. Madison


 Asserts principle of judicial review

Property Rights




Fletcher v. Peck


 Protects property rights through broad reading of Constitution’s contract clause



Dartmouth College v.
Woodward


 Safeguards property rights, especially of chartered corporations



 McCulloch v. Maryland

 Interprets Constitution to give broad powers to national government



Gibbons v. Ogden


 Gives national government jurisdiction over interstate commerce

Supremacy of National Law


 tax on notes issued by the Baltimore branch of the Second Bank. The Second Bank refused to pay, claiming that the tax infringed on national powers and was therefore unconstitutional. The state’s lawyers then invoked Jefferson’s argument: that Congress lacked the constitutional authority to charter a national bank. Even if a national bank was legitimate, the lawyers argued, Maryland could tax its activities within the state. Marshall and the nationalist-minded Republicans on the Court firmly rejected both arguments. The Second Bank was constitutional, said the chief justice, because it was “necessary and proper,” given the national govUNDERSTAND ernment’s control over currency POINTS OF VIEW and credit, and Maryland did not Why do historians think have the power to tax it. the decisions of the MarThe Marshall Court again shall Court constitute a Federalist legacy? asserted the dominance of national over state statutes in Gibbons v. Ogden (1824). The decision struck down a New York law granting a monopoly to Aaron Ogden for steamboat passenger service across the Hudson River to New Jersey. Asserting that the Constitution gave the federal government authority over interstate commerce, the chief justice sided with Thomas Gibbons, who held a federal license to run steamboats between the two states.

Upholding Vested Property Rights Finally,
 Marshall used the Constitution to uphold Federalist notions of property rights. During the 1790s, Jefferson Republicans had celebrated “the will of the people,” prompting Federalists to worry that popular sovereignty would result in a “tyranny of the majority.” If

 state legislatures enacted statutes infringing on the property rights of wealthy citizens, Federalist judges vowed to void them. Marshall was no exception. Determined to protect individual property rights, he invoked the contract clause of the Constitution to do it. The contract clause (in Article I, Section 10) prohibits the states from passing any law “impairing the obligation of contracts.” Economic conservatives at the Philadelphia convention had inserted the clause to prevent “stay” laws, which kept creditors from seizing the lands and goods of delinquent debtors. In Fletcher v. Peck (1810), Marshall greatly expanded its scope. The Georgia legislature had granted a huge tract of land to the Yazoo Land Company. When a new legislature cancelled the grant, alleging fraud and bribery, speculators who had purchased Yazoo lands appealed to the Supreme Court to uphold their titles. Marshall did so by ruling that the legislative grant was a contract that could not be revoked. His decision was controversial and far-reaching. It limited state power; bolstered vested property rights; and, by protecting out-of-state investors, promoted the development of a national capitalist economy. The Court extended its defense of vested property rights in Dartmouth College v. Woodward (1819). Dartmouth College was a private institution created by a royal charter issued by King George III. In 1816, New Hampshire’s Republican legislature enacted a statute converting the school into a public university. The Dartmouth trustees opposed the legislation and hired Daniel Webster to plead their case. A renowned constitutional lawyer and a leading Federalist, Webster cited the Court’s decision in Fletcher v. Peck and argued that the royal charter was an unalterable contract. The Marshall Court agreed and upheld Dartmouth’s claims.

 CHAPTER 7

Hammering Out a Federal Republic, 1787–1820


John Marshall, by Chester Harding,
 c. 1830 Even at the age of seventy-five, John Marshall (1755–1835) had a commanding personal presence. After he became chief justice of the U.S. Supreme Court in 1801, Marshall elevated the Court from a minor department of the national government to a major institution in American legal and political life. His decisions on judicial review, contract rights, the regulation of commerce, and national banking permanently shaped the character of American constitutional law. © Boston Athenaeum, USA/The Bridgeman Art Library.

The Diplomacy of John Quincy Adams Even as
 John Marshall incorporated important Federalist principles into the American legal system, voting citizens and political leaders embraced the outlook of the Republican Party. The political career of John Quincy Adams was a case in point. Although he was the son of Federalist president John Adams, John Quincy Adams had joined the Republican Party before the War of 1812. He came to national attention for his role in negotiating the Treaty of Ghent, which ended the war. Adams then served brilliantly as secretary of state for two terms under James Monroe (1817–1825). Ignoring Republican antagonism toward Great Britain,

 in 1817 Adams negotiated the Rush-Bagot Treaty, which limited American and British naval forces on the Great Lakes. In 1818, he concluded another agreement with Britain setting the forty-ninth parallel as the border between Canada and the lands of the Louisiana Purchase. Then, in the Adams-Onís Treaty of 1819, Adams persuaded Spain to cede the Florida territory to the United States (Map 7.6). In return, the American government accepted Spain’s claim to Texas and agreed to a compromise on the western boundary for the state of Louisiana, which had entered the Union in 1812. Finally, Adams persuaded President Monroe to declare American national policy with respect to the





 PART 3

REVOLUTION AND REPUBLICAN CULTURE, 1763–1820

N


BRITISH CANADA

N.
 MAINE

E


W
S


 OREGON

AT L A N T I C OCEAN

 COUNTRY

Treaty Lines
U.S. and Britain, 1818
 Adams-Onís Treaty, 1819

LOUISIANA PURCHASE, 1803 A LT

U N I T E D S TAT E S , 1 7 8 3


A
A C


NEW SPAIN
(Mexico after 1821) 
U.S. and British Territory
 Disputed territory, Maine Joint occupation, Oregon 1818–1846

 LI

 FO

Cessions


R


 IA

N


 BA

SONORA Y SINALOA

 JA

PAC I F I C OCEAN

Ceded by U.S.
 to Spain, 1818 Ceded by Britain to U.S., 1819

NUEVO MEXICO

 TEJAS

 CA

 LI

 FO

NUEVA VIZCAYA

Gulf of Mexico


 COAHUILA

RN IA

NUEVO SANTANDER





 FLORIDA (Ceded to U.S. by Spain, 1819) 500 miles

Land in Florida,
Occupied by U.S.


 500 kilometers

 MAP 7.6 Defining the National Boundaries, 1800–1820 After the War of 1812, American diplomats negotiated treaties with Great Britain and Spain that defined the boundaries of the Louisiana Purchase, with British Canada to the north and New Spain (which in 1821 became the independent nation of Mexico) to the south and west. These treaties eliminated the threat of border wars with neighboring states for a generation, giving the United States a much-needed period of peace and security.

 Western Hemisphere. At Adams’s behest, Monroe warned Spain and other European powers to keep their hands off the newly independent republics in Latin America. The American continents were not “subject for further colonization,” the president declared in 1823 — a policy that thirty years later became known as the Monroe Doctrine. In return, Monroe pledged that the United States would not “interfere in the internal concerns” of European nations. Thanks to John Quincy Adams, the United States had successfully asserted its diplomatic leadership in the Western Hemisphere and won international acceptance of its northern and western boundaries. The appearance of political consensus after two decades of bitter party conflict prompted observers to dub James Monroe’s presidency (1817–1825) the “Era of Good Feeling.” This harmony was real but transitory. The Republican Party was now split between the National faction, led by Clay and Adams, and the Jeffersonian faction, soon to be led by Martin Van

 Buren and Andrew Jackson. The two groups differed sharply over federal support for roads and canals and many other issues. As the aging Jefferson himself complained, “You see so many of these new [National] republicans maintaining in Congress the rankest doctrines of the old federalists.” This division in the Republican Party would soon produce the Second Party System, in which national-minded Whigs and state-focused Democrats would confront each other. By the early 1820s, one cycle of American politics and economic debate had ended, and another was about to begin.

SUMMARY
In this chapter, we traced three interrelated themes: public policy, westward expansion, and party politics. We began by examining the contrasting public policies advocated by Alexander Hamilton and Thomas 
 CHAPTER 7

 Jefferson. A Federalist, Hamilton supported a strong national government and created a fiscal infrastructure (the national debt, tariffs, and a national bank) to spur trade and manufacturing. By contrast, Jefferson wanted to preserve the authority of state governments, and he envisioned an America enriched by farming rather than industry. Jefferson and the Republicans promoted a westward movement that transformed the agricultural economy and sparked new wars with Indian peoples. Expansion westward also shaped American diplomatic and military policy, leading to the Louisiana Purchase,

CHAPTER REVIEW

 the War of 1812, and the treaties negotiated by John Quincy Adams. Finally, there was the unexpected rise of the First Party System. As Hamilton’s policies split the political elite, the French Revolution divided Americans into hostile ideological groups. The result was two decades of bitter conflict and controversial measures: the Federalists’ Sedition Act, the Republicans’ Embargo Act, and Madison’s decision to go to war with Britain. Although the Federalist Party faded away, it left as its enduring legacy Hamilton’s financial innovations and John Marshall’s constitutional jurisprudence.

C H A P T E R


R E V I E W


M A K E I T S T I C K
Go to LearningCurve to retain what you’ve read. 
TERMS TO KNOW

 Identify and explain the significance of each term below.

Key Concepts and Events
Judiciary Act of 1789 (p. 216)
Bill of Rights (p. 216)
Report on the Public Credit
 (p. 216) Bank of the United States (p. 218) Report on Manufactures (p. 218) Proclamation of Neutrality (p. 219) French Revolution (p. 219) Jacobins (p. 219) Whiskey Rebellion (p. 219) Jay’s Treaty (p. 222) Haitian Revolution (p. 222) XYZ Affair (p. 223)

Key People
Naturalization, Alien, and
Sedition Acts (p. 224)
Virginia and Kentucky
Resolutions (p. 225)
Treaty of Greenville (p. 226)
Marbury v. Madison (1803)
 (p. 231) Louisiana Purchase (p. 233) Embargo Act of 1807 (p. 234) Battle of Tippecanoe (p. 236) Treaty of Ghent (p. 241) McCulloch v. Maryland (1819) (p. 241) Adams-Onís Treaty (p. 243) Monroe Doctrine (p. 244)

Alexander Hamilton (p. 216)
Thomas Jefferson (p. 218)
John Adams (p. 223)
Little Turtle (p. 226)
John Marshall (p. 231)
Tecumseh (p. 235)
Henry Clay (p. 241)
John Quincy Adams (p. 243)


REVIEW QUESTIONS
Answer these questions to demonstrate your understanding of the chapter’s main ideas. 
 1. Why did Alexander Hamilton, as Washington’s first

 secretary of the treasury, advocate the creation of a permanent national debt and a national bank? What fears did his economic plans arouse in his Republican opponents?

 2. What were the principal effects of the French and

Haitian Revolutions in the United States? How
 did they influence the development of the American economy, American politics, and westward development?





 PART 3

CHAPTER REVIEW

 3. What forces — ideological, political, and eco-

 nomic — led the United States to gain dominance over eastern North America in these years?

 4. Explain the rise and fall of the First Party System.

 How did the policies implemented by Republican presidents between 1801 and 1825 differ from those implemented during the 1790s? Why did the Federalists fall out of favor? What legacy did the Federalists leave?

MAKING CONNECTIONS

 events listed under “Work, Exchange, and Technology” and “Politics and Power” for the period 1800– 1820 on the thematic timeline on page 149. What was the relationship in these years between the activism of the national government and developments in the American economy?

 Recognize the larger developments and continuities within and across chapters by answering these questions.

ACROSS TIME AND PLACE
In Chapter 6, 
 thirteen former British colonies cooperated in war and established new republican institutions of selfgovernment. After 1789, unforeseen divisions developed in American politics. Why did Hamiltonians and Jeffersonians disagree so sharply on key questions of national policy? Which of the factions in the First Party System — Federalists or Republicans — best embodied the principles of the Revolution? How did westward expansion and

MORE TO EXPLORE

THEMATIC UNDERSTANDING
Look at the 
 international relations force the United States to modify its Revolutionary republican ideals? 2. VISUAL EVIDENCE Return to the Currier &

 Ives print depicting the bombardment of Tripoli on page 232. What message does it convey about America’s position in the world? How well does that message square with the actual outcome of the First Barbary War? What does this suggest about the artist’s purpose?

 Start here to learn more about the events discussed in this chapter.

Gregory Dowd, A Spirited Resistance (1993). A
 penetrating account of Indian resistance to American expansion. Joanne B. Freeman, Affairs of Honor (2002). A cultural analysis of the politics of the 1790s. Jon Kukla, A Wilderness So Immense (2004). A sweeping account of the contexts for the Louisiana Purchase.

Alan Taylor, The Civil War of 1812 (2010). Presents
 the contest for Canada as a multiethnic civil war. Ashli White, Encountering Revolution (2012). Considers the impact of the Haitian Revolution on the United States. The War of 1812 (PBS video, 2011) and its accompanying Web site (pbs.org/wned/war-of-1812/home/) offer reenactments, animations, interpretive essays, and historical site analyses.

 CHAPTER 7

 TIMELINE

CHAPTER REVIEW

 Ask yourself why this chapter begins and ends with these dates and then identify the links among related events.

1784–1789


 Contested Indian treaties: Fort Stanwix (1784), Fort McIntosh (1785), Fort Finney (1786), and Fort Harmar (1789)

1789–1799


French Revolution




 Judiciary Act establishes federal courts



 Hamilton’s public credit system approved

1790–1791


 Western Confederacy defeats U.S. armies

1791–1803


Haitian Revolution




 Bill of Rights ratified Bank of the United States chartered



 Kentucky joins Union



 War between Britain and France



 Madison and Jefferson found Republican Party Whiskey Rebellion Battle of Fallen Timbers



 Jay’s Treaty with Great Britain Pinckney’s Treaty with Spain Treaty of Greenville accepts Indian land rights



XYZ
Affair Alien, Sedition, and Naturalization Acts Virginia and Kentucky Resolutions 


 Jefferson elected president

1801–1812


 Gallatin reduces national debt



Louisiana Purchase
 Marbury v. Madison asserts judicial review

1804–1806


 Lewis and Clark explore West



 Embargo Act cripples American shipping



 Madison elected president



 Tecumseh and Tenskwatawa revive Western Confederacy

1812–1815


War of 1812


1817–1825


Era of Good Feeling




 Adams-Onís Treaty McCulloch v. Maryland; Dartmouth College v. Woodward

KEY TURNING POINTS:
The Northwest Ordinance (1787; Chapter 6), Kentucky and Tennes- 
 see join the Union (1792, 1796), and Jefferson is elected president (1800). How were developments in the West tied into national politics in the 1790s? Why did the Federalists steadily lose ground to the Republicans?





Creating a Republican Culture
1790–1820


C H A P T E R
THE CAPITALIST COMMONWEALTH
Banks, Manufacturing, and Markets Public Enterprise: The Commonwealth System 
TOWARD A DEMOCRATIC REPUBLICAN CULTURE
Opportunity and Equality — for White Men Toward Republican Families Raising Republican Children 
ARISTOCRATIC REPUBLICANISM AND SLAVERY
The Revolution and Slavery, 1776–1800 The North and South Grow Apart The Missouri Crisis, 1819–1821 
PROTESTANT CHRISTIANITY AS A SOCIAL FORCE A
Republican Religious Order The Second Great Awakening Religion and Reform Women’s New Religious Roles 


B


 y the 1820s, America’s white citiIDENTIFY THE BIG IDEA zenry had embraced the republican In eighteenth-century Europe, the political order. Their nation stood leading principles were aristocracy, forth as a “promised land of civil liberty, patriarchy, mercantilism, arranged and of institutions designed to liberate marriages, legal privilege, and and exalt the human race,” declared a established churches. What prinKentucky judge. White Americans were ciples would replace those societal indeed fortunate. They lived under a reprerules in America’s new republican sentative republican government, free society? from arbitrary taxation and from domination by an established church. The timing of the deaths of aging political leaders John Adams and Thomas Jefferson seemed to many Americans to confirm that God looked with favor on their experiment in self-government. What other than divine intervention could explain their nearly simultaneous deaths on July 4, 1826, the fiftieth anniversary of the Declaration of Independence? Inspired by their political freedom, many citizens sought to extend republican principles throughout their society. But what were those principles? For entrepreneurial-minded merchants, farmers, and political leaders, republicanism meant a dynamic market economy based on the private ownership of property and capital. However, they welcomed legislative policies that assisted private business and, they claimed, enhanced the “common wealth” of the society. Other Americans in the northern states championed democratic republican cultural values, such as equality in the family and in social relationships. In the southern states, sharply divided by class and race, politicians and pamphleteers endorsed aristocratic republicanism. It stressed liberty for whites rather than equality for all. Yet another vision of American republicanism emerged from the Second Great Awakening, religious revivals that swept the nation between 1790 and 1850. As Alexis de Tocqueville reported in Democracy in America (1835), the Second Great Awakening gave “the Christian religion . . . a greater influence over the souls of men” than in any other country. Moreover, religious enthusiasm — what Methodist bishop McIlvaine praised as “the quickening of the people of God to a spirit and walk becoming the gospel” — prompted social reform on many fronts. For those who embraced the Awakening, the United States was both a great experiment in republican government and a Christian civilization destined to redeem the world — a moral mission that would inform American diplomacy in the centuries to come.

 Mrs. Hugh McCurdy and Her Daughters This 1806 portrait of Grace Allison McCurdy and her

 daughters, Mary Jane and Letitia Grace, excludes her husband, the Baltimore merchant Hugh McCurdy, suggesting the increased cultural focus on mothers and children in the early republic. A few years earlier, the artist, Joshua Johnson (or Johnston, c. 1763–c. 1824), had painted a solo portrait of Letitia Grace. Here Johnson links Mrs. McCurdy and her elder daughter visually with a splash of vibrant red fruit near their laps, which probably also serves as a symbol of their fertility. Corcoran Gallery of Art, Washington D.C., USA/Museum Purchase through the gifts of William Wilson Corcoran, Elizabeth Donner Norment, Francis Biddle, Erich Cohn, Hardinge Scholle and the William A. Clark Fund/The Bridgeman Art Library.





 PART 3

REVOLUTION AND REPUBLICAN CULTURE, 1763–1820

The Capitalist Commonwealth
 What did republicanism mean for economic life? In early-nineteenth-century America, it meant private property, market exchange, individual opportunity, and activist governments. Throughout the nation, and especially in the Northeast, republican state legislatures embraced a “neomercantilist” system of governmentassisted economic development. And it worked. Beginning around 1800, the average per capita income of Americans increased by more than 1 percent a year — more than 30 percent in a single generation.

Banks, Manufacturing, and Markets
 America was “a Nation of Merchants,” a British visitor reported from Philadelphia in 1798, “keen in the pursuit of wealth in all the various modes of acquiring it.” Acquire it they did, making spectacular profits as the wars of the French Revolution and Napoleon (1793– 1815) crippled European firms. Merchants John Jacob Astor and Robert Oliver became the nation’s first millionaires. After working for an Irish-owned linen firm in Baltimore, Oliver struck out on his own, achieving affluence by trading West Indian sugar and coffee. Astor, who migrated from Germany to New York in 1784, began by selling dry-goods in western New York and became wealthy by carrying furs from the Pacific Northwest to China and investing in New York City real estate (Thinking Like a Historian, p. 252).

 Banking and Credit To finance their ventures, Oliver, Astor, and other merchants needed capital, from either their own savings or loans. Before the Revolution, farmers relied on government-sponsored land banks for loans, while merchants arranged partnerships or obtained credit from British suppliers. Then, in 1781, Philadelphia merchants persuaded the Confederation Congress to charter the Bank of North America, and traders in Boston and New York soon founded similar institutions that raised funds and lent them out. “Our monied capital has so much increased from the Introduction of Banks, & the Circulation of the Funds,” Philadelphia merchant William Bingham boasted in 1791, “that the Necessity of Soliciting Credits from England will no longer exist.” That same year, Federalists in Congress chartered the Bank of the United States to issue notes and make commercial loans (Chapter 7, p. 218). By 1805, the bank had branches in eight seaport cities, profits that averaged a handsome 8 percent annually, and clients

A
Cloth Merchant, 1789  Originally a prosperous storekeeper in New Milford, Connecticut, Elijah Boardman (1760–1832) eventually became a U.S. senator. Like other American traders during the 1780s, he imported huge quantities of cloth from Britain. When the wars of the 1790s cut off trade, some merchants financed the domestic production of textiles. Others, including Boardman, turned to land speculation. In 1795, he joined the Connecticut Land Company and bought huge tracts in Connecticut’s Western Reserve, including the present towns of Medina, Palmyra, and Boardman, Ohio. Ralph Earl painted this portrait in 1789. © The Metropolitan Museum of Art. Image Source: Art Resource/NY.

 with easy access to capital. As trader Jesse Atwater noted, “the foundations of our [merchant] houses are laid in bank paper.” However, Jeffersonians attacked the bank as an unconstitutional expansion of federal power. Moreover, they claimed it promoted “a consolidated, energetic government supported by public creditors, speculators, and other insidious men.” When the bank’s twenty-year charter expired in 1811, the Jeffersonian Republican–dominated Congress refused to renew it.

