 the New Deal, 1929–1939 CHAPTER 24

The World at War,
1937–1945


 In a famous speech he made in 1918, amid the horrors of World War I, President Woodrow Wilson outlined his Fourteen Points for international peace. Americans, he argued, must help make the world “fit and safe to live in.” “We cannot be separated in interest or divided in purpose,” Wilson declared. Fifteen years later, President Franklin Delano Roosevelt made a similar call for solidarity during the Great Depression. “We face the arduous days that lie before us,” he said, “in the warm courage of national unity.” Soon, even more grit and determination were needed, as Americans faced another looming world war. In these years, America’s political leaders met major challenges at home and abroad with bold responses. The exception to this pattern was the 1920s, a decade of limited government under Republican presidents who deferred to business interests and to Americans’ isolationist, consumer-oriented mood. During the crises of World War I, the Great Depression, and World War II, however, American voters called for — and got — what Roosevelt called “action and action now.” Wilson’s proposals met with failure at the end of World War I, but Roosevelt won immense popularity for his measures to combat the depression, which helped millions of Americans survive unemployment and hardship. FDR, however, had limited success in ending the depression until World War II reignited the American economy. The United States emerged from the war with unprecedented global power, and the federal government with a broad mandate for sustaining the new welfare state. Part 7 addresses these transformations.



 America’s Rise to World Power

Modernity and Its Discontents


 The United States became a major international power after the 1890s, first in the Western Hemisphere and by the 1940s across the world, renewing debates at home about America’s global role. After defeating Spain in the War of 1898, the United States claimed overseas colonies and asserted control over the Caribbean basin. Though President Wilson attempted to maintain neutrality at the start of World War I, trade ties and old alliances drew America into the conflict on the Allied side. Wilson sought to influence the peace, but Allied leaders ignored his proposals and the Senate rejected the Treaty of Versailles. By war’s end, the United States’s position on the world stage remained uncertain. The 1920s was an era of dollar diplomacy and U.S. business expansion abroad. In the 1930s, faced with isolationist sentiment at home and the rise of fascist powers in Europe and Japan, the Roosevelt administration steered a middle course. In the late 1930s, it began to send aid to its traditional ally Great Britain without committing U.S. forces, keeping the nation out of the brewing wars in Europe and the Pacific. When the United States entered World War II in 1941, it did so as part of an alliance with both England and the Soviet Union against Germany and Japan (and their ally Italy). The United States emerged from the war as the dominant global power. These events are covered in Chapters 21, 22, and 24.

 World War I had a powerful domestic impact in the United States. The Great Migration brought African Americans northward, and Mexicans across the U.S. border, to take up wartime jobs. A full-blown modern consumer culture also emerged by the 1920s as radio, cars, and Hollywood movies transformed leisure pastimes. While many Americans embraced consumer culture, others expressed deep fear and antagonism toward a new modern sensibility, especially secularism and sexual freedoms. Repressive impulses also came from above; during World War I, the federal government introduced new laws to police dissent, and the country took a sharp right turn. A Red Scare, rollback of labor and immigrant rights, and rising nativism marked the political scene. A resurgent nationwide Klan arose to target Catholics and Jews as well as African Americans. Many cultural conflicts emerged: the teaching of evolution in the schools angered religious fundamentalists, while “wets” and “drys” debated the prohibition of liquor. Later events showed that racism took many forms: the U.S. government deported hundreds of thousands of people of Mexican descent during the Great Depression, including American citizens, and temporarily imprisoned Japanese Americans in a mass relocation policy during World War II. These, too, represented battles over what a diverse, modern nation would look like. We explore these conflicts in Chapters 21, 22, and 24.

 PART 7

DOMESTIC AND GLOBAL CHALLENGES, 1890–1945



Domestic and
Global Challenges
1890–1945


Creation of the Welfare State
 In comparison with their progressive predecessors (Chapters 19 and 20), Republican policymakers of the 1920s believed in hands-off government. Their policies likely helped trigger the Great Depression and deepened its impact after it arrived. Starting in 1932, Americans voted for change: President Franklin Roosevelt’s New Deal programs, 1933–1937, expanded federal responsibility for the welfare of ordinary citizens, sweeping away the laissez faire individualism of the previous decade. Though the New Deal faced considerable challenges on the political right — especially from business and corporate leaders and a hostile Supreme Court — the popularity of its programs, such as Social Security, established a broad consensus that the United States needed a modern welfare state to regulate the economy and provide a basic safety net for the nation’s citizens. For an exploration of the New Deal, see Chapter 23. Wartime measures went even further, as the government mobilized the entire economy and tens of millions of citizens to fight the Axis powers. The welfare state became a “warfare state,” and Congress gave the president broad powers to fight the war abroad and reorganize the economy at home. Under the government-directed wartime economy, business boomed and productivity grew, but other policies, such as the internment of Japanese immigrants and Japanese Americans, violated fragile civil liberties, leaving a mixed legacy. On America’s roles in World War II, see Chapter 24.



Thematic Understanding
 This timeline arranges some of the important events of this period into themes. Consider the entries under “America in the World,” “Politics and Power,” “Identity,” and “Ideas, Beliefs, and Culture.” What connections do you see between events on the world stage and developments within the United States? What impact did World War I, the Great Depression, and World War II appear to have on American politics, society, and culture? >

AMERICA IN THE WORLD

 Congress funds construction of modern battleships U.S.-backed planters overthrow Hawaii’s queen (1892) U.S. wins War of 1898 against Spain; claims Hawaii, Puerto Rico, Guam, and Philippines



 Republicans sweep congressional elections as Americans respond to severe depression (1894) Republican William McKinley elected president (1896)

“American
 exceptionalism” and rise of imperialism

 William McKinley assassinated; Theodore Roosevelt becomes president (1901)

California, Washington,
 and Hawaii limit rights for Asian immigrants

 Wilson intervenes in Mexico (1914)

Woodrow Wilson
 elected president (1912)

New Ku Klux Klan
 founded (1915)

 Panama Canal opened (1914)

Red Scare (1919)


 Post-WWI race riots

 Woodrow Wilson issues Fourteen Points (1919)

 Wartime pressure for “100% loyalty”; dissent suppressed

 War ends; Wilson seeks to influence peace treaty negotiations (1918) Heyday of “dollar diplomacy” U.S. occupation of Haiti and other Caribbean and Central American nations

U.S.
Senate rejects Treaty of Versailles (1919, 1920) 
IDEAS, BELIEFS, AND CULTURE

 Depression of 1890s increases pressure for U.S. to secure foreign markets

 Rise of modernism

Root-Takahira
 Agreement affirms free oceanic commerce (1908)

 Moviemaking industry moves to southern California

 Great Migration brings African Americans to northern cities, Mexicans north to United States

Birth of a Nation
 glorifies the Reconstruction-era Klan (1915)

Nineteenth Amendment
 grants women’s suffrage (1920)

National Origins Act
 limits immigration (1924)

Rise of Hollywood
Harlem Renaissance


Prohibition (1920–1933)


 Popularity of jazz music

 Teapot Dome scandal (1923)

 Scopes “monkey trial” (1925)

 Rise of European fascist powers

Franklin Roosevelt
 elected president (1932)

 Japan invades China (1937)

First New Deal (1933)
Second New Deal (1935)
 Roosevelt attempts to reform Supreme Court (1937)



 Assembly-line production begins

Radio Corporation of
 America created (1919)

Bonus Army (1932)
Indian Reorganization
Act (1934)


 Labor gains rolled back Era of welfare capitalism

 Documentary impulse in arts

Great Depression
(1929–1941)


 WPA assists artists

Rise of CIO and
 organized labor

 Social Security created (1935)

Federal Writers’ Project


 Film industry aids war effort

 United States enters WWII (1941)

 Roosevelt elected to fourth term (1944)

Internment of Japanese
Americans


 Atomic bombing of Japan and end of WWII (1945)

 Roosevelt dies (1945)

 Segregation in armed services until 1948

 Harry Truman becomes president (1945)

 Economic prosperity (1922–1929)

 Rise of automobile loans and consumer credit

 Republican “associated state,” probusiness policies (1920–1932)



WORK, EXCHANGE, AND TECHNOLOGY

“Remember the Maine”
 campaign fuels surge in nationalism

Alfred Mahan, The
Influence of Sea Power
 upon History (1890)

 Insular Cases establish noncitizenship status for new territories (1901)

 United States enters WWI (1917)



 IDENTITY

 William McKinley reelected on proimperialist platform (1900)

 U.S. war against Philippine revolutionaries Roosevelt Corollary to Monroe Doctrine (1904)



POLITICS AND POWER

 United Nations founded (1945)

 PART 1

 War spending ends depression Rationing curbs consumer spending Married women take war jobs

 PART 7 THEMATIC TIMELINE, 1890–1945 TRANSFORMATIONS OF NORTH AMERICA, 1450-1700





An Emerging World Power
1890–1918


C H A P T E R
FROM EXPANSION TO IMPERIALISM
Foundations of Empire The War of 1898 Spoils of War 
A POWER AMONG POWERS
The Open Door in Asia The United States and Latin America 
THE UNITED STATES IN WORLD WAR I
From Neutrality to War “Over There” War on the Home Front 
CATASTROPHE AT VERSAILLES
The Fate of Wilson’s Ideas Congress Rejects the Treaty 


A


 ccepting the Democratic presidenIDENTIFY THE BIG IDEA tial nomination in 1900, William As the United States became a major Jennings Bryan delivered a famous power on the world stage, what speech denouncing U.S. military occuideas and interests did policymakpations overseas. “God Himself,” Bryan ers seek to promote in international declared, “placed in every human heart affairs? the love of liberty. . . . He never made a race of people so low in the scale of civilization or intelligence that it would welcome a foreign master.” At the time, Republican president William McKinley was leading an ambitious and popular plan of overseas expansion. The United States had asserted control over the Caribbean, claimed Hawaii, and sought to annex the Philippines. Bryan failed to convince a majority of voters that imperialism — the exercise of military, political, and economic power overseas — was the wrong direction. He lost the election by a landslide. By the 1910s, however, American enthusiasm for overseas involvement cooled. Despite efforts to stay neutral, the United States got caught up in the global catastrophe of World War I, which killed 8 million combatants, including over 50,000 U.S. soldiers. By the war’s end, European powers’ grip on their colonial empires was weakening. The United States also ceased acquiring overseas territories and pursued a different path. It did so in part because the war brought dramatic changes at home, leaving Americans a postwar legacy of economic upheaval and political disillusionment. President Woodrow Wilson, who in 1913 appointed Bryan as his secretary of state, tried to steer a middle course between revolutionary socialism and European-style imperialism. In Wilson’s phrase, America would “make the world safe for democracy” while unapologetically working to advance U.S. economic interests. The U.S. Senate, however, rejected the 1919 Treaty of Versailles and with it Wilson’s vision, leaving the nation’s foreign policy in doubt. Should the United States try to promote democracy abroad? If so, how? To what degree should the federal government seek to promote American business interests? Under what conditions was overseas military action justified? When, on the contrary, did it impinge on others’ sovereignty, endanger U.S. soldiers, and invite disaster? Today’s debates over foreign policy still center to a large degree on questions that Americans debated in the era of McKinley, Bryan, and Wilson, when the nation first asserted itself as a major world power.

 American Soldiers on a French Battlefield, 1918 As the United States asserted its power on the world stage, American soldiers found themselves fighting on foreign battlefields. This 1918 photograph shows a few of the 1 million U.S. soldiers who joined French and British troops fighting on the brutal Western Front to defeat Germany in the Great War. Over 26,000 American soldiers lost their lives on the battlefield during World War I, and 95,000 were wounded. Library of Congress.





 PART 7

DOMESTIC AND GLOBAL CHALLENGES, 1890–1945

From Expansion
 to Imperialism Historians used to describe turn-of-the-twentiethcentury U.S. imperialism as something new and unprecedented. Now they stress continuities between foreign policy in this era and the nation’s earlier, relentless expansion across North America. Wars against native peoples had occurred almost continuously since the country’s founding; in the 1840s, the United States had annexed a third of Mexico. The United States never administered a large colonial empire, as did European powers like Spain, England, and Germany, partly because it had a plentiful supply of natural resources in the American West. But policymakers undertook a determined quest for global markets. Events in the 1890s opened opportunities to pursue this goal in new ways.

Foundations of Empire
 American empire builders around 1900 fulfilled a vision laid out earlier by William Seward, secretary of state under presidents Abraham Lincoln and Andrew Johnson, who saw access to global markets as the key to power (Chapter 16). Seward’s ideas had won only limited support at the time, but the severe economic depression of the 1890s brought Republicans into power and Seward’s ideas back into vogue. Confronting high unemployment and mass protests, policymakers feared American workers would embrace socialism or Marxism. The alternative, they believed, was to create jobs and prosperity at home by selling U.S. products in overseas markets. Intellectual trends also favored imperialism. As early as 1885, in his popular book Our Country, Congregationalist minister Josiah Strong urged Protestants to proselytize overseas. He predicted that the American “Anglo-Saxon race,” which represented “the largest liberty, the purest Christianity, the highest civilization,” would “spread itself over the earth.” Such arguments were grounded in American exceptionalism, the idea that the United States had a unique destiny to foster democracy and civilization. As Strong’s exhortation sugTRACE CHANGE gested, imperialists also drew on OVER TIME popular racial theories, which How did imperialism in the claimed that people of “Anglo1890s reflect both contiSaxon” descent — English and nuities and changes from often German — were superior to earlier eras? all others. “Anglo-Saxon” rule

 over foreign people of color made sense in an era when, at home, most American Indians and Asian immigrants were denied citizenship and most southern blacks were disenfranchised. Imperialists argued that “free land” on the western frontier was dwindling, and thus new outlets needed to be found for American energy and enterprise. Responding to critics of U.S. occupation of the Philippines, Theodore Roosevelt scoffed: if Filipinos should control their own islands, he declared, then America was “morally bound to return Arizona to the Apaches.” Imperialists also justified their views through racialized Social Darwinism (Chapter 18). Josiah Strong, for example, predicted that with the globe fully occupied, a “competition of races” would ensue, with victory based on “survival of the fittest.” Fear of ruthless competition drove the United States, like European nations, to invest in the latest weapons. Policymakers saw that European powers were amassing steel-plated battleships and carving up Africa and Asia among themselves. In his book The Influence of Sea Power upon History (1890), U.S. naval officer Alfred Mahan urged the United States to enter the fray, observing that naval power had been essential to past empires. As early as 1886, Congress ordered construction of two steel-hulled battleships, the USS Texas and USS Maine; in 1890, it appropriated funds for three more, a program that expanded over the next two decades. During Grover Cleveland’s second term (1893– 1897), his secretary of state, Richard Olney, turned to direct confrontation. He warned Europe to stay away from Latin America, which he saw as the United States’s rightful sphere of influence. Without consulting the nation of Venezuela, Olney suddenly demanded in 1895 that Britain resolve a long-standing border dispute between Venezuela and Britain’s neighboring colony, British Guiana. Invoking the Monroe Doctrine, which stated that the Western Hemisphere was offlimits to further European colonization, Olney warned that the United States would brook no challenge to its interests. Startled, Britain agreed to arbitrate. U.S. power was on the rise.

The War of 1898
 Events in the Caribbean presented the United States with far greater opportunities. In 1895, Cuban patriots mounted a major guerrilla war against Spain, which had lost most of its other New World territories. The Spanish commander responded by rounding up Cuban civilians into concentration camps, where as many as 200,000 died of starvation, exposure,

 CHAPTER 21

 or dysentery. In the United States, “yellow journalists” such as William Randolph Hearst turned their plight into a cause célèbre. Hearst’s coverage of Spanish atrocities fed a surge of nationalism, especially among those who feared that industrialization was causing American men to lose physical strength and valor. The government should not pass up this opportunity, said Indiana senator Albert Beveridge, to “manufacture manhood.” Congress called for Cuban independence. President Cleveland had no interest in supporting the Cuban rebellion but worried over Spain’s failure to end it. The war disrupted trade and damaged Americanowned sugar plantations on the island. Moreover, an unstable Cuba was incompatible with U.S. strategic interests, including a proposed canal whose Caribbean approaches had to be safeguarded. Taking office in 1897, President William McKinley took a tough stance. In September, a U.S. diplomat informed Spain that it must ensure an “early and certain peace” or the United States would step in. At first, this hard line seemed to work: Spain’s conservative regime fell, and a liberal government, taking office in October 1897, offered Cuba limited self-rule. But Spanish loyalists in Havana rioted against this proposal, while Cuban rebels held out for full independence. In February 1898, Hearst’s New York Journal published a private letter in which a Spanish minister to the United States belittled McKinley. The minister, Dupuy de Lôme, resigned, but exposure of the de Lôme letter intensified Americans’ indignation toward Spain. The next week brought shocking news: the U.S. battle cruiser Maine had exploded and sunk in Havana harbor, with 260 seamen lost. “Whole Country Thrills with the War Fever,” proclaimed the New York Journal. “Remember the Maine” became a national chant. Popular passions were now a major factor in the march toward war. McKinley assumed the sinking of the Maine had been accidental. Improbably, though, a naval board of inquiry blamed an underwater mine, fueling public outrage. (Later investigators disagreed: the more likely cause was a faulty ship design that placed explosive munitions too close to coal bunkers, which were prone to fire.) No evidence linked Spain to the purported mine, but if a mine sank the Maine, then Spain was responsible for not protecting the ship. Business leaders became impatient, believing war was preferable to an unending Cuban crisis. On March 27, McKinley cabled an ultimatum to Madrid: an immediate ceasefire in Cuba for six months and, with the United States mediating, peace negotiations with the rebels. Spain, while desperate to avoid war, balked at the added demand that mediation must result

An Emerging World Power, 1890–1918


 in Cuban independence. On April 11, McKinley asked Congress for authority to intervene in Cuba “in the name of civilization, [and] in behalf of endangered American interests.” Historians long referred to the ensuing fight as the Spanish-American War, but because that name ignores the central role of Cuban revolutionaries, many historians now call the three-way conflict the War of 1898. Though Americans widely admired Cubans’ aspirations for freedom, the McKinley administration defeated a congressional attempt to recognize the rebel government. In response, Senator Henry M. Teller of Colorado added an amendment to the war bill, disclaiming any intention by the United States to occupy Cuba. The Teller Amendment reassured Americans that their country would uphold democracy abroad as well as at home. McKinley’s expectations differed. He wrote privately, “We must keep all we get; when the war is over we must keep what we want.” On April 24, 1898, Spain declared war on the United States. The news provoked full-blown war fever. Across the country, young men enlisted for the fight. Theodore Roosevelt, serving in the War Department, resigned to become lieutenant colonel of a cavalry regiment. Recruits poured into makeshift bases around Tampa, Florida, where confusion reigned. Rifles failed to arrive; food was bad, sanitation worse. No provision had been made for getting troops to Cuba, so the government hastily collected a fleet of yachts and commercial boats. Fortunately, the regular army was a disciplined, professional force; its 28,000 seasoned troops provided a nucleus for 200,000 volunteers. The navy was in better shape: Spain had nothing to match America’s seven battleships and armored cruisers. The Spanish admiral bitterly predicted that his fleet would “like Don Quixote go out to fight windmills and come back with a broken head.” The first, decisive military engagement took place in the Pacific. This was the handiwork of Theodore Roosevelt, who, in his government post, had gotten the intrepid Commodore George Dewey appointed commander of the Pacific fleet. In the event of war, Dewey had instructions to sail immediately for the Spanishowned Philippines. When war was declared, Roosevelt confronted his surprised superior and pressured him into validating Dewey’s instructions. On May 1, 1898, American ships cornered the Spanish fleet in Manila Bay and destroyed it. Manila, the Philippine capital, fell on August 13. “We must on no account let the [Philippines] go,” declared Senator Henry Cabot Lodge. McKinley agreed. The United States now had a major foothold in the western Pacific.





 PART 7

DOMESTIC AND GLOBAL CHALLENGES, 1890–1945

 U.S. naval base at Pearl Harbor. Four years later, succeeding her brother as Hawaii’s monarch, Queen Liliuokalani made known her frustration with these treaties. In response, an Annexation Club of U.S.backed planters organized secretly and in 1892, with the help of U.S. Marines, overthrew the queen and then negotiated a treaty of annexation. Grover Cleveland, however, rejected it when he entered office, declaring that it would violate America’s “unbroken tradition” against acquiring territory overseas. Dewey’s victory in Manila delivered what the planters wanted: Hawaii acquired strategic value as a halfway station to the Philippines. In July 1898, Congress voted for annexation, over the protests of Hawaii’s deposed queen. “Oh, honest Americans,” she pleaded, “as Christians hear me for my down-trodden people! Their form of government is as dear to them as yours is precious to you. Quite as warmly as you love your country, so they love theirs.” But to the great powers, Hawaii was not a country. One congressman dismissed Hawaii’s monarchy as “absurd, grotesque, tottering”; the “Aryan race,” he declared, would “rescue” the islands from it. Hawaii’s Queen Hawaiian queen Liliuokalani (1838–1917) was the greatgranddaughter of Keaweaheulu, founder of the Kamehameha dynasty that had ruled the islands since the late 1700s. Liliuokalani assumed the throne after her brother’s death in 1891. As an outspoken critic, however, of treaties ceding power to U.S. economic interests, she was deposed three years later by a cabal of sugar planters who established a republic. When secret plans to revolt and restore the monarchy were discovered, the queen was imprisoned for a year in Iolani Palace. She lived the remainder of her life in Hawaii but never regained power. Fluent in English and influenced from childhood by Congregational missionaries, she used this background to advocate for her people; in her book Hawaii’s Story by Hawaii’s Queen (1898), she appealed for justice from fellow Christians. George Bacon Collection, Hawaii State Archives.

 Dewey’s victory directed policymakers’ attention to Hawaii. Nominally independent, these islands had long been subject to U.S. influence, including a horde of resident American sugarcane planters. An 1876 treaty between the United States and the island’s monarch gave Hawaiian sugar free access to the American market, without tariff payments, IDENTIFY CAUSES and Hawaii pledged to sign no Why did the United States such agreement with any other go to war against Spain in power. When this treaty was 1898, and what led to U.S. renewed in 1887, Hawaii also victory? granted a long-coveted lease for a

 To see a longer excerpt from Queen Liliuokalani’s appeal, along with other primary sources from this period, see Sources for America’s History.

 Further U.S. annexations took on their own logic. The navy pressed for another coaling base in the central Pacific; that meant Guam, a Spanish island in the Marianas. A strategic base was needed in the Caribbean; that meant Puerto Rico. By early summer, before U.S. troops had fired a shot in Cuba, McKinley’s broader war aims were crystallizing. In Cuba, Spanish forces were depleted by the long guerrilla war. Though poorly trained and equipped, American forces had the advantages of a demoralized foe and knowledgeable Cuban allies. The main battle occurred on July 1 at San Juan Hill, near Santiago, where the Spanish fleet was anchored. Roosevelt’s Rough Riders took the lead, but four African American regiments bore the brunt of the fighting. Observers credited much of the victory to the “superb gallantry” of these soldiers. Spanish troops retreated to a well-fortified second line, but U.S. forces were spared the test of a second assault. On July 3, the Spanish fleet in Santiago harbor tried a desperate run through the American blockade and was destroyed. Days later, Spanish forces surrendered. American combat casualties had been few; most U.S. soldiers’ deaths had resulted from malaria and yellow fever.

 CHAPTER 21

An Emerging World Power, 1890–1918


The Battle of San Juan Hill
 On July 1, 1898, the key battle for Cuba took place on heights overlooking Santiago. African American troops bore the brunt of the fighting. Although generally overlooked, black soldiers’ role in the San Juan battle is done justice in this contemporary lithograph, without the demeaning stereotypes by which blacks were normally depicted in an age of intensifying racism. Note, however, that as in the Civil War, blacks enlisted as foot soldiers; their officers were white. Library of Congress.

Spoils of War
 The United States and Spain quickly signed a preliminary peace agreement in which Spain agreed to liberate Cuba and cede Puerto Rico and Guam to the United States. But what would happen to the Philippines, an immense archipelago that lay more than 5,000 miles from California? Initially, the United States aimed to keep only Manila, because of its fine harbor. Manila was not defensible, however, without the whole island of Luzon, on which it sat. After deliberating, McKinley found a justification for annexing all of the Philippines. He decided that “we could not leave [the Filipinos] to themselves — they were unfit for self-rule.”

 This declaration provoked heated debate. Under the Constitution, as Republican senator George F. Hoar argued, “no power is given to the Federal Government to acquire territory to be held and governed permanently as colonies” or “to conquer alien people and hold them in subjugation.” Leading citizens and peace advocates, including Jane Addams and Mark Twain, enlisted in the anti-imperialist cause. Steel king Andrew Carnegie offered $20 million to purchase Philippine independence. Labor leader Samuel Gompers warned union members about the threat of competition from low-wage Filipino immigrants. Anti-imperialists, however, were a diverse lot. Some argued that Filipinos were perfectly capable of self-rule; others warned about





 PART 7

DOMESTIC AND GLOBAL CHALLENGES, 1890–1945

 the dangers of annexing eight million Filipinos of an “inferior race.” “No matter whether they are fit to govern themselves or not,” declared a Missouri congressman, “they are not fit to govern us.” Beginning in late 1898, anti-imperialist leagues sprang up around the country, but they never sparked a mass movement. On the contrary, McKinley’s “splendid little war” proved immensely popular. Confronted with that reality, Democrats waffled. Their standard-bearer, William Jennings Bryan, decided not to stake Democrats’ future on EXPLAIN opposition to a policy that he CONSEQUENCES believed to be irreversible. He What were the long-term threw his party into turmoil by results of the U.S. victory over Spain, in Hawaii and declaring last-minute support for in former Spanish possesMcKinley’s proposed treaty. Havsions? ing met military defeat, Spanish representatives had little choice. In the Treaty of Paris, Spain ceded the Philippines to the United States for $20 million. Annexation was not as simple as U.S. policymakers had expected. On February 4, 1899, two days before the Senate ratified the treaty, fighting broke out between American and Filipino patrols on the edge of Manila. Confronted by annexation, rebel leader Emilio Aguinaldo asserted his nation’s independence and turned his guns on occupying American forces. Though Aguinaldo found it difficult to organize a mass-based resistance movement, the ensuing conflict between Filipino nationalists and U.S. troops far exceeded in length and ferocity the war just concluded with Spain. Fighting tenacious guerrillas, the U.S. Army resorted to the same tactics Spain had employed in Cuba: burning crops and villages and rounding up civilians. Atrocities became commonplace on both sides. In three years of warfare, 4,200 Americans and an estimated 200,000 Filipinos died; many of the latter were dislocated civilians, particularly children, who succumbed to malnutrition and disease. McKinley’s convincing victory over William Jennings Bryan in 1900 suggested popular satisfaction with America’s overseas adventures, even in the face of dogged Filipino resistance to U.S. rule. The fighting ended in 1902, and William Howard Taft, appointed as governor-general of the Philippines, sought to make the territory a model of roadbuilding and sanitary engineering. Yet misgivings lingered as Americans confronted the brutality of the war. Philosopher William James noted that the United States had destroyed “these islanders by the thousands, their villages and cities. . . . Could there be any more damning indictment of that whole bloated ideal termed ‘modern civilization’?” (American Voices, p. 680).

 Constitutional issues also remained unresolved. The treaty, while guaranteeing freedom of religion to inhabitants of ceded Spanish territories, withheld any promise of citizenship. It was up to Congress to decide Filipinos’ “civil rights and political status.” In 1901, the Supreme Court upheld this provision in a set of decisions known as the Insular Cases. The Constitution, declared the Court, did not automatically extend citizenship to people in acquired territories; Congress could decide. Puerto Rico, Guam, and the Philippines were thus marked as colonies, not future states. The next year, as a condition for withdrawing from Cuba, the United States forced the newly independent island to accept a proviso in its constitution called the Platt Amendment (1902). This blocked Cuba from making a treaty with any country except the United States and gave the United States the right to intervene in Cuban affairs if it saw fit. Cuba also granted the United States a lease on Guantánamo Bay (still in effect), where the U.S. Navy built a large base. Cubans’ hard-fought independence was limited; so was that of Filipinos. Eventually, the Jones Act of 1916 committed the United States to Philippine independence but set no date. (The Philippines at last achieved independence in 1946.) Though the war’s carnage had rubbed off some of the moralizing gloss, America’s global aspirations remained intact.

A
Power Among Powers  No one appreciated America’s emerging influence more than the man who, after William McKinley’s assassination, became president in 1901. Theodore Roosevelt was an avid student of world affairs who called on “the civilized and orderly powers to insist on the proper policing of the world.” He meant, in part, directing the affairs of “backward peoples.” For Roosevelt, imperialism went hand in hand with domestic progressivism (Chapter 20). He argued that a strong federal government, asserting itself both at home and abroad, would enhance economic stability and political order. Overseas, Roosevelt sought to arbitrate disputes and maintain a global balance of power, but he also asserted U.S. interests.

The Open Door in Asia
 U.S. officials and business leaders had a burning interest in East Asian markets, but they were entering a crowded field (Map 21.1). In the late 1890s, following Japan’s victory in the Sino-Japanese War of 1894–1895, Japan, Russia, Germany, France, and Britain divided

 CHAPTER 21

 MAP 21.1

 RUSSIA

The Great Powers in East Asia, 1898–1910


L.
Baikal 

N
IA TRANS-SIB E R

Irkutsk !


R.R.


Chita!


CHINES EE

OUTER MONGOLIA

 AS

 (Russian influence)

Am
 TE

MO I N N E R
g Ho 
 SINKIANG

N


 GO

Sakhalin
 ur

RN R

 IA

 European powers established dominance over China by way of “treaty ports,” where the powers based their naval forces, and through “spheres of influence” that extended from the ports into the hinterland. This map reveals why the United States had a weak hand: it lacked a presence on this colonized terrain. An uprising of Chinese nationalists in 1900 gave the United States a chance to insert itself on the Chinese mainland by sending an American expeditionary force. American diplomats made the most of the opportunity to defend U.S. commercial interests in China. As noted in the key, all place names in this map are those in use in 1910: Modern Beijing, for example, is shown as Peking.



An Emerging World Power, 1890–1918


R.


.R .


L MANCHURIA
!% Tientsin 
Peking


Hw a n


Harbin
!


KURILE IS.

Vladivostok !


!
Port
Arthur


!


Sea of
Japan


 KOREA

Kobe


CHINA TIBET

Lhasa
!


 NEPAL

 INDIA

Chungking % R.
 gtze Yan

BHUTAN KWANGCHOWAN
(Fr.) 
Calcutta !


Colonial
Spheres
 possessions of influence American British French Japanese Russian German Chinese treaty ports % open for foreign trade Place names in common use, 1910

 coastal China into spheres of influence. Fearful of being shut out, U.S. Secretary of State John Hay sent these powers a note in 1899, claiming the right of equal trade access — an “open door” — for all nations seeking to do business in China. The United States lacked leverage in Asia, and Hay’s note elicited only noncommittal responses. But he chose to interpret this as acceptance of his position. When a secret society of Chinese nationalists, known outside China as “Boxers” because of their pugnacious political stance, rebelled against foreign occupation in 1900, the United States sent 5,000 troops to join a multinational campaign to break the nationalists’ siege of European offices in Beijing. Hay took this opportunity to assert a second open door principle: China must be preserved as a “territorial and administrative entity.” As long as the legal fiction of an independent China survived, Americans could claim equal access to its market. European and American plans were, however, unsettled by Japan’s emergence as East Asia’s dominant power. A decade after its victory over China, Japan responded to Russian bids for control of both Korea

Hanoi


!


%


Amoy


Bangkok
!
 FRENCH

South
China
Sea


E
W


RYUKYU IS.
(Japan) 
% Foochow


! ! Hong
Macao Kong (Br.)
(Port.)


 SIAM

!Tokyo
!
Yokohama
N


% %Shanghai
% Ningpo
% Wenchow


% %Canton


Wuchow


 BURMA

!


Nanking


%


Hankow


 JAPAN

Seoul


Formosa
(Taiwan)


!


PHILIPPINE ISLANDS

!
Saigon






PACIFIC OCEAN

Manila


 INDOCHINA

S


 1,000 miles

 1,000 kilometers

 and Manchuria, in northern China, by attacking the tzar’s fleet at Russia’s leased Chinese port. In a series of brilliant victories, the Japanese smashed the Russian forces. Westerners were shocked: for the first time, a European power had been defeated by a non-Western nation. Conveying both admiration and alarm, American cartoonists sketched Japan as a martial artist knocking down the Russian giant. Roosevelt mediated a settlement to the war in 1905, receiving for his efforts the first Nobel Peace Prize awarded to an American. Though he was contemptuous of other Asians, Roosevelt respected the Japanese, whom he called “a wonderful and civilized people.” More important, he understood Japan’s rising military might and aligned himself with the mighty. The United States approved Japan’s “protectorate” over Korea in 1905 and, six years later, its seizure of full control. With Japan asserting harsh COMPARE AND CONTRAST authority over Manchuria, enerWhat factors constrained getic Chinese diplomat Yüan and guided U.S. actions in Shih-k’ai tried to encourage the Asia and in Latin America? United States to intervene. But

AMERICAN VOICES

Debating the
Philippines


 As President McKinley privately acknowledged in writing — “when the war is over we must keep what we want” — seizing the Philippines was an act of national self-interest. Of the alternatives, it was the one that seemed best calculated to serve America’s strategic aims in Asia. But McKinley’s geopolitical decision had unintended consequences. For one, it provoked a bloody insurrection. For another, it challenged the United States’s democratic principles. As these consequences hit home, a divided Senate set up a special committee and held closed hearings. Congressional testimony is a source much prized by historians. Though some of it is prepared, once questioning begins, testimony becomes unscripted and can be especially revealing. The following documents are taken from the 1902 testimony before the Senate Committee on the Philippines.

Ideals
 General Arthur MacArthur (1845–1912) was in on the action in the Philippines almost from the start. He commanded one of the first units to arrive there in 1898 and in 1900 was reassigned as the islands’ military governor and general commander of the troops. His standing as a military man — holder of the Congressional Medal of Honor from the Civil War — was matched later by his more famous son, Douglas MacArthur, who fought in the Pacific during World War II. Here the elder MacArthur explains in prepared testimony his vision of America’s mission to the Philippines.

 At the time I returned to Manila [May 1900] to assume the supreme command it seemed to me that . . . our occupation of the island was simply one of the necessary consequences in logical sequence of our great prosperity, and to doubt the wisdom of [occupation] was simply to doubt the stability of our own institutions and in effect to declare that a self-governing nation was incapable of successfully resisting strains arising naturally from its own productive energy. It seemed to me that our conception of right, justice, freedom, and personal liberty was the precious fruit of centuries of strife . . . [and that] we must regard ourselves simply as the custodians of imperishable ideas held in trust for the general benefit of mankind. In other words, I felt that we had attained a moral and intellectual height from which we were bound to proclaim to all as the occasion arose the true message of humanity as embodied in the principles of our own institutions. . . . All other governments that have gone to the East have simply planted trading establishments; they have not materially affected the conditions of the people. . . . There is not a single establishment, in my judgment, in Asia to-day that would survive five years if the original power which planted it was withdrawn therefrom.

 The contrasting idea with our idea is this: In planting our ideas we plant something that can not be destroyed. To my mind the archipelago is a fertile soil upon which to plant republicanism. . . . We are planting the best traditions, the best characteristics of Americanism in such a way that they can never be removed from that soil. That in itself seems to me a most inspiring thought. It encouraged me during all my efforts in those lands, even when conditions seemed most disappointing, when the people themselves, not appreciating precisely what the remote consequences of our efforts were going to be, mistrusted us; but that fact was always before me — that going deep down into that fertile soil were the indispensable ideas of Americanism.

Skepticism
 At this point, the general was interrupted by Colorado senator Thomas Patterson, a Populist-Democrat and a vocal anti-imperialist.

 Sen. Patterson: Do you mean that imperishable idea of which you speak is the right of self-government? Gen. MacArthur: Precisely so; self-government regulated by law as I understand it in this Republic. Sen. Patterson: Of course you do not mean selfgovernment regulated by some foreign and superior power? Gen. MacArthur: Well, that is a matter of evolution, Senator. We are putting these institutions there so they will evolve themselves just as here and everywhere else where freedom has flourished. . . . Sen. Patterson [after the General concluded his statement]: Do I understand your claim of right and duty to retain the Philippine Islands is based upon the proposition that they have come to us upon the basis of our morals, honorable dealing, and unassailable international integrity?

 Gen. MacArthur: That proposition is not questioned by anybody in the world, excepting a few people in the United States. . . . We will be benefited, and the Filipino people will be benefited, and that is what I meant by the original proposition — Sen. Patterson: Do you mean the Filipino people that are left alive? Gen. MacArthur: I mean the Filipino people. . . . Sen. Patterson: You mean those left alive after they have been subjugated? Gen. MacArthur: I do not admit that there has been any unusual destruction of life in the Philippine Islands. The destruction is simply the incident of war, and of course it embraces only a very small percentage of the total population. . . . I doubt if any war — either international or civil, any war on earth — has been conducted with as much humanity, with as much careful consideration, with as much self-restraint, as have been the American operations in the Philippine Archipelago. . . .

Realities
 Brigadier General Robert P. Hughes, a military district commander, testified as follows.

Q:
In burning towns, what would you do? Would the entire town be destroyed by fire or would only the offending portions of the town be burned? Gen. Hughes: I do not know that we ever had a case of burning what you would call a town in this country, but probably a barrio or a sitio; probably half a dozen houses, native shacks, where the insurrectos would go in and be concealed, and if they caught a detachment passing they would kill some of them. Q: What did I understand you to say would be the consequences of that? Gen. Hughes: They usually burned the village. Q: All of the houses in the village? Gen. Hughes: Yes, every one of them. Q: What would become of the inhabitants? Gen. Hughes: That was their lookout. Q: If these shacks were of no consequence what was the utility of their destruction? Gen. Hughes: The destruction was as a punishment. They permitted these people to come in there and conceal themselves. . . . Q: The punishment in that case would fall, not upon the men, who could go elsewhere, but mainly upon the women and little children. Gen. Hughes: The women and children are part of the family, and where you wish to inflict a punishment you 
 can punish the man probably worse in that way than in any other. Q: But is that within the ordinary rules of civilized warfare? . . . Gen. Hughes: These people are not civilized.

Cruelties
 Daniel J. Evans, Twelfth Infantry, describes the “water cure.”

Q:
The committee would like to hear . . . whether you were the witness to any cruelties inflicted upon the natives of the Philippine Islands; and if so, under what circumstances. Evans: The case I had reference to was where they gave the water cure to a native in the Ilicano Province at Ilocos Norte . . . about the month of August 1900. There were two native scouts with the American forces. They went out and brought in a couple of insurgents. . . . They tried to get from this insurgent . . . where the rest of the insurgents were at that time. . . . The first thing one of the Americans — I mean one of the scouts for the Americans — grabbed one of the men by the head and jerked his head back, and then they took a tomato can and poured water down his throat until he could hold no more. . . . Then they forced a gag into his mouth; they stood him up . . . against a post and fastened him so that he could not move. Then one man, an American soldier, who was over six feet tall, and who was very strong, too, struck this native in the pit of the stomach as hard as he could. . . . They kept that operation up for quite a time, and finally I thought the fellow was about to die, but I don’t believe he was as bad as that, because finally he told them he would tell, and from that day on he was taken away, and I saw no more of him. Source: From American Imperialism and the Philippine Insurrection, edited by Henry F. Graff (Boston: Little, Brown, 1969). Reprinted by permission of the author. 
QUESTIONS FOR ANALYSIS 1.
The text of this chapter offers the U.S. reasons for holding on to the Philippines. In what ways does General MacArthur’s testimony confirm, add to, or contradict the text account? 2. The chapter text also describes the anti-imperialist movement. What does Senator Patterson’s cross-examination of General MacArthur reveal about the anti-imperialists’ beliefs? 3. Does the clash of ideas in these excerpts remain relevant to our own time? How does it compare to what you might read or hear about in a news source today? 




 PART 7

DOMESTIC AND GLOBAL CHALLENGES, 1890–1945

 Roosevelt reviewed America’s weak position in the Pacific and declined. He conceded that Japan had “a paramount interest in what surrounds the Yellow Sea.” In 1908, the United States and Japan signed the RootTakahira Agreement, confirming principles of free oceanic commerce and recognizing Japan’s authority over Manchuria. William Howard Taft entered the White House in 1909 convinced that the United States had been shortchanged in Asia. He pressed for a larger role for American investors, especially in Chinese railroad construction. Eager to promote U.S. business interests abroad, he hoped that infusions of American capital would offset Japanese power. When the Chinese Revolution of 1911 toppled the Manchu dynasty, Taft supported the victorious Nationalists, who wanted to modernize their country and liberate it from Japanese domination. The United States had entangled itself in China and entered a long-term rivalry with Japan for power in the Pacific, a competition that would culminate thirty years later in World War II.

The United States and Latin America
 Roosevelt famously argued that the United States should “speak softly and carry a big stick.” By “big stick,” he meant naval power, and rapid access to two

 oceans required a canal. European powers conceded the United States’s “paramount interest” in the Caribbean. Freed by Britain’s surrender of canal-building rights in the Hay-Pauncefote Treaty (1901), Roosevelt persuaded Congress to authorize $10 million, plus future payments of $250,000 per year, to purchase from Colombia a six-mile strip of land across Panama, a Colombian province. Furious when Colombia rejected this proposal, Roosevelt contemplated outright seizure of Panama but settled on a more roundabout solution. Panamanians, long separated from Colombia by remote jungle, chafed under Colombian rule. The United States lent covert assistance to an independence movement, triggering a bloodless revolution. On November 6, 1903, the United States recognized the new nation of Panama; two weeks later, it obtained a perpetually renewable lease on a canal zone. Roosevelt never regretted the venture, though in 1922 the United States paid Colombia $25 million as a kind of conscience money. To build the canal, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers hired 60,000 laborers, who came from many countries to clear vast swamps, excavate 240 million cubic yards of earth, and construct a series of immense locks. The project, a major engineering feat, took eight years and cost thousands of lives among the workers who built it. Opened in 1914, the Panama Canal gave

Panama Canal Workers, 1910
 The 51-mile-long Panama Canal includes seven sets of locks that can raise and lower fifty large ships in a twenty-four-hour period. Building the canal took eight years and required over 50,000 workers, including immigrants from Spain and Italy and many West Indians such as these men, who accomplished some of the worst-paid, most dangerous labor. Workers endured the horrors of rockslides, explosions, and a yellow fever epidemic that almost halted the project. But American observers hailed the canal as a triumph of modern science and engineering — especially in medical efforts to eradicate the yellow fever and malaria that had stymied earlier canal-building efforts. Theodore Roosevelt insisted on making a personal visit in November 1906. “He made the men that were building there feel like they were special people,” recalled the descendant of one canal worker. “Give them pride of what they were doing for the United States.” Library of Congress.

 CHAPTER 21

 the United States a commanding position in the Western Hemisphere. Meanwhile, arguing that instability invited European intervention, Roosevelt announced in 1904 that the United States would police all of the Caribbean (Map 21.2). This so-called Roosevelt Corollary to the Monroe Doctrine actually turned that doctrine upside down: instead of guaranteeing that the United States would protect its neighbors from Europe and help preserve their independence, it asserted the United States’s unrestricted right to regulate Caribbean affairs. The Roosevelt Corollary was not a treaty but a unilateral declaration sanctioned only by America’s military and economic might. Citing it, the United States intervened regularly in Caribbean and Central American nations over the next three decades. Entering office in 1913, Democratic president Woodrow Wilson criticized his predecessors’ foreign policy. He pledged that the United States would “never again seek one additional foot of territory by conquest.” This stance appealed to anti-imperialists in the Democratic base, including longtime supporters of William Jennings Bryan. But the new president soon showed that, when American interests called for it, his actions were not so different from those of Roosevelt and Taft. Since the 1870s, Mexican dictator Porfirio Díaz had created a friendly climate for American companies that

An Emerging World Power, 1890–1918


 purchased Mexican plantations, mines, and oil fields. By the early 1900s, however, Díaz feared the extraordinary power of these foreign interests and began to nationalize — reclaim — key resources. American investors who faced the loss of Mexican holdings began to back Francisco Madero, an advocate of constitutional government who was friendly to U.S. interests. In 1911, Madero forced Díaz to resign and proclaimed himself president. Thousands of poor Mexicans took this opportunity to mobilize rural armies and demand more radical change. Madero’s position was weak, and several strongmen sought to overthrow him; in 1913, he was deposed and murdered by a leading general. Immediately, several other military men vied for control. Wilson, fearing that the unrest threatened U.S. interests, decided to intervene in the emerging Mexican Revolution. On the pretext of a minor insult to the navy, he ordered U.S. occupation of the port of Veracruz on April 21, 1914, at the cost of 19 American and 126 Mexican lives. Though the intervention helped Venustiano Carranza, the revolutionary leader whom Wilson most favored, Carranza protested it as illegitimate meddling in Mexican affairs. Carranza’s forces, after nearly engaging the Americans themselves, entered Mexico City in triumph a few months later. Though Wilson had supported this outcome, his interference caused lasting mistrust.

UNITED STATES

ATLANTIC OCEAN PACIFIC OCEAN

 BAHAMAS (British)

Gulf of Mexico
 MEXICO

 U.S. possessions U.S. interventions

N
E


W


!


 CUBA

Veracruz


 1 Settled border dispute, 1895–1896 7 2 U.S. troops, 1898–1902, BRITISH 1906–1909, 1917–1922 HONDURAS 3 Support of revolt, 1903 HONDURAS 4 U.S. lease beginning in 1903 5 U.S. control beginning GUATEMALA in 1903 EL SALVADOR 6 U.S. troops, 1909–1910, 1912–1925 COSTA 7 Seized by U.S. Navy, 1914 RICA 8 U.S. troops, 1915–1934 500 miles 9 U.S. troops, 1916–1924



 500 kilometers

 Guantánamo Bay

 JAMAICA (British)

!




DOMINICAN REPUBLIC PUERTO RICO
Acquired in 1898 


 HAITI

S


VIRGIN IS.
Acquired in 1917 
Caribbean Sea
NICARAGUA CANAL ZONE 5

 VENEZUELA

 PANAMA

 COLOMBIA

 MAP 21.2 Policeman of the Caribbean After the War of 1898, the United States vigorously asserted its interest in the affairs of its neighbors to the south. As the record of interventions shows, the United States truly became the “policeman” of the Caribbean and Central America.

BR. GUIANA





 PART 7

DOMESTIC AND GLOBAL CHALLENGES, 1890–1945

Pancho Villa, 1914
 This photograph captures Mexican general Pancho Villa at the height of his power, at the head of Venustiano Carranza’s northern army in 1914. The next year, he broke with Carranza and, among other desperate tactics, began to attack Americans. Though he had been much admired in the United States, Villa instantly became America’s foremost enemy. He evaded General John J. Pershing’s punitive expedition of 1916, however, demonstrating the difficulties even modern armies could have against a guerrilla foe who knows his home terrain and can melt away into a sympathetic population. Brown Brothers.

 Carranza’s victory did not subdue revolutionary activity in Mexico. In 1916, General Francisco “Pancho” Villa — a thug to his enemies, but a heroic Robin Hood to many poor Mexicans — crossed the U.S.-Mexico border, killing sixteen American civilians and raiding the town of Columbus, New Mexico. Wilson sent 11,000 troops to pursue Villa, a force that soon resembled an army of occupation in northern Mexico. Mexican public opinion demanded withdrawal as armed clashes broke out between U.S. and Mexican troops. At the brink of war, both governments backed off and U.S. forces departed. But policymakers in Washington had shown their intention to police not only the Caribbean and Central America but also Mexico when they deemed it necessary.

The United States in
World War I
 While the United States staked claims around the globe, a war of unprecedented scale was brewing in Europe. The military buildup of Germany, a rising power, terrified its neighbors. To the east, the disintegrating Ottoman Empire was losing its grip on the Balkans. Out of these conflicts, two rival power blocs emerged: the Triple Alliance (Germany, AustriaHungary, and Italy) and Triple Entente (Britain, France, and Russia). Within each alliance, national governments pursued their own interests but were bound to one another by both public and secret treaties.

 Americans had no obvious stake in these developments. In 1905, when Germany suddenly challenged French control of Morocco, Theodore Roosevelt arranged an international conference to defuse the crisis. Germany got a few concessions, but France — with British backing — retained Morocco. Accomplished in the same year that Roosevelt brokered peace between Russia and Japan, the conference seemed another diplomatic triumph. One U.S. official boasted that America had kept peace by “the power of our detachment.” It was not to last.

From Neutrality to War
 The spark that ignited World War I came in the Balkans, where Austria-Hungary and Russia competed for control. Austria’s 1908 seizure of Ottoman provinces, including Bosnia, angered the nearby Slavic nation of Serbia and its ally, Russia. Serbian revolutionaries recruited Bosnian Slavs to resist Austrian rule. In June 1914, in the city of Sarajevo, university student Gavrilo Princip assassinated Archduke Franz Ferdinand, heir to the Austro-Hungarian throne. Like dominos falling, the system of European alliances pushed all the powers into war. Austria-Hungary blamed Serbia for the assassination and declared war on July 28. Russia, tied by secret treaty to Serbia, mobilized against Austria-Hungary. This prompted Germany to declare war on Russia and its ally France. As a preparation for attacking France, Germany launched a brutal invasion of the neutral country of Belgium, which caused Great Britain to declare war on Germany.

 CHAPTER 21

 Within a week, most of Europe was at war, with the major Allies — Great Britain, France, and Russia — confronting the Central Powers of Germany and Austria-Hungary. Two military zones emerged. On the Western Front, Germany battled the British and French; on the Eastern Front, Germany and AustriaHungary fought Russia. Because most of the warring nations held colonial empires, the conflict soon spread to the Middle East, Africa, and Asia. The so-called Great War wreaked terrible devastation. New technology, some of it devised in the United States, made warfare deadlier than ever before. Every soldier carried a long-range, high-velocity rifle that could hit a target at 1,000 yards — a vast technical advancement over the 300-yard range of rifles used in the U.S. Civil War. The machine gun was even more deadly. Its American-born inventor, Hiram Maxim, had moved to Britain in the 1880s to follow a friend’s advice: “If you want to make your fortune, invent something which will allow those fool Europeans to kill each other more quickly.” New technologies helped soldiers in defensive positions; once advancing Germans ran into French fortifications, they stalled. Across a swath of Belgium and northeastern France, millions of soldiers on both sides hunkered down in fortified trenches. During 1916, repeatedly trying to break through French lines at Verdun, Germans suffered 450,000 casualties. The French fared even worse, with 550,000 dead or wounded. It was all to no avail. From 1914 to 1918, the Western Front barely moved. At the war’s outbreak, President Wilson called on Americans to be “neutral in fact as well as in name.” If the United States remained out of the conflict, Wilson reasoned, he could influence the postwar settlement, much as Theodore Roosevelt had done after previous conflicts. Even if Wilson had wished to, it would have been nearly impossible in 1914 to unite Americans behind the Allies. Many Irish immigrants viewed Britain as an enemy — based on its continued occupation of Ireland — while millions of German Americans maintained ties to their homeland. Progressive-minded Republicans, such as Senator Robert La Follette of Wisconsin, vehemently opposed taking sides in a European fight, as did socialists, who condemned the war as a conflict among greedy capitalist empires. Two giants of American industry, Andrew Carnegie and Henry Ford, opposed the war. In December 1915, Ford sent a hundred men and women to Europe on a “peace ship” to urge an end to the war. “It would be folly,” declared the New York Sun, “for the country to sacrifice itself to . . . the clash of ancient hatreds which is urging the Old World to destruction.”

An Emerging World Power, 1890–1918


Flying Aces
 As millions of men suffered and died in the trenches during the Great War, a few hundred pilots did battle in the sky. America’s best-known ace pilot was Eddie Rickenbacker (right) of the 94th Aero Pursuit Squadron — a pilot who was credited with shooting down twenty-six enemy aircraft. The 94th was known as the hat-in-the-ring squadron, after the American custom by which a combatant threw his hat into the ring as an invitation to fight. Note the hat insignia on the plane. © Bettmann/Corbis.

The Struggle to Remain Neutral The United
 States, wishing to trade with all the warring nations, might have remained neutral if Britain had not held commanding power at sea. In September 1914, the British imposed a naval blockade on the Central Powers to cut off vital supplies of food and military equipment. Though the Wilson administration protested this infringement of the rights of neutral carriers, commerce with the Allies more than made up for the economic loss. Trade with Britain and France grew fourfold over the next two years, to $3.2 billion in 1916;





 PART 7

DOMESTIC AND GLOBAL CHALLENGES, 1890–1945

 by 1917, U.S. banks had lent the Allies $2.5 billion. In contrast, American trade and loans to Germany stood then at a mere $56 million. This imbalance undercut U.S. neutrality. If Germany won and Britain and France defaulted on their debts, American companies would suffer catastrophic losses. To challenge the British navy, Germany launched a devastating new weapon, the U-boat (short for Unterseeboot, “undersea boat,” or submarine). In April 1915, Germany issued a warning that all ships flying flags of Britain or its allies were liable to destruction. A few weeks later, a U-boat torpedoed the British luxury liner Lusitania off the coast of Ireland, killing 1,198 people, including 128 Americans. The attack on the passenger ship (which was later revealed to have been carrying munitions) incensed Americans. The following year, in an agreement known as the Sussex pledge, Germany agreed not to target passenger liners or merchant ships unless an inspection showed the latter carried weapons. But the Lusitania sinking prompted Wilson to reconsider his options. After quietly trying to mediate in Europe but finding neither side interested in peace, he endorsed a $1 billion U.S. military buildup. American public opinion still ran strongly against entering the war, a fact that shaped the election of 1916. Republicans rejected the belligerently prowar Theodore Roosevelt in favor of Supreme Court justice Charles Evans Hughes, a progressive former governor of New York. Democrats renominated Wilson, who campaigned on his domestic record and as the president who “kept us out of war.” Wilson eked out a narrow victory; winning California by a mere 4,000 votes, he secured a slim majority in the electoral college.

 America Enters the War Despite Wilson’s campaign slogan, events pushed him toward war. In February 1917, Germany resumed unrestricted submarine warfare, a decision dictated by the impasse on the Western Front. In response, Wilson broke off diplomatic relations with Germany. A few weeks later, newspapers published an intercepted dispatch from German foreign secretary Arthur Zimmermann to his minister in Mexico. The Zimmermann teleIDENTIFY CAUSES gram urged Mexico to join the What factors led the Central Powers, promising that if United States to enter the United States entered the war, World War I, despite Germany would help Mexico the desire of so many recover “the lost territory of Americans, including the Texas, New Mexico, and Arizona.” president, to stay out of With Pancho Villa’s border raids the war? still fresh in Americans’ minds,

 this threat jolted public opinion. Meanwhile, German U-boats attacked U.S. ships without warning, sinking three on March 18 alone. On April 2, 1917, Wilson asked Congress for a declaration of war. He argued that Germany had trampled on American rights and imperiled U.S. trade and citizens’ lives. “We desire no conquest,” Wilson declared, “no material compensation for the sacrifices we shall freely make.” Reflecting his progressive idealism, Wilson promised that American involvement would make the world “safe for democracy.” On April 6, the United States declared war on Germany. Reflecting the nation’s divided views, the vote was far from unanimous. Six senators and fifty members of the House voted against entry, including Representative Jeannette Rankin of Montana, the first woman elected to Congress. “You can no more win a war than you can win an earthquake,” Rankin said. “I want to stand by my country, but I cannot vote for war.”

“Over There”
 To Americans, Europe seemed a great distance away. Many assumed the United States would simply provide munitions and economic aid. “Good Lord,” exclaimed one U.S. senator to a Wilson administration official, “you’re not going to send soldiers over there, are you?” But when General John J. Pershing asked how the United States could best support the Allies, the French commander put it bluntly: “Men, men, and more men.” Amid war fever, thousands of young men prepared to go “over there,” in the words of George M. Cohan’s popular song: “Make your Daddy glad to have had such a lad. / Tell your sweetheart not to pine, / To be proud her boy’s in line.”

Americans Join the War In 1917, the U.S. Army
 numbered fewer than 200,000 soldiers; needing more men, Congress instituted a military draft in May 1917. In contrast to the Civil War, when resistance was common, conscription went smoothly, partly because local, civilian-run draft boards played a central role in the new system. Still, draft registration demonstrated government’s increasing power over ordinary citizens. On a single day — June 5, 1917 — more than 9.5 million men between the ages of twenty-one and thirty registered at local voting precincts for possible military service. President Wilson chose General Pershing to head the American Expeditionary Force (AEF), which had to be trained, outfitted, and carried across the submarineplagued Atlantic. This required safer shipping. When

 CHAPTER 21

An Emerging World Power, 1890–1918




Safe Sex, Vintage 1919
 To teach young American men how to avoid venereal diseases, the War Department used posters, pep talks, and films. There were no effective treatments for venereal infections until 1928, when Alexander Fleming discovered penicillin, and so the army urged soldiers to refrain from visiting prostitutes or to use condoms. Fit to Win starred handsome Ray McKee, who had already appeared in eighty films, and was directed by E. H. Griffith, who would go on to direct sixty Hollywood films between 1920 and 1946. Social Welfare History Archives Center, University of Minnesota/Picture Research Consultants & Archives.

 the United States entered the war, German U-boats were sinking 900,000 tons of Allied ships each month. By sending merchant and troop ships in armed convoys, the U.S. Navy cut that monthly rate to 400,000 tons by the end of 1917. With trench warfare grinding on, Allied commanders pleaded for American soldiers to fill their depleted units, but Pershing waited until the AEF reached full strength. As late as May 1918, the brunt of the fighting fell to the French and British. The Allies’ burden increased when the Eastern Front collapsed following the Bolshevik (Communist) Revolution in Russia in November 1917. To consolidate power at home, the new Bolshevik government, led by Vladimir Lenin, sought peace with the Central Powers. In a 1918 treaty, Russia surrendered its claims over vast parts of its territories in exchange for peace. Released from war against Germany, the Bolsheviks turned their attention to a civil war at home. Terrified by communism, Japan and several Allied countries, including the United States, later sent troops to fight the Bolsheviks and aid forces loyal to the deposed tsar. But after a four-year civil war, Lenin’s forces established full control over Russia and reclaimed Ukraine and other former possessions. Peace with Russia freed Germany to launch a major offensive on the Western Front. By May 1918, German troops had advanced to within 50 miles of Paris. Pershing at last committed about 60,000 U.S. soldiers to support the French defense. With American soldiers engaged in massive numbers, Allied forces brought the Germans to a halt in July; by September, they forced a retreat. Pershing then pitted more than one million

 American soldiers against an outEXPLAIN numbered and exhausted German CONSEQUENCES army in the Argonne forest. By How did U.S. military entry early November, this attack broke into World War I affect the German defenses at a crucial rail course of the war? hub, Sedan. The cost was high: 26,000 Americans killed and 95,000 wounded (Map 21.3). But the flood of U.S. troops and supplies determined the outcome. Recognizing inevitable defeat and facing popular uprisings at home, Germany signed an armistice on November 11, 1918. The Great War was over.

The American Fighting Force By the end of World
 War I, almost 4 million American men — popularly known as “doughboys” — wore U.S. uniforms, as did several thousand female nurses. The recruits reflected America’s heterogeneity: one-fifth had been born outside the United States, and soldiers spoke forty-nine different languages. Though ethnic diversity worried some observers, most predicted that military service would promote Americanization. Over 400,000 African American men enlisted, accounting for 13 percent of the armed forces. Their wartime experiences were often grim: serving in segregated units, they were given the most menial tasks. Racial discrimination hampered military efficiency and provoked violence at several camps. The worst incident occurred in August 1917, when, after suffering a string of racial attacks, black members of the 24th Infantry’s Third Battalion rioted in Houston, killing 15 white civilians and police officers. The army tried 118

 PART 7

DOMESTIC AND GLOBAL CHALLENGES, 1890–1945

 MAP 21.3

NETHERLANDS
Thame sR 
R.


.
London


Cologne


Dunkirk
Calais


Brussels


Ypres


 GERMANY

B ELG IU M


Frankfurt


R.


 el

 l le

 m me R Amiens . Cantigny ' May 1918

Sedan


Se
 in e

Verdun


R.


Soissons
Belleau Wood ' Marne
R.
June 1918 '
 ChâteauParis Thierry May 1918 Versailles

 LUX.

Meuse-Argonne Saar
R.
' Sept.–Nov. 1918


R.


'


Strasbourg


St. Mihiel Nancy
Sept. 1918


Rhi
 ne

 nn

So


 ha sh C E ngli

U.S.
Participation on the Western Front, 1918


 R hine

North
Sea


ENGL AND

Mo
 se



 When American troops reached the European front in significant numbers in 1918, the Allies and Central Powers had been fighting a deadly war of attrition for almost four years. The influx of American troops and supplies helped break the stalemate. Successful offensive maneuvers by the American Expeditionary Force included those at Belleau Wood and Château-Thierry and the Meuse-Argonne campaign.

N
E


W
S


'


FRA N C E

 Major battles involving U.S. forces SWITZERLAND

 Allied offensive Territory under German control by July 1918 Line of trench warfare, 1915–1917 Armistice line, November 11, 1918





 100 miles 100 kilometers

 of the soldiers in military courts for mutiny and riot, hanged 19, and sentenced 63 to life in prison. Unlike African Americans, American Indians served in integrated combat units. Racial stereotypes about Native Americans’ prowess as warriors enhanced their military reputations, but it also prompted officers to assign them hazardous duties as scouts and snipers. About 13,000, or 25 percent, of the adult male American Indian population served during the war; roughly 5 percent died, compared to 2 percent for the military as a whole. Most American soldiers escaped the horrors of sustained trench warfare. Still, during the brief period of U.S. participation, over 50,000 servicemen died in action; another 63,000 died from disease, mainly the devastating influenza pandemic that began early in 1918 and, over the next two years, killed 50 million people worldwide. The nation’s military deaths, though substantial, were only a tenth as many as the 500,000 American civilians who died of this terrible epidemic — not to mention the staggering losses of Europeans in the war (America Compared, p. 689).

War on the Home Front
 In the United States, opponents of the war were a minority. Helping the Allies triggered an economic boom that benefitted farmers and working people.

 Many progressives also supported the war, hoping Wilson’s ideals and wartime patriotism would renew Americans’ attention to reform. But the war bitterly disappointed them. Rather than enhancing democracy, it chilled the political climate as government agencies tried to enforce “100 percent loyalty.”

 Mobilizing the Economy American businesses made big bucks from World War I. As grain, weapons, and manufactured goods flowed to Britain and France, the United States became a creditor nation. Moreover, as the war drained British financial reserves, U.S. banks provided capital for investments around the globe. Government powers expanded during wartime, with new federal agencies overseeing almost every part of the economy. The War Industries Board (WIB), established in July 1917, directed military production. After a fumbling start that showed the limits of voluntarism, the Wilson administration reorganized the board and placed Bernard Baruch, a Wall Street financier and superb administrator, at its head. Under his direction, the WIB allocated scarce resources among industries, ordered factories to convert to war production, set prices, and standardized procedures. Though he could compel compliance, Baruch preferred to win voluntary cooperation. A man of immense charm, he usually succeeded — helped by the lucrative military contracts at his disposal. Despite higher taxes, corporate

AMERICA C O M PA R E D
The United States played a crucial role in financing World War I. In its war-related expenditures, totaling $22.6 billion, the United States ranked fourth among all nations that participated, ranking behind only Germany ($37.7 billion), Britain ($35.3 billion), and France ($24.3 billion). In human terms, however, the U.S. role was different. Note that the figures below for military casualties are rough estimates. Civilian casualties are even more uncertain: the exact number of Russians, Italians, Romanians, Serbians, and others who died will never be known. 
The Human Cost of
World War I
 TABLE 21.1 World War I Casualties Country

Total Population


Military Killed or Missing


Germany


67,000,000


2,037,000


700,000


Russia


167,000,000


1,800,000


2,000,000


France


39,000,000


1,385,300


40,000


Austria-Hungary


49,900,000


1,016,200


 unknown

United Kingdom


46,400,000


702,410


1,386


Italy


35,000,000


462,400


 unknown

Turkey


21,300,000


236,000


2,000,000*


Romania


7,510,000


219,800


265,000–500,000


Serbia


5,000,000


127,500


600,000


Bulgaria


5,500,000


77,450


275,000


316,000,000


62,060


 negligible

Canada


7,400,000


58,990


 negligible

Australia


4,872,000


53,560


 negligible

92,000,000


51,822


 negligible

India


United States


Total Civilian Deaths


*Mostly Armenians


QUESTIONS FOR ANALYSIS 1.
What does this data suggest about the comparative role of the United States in World War I? The experience of its soldiers? The war’s impact on civilians in each nation? 
 profits soared, as military production sustained a boom that continued until 1920. Some federal agencies took dramatic measures. The National War Labor Board (NWLB), formed in April 1918, established an eight-hour day for war workers with time-and-a-half pay for overtime, and it endorsed equal pay for women. In return for a no-strike pledge, the NWLB also supported workers’ right to organize — a major achievement for the labor movement. The Fuel

 2. Which other countries made contributions similar to that of the United States, and why?

 Administration, meanwhile, introduced daylight saving time to conserve coal and oil. In December 1917, the Railroad Administration seized control of the nation’s hodgepodge of private railroads, seeking to facilitate rapid movement of troops and equipment — an experiment that had, at best, mixed results. Perhaps the most successful wartime agency was the Food Administration, created in August 1917 and led by engineer Herbert Hoover. With the slogan “Food



 PART 7

DOMESTIC AND GLOBAL CHALLENGES, 1890–1945

Fighting the Flu
 Influenza traversed the globe in 1918–1919, becoming a pandemic that killed as many as 50 million people. According to recent research, the flu began as a virus native to wild birds and then mutated into a form that passed easily from one human to another. In the United States, one-fifth of the population was infected and more than 500,000 civilians died — ten times the number of American soldiers who died in combat during World War I. The flu virus spread with frightening speed, and the epidemic strained the resources of a U.S. public health system already fully mobilized for the war effort. In October 1918 alone, 200,000 Americans died. This photo shows doctors, army officers, and reporters who donned surgical masks and gowns before touring hospitals that treated influenza patients. © Bettmann/Corbis.

 will win the war,” Hoover convinced farmers to nearly double their acreage of grain. This increase allowed a threefold rise in food exports to Europe. Among citizens, the Food Administration mobilized a “spirit of self-denial” rather than mandatory rationing. Female volunteers went from door to door to persuade housekeepers to observe “Wheatless” Mondays and “Porkless” Thursdays. Hoover, a Republican, emerged from the war as one of the nation’s most admired public figures.

 Promoting National Unity Suppressing wartime dissent became a near obsession for President Wilson. In April 1917, Wilson formed the Committee on Public

 Information (CPI), a government propaganda agency

 headed by journalist George Creel. Professing lofty goals — educating citizens about democracy, assimilating immigrants, and ending the isolation of rural life — the committee set out to mold Americans into “one white-hot mass” of war patriotism. The CPI touched the lives of nearly all civilians. It distributed seventyfive million pieces of literature and enlisted thousands of volunteers — Four-Minute Men — to deliver short prowar speeches at movie theaters. The CPI also pressured immigrant groups to become “One Hundred Percent Americans.” German Americans bore the brunt of this campaign (Thinking Like a Historian, p. 692). With posters exhorting

 CHAPTER 21

An Emerging World Power, 1890–1918


Selling Liberty Bonds: Two Appeals
 Once the United States entered the Great War, government officials sought to enlist all Americans in the battle against the Central Powers. They carefully crafted patriotic advertising campaigns that urged Americans to buy bonds, conserve food, enlist in the military, and support the war effort in many other ways. One of these posters appeals to recent immigrants, reminding them of their debt to American Liberty. The other shows the overtly anti-German prejudices of many war appeals: it depicts the “Hun,” a slur for a German soldier, with bloody hands and bayonet. Library of Congress.

 citizens to root out German spies, a spirit of conformity pervaded the home front. A quasi-vigilante group, the American Protective League, mobilized about 250,000 “agents,” furnished them with badges issued by the Justice Department, and trained them to spy on neighbors and coworkers. In 1918, members of the league led violent raids against draft evaders and peace activists. Government propaganda helped rouse a nativist hysteria that lingered into the 1920s. Congress also passed new laws to curb dissent. Among them was the Sedition Act of 1918, which prohibited any words or behavior that might “incite, provoke, or encourage resistance to the United States, or promote the cause of its enemies.” Because this and an earlier Espionage Act (1917) defined treason loosely, they led to the conviction of more than a thousand

 people. The Justice Department prosecuted members of the Industrial Workers of the World, whose opposition to militarism threatened to disrupt war production of lumber and copper. When a Quaker pacifist teacher in New York City refused to teach a prowar curriculum, she was fired. Socialist Party leader Eugene V. Debs was sentenced to ten years in jail for the crime of arguing that wealthy capitalists had started the conflict and were forcing workers to fight. Federal courts mostly supported the acts. In Schenck v. United States (1919), the Supreme Court upheld the conviction of a socialist who was jailed for circulating pamphlets that urged army draftees to resist induction. The justices followed this with a similar decision in Abrams v. United States (1919), ruling that authorities could prosecute speech they believed to



THINKING LIKE A HISTORIAN

German Americans
 in World War I

 Before 1917, Americans expressed diverse opinions about the war in Europe. After the United States joined the Allies, however, German Americans’ loyalty became suspect. German immigrant men who were not U.S. citizens were required to register as “alien enemies,” and government propaganda fueled fear of alleged German spies. In April 1918 in Collinsville, Illinois, a German-born socialist named Robert Prager — who had sought U.S. citizenship and tried to enlist in the navy — was lynched by drunken miners. The documents below shed light on German Americans’ wartime experiences.

 1. Advertisement, Fatherland, 1915. This ad appeared in a political journal for German Americans. The translation of the songs offered on this recording are “Germany, Germany Above All” and “Precious Homeland.”

 3. Sign in a Chicago park, 1917.

Patriotic German Music on Columbia Double-Disc
Records
E2039


 Deutschland, Deutschland über alles. . . .

10 in. — 75¢


Teure Heimat. . . .


COLUMBIA GRAMOPHONE COMPANY . . . DEALERS EVERYWHERE. 2. C. J.
Hexamer, speech, Milwaukee, 1915. This address by a German American community leader was widely cited during a 1918 investigation by the Senate Judiciary Committee. 
 Whoever casts his Germanism from him like an old glove, is not worthy to be spit upon. . . . We have long suffered the preachment that “you Germans must allow yourselves to be assimilated, you must merge more in the American people;” but no one will ever find us prepared to step down to a lesser culture. No, we have made it our aim to elevate the others to us. . . . Be strong, and German. Remember, you German pioneers, that we are giving to this people the best the earth affords, the benefits of Germanic kultur.

Chicago History Museum.


 4. “Lager Uber Alles” cartoon, 1918. This cartoon was part of an Ohio Anti-Saloon League referendum campaign to prohibit liquor sales. Ohio voters had rejected such a measure in 1915 and 1917, but in 1918 a majority voted for prohibition. Many U.S. breweries, such as Anheuser-Busch and Pabst, were owned by German Americans. “Hun” was an epithet for Germans; “Lager (Beer) Uber Alles” refers to the German national anthem cited in source 1.

Courtesy of The Ohio State
University Department of
History.




 5. James W. Gerard, radio address, 1917. Gerard was U.S. ambassador to Great Britain.

 The great majority of American citizens of German descent have, in this great crisis in our history, shown themselves splendidly loyal to our flag. Everyone has a right to sympathize with any warring nation. But now that we are in the war there are only two sides, and the time has come when every citizen must declare himself American — or traitor! . . . The Foreign Minister of Germany once said to me “. . . we have in your country 500,000 German reservists who will rise in arms against your government if you dare to make a move against Germany.” Well, I told him that that might be so, but that we had 500,001 lampposts in this country, and that that was where the reservists would be hanging the day after they tried to rise. And if there are any German-Americans here who are so ungrateful for all the benefits they have received that they are still for the Kaiser, there is only one thing to do with them. And that is to hog-tie them, give them back the wooden shoes and the rags they landed in, and ship them back. . . . There is no animal that bites and kicks and squeals . . . equal to a fat German-American, if you commenced to tie him up and told him that he was on his way back to the Kaiser. 6. Actions by New York liederkranz reported in New Orleans Times-Picayune, May 16, 1918. Liederkranz, or singing societies, played a vital role in German immigrant communities. Before World War I the city of Wheeling, West Virginia, counted eleven such societies, with names like Harmonie, Germania, and Mozart. By 1918 most liederkranz had vanished. New York City’s was one of the few that did not.

 Members of the [New York] Liederkranz, an organization founded seventy-one years ago by Germans . . . met tonight and placed on record their unqualified Americanism. . . . They declared English the official language of the organization, and for the first time in years the sound of an enemy tongue will not be heard in the club’s halls. Likewise they reiterated their offer to turn the buildings over to the government as a hospital if it were necessary. 7. Lola Gamble Clyde, 1976 interview on life in Idaho during World War I. In the 1970s, historians interviewed residents of rural Latah County, Idaho, about their experiences in World War I. Frank

 Brocke, a farmer, recalled that neighbors on their joint telephone line would slam down the phone when his mother or sister spoke German. “We had to be so careful,” he said.

 I remember when they smashed out store windows at Uniontown that said [sauer]kraut. . . . Nobody would eat kraut. Throw the Kraut out, they were Germans. . . . Even the great Williamson store, he went in and gathered up everything that was made in Germany, and had a big bonfire out in the middle of the street, you know. Although he had many good German friends all over the county that had helped make him rich. . . . And if it was a German name — we’ll just change our name. . . . There were some [German American] boys that got draft deferments. . . . Some of them said that their fathers were sick and dying, and their father had so much land they had to stay home and farm it for them. . . . [Local men] tarred and feathered some of them. Some of them as old men dying still resented and remembered. Sources: (1) Frederick C. Luebke, Bonds of Loyalty: German Americans and World War I (Dekalb: Northern Illinois University Press, 1974), 109; (2) Hearings Before the Subcommittee on the Judiciary, United States Senate, 65th Congress, Second Session (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 1918), 300; (5) Gerard speech, transcript and recording, at Library of Congress American Memory: memory.loc.gov /ammem/nfhtml/nforSpeakers01.html; (6) New Orleans Times-Picayune, May 16, 1918; (7) Oral histories of Idaho residents at GMU History Matters, historymatters.gmu .edu/d/2/. Excerpt courtesy of Latah County Historical Society.

ANALYZING THE EVIDENCE 1.
How did conditions change for German Americans between 1915 and 1918? 2. According to these sources, what aspects of German American culture did other Americans find threatening? What forms did anti-German hostility take? 3. Compare the sources that offer a German American perspective (sources 1, 2, 6, and 7) to those that represent a threat to German Americans’ way of life (3, 4, 5). How did German Americans respond to growing anti-German sentiment in this period? 
PUTTING IT ALL TOGETHER
World War I heightened anxieties about who was a “true” American. What groups were singled out in particular and why? What continuities do you see between these fears over “hyphenated” identities and controversies in earlier eras of U.S. history? Today? 




 PART 7

DOMESTIC AND GLOBAL CHALLENGES, 1890–1945

The Labor Agent in the South
 This evocative painting from 1940 is part of the famous Great Migration series by African American painter Jacob Lawrence. It shows how many African American workers found a route to opportunity: northern manufacturers, facing severe wartime labor shortages, sent agents to the South to recruit workers. Agents often arranged loans to pay for train fare and other travel expenses; once laborers were settled and employed in the North, they repaid the loans from their wages. Here, a line of men waits for the agent to record their names in his open ledger. The bare tree in the background suggests the barrenness of economic prospects for impoverished rural blacks in the South; it also hints at the threat of lynching and racial violence. Digital Image © The Museum of Modern Art/Licensed by SCALA/Art Resource, NY.

 pose “a clear and present danger to the safety of the country.” In an important dissent, however, Justices Oliver Wendell Holmes, Jr. and Louis Brandeis objected to the Abrams decision. Holmes’s probing questions about the definition of “clear and present danger” helped launch twentieth-century legal battles over free speech and civil liberties.

 Great Migrations World War I created tremendous economic opportunities at home. Jobs in war industries drew thousands of people to the cities. With so many men in uniform, jobs in heavy industry opened for the first time to African Americans, accelerating the pace of black migration from South to North. During World War I, more than 400,000 African Americans moved to such cities as St. Louis, Chicago, New York, and Detroit, in what became known as the Great Migration. The rewards were great, and taking war jobs could be a source of patriotic pride. “If it hadn’t been for the negro,” a Carnegie Steel manager later recalled, “we could hardly have carried on our operations.” Blacks in the North encountered discrimination in jobs, housing, and education. But in the first flush of opportunity, most celebrated their escape from the repressive racism and poverty of the South. “It is a matter of a dollar with me and I feel that God made the path and I am walking therein,” one woman reported to her sister back home. “Tell your husband work is plentiful here.” “I just begin to feel like a man,” wrote another migrant to a friend in Mississippi. “My children are going to the same school with the whites. . . . Will vote the next election and there isn’t any ‘yes sir’ and ‘no sir’ — it’s all yes and no and Sam and Bill.” Wartime labor shortages prompted Mexican Americans in the Southwest to leave farmwork for urban industrial jobs. Continued political instability in Mexico, combined with increased demand for farmworkers in the United States, also encouraged more Mexicans to move across the border. Between 1917 and 1920, at least 100,000 Mexicans entered the United States; despite discrimination, large numbers stayed. If asked why, many might have echoed the words of an African American man who left New Orleans for Chicago: they were going “north for a better chance.” The same was true for Puerto Ricans such as Jésus Colón, who also confronted racism. “I came to New York to poor pay, long hours, terrible working conditions, discrimination even in the slums and in the poor paying factories,” Colón recalled, “where the bosses very dexterously pitted Italians against Puerto Ricans and Puerto Ricans against American Negroes and Jews.” Women were the largest group to take advantage of wartime job opportunities. About 1 million women joined the paid labor force for the first time, while another 8 million gave up low-wage service jobs for higher-paying industrial work. Americans soon got used to the sight of female streetcar conductors, train engineers, and defense workers. Though most people expected these jobs to return to men in peacetime, the

 CHAPTER 21

An Emerging World Power, 1890–1918




Women Riveters at the Puget Sound Navy Yard, 1919
 With men at the front, women took many new jobs during World War I — as mail carriers, police officers, and farm laborers who joined the Women’s Land Army. African American women, generally limited by white prejudice to jobs in domestic service and agriculture, found that the war opened up new opportunities and better wages in industry. When the war ended, women usually lost jobs deemed to be men’s work. In 1919, however, these women were still hard at work in the Puget Sound Navy Yard, near Seattle. What clues indicate their attitudes toward their work, and toward one another? National Archives.

 war created a new comfort level with women’s employment outside the home — and with women’s suffrage.

 Women’s Voting Rights The National American Woman Suffrage Association (NAWSA) threw the support of its 2 million members wholeheartedly into the war effort. Its president, Carrie Chapman Catt, declared that women had to prove their patriotism to win the ballot. NAWSA members in thousands of communities promoted food conservation and distributed emergency relief through organizations such as the Red Cross. Alice Paul and the National Woman’s Party (NWP) took a more confrontational approach. Paul was a Quaker who had worked in the settlement movement and earned a PhD in political science. Finding as a NAWSA lobbyist that congressmen dismissed her, Paul founded the NWP in 1916. Inspired by militant British suffragists, the group began in July 1917 to picket the

 White House. Standing silently with their banners, Paul and other NWP activists faced arrest for obstructing traffic and were sentenced to seven months in jail. They protested by going on a hunger strike, which prison authorities met with forced feeding. Public shock at the EXPLAIN women’s treatment drew attention CONSEQUENCES What were the different to the suffrage cause. Impressed by NAWSA’s patri- effects of African Ameriotism and worried by the NWP’s cans’, Mexican Americans’, militancy, the antisuffrage Wilson and women’s civilian reversed his position. In January mobilization during World 1918, he urged support for woman War I? suffrage as a “war measure.” The constitutional amendment quickly passed the House of Representatives; it took eighteen months to get through the Senate and another year to win ratification by the states. On August 26, 1920, when Tennessee voted for ratification, the Nineteenth



 PART 7

DOMESTIC AND GLOBAL CHALLENGES, 1890–1945

Wagon Decorated for the Labor Day Parade, San Diego, California, 1910
 As the woman suffrage movement grew stronger in the years before and during World War I, working-class women played increasingly prominent and visible roles in its leadership. This Labor Day parade float, created by the Women’s Union Label League of San Diego, showed that activists championed equal pay for women in the workplace as well as women’s voting rights. “Union Label Leagues” urged middle-class shoppers to purchase only clothing with a union label, certifying that the item had been manufactured under safe conditions and the workers who made it had received a fair wage. San Diego Historical Society, Title Insurance Trust Collection.

 Amendment became law. The state thus joined Texas as one of two ex-Confederate states to ratify it. In most parts of the South, the measure meant that white women began to vote: in this Jim Crow era, African American women’s voting rights remained restricted along with men’s. In explaining suffragists’ victory, historians have debated the relative effectiveness of Catt’s patriotic strategy and Paul’s militant protests. Both played a role in persuading Wilson and Congress to act, but neither might have worked without the extraordinary impact of the Great War. Across the globe, before 1914, the only places where women had full suffrage were New Zealand, Australia, Finland, and Norway. After World War I, many nations moved to enfranchise women. The new Soviet Union acted first, in 1917, with Great Britain and Canada following in 1918; by 1920, the measure had passed in Germany, Austria, Poland, Czechoslovakia, and Hungary as well as the United States. (Major exceptions were France and Italy, where

 women did not gain voting rights until after World War II, and Switzerland, which held out until 1971.) Thus, while World War I introduced modern horrors on the battlefield — machine guns and poison gas — it brought some positive results at home: economic opportunity and women’s political participation.

Catastrophe at Versailles
 The idealistic Wilson argued that no victor should be declared after World War I: only “peace among equals” could last. Having won at an incredible price, Britain and France showed zero interest in such a plan. But the devastation wrought by the war created popular pressure for a just and enduring outcome. Wilson scored a diplomatic victory at the peace conference, held at Versailles, near Paris, in 1919, when the Allies chose to base the talks on his Fourteen Points, a blueprint for

 CHAPTER 21

An Emerging World Power, 1890–1918


 collective military action. Wilson hoped the League would “end all wars.” But his ideals had marked limits, and in negotiations he confronted harsh realities.

 The Fate of Wilson’s Ideas

“Peace and Future Cannon Fodder”
 This scathing cartoon, published in 1920, was drawn by Australian-born artist Will Dyson and published in a British magazine. It shows the “Big Four” power brokers at Versailles — from left to right, Vittorio Orlando of Italy, David Lloyd George of Britain, Georges Clemenceau of France, and Woodrow Wilson of the United States. Clemenceau, who was nicknamed “The Tiger,” turns his head and comments on the crying child. Even at the time, astute observers such as Dyson argued that the treaty might have horrific consequences, particularly in the brutal conditions it imposed on Germany. Dyson sketched “1940 Class” over the head of the child. The young children of 1920 grew up to inherit the consequences of the Versailles treaty, which contributed to the rise of fascism, Nazism, and World War II. British Daily Herald, May 13, 1919.

 peace that he had presented a year earlier in a speech to Congress. Wilson’s Points embodied an important strand in progressivism. They called for open diplomacy; “absolute freedom of navigation upon the seas”; arms reduction; removal of trade barriers; and national selfdetermination for peoples in the Austro-Hungarian, Russian, and German empires. Essential to Wilson’s vision was the creation of an international regulatory body, eventually called the League of Nations, that would guarantee each country’s “independence and territorial integrity.” The League would mediate disputes, supervise arms reduction, and — according to its crucial Article X — curb aggressor nations through

 The peace conference included ten thousand representatives from around the globe, but leaders of France, Britain, and the United States dominated the proceedings. When the Japanese delegation proposed a declaration for equal treatment of all races, the Allies rejected it. Similarly, the Allies ignored a global Pan-African Congress, organized by W. E. B. Du Bois and other black leaders; they snubbed Arab representatives who had been military allies during the war. Even Italy’s prime minister — included among the influential “Big Four,” because in 1915 Italy had switched to the Allied side — withdrew from the conference, aggrieved at the way British and French leaders marginalized him. The Allies excluded two key players: Russia, because they distrusted its communist leaders, and Germany, because they planned to dictate terms to their defeated foe. For Wilson’s “peace among equals,” it was a terrible start. Prime Minister David Lloyd George of Britain and Premier Georges Clemenceau of France imposed harsh punishments on Germany. Unbeknownst to others at the time, they had already made secret agreements to divide up Germany’s African colonies and take them as spoils of war. At Versailles, they also forced the defeated nation to pay $33 billion in reparations and surrender coal supplies, merchant ships, valuable patents, and even territory along the French border. These terms caused keen resentment and economic hardship in Germany, and over the following two decades they helped lead to World War II. Given these conditions, it is remarkable that Wilson influenced the Treaty of Versailles as much as he did. He intervened repeatedly to soften conditions imposed on Germany. In accordance with the Fourteen Points, he worked with the other Allies to fashion nine new nations, stretching from the Baltic to the Mediterranean (Map 21.4). These were intended as a buffer to protect Western Europe from communist Russia; the plan also embodied Wilson’s principle of self-determination for European states. Elsewhere in the world, the Allies dismantled their enemies’ empires but did not create independent nations, keeping colonized people subordinate to European power. France, for example, refused to give up its long-standing occupation of Indochina; Clemenceau’s snub of future Vietnamese leader Ho Chi Minh, who sought representation at Versailles, had





 PART 7

DOMESTIC AND GLOBAL CHALLENGES, 1890–1945

 The Versailles treaty thus created conditions for horrific future bloodshed, and it must be judged one of history’s great catastrophes. Balfour astutely described Clemenceau, Lloyd George, and Wilson as “all-powerful, all-ignorant men, sitting there and carving up continents.” Wilson, however, remained optimistic as he returned home, even though his health was beginning to fail. The president hoped the new League of Nations, authorized by the treaty, would moderate the settlement and secure peaceful resolutions of other disputes. For this to occur, U.S. participation was crucial.

 grave long-term consequences for both France and the United States. The establishment of a British In what ways did the mandate in Palestine (now Israel) Treaty of Versailles also proved crucial. During the embody — or fail to war, Brit ish foreign secretary Sir embody — Wilson’s Balfour had stated that his Arthur Fourteen Points? country would work to establish there a “national home for the Jewish people,” with the condition that “nothing shall be done which may prejudice the civil and religious rights of existing nonJewish communities in Palestine.” Under the British mandate, thousands of Jews moved to Palestine and purchased land, in some cases evicting Palestinian tenants. As early as 1920, riots erupted between Jews and Palestinians — a situation that, even before World War II, escalated beyond British control. EXPLAIN CONSEQUENCES

 500 kilometers

ATLANTIC OCEAN

N
W
E


 ea

North
Sea


DENMARK IRELAND NETHERLANDS UNITED
Danzig KINGDOM (Free City) GERMANY BELG. RHINELAND CZ SAAR LUXEMBOURG 
E
IN R A CE R L O LS A A SWITZ.

S


 New and reconstituted nations Demilitarized or Allied occupation British mandates

 ESTONIA cS



 The outlook for U.S. ratification was not promising. Though major opinion makers and religious denominations supported the treaty, openly hostile Republicans

 FINLAND

 lti



 500 miles

S W ED
 EN



NO RW AY



Congress Rejects the Treaty


Ba


!


 French mandates

 LATVIA

LITHUANIA EAST PRUSSIA
(Ger.) 
SOVIET UNION

POLAND EC

Vol
 ga R.

H.


Ca


 FRANCE

AL TUG POR

Black Sea


Y
 AL

 Ad YUGOSLAVIA ria tic BULG. Se a ALB.

Sardinia
(It.)


 GREECE

A F R I C A


Persian
Gulf


 SYRIA

Mediterranean Sea
 TUNISIA (Fr.)

N O R T H


 PERSIA

 TURKEY

Sicily


 ALGERIA (Fr.)

 a

 IT

Corsica
(Fr.)


 i Se

ROMANIA SPAIN

 sp

 an

AUST. HUNG.

 LIBYA (It.)

Crete


 IRAQ

DODECANESE IS.
(Italy) 
 PALESTINE

 EGYPT (independent 1922)

 TRANSJORDAN

 KUWAIT (Gr. Br.) SAUDI ARABIA

 MAP 21.4 Europe and the Middle East After World War I World War I and its aftermath dramatically altered the landscape of Europe and the Middle East. In central Europe, the collapse of the German, Russian, and Austro-Hungarian empires brought the reconstitution of Poland and the creation of a string of new states based on the principle of national (ethnic) self-determination. The demise of the Ottoman Empire resulted in the appearance of the quasi-independent territories, or “mandates,” of Iraq, Syria, Lebanon, and Palestine. The League of Nations stipulated that their affairs would be supervised by one of the Allied powers.

 CHAPTER 21

 held a majority in the Senate. One group, called the “irreconcilables,” consisted of western progressive Republicans such as Hiram Johnson of California and Robert La Follette of Wisconsin, who opposed U.S. involvement in European affairs. Another group, led by Senator Henry Cabot Lodge of Massachusetts, worried that Article X — the provision for collective security — would prevent the United States from pursuing an independent foreign policy. Was the nation, Lodge asked, “willing to have the youth of America ordered to war” by an international body? Wilson refused to accept any amendments, especially to placate Lodge, a hated rival. “I shall consent to nothing,” the president told the French ambassador. “The Senate must take its medicine.” To mobilize support, Wilson embarked on an exhausting speaking tour. His impassioned defense of the League of Nations brought audiences to tears, but the strain proved too much for the president. While visiting Colorado in September 1919, Wilson collapsed. A week later, back in Washington, he suffered a stroke that left one side of his body paralyzed. Wilson still urged Democratic senators to reject all Republican amendments. When the treaty came up for a vote in November 1919, it failed to win the required two-thirds majority. A second attempt, in March 1920, fell seven votes short. The treaty was dead, and so was Wilson’s leadership. The president never fully recovered from his stroke. During the last eighteen months of his administration, the government drifted as Wilson’s physician, his wife, and various cabinet heads secretly took charge. The United States never ratified the Versailles treaty or joined the League of Nations. In turn, the League was weak. When Wilson died in 1924, his dream of a just and peaceful international order lay in ruins. The impact of World War I can hardly be overstated. Despite bids for power by Britain and France, Europe’s hold on its colonial empires never recovered. The United States, now a major world power, appeared to turn its back on the world when it rejected the Versailles treaty. But in laying claim to Hawaii and the Philippines, asserting power in Latin America, and intervening in Asia, the United States had entangled itself deeply in global politics. By 1918, the nation had gained too much diplomatic clout — and was too dependent on overseas trade — for isolation to be a realistic long-term option. On the home front, the effects of World War I were no less dramatic. Wartime jobs and prosperity ushered in an era of exuberant consumerism, while the

An Emerging World Power, 1890–1918


 achievements of women’s voting rights seemed to presage a new progressive era. But as peace returned, it became clear that the war had not advanced reform. Rather than embracing government activism, Americans of the 1920s proved eager to relinquish it.

SUMMARY
Between 1877 and 1918, the United States rose as a major economic and military power. Justifications for overseas expansion emphasized access to global markets, the importance of sea power, and the need to police international misconduct and trade. These justifications shaped U.S. policy toward European powers in Latin America, and victory in the War of 1898 enabled the United States to take control of former Spanish colonies in the Caribbean and Pacific. Victory, however, also led to bloody conflict in the Philippines as the United States struggled to suppress Filipino resistance to American rule. After 1899, the United States aggressively asserted its interests in Asia and Latin America. In China, the United States used the so-called Boxer Rebellion to make good its claim to an “open door” to Chinese markets. Later, President Theodore Roosevelt strengthened relations with Japan, and his successor, William Howard Taft, supported U.S. business interests in China. In the Caribbean, the United States constructed the Panama Canal and regularly exercised the right, claimed under the Roosevelt Corollary, to intervene in the affairs of states in the region. President Woodrow Wilson publicly disparaged the imperialism of his predecessors but repeatedly used the U.S. military to “police” Mexico. At the outbreak of World War I, the United States asserted neutrality, but its economic ties to the Allies rapidly undercut that claim. In 1917, German submarine attacks drew the United States into the war on the side of Britain and France. Involvement in the war profoundly transformed the economy, politics, and society of the nation, resulting in an economic boom, mass migrations of workers to industrial centers, and the achievement of national voting rights. At the Paris Peace Conference, Wilson attempted to implement his Fourteen Points. However, the designs of the Allies in Europe undermined the Treaty of Versailles, while Republican resistance at home prevented ratification of the treaty. Although Wilson’s dream of a just international order failed, the United States had taken its place as a major world power. 




 PART 7

CHAPTER REVIEW

C H A P T E R


R E V I E W


M A K E I T S T I C K
Go to LearningCurve to retain what you’ve read. 
TERMS TO KNOW

 Identify and explain the significance of each term below.

Key Concepts and Events
 American exceptionalism (p. 674) “Remember the Maine” (p. 675) Teller Amendment (p. 675) Insular Cases (p. 678) Platt Amendment (p. 678) open door policy (p. 679) Root-Takahira Agreement (p. 682) Panama Canal (p. 682) Roosevelt Corollary (p. 683) Zimmermann telegram (p. 686) War Industries Board (p. 688)

Key People
National War Labor Board
 (p. 689) Committee on Public Information (p. 690) Four-Minute Men (p. 690) Sedition Act of 1918 (p. 691) Great Migration (p. 694) National Woman’s Party (p. 695) Fourteen Points (p. 696) League of Nations (p. 697) Treaty of Versailles (p. 697)

Theodore Roosevelt (p. 674)
Alfred Mahan (p. 674)
Queen Liliuokalani (p. 676)
Emilio Aguinaldo (p. 678)
 Porfirio Díaz (p. 683) Woodrow Wilson (p. 683) Herbert Hoover (p. 689) Alice Paul (p. 695)

REVIEW QUESTIONS
Answer these questions to demonstrate your understanding of the chapter’s main ideas. 
 1. What factors prompted the United States to claim

 overseas territories in the 1890s and early 1900s?

 2. What role did the United States play in World War

I?
On balance, do you think U.S. entry into the war was justified? Why or why not? 
 3. How did World War I shape America on the home

 front, economically and politically?

THEMATIC UNDERSTANDING
Review the 
 events listed under “America in the World” on the thematic timeline on page 671. By the end of World War I, what influence did the United States exercise in the Caribbean, Latin America, the Pacific, and China, and in European affairs? How, and to what extent, had its power in each region expanded over the previous four decades? Compare and contrast the role of the United States to the roles of other powers in each region.

 CHAPTER 21

MAKING CONNECTIONS

 Recognize the larger developments and continuities within and across chapters by answering these questions.

ACROSS TIME AND PLACE
Read again the 
 documents from “Representing Indians” in Chapter 16 (Thinking Like a Historian, p. 530). In what ways might ideas about Native Americans have informed attitudes toward Hawaiians, Filipinos, and other people of color overseas? How might this explain which peoples Woodrow Wilson included and excluded in his ideal of “national self-determination”? Write a short essay in which you explain how Americans’ policies and attitudes toward native peoples within North America shaped U.S. foreign policy between 1898 and 1918. You may also wish to review relevant information in Chapters 15 and 20 and consider how attitudes toward African

MORE TO EXPLORE

CHAPTER REVIEW

 Americans shaped white Americans’ racial assumptions in this era. Review the images on pages 673, 685, and 695. What do they tell us about how the 1910s, especially the experiences of World War I, changed gender expectations for men and women? At the start of the war, would you rather have been a young man or a young woman? Why? How did new opportunities vary according to a young person’s race and ethnicity? (The posters on pp. 687 and 691 may also be useful in considering this question.)

VISUAL EVIDENCE

 Start here to learn more about the events discussed in this chapter.

 Jean H. Baker, Votes for Women (2002). A collection of essays on the achievement of women’s suffrage. Frank Freidel, Over There (1990). A collection of American soldiers’ firsthand accounts of their experiences in World War I. The Great War and the Shaping of the 20th Century. An excellent PBS documentary with accompanying documents at pbs.org/greatwar/index.html.

 Julie Greene, The Canal Builders (2009). The story of the Panama Canal through the viewpoint of the diverse workers who constructed it. James R. Grossman, Land of Hope (1999). A sweeping study of the Great Migration. Walter LaFeber, The American Search for Opportunity, 1865–1913 (1993). An excellent, up-to-date synthesis of foreign policy in this era.





 PART 7

CHAPTER REVIEW

 TIMELINE

 Ask yourself why this chapter begins and ends with these dates and then identify the links among related events.



 U.S. begins building modern battleships



 U.S.-backed planters overthrow Hawaii’s Queen Liliuokalani



 United States arbitrates border dispute between Britain and Venezuela Guerrilla war against Spanish rule begins in Cuba



 War between United States and Spain United States annexes Hawaii, Puerto Rico, and Guam

1899–1902


 U.S.-Philippine War, ending in U.S. occupation of Philippines United States pursues open door policy in China



 United States helps suppress nationalist rebellion in China (“Boxer Rebellion”)



Hay-Pauncefote Treaty




 Platt Amendment gives U.S. exclusive role in Cuba



 U.S. recognizes Panama’s independence from Colombia



 Russo-Japanese War; Roosevelt mediates peace



Root-Takahira Agreement




 Panama Canal opens U.S. military action in Veracruz, Mexico World War I begins in Europe



 Jones Act commits United States to future Philippine independence



 United States declares war on Germany and its allies, creates new agencies to mobilize economy and promote national unity Espionage Act



Sedition Act
 World War I ends Beginning of two-year influenza pandemic that kills 50 million people worldwide



Schenck v. United States and Abrams v. United States
 Wilson promotes Fourteen Points at Paris Peace Conference Senate rejects the Treaty of Versailles



 Nineteenth Amendment grants women suffrage

 CHAPTER 21

CHAPTER REVIEW

KEY TURNING POINTS:
On the timeline above, identify at least five events that demonstrated the rising global power of the United States. Compare their consequences. If you had been an observer in London or Tokyo, how might you have interpreted the United States’s actions in each case? 




Cultural Conflict,
Bubble, and Bust
1919–1932


C H A P T E R
CONFLICTED LEGACIES OF WORLD WAR I
Racial Strife Erosion of Labor Rights The Red Scare 
POLITICS IN THE 1920s
Women in Politics Republicans and Business Dollar Diplomacy Culture Wars 
INTELLECTUAL MODERNISM
Harlem in Vogue Critiquing American Life 
FROM BOOM TO BUST
The Postwar Economy Consumer Culture The Coming of the Great Depression 


R


 ising to fame in The Sheik (1922), IDENTIFY THE BIG IDEA Rudolph Valentino became a conWhat conflicts in culture and politics troversial Hollywood star. Calling arose in the 1920s, and how did ecohim “dark, darling, and delightful,” female nomic developments in that decade fans mobbed his appearances. In Chicago, help cause the Great Depression? Mexican American boys slicked back their hair and called each other “sheik.” But some Anglo men said they loathed Valentino. One reviewer claimed the star had stolen his style from female “vamps” and ridiculed him for wearing a bracelet (a gift from his wife). The Chicago Tribune blamed Valentino for the rise of “effeminate men,” shown by the popularity of “floppy pants and slave bracelets.” Outraged, Valentino challenged the journalist to a fight — and defeated the writer’s stand-in. Valentino, an Italian immigrant, upset racial and ethnic boundaries. Nicknamed the Latin Lover, he played among other roles a Spanish bullfighter and the son of a maharajah. When a reporter called his character in The Sheik a “savage,” Valentino retorted, “People are not savages because they have dark skins. The Arab civilization is one of the oldest in the world.” But to many American-born Protestants, movies were morally dangerous — “vile and atrocious,” one women’s group declared. The appeal of “dark” stars like Valentino and his predecessor, Japanese American actor Sessue Hayakawa, was part of the problem. Hollywood became a focal point for political conflict as the nation took a sharp right turn. A year before The Sheik appeared, the Reverend Wilbur Crafts published a widely reprinted article warning of “Jewish Supremacy in Film.” He accused “Hebrew” Hollywood executives of “gross immorality” and claimed they were racially incapable of understanding “the prevailing standards of the American people.” These were not fringe views. Crafts’s editorial first appeared in a newspaper owned by prominent automaker Henry Ford. Critics, though, failed to slow Hollywood’s success. Faced with threats of regulation, movie-makers did what other big businesses did in the 1920s: they used their clout to block government intervention. At the same time, they expanded into world markets; when Valentino visited Paris, he was swarmed by thousands of French fans. The Sheik highlighted America’s business success and its political and cultural divides. Young urban audiences, including women “flappers,” were eager to challenge older sexual and religious mores. Rural Protestants saw American values going down the drain. In Washington, meanwhile, Republican leaders abandoned two decades of reform and deferred to business. Americans wanted prosperity, not progressivism — until the consequences arrived in the shock of the Great Depression.

 Celebrating the Fourth of July, 1926 This Life magazine cover celebrates two famous symbols

 of the 1920s: jazz music and the “flapper,” in her droopy tights and scandalously short skirt, who loves to dance to its rhythms. The flags at the top record the latest slang expressions, including “so’s your old man” and “step on it” (“it” being the accelerator of an automobile, in a decade when cars were America’s hottest commodity). The bottom of the picture also added a note of protest: while July 4, 1926, marked the 150th anniversary of the Declaration of Independence, Life says that Americans have had only “one hundred and forty-three years of liberty” — followed by “seven years of Prohibition.”

Picture Research Consultants & Archives.






 PART 7

DOMESTIC AND GLOBAL CHALLENGES, 1890–1945

Conflicted Legacies
 of World War I “The World War has accentuated all our differences,” a journalist observed in 1919. “It has not created those differences, but it has revealed and emphasized them.” In the war’s immediate aftermath, thousands of strikes revealed continuing labor tensions. Violent riots exposed white resistance to the rising expectations of African Americans, while an obsessive hunt for “foreign” radicals — like angry denunciations of Hollywood’s Latin Lover — showed that ethnic pluralism would not win easy acceptance.

Racial Strife
 African Americans emerged from World War I determined to achieve citizenship rights. Millions had loyally supported the war effort; 350,000 had served in uniform. At the same time, the Great Migration drew hundreds of thousands from the South to northern industrial cities, where they secured good wartime jobs and found they could vote and use their new economic

 clout to build community institutions and work for racial justice. The black man, one observer wrote, “realized that he was part and parcel of the great army of democracy. . . . With this realization came the consciousness of pride in himself as a man, and an American citizen.” These developments sparked white violence. In the South, the number of lynchings rose from 48 in 1917 to 78 in 1919, including several murders of returning black soldiers in their military uniforms. In 1921, after a brutal lynching in the railroad town of Rosewood, Florida, black residents armed for self-defense; mobs of furious whites responded by torching houses and hunting down African Americans. Police and state authorities refused to intervene. The town of Rosewood vanished from the map. In northern and midwestern cities, the arrival of southern migrants deepened existing racial tensions. Blacks competed with whites — including recent immigrants — for scarce housing and jobs. Unionized white workers resented blacks who served as strikebreakers. Racism turned such conflicts into violent confrontations. Attacks on African Americans broke out in more than twenty-five cities. One of the deadliest riots Chicago Race Riot When racial violence exploded in Chicago during the summer of 1919, Chicago Evening Post photographer Jun Fujita was on the scene to capture it. As one of the few Japanese immigrants in Chicago at the time, Fujita was probably no stranger to racism, and it took personal courage to put himself in the midst of the escalating violence. When the riot finally ended, thirty-eight people were dead and more than five hundred were injured. Chicago Historical Society/Photo by Jun Fujita.

 CHAPTER 22

Cultural Conflict, Bubble, and Bust, 1919–1932




 occurred in 1917 in East St. Louis, Illinois, where nine whites and more than forty blacks died. Chicago endured five days of rioting in July 1919. By September, the national death toll from racial violence reached 120. The oil boomtown of Tulsa, Oklahoma, was the site of a horrific incident in June 1921. Sensational, false reports of an alleged rape helped incite white mobs who resented growing black prosperity. Anger focused on the 8,000 residents of Tulsa’s prosperous Greenwood district, locally known as “the black Wall Street.” The mob — helped by National Guardsmen, who arrested blacks who resisted — burned thirty-five blocks of Greenwood and killed several dozen people. The city’s leading paper acknowledged that “semi-organized bands of white men systematically applied the torch, while others shot on sight men of color.” It took a decade for black residents to rebuild Greenwood.

Erosion of Labor Rights
 African Americans were not the only ones who faced challenges to their hard-won gains. The war effort, overseen by a Democratic administration sympathetic to labor, had temporarily increased the size and power of labor unions. The National War Labor Board had instituted a series of prolabor measures, including recognition of workers’ right to organize. Membership in the American Federation of Labor (AFL) grew by a third during World War I, reaching more than 3 million by war’s end, and continued to climb afterward. Workers’ expectations also rose as the war economy brought higher pay and better working conditions. But when workers tried to maintain these standards after the war, employers cut wages and rooted out unions, prompting massive confrontations. In 1919, more than four million wage laborers — one in every five — went on strike, a proportion never since equaled. A walkout of shipyard workers in Seattle sparked a general strike that shut down the city. Another strike disrupted the steel industry, as 350,000 workers demanded union recognition and an end to twelvehour shifts. Elbert H. Gary, head of United States Steel Corporation, refused to negotiate; he hired Mexican and African American replacements and broke the strike. Meanwhile, business leaders in rising industries, such as automobile manufacturing, resisted unions, creating more and more nonunionized jobs. Public employees fared no better. Late in 1919, Boston’s police force demanded a union and went on strike to get it. Massachusetts governor Calvin Coolidge won national fame by declaring, “There is no right to strike against the public safety by anybody, anywhere,

Fear of “Bolshevism,” 1919
 This cartoon from the Post Dispatch in Cleveland, Ohio, reflects nationwide panic over the general strike by 110 unions that paralyzed Seattle in February 1919. Opponents of radical labor unrest had a deeper fear: the Bolshevik Revolution in Russia, resulting in creation of the USSR, had brought into existence the world’s first enduring communist state. By crushing unions in Seattle with a club of “Law and Order,” this image suggests that Uncle Sam could beat back the global communist threat. This aspect of the 1919 Red Scare prefigured, at an early date, the anxieties of the Cold War era. Ohio Historical Society.

 anytime.” Coolidge fired the entire police force; the strike failed. A majority of the public supported the governor. Republicans rewarded Coolidge by nominating him for the vice-presidency in 1920. Antilabor decisions by the Supreme Court were an additional key factor in unions’ decline. In Coronado Coal Company v. United Mine Workers (1925), the Court ruled PLACE EVENTS that a striking union could be IN CONTEXT penalized for illegal restraint What factors contributed of trade. The Court also struck to antiblack violence, labor down federal legislation regulat- defeats, and the Red Scare, and what connections ing child labor; in Adkins v. Childmight we draw among ren’s Hospital (1923), it voided these events? a minimum wage for women



 PART 7

DOMESTIC AND GLOBAL CHALLENGES, 1890–1945

 workers in the District of Columbia, reversing many of the gains that had been achieved through the groundbreaking decision in Muller v. Oregon (Chapter 20). Such decisions, along with aggressive antiunion campaigns, caused membership in labor unions to fall from 5.1 million in 1920 to 3.6 million in 1929 — just 10 percent of the nonagricultural workforce. In place of unions, the 1920s marked the heyday of welfare capitalism, a system of labor relations that stressed management’s responsibility for employees’ well-being. Automaker Henry Ford, among others, pioneered this system before World War I, famously paying $5 a day. Ford also offered a profit-sharing plan to employees who met the standards of its Social Department, which investigated to ensure that workers’ private lives met the company’s moral standards. At a time when government unemployment compensation and Social Security did not exist, General Electric and U.S. Steel provided health insurance and old-age pensions. Other employers, like Chicago’s Western Electric Company, built athletic facilities and selectively offered paid vacations. Employers hoped this would build a loyal workforce and head off labor unrest. But such plans covered only about 5 percent of the industrial workforce. Facing new financial pressures in the 1920s, even Henry Ford cut back his $5 day. In the tangible benefits it offered workers, welfare capitalism had serious limitations.

The Red Scare
 Many well-off Americans sided with management in the upheavals of the postwar years. They blamed workers for the rapidly rising cost of living, which jumped nearly 80 percent between 1917 and 1919. The socialist views of some recent immigrants frightened nativeborn citizens; communism terrified them. When in 1919 the Soviet Union’s new Bolshevik leaders founded the Third International, intended to foster revolutions abroad, some Americans began to fear that dangerous radicals were hiding everywhere. Wartime hatred of Germans was replaced by hostility toward Bolsheviks (labeled “Reds,” after the color of communist flags). Ironically, American communists remained few in number and had little political influence. Of the 50 million adults in the United States in 1920, no more than 70,000 belonged to either the fledgling U.S. Communist Party or the Communist Labor Party. In April 1919, alert postal workers discovered and defused thirty-four mail bombs addressed to government officials. In June, a bomb detonated outside the Washington town house of recently appointed attorney

The Passion of Sacco and Vanzetti, by Ben Shahn,
1931–1932
 Ben Shahn (1898–1969) came to the United States from Lithuania as a child and achieved fame as a social realist painter and photographer. Shahn used his art to advance his belief in social justice. In this painting, Sacco and Vanzetti lie dead and pale, hovered over by three distinguished Massachusetts citizens. These grim-faced men — holding lilies, a symbol of death — are Harvard University president A. Lawrence Lowell and the two other members of a commission appointed by the governor in 1927 to review the case. The commission concluded that the men were guilty, a finding that led to their execution. Judge Webster Thayer, who presided at the original trial in 1921, stands in the window in the background. The Passion of Sacco and Vanzetti by Ben Shahn (1931–1932) Art © Estate of Ben Shahn/Licensed by VAGA, New York, NY. Photo © Geoffrey Clements.

 general A. Mitchell Palmer. Palmer escaped unharmed, but he used the incident to fan public fears, precipitating a hysterical Red Scare. With President Woodrow Wilson incapacitated by stroke, Palmer had a free

 CHAPTER 22

 hand. He set up an antiradicalism division in the Justice Department and appointed his assistant J. Edgar Hoover to direct it; shortly afterward, it became the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI). In November 1919, Palmer’s agents stormed the headquarters of radical organizations. The dragnet captured thousands of aliens who had committed no crimes but who held anarchist or revolutionary beliefs. Lacking the protection of U.S. citizenship, many were deported without indictment or trial. The Palmer raids peaked on a notorious night in January 1920, when federal agents invaded homes and meeting halls, arrested six thousand citizens and aliens, and denied the prisoners access to legal counsel. Then Palmer, who had presidential ambitions, overreached. He predicted that on May 1 a radical conspiracy would attempt to overthrow the U.S. government. State militia and police went on twenty-four-hour alert to guard against the alleged threat, but not a single incident occurred. As the summer of 1920 passed without major strikes or renewed bombings, the Red Scare began to abate. Like other postwar legacies, however, antiradicalism had broad, long-lasting effects. In May 1920, at the height of the Red Scare, police arrested Nicola Sacco, a shoemaker, and Bartolomeo Vanzetti, a fish peddler, for the murder of two men during a robbery of a shoe company in South Braintree, Massachusetts. Sacco and Vanzetti were Italian aliens and self-proclaimed anarchists who had evaded the draft. Convicted of the murders, Sacco and Vanzetti sat in jail for six years while supporters appealed their verdicts. In 1927, Judge Webster Thayer denied a motion for a new trial and sentenced them to death. Scholars still debate their guilt or innocence. But the case was clearly biased by prosecutors’ emphasis on their ties to radical groups. The execution of Sacco and Vanzetti was one of the ugly scars left by the ethnic and political hostilities of the Great War.

 Politics in the 1920s As the plight of labor suggested, the 1920s were a tough decade for progressives who had gained ground before World War I. After a few early reform victories, including achievement of national women’s suffrage, the dominant motif of the 1920s was limited government. Native-born white Protestants rallied against what they saw as big-city values and advocated such goals as immigration restriction. A series of Republican presidents placed responsibility for the nation’s well-being

Cultural Conflict, Bubble, and Bust, 1919–1932




 in the hands of business. President Calvin Coolidge declared, “The man who builds a factory builds a temple. The man who works there worships there.” The same theme prevailed in continued U.S. interventions in Latin America and elsewhere: American business needs were the top priority.

Women in Politics
 At the start of the 1920s, many progressives hoped the attainment of women’s voting rights would offer new leverage to tackle poverty. They created organizations like the Women’s Joint Congressional Committee, a Washington-based advocacy group. The committee’s greatest accomplishment was the first federally funded health-care legislation, the Sheppard-Towner Federal Maternity and Infancy Act (1921). Sheppard-Towner provided federal funds for medical clinics, prenatal education programs, and visiting nurses. Though opponents warned that the act would lead to socialized medicine, Sheppard-Towner improved health care for the poor and significantly lowered infant mortality rates. It also marked the first time that Congress designated federal funds for the states to encourage them to administer a social welfare program. In 1923, Alice Paul, founder EXPLAIN of the National Woman’s Party, CONSEQUENCES also persuaded congressional allies Before World War I, to consider an Equal Rights women didn’t have full Amendment (ERA) to the U.S. voting rights, but they had Constitution. It stated simply, considerable success as “men and women shall have equal reformers. After the war rights throughout the United they could vote, but their States.” Advocates were hopeful; proposals met defeat. How Wisconsin had passed a similar might we account for this law two years earlier, and it helped apparent contradiction? women fight gender discrimination. But opponents pointed out that the ERA would threaten recent labor laws that protected women from workplace abuses. Such laws recognized women’s vulnerable place in a heavily sex-segregated labor market. Would a theoretical statement of “equality” help poor and working women more than existing protections did? This question divided women’s rights advocates. Introduced repeatedly in Congress over the next five decades but rarely making it out of committee, the ERA was debated again and again until the bitter ratification struggle of the 1970s (Chapter 29). Horrified at the suffering caused by World War I, some women joined a growing international peace movement. While diplomats conducted negotiations at Versailles, women peace advocates from around the



 PART 7

DOMESTIC AND GLOBAL CHALLENGES, 1890–1945

 Such women faced serious opposition. The WILPF came under fierce attack during the Red Scare because it included socialist women in its ranks. And though women proved to be effective lobbyists, they had difficulty gaining access to positions inside the Republican and Democratic parties. Finding that women did not vote as a bloc, politicians in both parties began to take their votes for granted. New reforms failed to gain support, and others were rolled back. Many congressmen, for example, had supported the Sheppard-Towner Act because they feared the voting power of women, but Congress ended the program in the late 1920s.

Republicans and Business


The League of Women Voters
 The League of Women Voters was the brainchild of Carrie Chapman Catt, president of the National American Woman Suffrage Association. Formed in 1920, as the Nineteenth Amendment was about to give women the vote, the league undertook to educate Americans in responsible citizenship and to win enactment of legislation favorable to women. The league helped secure passage of the Sheppard-Towner Act of 1921, which provided federal aid for maternal and child-care programs. In the 1930s, members campaigned for the enactment of Social Security and other social welfare legislation. The Library of Virginia

 world convened in Zurich and called on all nations to use their resources to end hunger and promote human welfare. Treaty negotiators ignored them, but the women organized for sustained activism. In 1919, they created the Women’s International League for Peace and Freedom (WILPF), whose leading American members included Jane Addams. Members of the league denounced imperialism, stressed the human suffering caused by militarism, and proposed social justice measures.

 With President Wilson ailing in 1920, Democrats nominated Ohio governor James M. Cox for president, on a platform calling for U.S. participation in the League of Nations and continuation of Wilson’s progressivism. Republicans, led by their probusiness wing, tapped genial Ohio senator Warren G. Harding. In a dig at Wilson’s idealism, Harding promised “not nostrums but normalcy.” On election day, he won in a landslide, beginning an era of Republican dominance that lasted until 1932. Harding’s most energetic appointee was Secretary of Commerce Herbert Hoover, well known as head of the wartime Food Administration. Under Hoover’s direction, the Commerce Department helped create two thousand trade associations representing companies in almost every major industry. Government officials worked closely with the associations, providing statistical research, suggesting industry-wide standards, and promoting stable prices and wages. Hoover hoped that through voluntary business cooperation with government — an associated state — he could achieve what progressives had sought through governmental regulation. This meant, of course, giving corporate leaders greater policymaking power. More sinister links between government and corporate interests were soon revealed. When President Harding died suddenly of a heart attack in August 1923, evidence was just emerging that parts of his administration were riddled with corruption. The worst scandal concerned secret leasing of government oil reserves in Teapot Dome, Wyoming, and Elk Hills, California, to private companies. Secretary of the Interior Albert Fall was eventually convicted of taking $300,000 in bribes and became the first cabinet officer in U.S. history to serve a prison sentence. Vice President Calvin Coolidge became president upon Harding’s death. He maintained Republican

 CHAPTER 22

 dominance while offering, with his austere Yankee morality, a contrast to his predecessor’s cronyism. Campaigning for election in his own right in 1924, Coolidge called for limited government and tax cuts for business. Rural and urban Democrats, deeply divided over such issues as prohibition and immigration restriction, deadlocked at their national convention; after 102 ballots, delegates finally nominated John W. Davis, a Wall Street lawyer. Coolidge easily defeated Davis and staved off a challenge from Senator Robert M. La Follette of Wisconsin, who tried to resuscitate the Progressive Party. The 1924 Progressive platform called for stronger government regulation at home and international efforts to reduce weapons production and prevent war. “Free men of every generation,” it declared, “must combat the renewed efforts of organized force and greed.” In the end, Coolidge received 15.7 million votes to Davis’s 8.4 million and La Follette’s 4.9 million. To see a longer excerpt of the Progressive Party platform, along with other primary sources from this period, see Sources for America’s History.

 For the most part, Republicans dropped progressive initiatives of the prewar years. The Federal Trade Commission failed to enforce antitrust laws. The Supreme Court, now headed by former Republican president William Howard Taft, refused to break up the mammoth U.S. Steel Corporation, despite evidence of its near-monopoly status. With the agricultural sector facing hardship, Congress sought to aid farmers with the McNary-Haugen bills of 1927 and 1928, which proposed a system of federal price supports for major crops. But President Coolidge opposed the bills as “special-interest legislation” and vetoed them both. While some state and municipal leaders continued to pursue ambitious agendas, they were shut out of federal power.

Dollar Diplomacy
 Political campaigns emphasized domestic issues in the 1920s, but while the United States refused to join the League of Nations, the federal government remained deeply engaged in foreign affairs. Republican presidents worked to advance U.S. business interests, especially by encouraging private banks to make foreign loans — part of the broader government-business alliance in Republicans’ associated state. Policymakers hoped loans would stimulate growth and increase demand for U.S. products in developing markets. Bankers, though, wanted

Cultural Conflict, Bubble, and Bust, 1919–1932




 government guarantees of repayCOMPARE AND ment in countries they perceived CONTRAST as weak or unstable. What choices did AmeriOfficials provided such assur- cans face in the elections ance. In 1922, for example, when of 1920 and 1924, and American banks offered an what directions did they immense loan to Bolivia (at a choose? hefty profit), State Department officials pressured the South American nation to accept it. Diplomats also forced Bolivia to agree to financial oversight by a commission under the banks’ control. A similar arrangement was reached with El Salvador’s government in 1923. In other cases, the United States intervened militarily, often to force repayment of debt. To implement such policies, the U.S. Marines occupied Nicaragua almost continuously from 1912 to 1933, the Dominican Republic from 1916 to 1924, and Haiti from 1915 to 1934. In these lengthy military deployments, Americans came to think of the occupied countries as essentially U.S. possessions, much like Puerto Rico and the Philippines. Sensational memoirs by marines who had served in Haiti popularized the island as the “American Africa.” White Americans became fascinated by vodou (voodoo) and other Haitian religious customs, reinforcing their view of Haitians as dangerous savages or childlike people who needed U.S. guidance and supervision. One commander testified that his troops saw themselves as “trustees of a huge estate that belonged to minors. . . . The Haitians were our wards.” At home, critics denounced loan guarantees and military interventions as dollar diplomacy. The term was coined in 1924 by Samuel Guy Inman, a Disciples of Christ missionary who toured U.S.-occupied Haiti and the Dominican Republic. “The United States,” Inman declared, “cannot go on destroying with impunity the sovereignty of other peoples, however weak.” African American leaders also denounced the Haitian occupation. On behalf of the Women’s International League for Peace and Freedom and the International Council of Women of the Darker Races, a delegation conducted a fact-finding tour of Haiti in 1926. Their report exposed, among other things, the sexual exploitation of Haitian women by U.S. soldiers. By the late 1920s, dollar diplomacy was on the defensive, in keeping with a broader disgust over international affairs. At the same time, political leaders became frus- PLACE EVENTS IN CONTEXT trated with their poor results. What were the economic Dollar diplomacy usually mangoals of U.S. foreign aged to get loans repaid, securing policymakers in the 1920s? bankers’ profits. But the loans



 PART 7

DOMESTIC AND GLOBAL CHALLENGES, 1890–1945

 often ended up in the pockets of local elites; U.S. policies failed to build broad-based prosperity overseas. Military intervention had even worse results. In Haiti, for example, the marines crushed peasant protests and helped the Haitian elite consolidate power. U.S. occupation thus helped create the conditions for harsh dictatorships that Haitians endured through the rest of the twentieth century.

Culture Wars
 By 1929, ninety-three U.S. cities had populations of more than 100,000. New York City’s population exceeded 7 million; Los Angeles’s had exploded to 1.2 million. The lives and beliefs of urban Americans often differed dramatically from those in small towns and farming areas. Native-born rural Protestants, faced with a dire perceived threat, rallied in the 1920s to protect what they saw as American values.

 Prohibition Rural and native-born Protestants started the decade with the achievement of a longtime goal: national prohibition of liquor (Chapter 18). Wartime anti-German prejudice was a major spur. Since breweries like Pabst and Anheuser-Busch were owned by German Americans, many citizens decided it was unpatriotic to drink beer. Mobilizing the economy for war, Congress also limited brewers’ and

 distillers’ use of barley and other scarce grains, causing consumption to decline. The decades-long prohibition campaign culminated with Congress’s passage of the Eighteenth Amendment in 1917. Ratified over the next two years by nearly every state and taking effect in January 1920, the amendment prohibited “manufacture, sale, or transportation of intoxicating liquors” anywhere in the United States. Defenders hailed prohibition as a victory for health, morals, and Christian values. In urban areas, though, thousands flagrantly ignored the law. Patrons flocked to urban speakeasies, or illegal drinking sites, which flourished in almost every Chicago neighborhood; one raid on a South Side speakeasy yielded 200,000 gallons of alcohol. Profits from the secret clubs enriched notorious gangsters such as Chicago’s Al Capone and New York’s Jack Diamond. In California, Arizona, and Texas, tens of thousands of Americans streamed “south of the border.” Mexico regulated liquor but kept it legal (along with gambling, drugs, and prostitution), leading to the rise of booming vice towns such as Tijuana and Mexicali, places that had been virtually uninhabited before 1900. U.S. nightclub owners in these cities included such prominent figures as African American boxer Jack Johnson. By 1928, the American investors who built a $10 million resort, racetrack, and casino in Tijuana became known as border barons. Prohibitionists were

Wine in the Gutters,
Brooklyn
 This photograph captures America’s cultural conflicts over prohibition. When the law went into effect, federal agents seized and destroyed supplies of alcohol, often dumping it in the streets. Here, working-class children in Brooklyn race to scoop it up in buckets before it drains away. In tenement neighborhoods, children eager to earn a nickel often toted buckets of beer, wine, and homemade liquor for their parents or neighbors. How might a rural temperance advocate have responded to this photograph? How about a working-class man in Chicago, Atlanta, Seattle, or New York? Picture Research Consultants & Archives.

 CHAPTER 22

 outraged by Americans’ circumventions of the law. Religious leaders on both sides of the border denounced illegal drinking — but profits were staggering. The difficulties of enforcing prohibition contributed to its repeal in 1933 (Chapter 23).

 Evolution in the Schools At the state and local levels, controversy erupted as fundamentalist Protestants sought to mandate school curricula based on the biblical account of creation. In 1925, Tennessee’s legislature outlawed the teaching of “any theory that denies the story of the Divine creation of man as taught in the Bible, [and teaches] instead that man has descended from a lower order of animals.” The American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU), formed during the Red Scare to protect free speech rights, challenged the law’s constitutionality. The ACLU intervened in the trial of John T. Scopes, a high school biology teacher who taught the theory of evolution to his class and faced a jail sentence for doing so. The case attracted national attention because Clarence Darrow, a famous criminal lawyer, defended Scopes, while William Jennings Bryan, the three-time Democratic presidential candidate, spoke for the prosecution. Journalists dubbed the Scopes trial “the monkey trial.” This label referred both to Darwin’s argument that human beings and other primates share a common ancestor and to the circus atmosphere at the trial, which was broadcast live over a Chicago radio station. (Proving that urbanites had their own prejudices, acerbic critic H. L. Mencken dismissed antievolutionists as “gaping primates of the upland valleys,” implying that they had not evolved.) The jury took only eight minutes to deliver its verdict: guilty. Though the Tennessee Supreme Court later overturned Scopes’s conviction, the law remained on the books for more than thirty years. Nativism Some native-born Protestants pointed to immigration as the primary cause of what they saw as America’s moral decline. A nation of 105 million people had added more than 23 million immigrants over the previous four decades; the newcomers included many Catholics and Jews from Southern and Eastern Europe, whom one Maryland congressman referred to as “indigestible lumps” in the “national stomach.” Such attitudes recalled hostility toward Irish and Germans in the 1840s and 1850s. In this case, they fueled a momentous shift in immigration policy. “America must be kept American,” President Coolidge declared in 1924. Congress had banned Chinese immigration in 1882, and Theodore Roosevelt had

Cultural Conflict, Bubble, and Bust, 1919–1932




 negotiated a so-called gentleman’s TRACE CHANGE agreement that limited Japanese OVER TIME immigration in 1907. Now nativ- How did debates over ists charged that there were also alcohol use, the teaching too many European arrivals, some of evolution, immigration, of whom undermined Protes- anti-Semitism, and racism tantism and imported anarchism, evolve in the 1920s? socialism, and other radical doctrines. Responding to this pressure, Congress passed emergency immigration restrictions in 1921 and a permanent measure three years later. The National Origins Act (1924) used backdated census data to establish a baseline: in the future, annual immigration from each country could not exceed 2 percent of that nationality’s percentage of the U.S. population as it had stood in 1890. Since only small numbers of Italians, Greeks, Poles, Russians, and other Southern and Eastern European immigrants had arrived before 1890, the law drastically limited immigration from those places. In 1929, Congress imposed even more restrictive quotas, setting a cap of 150,000 immigrants per year from Europe and continuing to ban most immigrants from Asia. The new laws, however, permitted unrestricted immigration from the Western Hemisphere. As a result, Latin Americans arrived in increasing numbers, finding jobs in the West that had gone to other immigrants before exclusion. More than 1 million Mexicans entered the United States between 1900 and 1930, including many during World War I. Nativists lobbied Congress to cut this flow; so did labor leaders, who argued that impoverished migrants lowered wages for other American workers. But Congress heeded the pleas of employers, especially farmers in Texas and California, who wanted cheap labor. Only the Great Depression cut off migration from Mexico. Other anti-immigrant measures emerged at the state level. In 1913, by an overwhelming majority, California’s legislature had passed a law declaring that “aliens ineligible to citizenship” could not own “real property.” The aim was to discourage Asians, especially Japanese immigrants, from owning land, though some had lived in the state for decades and built up prosperous farms. In the wake of World War I, California tightened these laws, making it increasingly difficult for Asian families to establish themselves. California, Washington, and Hawaii also severely restricted any school that taught Japanese language, history, or culture. Denied both citizenship and land rights, Japanese Americans would be in a vulnerable position at the outbreak of World War II, when anti-Japanese hysteria swept the United States.



 PART 7

DOMESTIC AND GLOBAL CHALLENGES, 1890–1945

The U.S. Border Patrol, Laredo, Texas, 1926
 In 1926, San Antonio photographer Eugene O. Goldbeck took this photograph of U.S. Border Patrol officers in Laredo. Since 1917, Mexicans, like other immigrants, had been subject to a head tax and literacy test. The U.S. government had not enforced these provisions, however, because of pressure from southwestern employers eager for cheap Mexican labor. Following passage of the National Origins Act in 1924, the United States established the Border Patrol. Its increasing efforts to police the border slowed the casual movement of Mexican workers in and out of the United States. Why do you think the Border Patrol posed in this way for Goldbeck’s picture? Notice that some of the officers depicted here were dressed as civilians. What might this signify? Harry Ransom Center, University of Texas at Austin.

 The National Klan The 1920s brought a nationwide resurgence of the Ku Klux Klan (KKK), the white supremacist group formed in the post–Civil War South. Soon after the premiere of Birth of a Nation (1915), a popular film glorifying the Reconstructionera Klan, a group of southerners gathered on Georgia’s Stone Mountain to revive the group. With its blunt motto, “Native, white, Protestant supremacy,” the Klan recruited supporters across the country (Thinking Like a Historian, p. 716). KKK members did not limit their harassment to blacks but targeted immigrants, Catholics, and Jews as well, with physical intimidation, arson, and economic boycotts. At the height of its power, the Klan wielded serious political clout and counted more than three million members, including many women. The Klan’s mainstream appeal was illustrated by President Woodrow Wilson’s public praise for Birth of a Nation. Though the Klan declined nationally after 1925, robbed of a potent issue by passage of the anti-immigration bill, it remained strong in the South, and pockets of KKK activity persisted in all parts of the country (Map 22.1). Klan activism lent a menacing cast to political issues. Some local Klansmen, for example, cooperated with

 members of the Anti-Saloon League to enforce prohibition laws through threats and violent attacks. The rise of the Klan was part of an ugly trend that began before World War I and extended into the 1930s. In 1915, for example, rising anti-Semitism was marked by the lynching of Leo Frank, a Jewish factory supervisor in Marietta, Georgia, who was wrongly accused of the rape and murder of a thirteen-year-old girl. The rise of the national Klan helped prepare the way for white supremacist movements of the 1930s, such as the Los Angeles–based Silver Legion, a fringe paramilitary group aligned with Hitler’s Nazis. Far more influential were major figures such as industrialist Henry Ford, whose Dearborn Independent railed against immigrants and warned that members of “the proud Gentile race” must arm themselves against a Jewish conspiracy aimed at world domination. Challenged by critics, Ford issued an apology in 1927 and admitted that his allegations had been based on “gross forgeries.” But with his paper’s editorials widely circulated by the Klan and other groups, considerable long-term damage had been done.

 The Election of 1928 Conflicts over race, religion, and ethnicity created the climate for a stormy

 CHAPTER 22

Cultural Conflict, Bubble, and Bust, 1919–1932


C A N A D A


!


 ME.

WASH. NORTH DAKOTA

 MONTANA

!%


 OREGON

MINN. WIS.

WYOMING NEBRASKA

 NEVADA

 UTAH

!


!% %


 COLORADO

 CALIF.

 ARIZONA

 Governor elected with Klan support U.S. senator elected with Klan support

%


 MICH.

 IOWA

!


 KANSAS

 ILL. '

 MO.

IND. W.
!% VA. KY. % !% 
 TENN.

%%


 OKLAHOMA

NEW MEXICO

ARK. MISS. LA. '

%


 TEXAS '

PACIFIC OCEAN

!
%


!


SOUTH DAKOTA

 IDAHO

VT. N.H. N.Y. '

!'
 ALA.

!


 PA. '

'


 VA.

N.J.


MASS. R.I. CONN.

DEL. MD. N

N.C.
'


S.C.


 GA. '

E


W
S


ATLANTIC OCEAN FLA. '

Gulf of Mexico


 MEXICO

 ' Major areas of Klan violence





 500 miles 500 kilometers

 MAP 22.1 Ku Klux Klan Politics and Violence in the 1920s Unlike the Reconstruction-era Klan, the Klan of the 1920s was geographically dispersed and had substantial strength in the West and Midwest as well as in the South. Although the Klan is often thought of as a rural movement, some of the strongest “klaverns” were in Chicago, Los Angeles, Atlanta, Detroit, and other large cities. The organization’s members operated as vigilantes in areas where they were strong; elsewhere, their aggressive tactics triggered riots between Klansmen and their ethnic and religious targets.

 presidential election in 1928. Democrats had traditionally drawn strength from white voters in the South and immigrants in the North: groups that divided over prohibition, immigration restriction, and the Klan. By 1928, the northern urban wing gained firm control. Democrats nominated Governor Al Smith of New York, the first presidential candidate to reflect the aspirations of the urban working class. A grandson of Irish peasants, Smith had risen through New York City’s Democratic machine to become a dynamic reformer. But he offended many small-town and rural Americans with his heavy New York accent and brown derby hat, which highlighted his ethnic working-class origins. Middle-class reformers questioned his ties to Tammany Hall; temperance advocates opposed him as a “wet.” But the governor’s greatest handicap was his religion.

 Although Smith insisted that his Catholic beliefs would not affect his duties as president, many Protestants opposed him. “No Governor can kiss the papal ring and get within gunshot of the White House,” vowed one Methodist bishop. Smith proved no match for the Republican nominee, Secretary of Commerce Herbert Hoover, who embodied the technological promise of the modern age. Women who had mobilized for Hoover’s conservation campaigns during World War I enlisted as Hoover Hostesses, inviting friends to their homes to hear the candidate’s radio speeches. Riding on eight years of Republican prosperity, Hoover promised that individualism and voluntary cooperation would banish poverty. He won overwhelmingly, with 444 electoral votes to Smith’s 87 (Map 22.2). Because many



THINKING LIKE A HISTORIAN
Who Joined the Ku Klux Klan? 
 Asked why a person would join the Klan, you might cite racism and religious bigotry. But the story is complicated: many whites with strong prejudices did not join the Klan in the 1920s, while others did. Why?

 1. Klan wedding in Washington, D.C., 1925.

 propaganda. . . . The idea of drink will be maintained by means of the Jewish stage, Jewish jazz, and the Jewish comics, until somebody comes down hard upon it. 4. Report on a Klan gathering in Birmingham, Alabama, 1923.

 Edgewood Park was crowded by noon. Klansmen and their wives and families enjoyed a great barbecue, went swimming, dancing, and picknicking. There were airplane stunts during the day with band concerts thrown in for good measure. At night there was a wonderful display of fireworks following the initiation and the address of the Imperial Wizard.

Source: Getty Images


 5. Klansmen in Buffalo, New York, 1924. Data based on historical research into a Klan membership list of almost 2,000 men in the Buffalo area.

 TABLE 22.1 2. Poem read at a meeting of KKK Grand Dragons, North Carolina, 1923.

Klansmen in Buffalo, New York, 1924


Percentage
 of KKK Members

Percentage of
Total Native
White Male
Workers in
Buffalo


 Professional (predominantly clergy, doctors, engineers, pharmacists)

6.1


4.7


 Business (small businessmen, managers, inspectors, accountants)

18.5


10.4


 3. “95% of Bootleggers Jews,” editorial, Dearborn Independent, Michigan, 1922.

 Low nonmanual (salesmen, clerks, foremen)

27.7


22.6


 Violation and evasion of the Prohibition laws has had a deep Jewish complexion from the very beginning. . . . This does not mean, of course, that every bootlegger is a Jew. Unless you live in Chicago, New York or other large cities, an actual meeting with the Jew in this minor capacity will not be frequent. The Jew is the possessor of the wholesale stocks; . . . But notwithstanding all this carefulness, the bulk of the arrests made in the United States have been among Jews. . . . The maintenance of the idea of drink in the minds of the people is due to Jewish

 Skilled (machinists, electricians, railroad engineers, construction trades)

30.6


25.3


 Semiskilled and service (factory and rail workers, deliverymen, policemen, repairmen)

16.4


30.2


0.5


14.5


 God Give Us Men! The Invisible Empire demands strong Minds, great hearts, true faith and ready hands . . . Men who possess opinions and a will; Men who have honor; men who will not lie; Men who can stand before a demagogue and damn his treacherous flattering without winking! . . . Men of dependable character; men of sterling worth; Then wrongs will be redressed, and right will rule the earth.



Occupational Group


 Unskilled (laborers, gardeners)

 6. Interviews conducted in the 1980s with Indiana Klanswomen about Klan life in the 1920s. Seeking truthful accounts, the interviewer allowed the women to remain anonymous.

Anonymous
 For [the Klan] to say, we want to get rid of the niggers, we want to get rid of the Catholics, it didn’t mean a thing to us. . . . I can remember quite well the stories that you hear sitting on the porch. . . . They’d talk about religion, and they’d talk about Catholics. . . . The Catholics were considered horrible people. . . . Anonymous Kelly had a grocery store. Well, it hurt their business terribly because people wouldn’t go in there, because the Klan would tell you not to. . . . If you had a empty house . . . , why you were told not to rent it to a Catholic. Some Klan leader said that the Pope was coming to take over the country, and he said he might be on the next train that went through North Manchester. You know, just trying to make it specific. So, about a thousand people went out to the train station and stopped the train. It only had . . . one passenger on it. They took him off, and he finally convinced them that he wasn’t the Pope. He was a carpet salesman. And so they put him on the next train and he went on to Chicago. 7. Editorial by National Imperial Wizard Hiram Wesley Evans in the KKK periodical Dawn: A Journal for True American Patriots, November 10, 1923.

 Humanity has become a commodity. For mercenary motives, our importers of it want the most inferior grade. Industry desires cheap labor. Therefore, we have had this recent flood of 5 and 10-cent citizenship. Take any map which shows the concentration of the South and Eastern European type of immigrant and you will see [that] wherever manufacturing and mining and lumbering predominate, there the hordes of unskilled labor have overwhelmingly been assembled. . . . The present and recent flood of inferior foreigners has vastly increased our illiteracy, vitally lowered the health level and visibly menaced America by inheritable mental and moral deficiencies. . . . [Farms are] the only legitimate and justifiable excuse for cheap labor, yet that class is moving irresistibly cityward to swell the slums and multiply immorality. For example, throughout the south the colored race . . . is migrating to the North — not to its rural districts, but to its industrial centers. 8. “Program for America,” in the KKK newspaper American Standard, April 15, 1925.

 Laws to require the reading of the Holy Bible in every American public school.

 Recognition of the fact . . . that Romanism is working here to undermine Americanism. . . . Since Roman Catholics give first allegiance to an alien political potentate, the pope . . . their claim to citizenship, to the ballot, and to public office in this Protestant country is illegitimate, and must be forbidden by law. . . . A law to destroy the alien influence of the foreign language press [by] requiring that the English language be used exclusively. . . . Recognition of the tendency toward moral disintegration, resulting from the activities . . . of the anti-Christian Jews, in our theaters, our motion pictures, and in American business circles; the discontinuance of these anti-Christian activities, and the exclusion of Jews of this character from America. The return of the Negroes to their homeland of Africa, under the protection and with the help of the United States Government. Strict adherence to the Constitution of the United States, including the Prohibition Amendment, by every citizen. Sources: (2) Kelly J. Baker, Gospel According to the Klan (Lawrence: University Press of Kansas, 2011), 119; (3) Dearborn Independent editorial reprinted in Aspects of Jewish Power in the United States (Dearborn, MI: Dearborn Publishing, 1922), 34–40; (4) Rory McVeigh, The Rise of the Ku Klux Klan (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2009), 150; (5) Shawn Lay, Hooded Knights on the Niagara (New York: New York University Press, 1995), chapter 4 (esp. 87); (6) Kathleen M. Blee, Women in the Klan (Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press, 1991), 78–79, 149–151; (7) McVeigh, 64–65; (8) American Standard, April 15, 1925, 172.

ANALYZING THE EVIDENCE 1.
Based on the documents above, identify factors that made the KKK appealing to some Americans in the 1920s. 2. Which groups in source 5 were over- and underrepresented in the Klan? The same historian found that at least 34 percent of local Klan members were German American. Review the Thinking Like a Historian feature in Chapter 21, page 692. Why might Germans have been especially likely to join the Klan in this period? 3. What are the advantages and limitations of source 6? 4. Imagine that Republican president Calvin Coolidge had set up a federal agency to discourage KKK activity (an action he did NOT take). He put you in charge of the effort and gave you a generous budget. How would you have spent the funds? Explain why you believe your strategy might have been effective. 
PUTTING IT ALL TOGETHER
Using your knowledge of Chapter 22, and drawing on evidence from the documents above, write a brief essay explaining how the rise of the KKK in the 1920s reflected larger patterns in American society and politics. 




 PART 7

DOMESTIC AND GLOBAL CHALLENGES, 1890–1945

Harlem in Vogue






































29 15






8 12






10 12












Candidate
Herbert C. Hoover
(Republican)
Alfred E. Smith
(Democrat)


Electoral
Vote


Popular
Vote


Percent of
Popular Vote




21,391,993


58.2




15,016,169


40.9


 MAP 22.2 The Presidential Election of 1928 Historians still debate the extent to which 1928 was a critical election — an election that produced a significant realignment in voting behavior. Although Republican Herbert Hoover swept the popular and the electoral votes, Democrat Alfred E. Smith won majorities not only in the South, his party’s traditional stronghold, but also in Rhode Island, Massachusetts, and (although it is not evident on this map) all of the large cities of the North and Midwest. In subsequent elections, the Democrats won even more votes among African Americans and European ethnic groups and, until 1980, were the nation’s dominant political party.

 southern Protestants refused to vote for a Catholic, Hoover carried five ex-Confederate states, breaking the Democratic “Solid South” for the first time since Reconstruction. Smith, though, carried industrialized Massachusetts and Rhode Island as well as the nation’s twelve largest cities, suggesting that urban voters were moving into the Democrats’ camp.

Intellectual Modernism
 The horrors of World War I prompted many intellectuals to question long-standing assumptions about civilization, progress, and the alleged superiority of Western cultures over so-called primitive ways of life. In the United States, these questions contributed to struggles between modernity and tradition, reflected not only in politics but also in art and literature. Some of these intellectual movements had their roots in the devastation of Europe; others — such as the Harlem Renaissance — emerged from social upheavals the Great War had wrought at home.

 The Great Migration tripled New York’s black population in the decade after 1910. Harlem stood as “the symbol of liberty and the Promised Land to Negroes everywhere,” as one minister put it. Talented African Americans flocked to the district, where they created bold new art forms and asserted ties to Africa.

Black Writers and Artists Poet Langston Hughes
 captured the upbeat spirit of the Harlem Renaissance when he asserted, “I am a Negro — and beautiful.” Other writers and artists also championed race pride. Claude McKay and Jean Toomer represented in fiction what philosopher Alain Locke called, in an influential 1925 book, The New Negro. Painter Jacob Lawrence, who had grown up in crowded tenement districts of the urban North, used bold shapes and vivid colors to portray the daily life, aspirations, and suppressed anger of African Americans. No one embodied the energy and optimism of the Harlem Renaissance more than Zora Neale Hurston. Born in the prosperous black community of Eatonville, Florida, Hurston had been surrounded as a child by examples of achievement, though she struggled later with poverty and isolation. In contrast to some other black thinkers, Hurston believed African American culture could be understood without heavy emphasis on the impact of white oppression. After enrolling at Barnard College and studying with anthropologist Franz Boas, Hurston traveled through the South and the Caribbean for a decade, documenting folklore, songs, and religious beliefs. She incorporated this material into her short stories and novels, celebrating the humor and spiritual strength of ordinary black men and women. Like other work of the Harlem Renaissance, Hurston’s stories and novels sought to articulate what it meant, as black intellectual W. E. B. Du Bois wrote, “to be both a Negro and an American.” Jazz To millions of Americans, the most famous product of the Harlem Renaissance was jazz. Though the origins of the word are unclear, many historians believe it was a slang term for sex — an etymology that makes sense, given the music’s early association with urban vice districts. As a musical form, jazz coalesced in New Orleans and other parts of the South before World War I. Borrowing from blues, ragtime, and other popular forms, jazz musicians developed an ensemble style in which performers, keeping a rapid ragtime beat, improvised around a basic melodic line. The majority of early jazz musicians were black, but white

 CHAPTER 22

Cultural Conflict, Bubble, and Bust, 1919–1932




Archibald Motley, Blues, 1929
 Painter Archibald Motley (1891–1981) was born in New Orleans but arrived in Chicago as a small child, when his family — like thousands of other African Americans — moved north in search of opportunity. Motley was able to study at the Art Institute of Chicago and by the 1920s also showed his work in New York City. Many of his paintings depicted life in the predominantly African American neighborhood on Chicago’s South Side that was widely known as the Black Belt. This piece, Blues, was painted when Motley was living in Paris. It shows the powerful impact jazz had on European listeners. Art Institute of Chicago.

 performers, some of whom had more formal training, injected elements of European concert music. In the 1920s, as jazz spread nationwide, musicians developed its signature mode, the improvised solo. The key figure in this development was trumpeter Louis Armstrong. A native of New Orleans, Armstrong learned his craft playing in the saloons and brothels of the city’s vice district. Like tens of thousands of other African Americans he moved north, settling in Chicago in 1922. Armstrong showed an inexhaustible capacity for melodic invention, and his dazzling solos inspired other musicians. By the late 1920s, soloists became the celebrities of jazz, thrilling audiences with their improvisational skill. As jazz spread, it followed the routes of the Great Migration from the South to northern and midwestern cities, where it met consumers primed to receive it. Most cities had plentiful dance halls where jazz could be featured. Radio also helped popularize jazz, with the emerging record industry marketing the latest tunes. As white listeners flocked to ballrooms and clubs to hear Duke Ellington and other stars, Harlem became the hub of this commercially lucrative jazz. Those who hailed “primitive” black music rarely suspended their racial condescension: visiting a mixed-race club became known as “slumming.” The recording industry soon developed race records specifically aimed at urban working-class blacks. The breakthrough came in 1920, when Otto

K. E.
Heinemann, a producer who sold immigrant records in Yiddish, Swedish, and other languages, recorded singer Mamie Smith performing “Crazy Blues.” This smash hit prompted big recording labels like Columbia and Paramount to copy Heinemann’s approach. Yet, while its marketing reflected the segregation of American society, jazz brought black music to the center stage of American culture. It became the era’s signature music, so much so that novelist F. Scott Fitzgerald dubbed the 1920s the “Jazz Age.” 
 Marcus Garvey and the UNIA Harlem’s creative energy generated broad political aspirations. The Harlem-based Universal Negro Improvement Association (UNIA), led by charismatic Jamaican-born Marcus Garvey, arose in the 1920s to mobilize African American workers and champion black separatism. Garvey urged followers to move to Africa, arguing that people of African descent would never be treated justly in white-run countries. The UNIA soon claimed four million followers, including many EXPLAIN recent migrants to northern cit- CONSEQUENCES ies. It published a newspaper, How did the Great MigraNegro World, and solicited funds tion lead to flourishing for the Black Star steamship com- African American culture, politics, and intellectual pany, which Garvey created as an life, and what form did enterprise that would foster trade these activities take? with the West Indies and carry



 PART 7

DOMESTIC AND GLOBAL CHALLENGES, 1890–1945

 that had sought representation at the Versailles treaty table, protests against U.S. occupation of Haiti, and modernist experiments in literature and the arts. One African American historian wrote in 1927, “The grandiose schemes of Marcus Garvey gave to the race a consciousness such as it had never possessed before. The dream of a united Africa, not less than a trip to France, challenged the imagination.”

Critiquing American Life
 Paralleling the defiant creativity of Harlem, other artists and intellectuals of the 1920s raised voices of dissent. Some had endured firsthand the shock of World War I, an experience so searing that American writer Gertrude Stein dubbed those who survived it the Lost Generation. Novelist John Dos Passos railed at the obscenity of “Mr. Wilson’s war” in The Three Soldiers (1921). Ernest Hemingway’s novel A Farewell to Arms (1929) portrayed war’s futility and dehumanizing consequences. Augusta Fells Savage, African American Sculptor Born in Florida in 1892, Augusta Fells Savage arrived in New York in 1921 to study and remained to take part in the Harlem Renaissance. Widowed at a young age and struggling to support her parents and young daughter, Savage faced both racism and poverty. Much of her work has been lost because she sculpted in clay and could not afford to cast in bronze. Savage began to speak out for racial justice after she was denied, on the basis of her race, a fellowship to study in Paris. In 1923, she married a close associate of UNIA leader Marcus Garvey. Augusta Savage with her sculpture Realization, c. 1938/Andrew Herman, photographer. Federal Art Project, Photographic Division collection, Archives of American Art/Smithsonian Institution.

 American blacks to Africa. But the UNIA declined as quickly as it had risen. In 1925, Garvey was imprisoned for mail fraud because of his solicitations for the Black Star Line. President Coolidge commuted his sentence but ordered his deportation to Jamaica. Without Garvey’s leadership, the movement collapsed. However, the UNIA left a legacy of activism, especially among the working class. Garvey and his followers represented an emerging pan-Africanism. They argued that people of African UNDERSTAND descent, in all parts of the world, POINTS OF VIEW had a common destiny and should What criticisms of maincooperate in political action. Sevstream culture did eral developments contributed to modernist American this ideal: black men’s military writers offer in the service in Europe during World 1920s? War I, the Pan-African Congress

UNIA
Parade in Harlem, Early 1920s This photo, taken at 138th Street in Harlem, shows the collective pride fostered by Marcus Garvey’s Universal Negro Improvement Association. What types of people do you see in the crowd? How are they dressed? Note the slogan carried by a rider in the automobile: “The New Negro Has No Fear.” Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture, New York Public Library. 
 CHAPTER 22

 Other writers also explored the dark side of the human psyche. In such dramas as Desire Under the Elms (1924), playwright Eugene O’Neill depicted characters driven by raw, ungovernable sexual impulses. O’Neill first made his mark with The Emperor Jones (1920), a popular Broadway drama about a black dictator driven from power by his people. Appealing to Americans’ fascination with Haiti, the play offered an ambiguous message: its black protagonist was played not by the customary white actors made up in blackface, but by African Americans who won acclaim for their performances. W. E. B. Du Bois called it “a splendid tragedy.” But others were dissatisfied with the play’s primitivism; one actor who played Emperor Jones altered the script to omit offensive racial epithets. The white crowds who made The Emperor Jones a hit, like those who flocked to Harlem’s jazz clubs, indulged a problematic fascination with “primitive” sexuality. In a decade of conflict between traditional and modern worldviews, many writers exposed what they saw as the hypocrisy of small-town and rural life (American Voices, p. 722.) The most savage critic of conformity was Sinclair Lewis, whose novel Babbitt (1922) depicted the disillusionment of an ordinary small-town salesman. Babbitt was widely denounced as un-American; Elmer Gantry (1927), a satire about a greedy evangelical minister on the make, provoked even greater outrage. But critics found Lewis’s work superb, and in 1930 he became the first American to win the Nobel Prize for literature. Even more famous was F. Scott Fitzgerald’s The Great Gatsby (1925), which offered a scathing indictment of Americans’ mindless pursuit of pleasure and material wealth.

From Boom to Bust
 Spurred by rapid expansion during the war, American business thrived in the 1920s. Corporations expanded more and more into overseas markets, while at home a national consumer culture emphasized leisure and fun. But some sectors of the economy, notably agriculture, never recovered from a sharp recession in the wake of World War I. Meanwhile, close observers worried over the rapid economic growth and easy credit that fueled the Roaring Twenties. Their fears proved well founded: the “Roar” ended in the Great Depression.

The Postwar Economy
 Immediately after World War I, the United States experienced a series of economic shocks. They began with rampant inflation, as prices jumped by one-third in

Cultural Conflict, Bubble, and Bust, 1919–1932


 1919 alone. Then came a two-year recession that raised unemployment to 10 percent. Finally, the economy began to grow smoothly, and more Americans began to benefit. Between 1922 and 1929, national per capita income rose an impressive 24 percent. Large-scale corporations continued to replace small business in many sectors of the economy. By 1929, through successive waves of consolidation, the two hundred largest businesses had come to control almost half of the country’s nonbanking corporate wealth. The greatest number of mergers occurred in rising industries such as chemicals (with DuPont in the lead) and electrical appliances (General Electric). At the same time, mergers between Wall Street banks enhanced New York City’s position as the financial center of the nation and increasingly the world. Aided by Washington’s dollar diplomats, U.S. companies exercised growing global power. Seeking cheaper livestock, giant American meat-packers opened plants in Argentina; the United Fruit Company developed plantations in Costa Rica, Honduras, and Guatemala; General Electric set up production facilities in Latin America, Asia, and Australia. Despite the boom, the U.S. economy had areas of significant weakness throughout the 1920s. Agriculture, which still employed one-fourth of all American workers, never fully recovered from the postwar recession. Once Europe’s economy revived, its farmers flooded world markets with grain and other farm products, causing agricultural prices to fall. Other industries, including coal and textiles, languished for similar reasons. As a consequence, many rural Americans shared little of the decade’s prosperity. The bottom 40 percent of American families earned an average annual income of only $725 (about $9,100 today). Many, especially rural tenants and sharecroppers, languished in poverty and malnutrition.

Consumer Culture
 In middle-class homes, Americans of the 1920s sat down to a breakfast of Kellogg’s corn flakes before getting into Ford Model Ts to work or shop at Safeway. On weekends, they might head to the local theater to see the newest Charlie Chaplin film. By 1929, electric refrigerators and vacuum cleaners came into use in affluent homes; 40 percent of American households owned a radio. The advertising industry reached new levels of ambition and sophistication, entering what one historian calls the era of the “aggressive hard sell.” The 1920s gave birth, for example, to fashion modeling and style consulting. “Sell them their dreams,” one radio announcer urged advertisers in 1923. “People



AMERICAN VOICES

Urban Writers Describe
Small-Town America


 In the early twentieth century, the United States was becoming an urban society. By 1920, life outside the metropolis seemed sufficiently remarkable to warrant sociological investigation — or at least, city people thought so. Presented here are three views of rural and small-town America, all published during the 1920s. Though cities had become the wellspring of American intellectual life, urban writers juxtaposed their own experiences with those of people they thought of as living in “Middletown, U.S.A.”

Sinclair Lewis


Main Street
 In his novel Main Street (1920), Sinclair Lewis portrayed the fictional midwestern town of Gopher Prairie. In the excerpts below, Lewis’s narrator describes the reactions of young, urban Carol Kennicott, wife of the town’s new doctor, and Bea Sorenson, a Swedish American farm girl.

 When Carol had walked for thirty-two minutes she had completely covered the town, east and west, north and south; and she stood at the corner of Main Street and Washington Avenue and despaired. Main Street with its two-story brick shops, its storyand-a-half wooden residences, its muddy expanse from concrete walk to walk, its huddle of Fords and lumberwagons, was too small to absorb her. The broad, straight, unenticing gashes of the streets let in the grasping prairie on every side. She realized the vastness and the emptiness of the land. The skeleton iron windmill on the farm a few blocks away, at the north end of Main Street, was like the ribs of a dead cow. She thought of the coming of the Northern winter, when the unprotected houses would crouch together in terror of storms galloping out of that wild waste. They were so small and weak, the little brown houses. They were shelters for sparrows. . . . She wanted to run, fleeing from the encroaching prairie, demanding the security of a great city. Her dreams of creating a beautiful town were ludicrous. Oozing out from every drab wall, she felt a forbidding spirit which she could never conquer. She trailed down the street on one side, back on the other, glancing into the cross streets. It was a private Seeing Main Street tour. She was within ten minutes beholding not only the heart of a place called Gopher Prairie, but ten thousand towns from Albany to San Diego. Dyer’s Drug Store, a corner building of regular and unreal blocks of artificial stone. Inside the store, a greasy marble soda-fountain with an electric lamp of red and green and curdled-yellow mosaic shade. Pawed-over

 heaps of toothbrushes and combs and packages of shaving-soap. Shelves of soap-cartons, teething-rings, garden-seeds, and patent medicines in yellow packages — nostrums for consumption, for “women’s diseases” — notorious mixtures of opium and alcohol, in the very shop to which her husband sent patients for the filling of prescriptions. The train which brought Carol to Gopher Prairie also brought Miss Bea Sorenson. Miss Bea was a stalwart, corn-colored, laughing young woman, and she was bored by farm-work. She desired the excitements of city-life, and the way to enjoy city-life was, she had decided, to “go get a yob as a hired girl in Gopher Prairie.” . . . Bea had never before been in a town larger than Scandia Crossing, which has sixty-seven inhabitants. As she marched up the street she was meditating that it didn’t hardly seem like it was possible there could be so many folks all in one place at the same time. My! It would take years to get acquainted with them all. And swell people, too! A fine big gentleman in a new pink shirt with a diamond, and not no washed-out blue denim working-shirt. A lovely lady in a longery dress (but it must be an awful hard dress to wash). And the stores! . . . A drug store with a soda fountain that was just huge, awful long, and all lovely marble . . . and the soda spouts, they were silver, and they came right out of the bottom of the lamp-stand! Behind the fountain there were glass shelves, and bottles of new kinds of soft drinks, that nobody ever heard of. Suppose a fella took you there! Anzia Yezierska

Bread Givers
 A child of Jewish immigrants from Eastern Europe, Anzia Yezierska grew up on the Lower East Side of New York City. In her autobiographical novel Bread Givers (1925), Yezierska described her arrival in the Ohio town where she attended college.

 Before this, New York was all of America to me. But now I came to a town of quiet streets, shaded with green trees. No crowds, no tenements. No hurrying noise to beat the race of the hours. Only a leisured quietness whispered in the air: Peace. . . . Each house had its own green grass in front, its own free space all around, and it faced the street with the calm security of being owned for generations, and not rented by the month from a landlord. In the early twilight, it was like a picture out of fairyland to see people sitting on their porches, lazily swinging in their hammocks, or watering their own growing flowers. So these are the real Americans, I thought, thrilled by the lean, straight bearing of the passers-by. They had none of that terrible fight for bread and rent that I always saw in the New York people’s eyes. . . . All the young people I had ever seen were shut up in factories. But here were young girls and young men enjoying life, free from the worry for a living. . . . The spick-and-span cleanliness of these people! It smelled from them, the soap and the bathing. Their fingernails so white and pink. . . . What a feast of happenings each day of college was to those other students. Societies, dances, letters from home, packages of food, midnight spreads and even birthday parties. I never knew that there were people glad enough of life to celebrate the day they were born. Source: From Bread Givers by Anzia Yezierska. Copyright © 1970 by Louise Levitas Henriksen. Reprinted by permission of Persea Books, Inc., New York. All rights reserved.

Robert S. Lynd and Helen Merrell Lynd


 locally are bought on time payment, and a working man earning $35.00 a week frequently plans to use one week’s pay each month as payment for his car. The automobile has apparently unsettled the habit of careful saving for some families. . . . “I’ll go without food before I’ll see us give up the car,” said one woman emphatically. . . . Many families feel that an automobile is justified as an agency holding the family group together. . . . [But] the fact that 348 boys and 382 girls in the three upper years of the high school placed “use of the automobile” fifth and fourth respectively in a list of twelve possible sources of disagreement between them and their parents suggests that this may be an increasing decentralizing agent. . . . If the automobile touches the rest of Middletown’s living at many points, it has revolutionized its leisure . . . making leisure-time enjoyment a regularly expected part of every day and week rather than an occasional event. . . . The frequency of movie attendance of high school boys and girls is about equal, business class families tend to go more often than do working class families, and children of both groups attend more often without their parents than do all the individuals or combinations of family members put together. . . . It is probable that time formerly spent in lodges, saloons, and unions is now being spent in part at the movies, at least occasionally with other members of the family. Like the automobile and radio, the movies [break] up leisure time into an individual, family, or small group affair. Source: Excerpt from Middletown: A Study in American Culture, by Robert S. Lynd and Helen M. Lynd. Copyright © 1929 by Harcourt, Inc. and renewed 1957 by Robert S. and Helen M. Lynd. Reprinted by permission of Houghton Mifflin Harcourt Publishing Company. All rights reserved.

Middletown
 In 1929, sociologists Robert S. Lynd and Helen Merrell Lynd published Middletown, a study of life in a small midwestern city. Middletown was not a single community but a composite of several communities studied by the Lynds.

 The first real automobile appeared in Middletown in 1900. . . . At the close of 1923 there were 6,221 passenger cars in the city, one for every 6.1 persons, or roughly two for every three families. . . . As, at the turn of the century, business class people began to feel apologetic if they did not have a telephone, so ownership of an automobile has now reached the point of being an accepted essential of normal living. . . . According to an officer of a Middletown automobile financing company, 75 to 90 percent of the cars purchased

QUESTIONS FOR ANALYSIS 1.
What attitudes toward the small town and big city does Main Street represent? Why do you think Lewis includes views as different as Carol’s and Bea’s? 2. How does the urban experience of Yezierska’s narrator shape her reaction to life in an Ohio town? How might small-town residents have reacted to her description of them as “the real Americans”? How might Lewis have responded to Yezierska’s description? 3. How do the two novelists (Lewis and Yezierska) differ from the sociologists (the Lynds) in the issues they emphasize, and in their tone and point of view? What features of small-town life does each text emphasize? 




 PART 7

DOMESTIC AND GLOBAL CHALLENGES, 1890–1945

American Companies Abroad
 United Fruit was one of the many American companies that found opportunities for investment in South America in the 1920s and that introduced tropical foods to the United States. The company used elaborate and informative color advertisements to sell its products. Bananas were sufficiently exotic that the ads explained to consumers how to tell when bananas were ripe and how to store them (“Never place them in the ice-box”). John W. Hartman Center/Duke University Special Collections Library.

 don’t buy things to have things. . . . They buy hope — hope of what your merchandise will do for them.” In practice, participation in consumer culture was as contested as the era’s politics. It was no accident that white mobs in the Tulsa race riot plundered radios and phonograph players from prosperous African American homes: the message was that whites deserved such items and blacks did not. But neither prosperity nor poverty was limited by race. Surrounded by exhortations to indulge in luxuries, millions of working-class Americans barely squeaked by, with wives and mothers often working to pay for basic necessities. In times of crisis, some families sold their furniture, starting with pianos and phonographs and continuing, if necessary, to dining tables and beds. In the Los Angeles suburb of South Gate, white working-class men secured jobs in the steel and automobile industries, but prices were

 high and families often found it difficult to make ends meet. Self-help was the watchword as families bartered with neighbors and used their yards to raise vegetables, rabbits, and chickens. The lure of consumer culture created friction. Wives resented husbands who spent all their discretionary cash at the ballpark. Generational conflicts emerged, especially when wage-earning children challenged the expectation that their pay should go “all to mother.” In St. Louis, a Czech-born woman was exasperated when her son and daughter stopped contributing to rent and food and pooled their wages to buy a car. In Los Angeles, one fifteen-year-old girl spent her summer earning $2 a day at a local factory. Planning to enroll in business school, she spent $75 on dressy shoes and “a black coat with a red fox collar.” Her brother reported that “Mom is angry at her for ‘squandering’ so much money.”

 CHAPTER 22

 Many poor and affluent families shared one thing in common: they stretched their incomes, small or large, through new forms of borrowing such as auto loans and installment plans. “Buy now, pay later,” said the ads, and millions did. Anyone, no matter how rich, could get into debt, but consumer credit was particularly perilous for those living on the economic margins. In Chicago, one Lithuanian man described his neighbor’s situation: “She ain’t got no money. Sure she buys on credit, clothes for the children and everything.” Such borrowing turned out to be a factor in the bust of 1929.

 The Automobile No possession proved more popular than the automobile, a showpiece of modern consumer capitalism that revolutionized American life. Car sales played a major role in the decade’s economic boom: in one year, 1929, Americans spent $2.58 billion on automobiles. By the end of the decade, they owned 23 million cars — about 80 percent of the world’s automobiles — or an average of one for every six people. The auto industry’s exuberant expansion rippled through the economy, with both positive and negative results. It stimulated steel, petroleum, chemical, rubber, and glass production and, directly or indirectly, created 3.7 million jobs. Highway construction became

Cultural Conflict, Bubble, and Bust, 1919–1932




 a billion-dollar-a-year enterprise, PLACE EVENTS financed by federal subsidies and IN CONTEXT state gasoline taxes. Car owner- How did the radio, autoship spurred urban sprawl and, in mobile, and Hollywood 1924, the first suburban shopping movies exemplify the center: Country Club Plaza out- opportunities and the side Kansas City, Missouri. But risks of 1920s consumer cars were expensive, and most culture? Americans bought them on credit. This created risks not only for buyers but for the whole economy. Borrowers who could not pay off car loans lost their entire investment in the vehicle; if they defaulted, banks were left holding unpaid loans. Amid the boom of the 1920s, however, few worried about this result. Cars changed the way Americans spent their leisure time, as proud drivers took their machines on the road. An infrastructure of gas stations, motels, and drive-in restaurants soon catered to drivers. Railroad travel faltered. The American Automobile Association, founded in 1902, estimated that by 1929 almost a third of the population took vacations by car. As early as 1923, Colorado had 247 autocamps. “I had a few days after I got my wheat cut,” reported one Kansas farmer, “so I just loaded my family . . . and lit out.” An elite Californian complained that automobile travel was no

Automobiles at Jacksonville Beach, Florida, 1923
 The automobile transformed Americans’ leisure pursuits. As proud car owners took to the road in ever-larger numbers, the “vacation” became a summer staple. Auto travel created a booming business in gas stations, roadside motels, campgrounds, and sightseeing destinations. A Florida vacation — once reserved for wealthy northeasterners who had traveled to Miami’s exclusive hotels by first-class rail car — became an attainable luxury for middle-class and even some working-class families. © Curt Teich Postcard Archives, Lake County Museum.



 PART 7

DOMESTIC AND GLOBAL CHALLENGES, 1890–1945

Charlie Chaplin and Jackie Coogan
 Charlie Chaplin (left) and Jackie Coogan starred together in The Kid (1921), a silent comedy that also included sentimental and dramatic moments, promising viewers “a smile . . . and perhaps a tear.” Chaplin, born in London in 1889, moved to the United States in 1912 and over the next two decades reigned as one of Hollywood’s most famous silent film stars. In 1919, he joined with D. W. Griffith, Mary Pickford, and other American directors and stars to create the independent studio United Artists. The Kid made the Los Angeles–born Coogan — discovered by Chaplin on the vaudeville stage — into America’s first child star. Library of Congress.

 longer “aristocratic.” “The clerks and their wives and sweethearts,” observed a reporter, “driving through the Wisconsin lake country, camping at Niagara, scattering tin cans and pop bottles over the Rockies, made those places taboo for bankers.”

 Hollywood Movies formed a second centerpiece of consumer culture. In the 1910s, the moviemaking industry had begun moving to southern California to take advantage of cheap land, sunshine, and varied scenery within easy reach. The large studios — United Artists, Paramount, and Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer — were run mainly by Eastern European Jewish immigrants like Adolph Zukor, who arrived from Hungary in the 1880s. Starting with fur sales, Zukor and a partner then set up five-cent theaters in Manhattan. “I spent a good

 deal of time watching the faces of the audience,” Zukor recalled. “With a little experience I could see, hear, and ‘feel’ the reaction to each melodrama and comedy.” Founding Paramount Pictures, Zukor signed emerging stars and produced successful feature-length films. By 1920, Hollywood reigned as the world’s movie capital, producing nearly 90 percent of all films. Large, ornate movie palaces attracted both middle-class and working-class audiences. Idols such as Rudolph Valentino, Mary Pickford, and Douglas Fairbanks set national trends in style. Thousands of young women followed the lead of actress Clara Bow, Hollywood’s famous flapper, who flaunted her boyish figure. Decked out in knee-length skirts, flappers shocked the older generation by smoking and wearing makeup. Flappers represented only a tiny minority of women, but thanks to the movies and advertising, they became influential symbols of women’s sexual and social emancipation. In cities, young immigrant women eagerly bought makeup and the latest flapper fashions and went dancing to jazz. Jazz stars helped popularize the style among working-class African Americans. Mexican American teenagers joined the trend, though they usually found themselves under the watchful eyes of la dueña, the chaperone. Politicians quickly grasped the publicity value of American radio and film to foreign relations. In 1919, with government support, General Electric spearheaded the creation of Radio Corporation of America (RCA) to expand U.S. presence in foreign radio markets. RCA — which had a federal appointee on its board of directors — emerged as a major provider of radio transmission in Latin America and East Asia. Meanwhile, by 1925, American films made up 95 percent of the movies screened in Britain, 80 percent in Latin America, and 70 percent in France (America Compared, p. 727). The United States was experimenting with what historians call soft power — the exercise of popular cultural influence — as radio and film exports celebrated the American Dream.

The Coming of the Great Depression
 By 1927, strains on the economy began to show. Consumer lending had become the tenth-largest business in the country, topping $7 billion that year. Increasing numbers of Americans bought into the stock market, often with unrealistic expectations. One Yale professor proclaimed that stocks had reached a “permanently high plateau.” Corporate profits were so high that some companies, fully invested in their own operations, plowed excess earnings into the stock

AMERICA C O M PA R E D

Hollywood in Europe


 European film studios struggled after World War I to reach audiences who had fallen in love with American movies. Working-class Europeans, in particular, preferred Hollywood’s offerings to the films produced in Europe. In this 1928 article from a cinematography journal, German expressionist filmmaker Erich Pommer suggested new strategies for expanding an audience for European films. Expressionists, influenced by romanticism and modernism, explored dark themes such as spiritual crisis and insanity. (A famous example of expressionist painting is Edvard Munch’s The Scream.) Pommer worked for American studios and later fled to the United States after the rise of Hitler.

 The towering importance of the American motion picture on the world’s markets cannot be safely explained by the unlimited financial resources at the disposal of the American producers. . . . Its main reason is the mentality of the American picture, which, notwithstanding all attacks and claims to the contrary, apparently comes nearest to the taste of international cinema audiences. . . . The specific and unique element of the American film is the fact of its being absolutely uncomplicated. Being what is called “naïve” it knows no problems. . . . Universal Appeal. It is really preferable to have a picture too light rather than too heavy, because in the latter case there is a danger that the public will not understand the story. This is the worst thing that can happen with a picture. . . . Spectacular Appeal. The international appeal of a picture has its foundation in a story. It is totally independent of the capital invested and of the splendor and luxury used in its production. The fact that in most cases the supers and monumental pictures have proved to be such international successes, does not disprove this claim.

 market. Other market players compounded risk by purchasing on margin. An investor might, for example, spend $20 of his own money and borrow $80 to buy a $100 share of stock, expecting to pay back the loan as the stock rose quickly in value. This worked as long as the economy grew and the stock market climbed. But those conditions did not last. Yet when the stock market fell, in a series of plunges between October 25 and November 13, 1929, few onlookers understood the magnitude of the crisis. Cyclical downturns had been a familiar part of the industrializing economy since the panic of the 1830s; they tended to follow periods of rapid growth and speculation. A sharp recent recession, in 1921, had not

 Such productions always have a simple story of universal appeal, because it is simply impossible to use spiritual thoughts and impressions of the soul in a picture deluxe. The splendour in such production is not merely created for decoration — it is its outstanding purpose. . . . But splendour means show, and a show is always and everywhere easy to understand. . . . Source: Excerpt from “The International Picture: A Lesson on Simplicity” by Erich Pommer from “Film Europe” and “Film America”: Cinema, Commerce and Cultural Exchange 1920–1939, edited by Andrew Higson and Richard Maltby, 1999, ISBN: 978-0-85989-546-0. Used by permission of Exeter University Press.

QUESTIONS FOR ANALYSIS 1.
How does Pommer characterize the attraction of popular American films for European audiences? What does he mean when he calls those films “naïve”? 2. How does Pommer propose to produce German films that will compete with Hollywood? What constraints and challenges did he face? 
 triggered disaster. The market IDENTIFY CAUSES rose again in late 1929 and early What domestic and global 1930, and while a great deal factors helped cause the of money had been lost, most Great Depression? Americans hoped the aftermath of the crash would be brief. In fact, the nation had entered the Great Depression. Over the next four years, industrial production fell 37 percent. Construction plunged 78 percent. Prices for crops and other raw materials, already low, fell by half. By 1932, unemployment had reached a staggering 24 percent (Figure 22.1). A precipitous drop in consumer spending deepened the crisis. Facing hard times and unemployment, Americans cut back dramatically, creating a

 PART 7

DOMESTIC AND GLOBAL CHALLENGES, 1890–1945

24.9
23.6
21.7
20.1




19.0
16.9


 Percent unemployed



17.2


15.9


14.3


14.6


11.7
9.9


8.7


8.5
6.7
5.1




5.2


4.6


5.0
2.4


1.4 1.4






4.7


4.2
3.3


3.2


3.2
1.9


1.8








1.2


1.9




 FIGURE 22.1 Unemployment, 1915–1945 During the 1920s, business prosperity and low rates of immigration resulted in historically low unemployment levels. The Great Depression threw millions of people out of work; by 1933, one in four American workers was unemployed, and the rate remained high until 1941, when the nation mobilized for World War II.

 vicious cycle of falling demand and forfeited loans. In late 1930, several major banks went under, victims of overextended credit and reckless management. The following year, as industrial production slowed, a much larger wave of bank failures occurred, causing an even greater shock. Since the government did not insure bank deposits, accounts in failed banks simply vanished. Some people who had had steady jobs and comfortable savings found themselves broke and out of work. Not all Americans were devastated by the depression; the middle class did not disappear and the rich lived in accustomed luxury. But incomes plummeted even among workers who kept their jobs. Salt Lake City went bankrupt in 1931. Barter systems developed, as barbers traded haircuts for onions and potatoes and laborers worked for payment in eggs or pork. “We do not dare to use even a little soap,” reported one jobless Oregonian, “when it will pay for an extra egg, a few more carrots for our children.” “I would be only too glad to dig ditches to keep my family from going hungry,” wrote a North Carolina man.

 Where did desperate people turn for aid? Their first hope lay in private charity, especially churches and synagogues. But by the winter of 1931, these institutions were overwhelmed, unable to keep pace with the extraordinary need. Only eight states provided even minimal unemployment insurance. There was no public support for the elderly, statistically among the poorest citizens. Few Americans had any retirement savings, and many who had saved watched their accounts erased by failing banks. Even those who were not wiped out had to adapt to depression conditions. Couples delayed marriage and reduced the number of children they conceived. As a result, the marriage rate fell to a historical low, and by 1933 the birthrate dropped from 97 births per 1,000 women to 75. Often the responsibility for birth control fell to women. It was “one of the worst problems of women whose husbands were out of work,” a Californian told a reporter. Campaigns against hiring married women were common, on the theory that available jobs should go to male breadwinners. Three-quarters of the nation’s school districts banned married women

 CHAPTER 22

Cultural Conflict, Bubble, and Bust, 1919–1932


Minnesota Potato Farmers
 The prosperity and consumer pleasures of the 1920s hardly extended to all Americans. This Minnesota family had horses, not a tractor; many of the women’s clothes were probably made by hand. Rural and working-class Americans, who often struggled in the 1920s, found conditions even harsher after 1929. On the other hand, farmers had resources to fall back on that city folks did not: they could grow their own food, and they had long experience in “making do.” Minnesota Historical Society.

 from working as teachers — ignoring the fact that many husbands were less able to earn than ever before. Despite restrictions, female employment increased, as women expanded their financial contributions to their families in hard times. The depression crossed regional boundaries, though its severity varied from place to place. Bank failures clustered heavily in the Midwest and plains, while areas dependent on timber, mining, and other extractive industries suffered catastrophic declines. Although southern states endured less unemployment because of their smaller manufacturing base, farm wages plunged. In many parts of the country, unemployment rates among black men stood at double that of white men; joblessness among African American women was triple that of white women. By 1932, comprehending the magnitude of the crisis, Americans went to the ballot box and decisively rejected the probusiness, antiregulatory policies of the 1920s. A few years earlier, with business booming, politics had been so placid that people chuckled when President Coolidge disappeared on extended fishing trips. Now, Americans wanted bold action in Washington. Faced with the cataclysm of the Great Depression, Americans would transform their government and create a modern welfare state.

SUMMARY
Although involvement in World War I strengthened the United States economically and diplomatically, it left the nation profoundly unsettled. Racial tensions exploded after the war as African Americans pursued new opportunities and asserted their rights. Meanwhile, labor unrest grew as employers cut wages and sought to break unions. Labor’s power declined sharply in the war’s aftermath, while anxieties over radicalism and immigration prompted a nationwide Red Scare. The politics of the 1920s brought a backlash against prewar progressivism. The agenda of women reformers met very limited success. Republican administrations pursued probusiness “normalcy” at home and “dollar diplomacy” abroad. Prohibition and the Scopes trial demonstrated the influence religion could exert on public policy, while rising nativism fueled a resurgent Ku Klux Klan and led to sweeping new restrictions on immigration. Postwar alienation found artistic expression in new forms of modernism, which denounced the dehumanizing effects of war and criticized American materialism and hypocrisy. Spreading throughout the nation 




 PART 7

CHAPTER REVIEW

 from New Orleans, jazz appealed to elite and popular audiences alike. Black artists and intellectuals of the Harlem Renaissance, including many inspired by panAfrican ideas, explored the complexities of African American life. Business thrived and a booming consumer culture, exemplified by the radio, the automobile, and

C H A P T E R


 Hollywood films, created new forms of leisure, influencing daily life and challenging older sexual norms. However, the risky speculation and easy credit of the 1920s undermined the foundations of the economy. After the 1929 crash, these factors, along with a range of interconnected global conditions, plunged the United States into the Great Depression.

R E V I E W


M A K E I T S T I C K
Go to LearningCurve to retain what you’ve read. 
TERMS TO KNOW

 Identify and explain the significance of each term below.

Key Concepts and Events
 Adkins v. Children’s Hospital (p. 707) welfare capitalism (p. 708) Red Scare (p. 708) Palmer raids (p. 709) Sheppard-Towner Federal Maternity and Infancy Act (p. 709) Women’s International League for Peace and Freedom (p. 710) associated state (p. 710) Teapot Dome (p. 710) dollar diplomacy (p. 711) prohibition (p. 712) American Civil Liberties Union (p. 713)

Key People
 Scopes trial (p. 713) National Origins Act (p. 713) Ku Klux Klan (p. 714) Harlem Renaissance (p. 718) jazz (p. 718) Universal Negro Improvement Association (p. 719) pan-Africanism (p. 720) Lost Generation (p. 720) consumer credit (p. 725) Hollywood (p. 726) flapper (p. 726) soft power (p. 726)

A.
Mitchell Palmer (p. 708) Nicola Sacco and Bartolomeo
Vanzetti (p. 709)
Henry Ford (p. 714)
Leo Frank (p. 714)
Zora Neale Hurston (p. 718)
Louis Armstrong (p. 719)
Marcus Garvey (p. 719)
Adolph Zukor (p. 726)


REVIEW QUESTIONS
Answer these questions to demonstrate your understanding of the chapter’s main ideas. 
 1. What was the Republican vision of “normalcy,” and

 how did the Harding and Coolidge administrations seek to realize it?

 2. Along what lines did Americans find themselves

 divided in the 1920s? How were those conflicts expressed in politics? In culture and intellectual life?

 CHAPTER 22

 3. What factors contributed to the economic boom of

 the 1920s and the crash that followed?

THEMATIC UNDERSTANDING
Between 1917 
 and 1945, the “Roaring Twenties” were the only years when the United States did not face a major economic or international crisis. Review the categories

MAKING CONNECTIONS

 of “America in the World,” “Politics and Power,” and “Identity” on the thematic timeline on page 671. In what ways do they suggest that the prosperous 1920s were a politically distinctive era? What continuities do you see in politics and foreign policy?

 Recognize the larger developments and continuities within and across chapters by answering these questions.

ACROSS TIME AND PLACE
The Ku Klux Klan 
 of the Reconstruction era (Chapter 15) emerged in a specific political and social context; while the Klan of the 1920s built on its predecessor, its goals and scope were different. Using material from Chapters 15 and 22, imagine that you are investigating a series of Klan meetings in each era (1870s and 1920s). Where would you conduct your investigation? How might you explain, to the public, the Klan’s membership and activities? How would you compare the two Klans?

MORE TO EXPLORE

CHAPTER REVIEW

 This chapter includes two depictions of people dancing to jazz: the Life magazine cover that opens the chapter (p. 705) and Blues (p. 719) by Archibald John Motley Jr., an African American painter of the Harlem Renaissance. Look at these pictures carefully. Who do you think were the intended audiences for each? What evidence could you point to in support of that conclusion? What messages do you think the Life artist and Motley wanted to convey?

VISUAL EVIDENCE

 Start here to learn more about the events discussed in this chapter.

Lynn Dumenil, The Modern Temper (1995). A
 readable overview of events in the 1920s. David Levering Lewis, When Harlem Was in Vogue (1979). A wonderful account of politics, arts, and culture in the vibrant “Negro capital of the world.” Daniel Okrent, Last Call: The Rise and Fall of Prohibition (2010). A lively recent history of the movement to ban liquor. Martha L. Olney, Buy Now, Pay Later (1991). Explores the rise and impact of consumer credit.

 Mary A. Renda, Taking Haiti (2001). A compelling exploration of U.S. occupation of Haiti and its impact on Haiti and especially the United States. The PBS series American Experience has produced an excellent documentary on the Scopes trial; information and documents are available at pbs.org/wgbh/ amex/monkeytrial/. For a broad view of the 1929 crash and its impact, see pbs.org/wgbh/amex/crash.





 PART 7

CHAPTER REVIEW

 TIMELINE



 Ask yourself why this chapter begins and ends with these dates and then identify the links among related events.

 New Ku Klux Klan founded United States occupies Haiti



 United States occupies Dominican Republic



 Race riot in East St. Louis, Illinois



 Race riot in Chicago Boston police strike Palmer raids Women’s International League for Peace and Freedom founded



Height of Red Scare
 Eighteenth Amendment (prohibition) takes effect Warren Harding wins presidency Eugene O’Neill’s The Emperor Jones



 Race riots in Rosewood, Florida, and Tulsa, Oklahoma Sheppard-Towner Federal Maternity and Infancy Act



 Adkins v. Children’s Hospital President Harding dies Calvin Coolidge assumes presidency Teapot Dome scandal Equal Rights Amendment first introduced in Congress



National Origins Act
 Coolidge wins presidential election against Democrats and La Follette’s Progressive Party First suburban shopping center opens outside Kansas City, Missouri



Coronado Coal Company v. United Mine Workers
 Scopes “monkey trial” Alain Locke’s The New Negro F. Scott Fitzgerald’s The Great Gatsby



 Sacco and Vanzetti executed



 Herbert Hoover wins presidency



 Stock market crashes precipitate Great Depression

 CHAPTER 22

CHAPTER REVIEW

KEY TURNING POINTS:
American politics underwent two shifts in the period covered in this chapter: one in the aftermath of World War I, and another in 1932. What caused each turning point? What factors in American Society, economics, and culture help explain each moment of political change? 




C H A P T E R
EARLY RESPONSES TO THE DEPRESSION, 1929–1932
Enter Herbert Hoover Rising Discontent The 1932 Election 
THE NEW DEAL ARRIVES, 1933–1935
Roosevelt and the First Hundred Days The New Deal Under Attack 
THE SECOND NEW DEAL AND THE REDEFINING OF LIBERALISM, 1935–1938
The Welfare State Comes into Being From Reform to Stalemate 
THE NEW DEAL’S IMPACT ON SOCIETY A
People’s Democracy Reshaping the Environment The New Deal and the Arts The Legacies of the New Deal 


Managing the Great Depression,
Forging the New Deal
1929–1939


I


 n his inaugural address in March 1933, IDENTIFY THE BIG IDEA President Franklin Delano Roosevelt What new roles did the American did not hide the country’s precarious government take on during the condition. “A host of unemployed citizens New Deal, and how did these roles face the grim problem of existence,” he shape the economy and society? said, “and an equally great number toil with little return. Only a foolish optimist can deny the dark realities of the moment.” Roosevelt, his demeanor sincere and purposeful, saw both despair and determination as he looked out over the country. “This nation asks for action, and action now.” From Congress he would request “broad Executive power to wage a war against the emergency, as great as the power that would be given to me if we were in fact invaded by a foreign foe.” With these words, Roosevelt launched a program of federal activism — which he called the New Deal — that would change the nature of American government. The New Deal represented a new form of liberalism, a fresh interpretation of the ideology of individual rights that had long shaped the character of American society and politics. Classical nineteenth-century liberals believed that, to protect those rights, government should be small and relatively weak. However, the “regulatory” liberals of the early twentieth century had safeguarded individual freedom and opportunity by strengthening state and federal control over large businesses and monopolies. New Deal activists went much further: their social-welfare liberalism expanded individual rights to include economic security. Beginning in the 1930s and continuing through the 1960s, they increased the responsibility of the national government for the welfare of ordinary citizens. Their efforts did not go unchallenged. Conservative critics of the New Deal charged that its “big government” programs were paternalistic and dangerous, undermining individual responsibility and constraining personal freedom. This division between the advocates and To see a longer excerpt of Roosevelt’s inaugural the critics of the New Deal address, along with other primary sources from this shaped American politics for period, see Sources for America’s History. the next half century. Before Roosevelt was elected president, between the onset of the depression in 1929 and November 1932, the “dark realities of the moment” wore down American society. Rising unemployment, shuttered businesses, failing banks, and home foreclosures tore at the nation’s social fabric. As crisis piled upon crisis and the federal government’s initiatives under President Hoover proved ineffectual, Americans had to reconsider more than the role of government in economic life: they had to rethink many of the principles of individualism and free enterprise that had guided so much of the nation’s history.

 The New Deal This Federal Arts Project poster from 1936 captured the spirit of the New Deal under

 President Franklin Roosevelt. Roosevelt and other “New Dealers” hoped to get people working again during the depths of the Great Depression, raise their spirits, and help rebuild the national infrastructure. Library of Congress.





 PART 7

DOMESTIC AND GLOBAL CHALLENGES, 1890–1945

Early Responses to the
Depression, 1929–1932
 The American economy collapsed between 1929 and 1932. U.S. gross domestic product fell almost by half, from $103.1 billion to $58 billion. Consumption dropped by 18 percent, construction by 78 percent, and private investment by 88 percent. Nearly 9,000 banks closed their doors, and 100,000 businesses failed. Corporate profits fell from $10 billion to $1 billion. Unemployment rose to 25 percent. Fifteen million people were out of work by 1933, and many who had jobs took wage cuts. “Hoover made a souphound outa me!” sang jobless harvest hands in the Southwest. The depression respected no national boundaries. Germany had preceded the United States into economic contraction in 1928, and its economy, burdened by heavy World War I reparations payments, was brought to its knees by 1929. France, Britain, Argentina, Brazil, Poland, and Canada were hard hit as well (America Compared, p. 737). The legacies of World War I made recovery difficult in two respects. First, Britain’s central bank was in no position to resume its traditional role in managing the international financial system. Second, the war disrupted the international gold standard. The United States and most European nations had tied the value of their currencies to the price of gold, and the amount of gold held in reserves, since the late nineteenth century. This system had worked fairly well for a few decades, but it was vulnerable during economic downturns, when large financiers withdrew their investments and demanded gold payments. The gold standard rendered the international monetary system inflexible at a moment that required great flexibility in global finance.

Enter Herbert Hoover
 President Herbert Hoover and Congress responded to the downturn by drawing on two powerful American traditions. The first was the belief that economic outcomes were the product of individual character. People’s fate was in their own hands, and success went to those who deserved it. The second PLACE EVENTS tradition held that through volunIN CONTEXT tary action, the business commuWhat economic principles nity could right itself and recover guided President Hoover from economic downturns withand Congress in their out relying on government assisresponse to the Great tance. Following these principles, Depression? Hoover asked Americans to

 tighten their belts and work hard. After the stock market crash, he cut federal taxes in an attempt to boost private spending and corporate investment. “Any lack of confidence in the economic future or the strength of business in the United States is foolish,” Hoover assured the country in late 1929. Treasury secretary Andrew Mellon suggested that the downturn would help Americans “work harder” and “live a more moral life.” While many factors caused the Great Depression, Hoover’s adherence to the gold standard was a major reason for its length and severity in the United States. Faced with economic catastrophe, both Britain and Germany abandoned the gold standard in 1931; when they did so, their economies recovered modestly. But the Hoover administration feared that such a move would weaken the value of the dollar. In reality, an inflexible money supply discouraged investment and therefore prevented growth. The Roosevelt administration would ultimately remove the United States from the burdens of the gold standard in 1933. By that time, however, the crisis had achieved catastrophic dimensions. Billions had been lost in business and bank failures, and the economy had stalled completely. Along with their adherence to the gold standard, the Hoover administration and many congressional Republicans believed in another piece of economic orthodoxy that had protected American manufacturing in good economic times but that proved damaging during the downturn: high tariffs (taxes on imported goods designed to encourage American manufacturing). In 1930, Republicans enacted the Smoot-Hawley Tariff. Despite receiving a letter from more than a thousand economists urging him to veto it, Hoover approved the legislation. What served American interests in earlier eras now confounded them. SmootHawley triggered retaliatory tariffs in other countries, which further hindered global trade and led to greater economic contraction throughout the industrialized world. The president recognized that individual initiative, voluntarism, and high tariffs might not be enough, given the depth of the crisis, so he proposed government action as well. He called on state and local governments to provide jobs by investing in public projects. And in 1931, he secured an unprecedented increase of $700 million in federal spending for public works. Hoover’s most innovative program was the Reconstruction Finance Corporation (RFC), which provided federal loans to railroads, banks, and other businesses. But the RFC lent money too cautiously, and by the end of 1932, after a year in operation, it had loaned out only 20 percent of its $1.5 billion in funds.

AMERICA C O M PA R E D
The Great Depression in England and the United States 
 In a 1954 book, Denis Brogan, a professor at Cambridge University in England, looked back at the descent into the Great Depression between 1929 and 1932 and explained the significance of Franklin Roosevelt’s election from an English perspective. The second selection is from an oral history conducted in the 1970s with an ordinary resident of London, who recalled life in the 1930s.

Denis W. Brogan, “From England”


 Gladys Gibson, a Resident of London in the 1930s

 No event . . . has so colored the European view of the United States as “the Depression.” The first news of the crash of 1929 was not ill received. There was not only a marked feeling of Schadenfreude at the snub that destiny had given to the overconfident masters of the new world, but also a widespread belief that the extravagant gambling of the New York market was one of the chief causes of our ills. . . . But as the extent, depth, and duration of the American depression began to be appreciated, as its impact on all the world, especially on the dangerously unstable political and economic status quo of Germany and Austria, became more evident, as the old wound of unemployment was made to bleed more deeply in Britain, the tendency to blame the United States became overwhelming. Gone were the illusions about the “secret of high wages.” If ever found, it had now been lost. American politics was seen as not only sterile but positively immoral and dangerous. . . . American business and its political arm, the Republican Party, had been tried in the balance and found wanting. And it is safe to say that the election of F. D. Roosevelt was welcomed in every country of Europe as good news almost overshadowing the nomination of Adolf Hitler as Chancellor of the German Reich.

 Most of the unemployed were genuinely seeking work. A heavy snowfall was a blessing, when men with broken boots earned a little money by sweeping the streets. The Boroughs [a form of local administration in London] took on unemployed, in strict rotation, for thirteen weeks of unskilled work. It sometimes put a man back in benefit and took him off the hated dole. The situation began to change after Munich, when more men found work. Salvation came with the War, when the despised unemployed became valued workers or serving helpers.

 Like most federal initiatives under Hoover, the RFC was not nearly aggressive enough given the severity of the depression. With federal officials fearing budget deficits and reluctant to interfere with the private market, caution was the order of the day. Few chief executives could have survived the downward economic spiral of 1929–1932, but Hoover’s reluctance to break with the philosophy of limited government and his insistence that recovery was always just around the corner contributed to his unpopularity.

Source: Joseph, Franz M., As Others See Us. © 1959 Princeton University Press, 1987
 renewed PUP. Reprinted by permission of Princeton University Press. Nigel Gray, The Worst of Times: An Oral History of the Great Depression in Britain (Totowa, NJ: Barnes & Noble Books, 1985), 54.

QUESTIONS FOR ANALYSIS 1.
Why would Brogan call the United States “overconfident masters of the new world”? What are his criticisms of U.S. economic policy? 2. How does the testimony of Gladys Gibson about the “hated dole” compare with what you have learned about attitudes in the United States in these years? 
 By 1932, Americans perceived Hoover as insensitive to the depth of the country’s economic suffering. The nation had come a long way since the depressions of the 1870s and 1890s, when no one except the most radical figures, such as Jacob Coxey, called for direct federal aid to the unemployed (Chapter 20). Compared with previous chief executives — and in contrast to his popular image as a “do-nothing” president — Hoover had responded to the national emergency with unprecedented government action. But the nation’s needs



 PART 7

DOMESTIC AND GLOBAL CHALLENGES, 1890–1945

Hooverville
 The depression cast hundreds of thousands of Americans out of their homes. Most found shelter with relatives, but those with little choice had to make do as they could. Encampments such as this one south of downtown Seattle, Washington — places where the homeless crafted makeshift lodging out of whatever materials were at hand — became known as Hoovervilles. The name reflected Americans’ attitudes toward President Hoover, whose popularity plummeted as the depression deepened. University of Washington Libraries, Special Collections, UW2129.

 were even more unprecedented, and Hoover’s programs failed to meet them (Map 23.1).

Rising Discontent
 As the depression deepened, the American vocabulary now included the terms Hoovervilles (shantytowns where people lived in packing crates) and Hoover blankets (newspapers). Bankrupt farmers banded together to resist the bank agents and sheriffs who tried to evict them from their land. To protest low prices for their goods, in the spring of 1932 thousands of midwestern farmers joined the Farmers’ Holiday Association, which cut off supplies to urban areas by barricading roads and dumping milk, vegetables, and other foodstuffs onto the roadways. Agricultural prices were so low that the Farmers’ Holiday Association favored a government-supported farm program.

 In the industrial sector, layoffs and wage cuts led to violent strikes. When coal miners in Harlan County, Kentucky, went on strike over a 10 percent wage cut in 1931, the mine owners called in the state’s National Guard, which crushed the union. A 1932 confrontation between workers and security forces at the Ford Motor Company’s giant River Rouge factory outside Detroit left five workers dead and fifty with serious injuries. A photographer had his camera shot from his hands, and fifteen policemen were clubbed or stoned. Whether on farms or in factories, those who produced the nation’s food and goods had begun to push for a more aggressive response to the nation’s economic troubles. Veterans staged the most publicized — and most tragic — protest. In the summer of 1932, the Bonus Army, a determined group of 15,000 unemployed World War I veterans, hitchhiked to Washington to demand

 CHAPTER 23



Managing the Great Depression, Forging the New Deal, 1929–1939


 MAP 23.1 The Great Depression: Families on Relief Although the Great Depression was a nationwide crisis, some regions were hit harder than others. Economic hardship was widespread in the agricultural-based southern and Appalachian states of the Northeast and Midwest. As the depression worsened in 1931 and 1932, local and state governments, as well as charitable organizations, could not keep up with the demand for relief. After Franklin D. Roosevelt assumed the presidency in 1933, the national government began a massive program of aid through the Federal Emergency Relief Administration (FERA).

 WASH.

VT. MONTANA

N. DAK.

OREGON IDAHO

 WIS.

S. DAK. WYOMING NEBRASKA

NEVADA UTAH

 COLO.

 ARIZONA

KANSAS OKLA.

N. MEX.

 MO.

 ARK.

 MICH.

 immediate payment of pension awards that were due to be paid in 1945. “We were heroes in 1917, but we’re bums now,” one veteran complained bitterly. While their leaders unsuccessfully lobbied Congress, the Bonus Army set up camps near the Capitol building. Hoover called out regular army troops under the command of General Douglas MacArthur, who forcefully evicted the marchers and burned their main encampment to the ground. When newsreel footage showing the U.S. Army attacking and injuring veterans reached movie theaters across the nation, Hoover’s popularity plunged. In another measure of how the country had changed since the 1890s, what Americans had applauded when done to Coxey in 1894 was condemned in 1932.

The 1932 Election
 Despite rising discontent, the national mood was mixed as the 1932 election approached. Many Americans had internalized the ideal of the self-made man and blamed themselves for their economic hardships. Despair, not anger, characterized their mood. Others, out of work for a year or more, perhaps homeless, felt the deeper stirrings of frustration and rage. Regardless of their circumstances, most Americans believed that something altogether new had to be tried — whatever that might be. The Republicans, reluctant to dump an incumbent president, unenthusiastically renominated Hoover. The Democrats turned to New York governor Franklin Delano Roosevelt, whose state had initiated innovative relief and unemployment programs. Roosevelt, born into a wealthy New York family, was a distant cousin to former president Theodore

E


W


LA. FLA.



N


 GA.

Percentage of Families
 on Relief, 1933 Below 8 percent 8–15 percent Over 15 percent

R.I.
CONN. N.J. DEL. MD.

IND. OHIO W. VA. VA. KY. N.C. TENN. S.C.

MISS. ALA. TEXAS

N.H.
 MASS.

N.Y.
 PA.

IOWA ILL.

 CALIF.

 ME.

 MINN.



S


 500 miles

 500 kilometers

 Roosevelt, whose career he emuUNDERSTAND lated. After attending Harvard POINTS OF VIEW College and Columbia University, What did the depression Franklin Roosevelt served as look like when seen from assistant secretary of the navy the vantage of ordinary during World War I (as Theodore Americans? Roosevelt had done before the War of 1898). Then, in 1921, a crippling attack of polio left both of his legs permanently paralyzed. Supported by his wife, Eleanor, he slowly returned to public life and campaigned successfully for the governorship of New York in 1928 and again in 1930. Running for the presidency in 1932, Roosevelt pledged vigorous action but gave no indication what that action might be, arguing simply that “the country needs and, unless I mistake its temper, the country demands bold, persistent experimentation.” He won easily, receiving 22.8 million votes to Hoover’s 15.7 million. Elected in November, Roosevelt would not begin his presidency until March 1933. (The Twentieth Amendment, ratified in 1933, set subsequent inaugurations for January 20.) Meanwhile, Americans suffered through the worst winter of the depression. Unemployment continued to climb, and in three major industrial cities in Ohio, it shot to staggering levels: 50 percent in Cleveland, 60 percent in Akron, and 80 percent in Toledo. Private charities and public relief agencies reached only a fraction of the needy. The nation’s banking system was so close to collapse that many state governors closed banks temporarily to avoid further withdrawals. Several states were approaching bankruptcy, their tax revenues too low to pay for basic services. By March 1933, the nation had hit rock bottom.



 PART 7

DOMESTIC AND GLOBAL CHALLENGES, 1890–1945

The New Deal Arrives,
1933–1935
 The ideological differences between Herbert Hoover and Franklin Roosevelt were not vast. Both leaders wished to maintain the nation’s economic institutions and social values, to save capitalism while easing its worst downturns. Both believed in a balanced government budget and extolled the values of hard work, cooperation, and sacrifice. But Roosevelt’s personal charm, political savvy, and willingness to experiment made him far more effective and more popular than Hoover. Most Americans felt a kinship with their new president, calling him simply FDR. His New Deal would put people to work and restore hope for the nation’s future.

Roosevelt and the First Hundred Days
 A wealthy patrician, Roosevelt was an unlikely figure to inspire millions of ordinary Americans. But his close rapport with the American people was critical to his political success. More than 450,000 letters poured into the EXPLAIN White House in the week after his CONSEQUENCES inauguration. The president’s What specific new roles masterful use of the new medium did the American governof radio, especially his evening ment take up as a result of the legislation passed radio addresses to the American during the first hundred public known as fireside chats, days? made him an intimate presence in people’s lives. Thousands of citizens felt a personal relationship with FDR, saying, “He gave me a job” or “He saved my home” (American Voices, p. 742). Citing the national economic emergency, Roosevelt further expanded the presidential powers that Theodore Roosevelt and Woodrow Wilson had increased previously. To draft legislation and policy, he relied heavily on financier Bernard Baruch and a “Brains Trust” of professors from Columbia, Harvard, and other leading universities. Roosevelt also turned to his talented cabinet, which included Harold L. Ickes, secretary of the interior; Frances Perkins at the Labor Department; Henry A. Wallace at Agriculture; and Henry Morgenthau Jr., secretary of the treasury. These intellectuals and administrators attracted hundreds of highly qualified recruits to Washington. Inspired by New Deal idealism, many of them would devote their lives to public service and the principles of social-welfare liberalism.

 Roosevelt could have done little, however, without a sympathetic Congress. The 1932 election had swept Democratic majorities into both the House and Senate, giving the new president the lawmaking allies he needed. The first months of FDR’s administration produced a whirlwind of activity on Capitol Hill. In a legendary session, known as the Hundred Days, Congress enacted fifteen major bills that focused primarily on four problems: banking failures, agricultural overproduction, the business slump, and soaring unemployment. Derided by some as an “alphabet soup” because of their many abbreviations (CCC, WPA, AAA, etc.), the new policies and agencies were more than bureaucracies: they represented the emergence of a new American state.

 Banking Reform The weak banking system hobbled the entire economy, curtailing consumer spending and business investment. Widespread bank failures had reduced the savings of nearly nine million families, and panicked account holders raced to withdraw their funds. On March 5, 1933, the day after his inauguration, FDR declared a national “bank holiday” — closing all the banks — and called Congress into special session. Four days later, Congress passed the Emergency Banking Act, which permitted banks to reopen if a Treasury Department inspection showed that they had sufficient cash reserves. In his first Sunday night fireside chat, to a radio audience of sixty million, the president reassured citizens that their money was safe. When the banks reopened on March 13, calm prevailed and deposits exceeded withdrawals, restoring stability to the nation’s basic financial institutions. “Capitalism was saved in eight days,” quipped Roosevelt’s advisor Raymond Moley. Four thousand banks had collapsed in the months prior to Roosevelt’s inauguration; only sixtyone closed their doors in all of 1934 (Table 23.1). A second banking law, the Glass-Steagall Act, further restored public confidence by creating the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC), which insured deposits up to $2,500 (and now insures them up to $250,000). The act also prohibited banks from making risky, unsecured investments with the deposits of ordinary people. And in a profoundly important economic and symbolic gesture, Roosevelt removed the U.S. Treasury from the gold standard in June 1933, which allowed the Federal Reserve to lower interest rates; since 1931, it had been raising rates, which had only deepened the downturn. Saving the banks and leaving the gold standard led to a mild and, it would turn out, brief recovery.

 CHAPTER 23

Managing the Great Depression, Forging the New Deal, 1929–1939


 TABLE 23.1 American Banks and Bank Failures, 1920–1940 Year

Total Number of Banks


 Total Assets ($ billion)

Bank Failures




30,909


53.1






25,568


72.3






22,242


70.1


2,294




14,771


51.4


4,004




15,913


55.9






15,076


79.7




SOURCE:
Historical Statistics of the United States: Colonial Times to 1970 (Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1975), 1019, 1038–1039. 
Agriculture and Manufacturing Roosevelt and the
 New Deal Congress next turned to agriculture and manufacturing. In those sectors, a seeming paradox was evident: the depression led to overproduction in agriculture and underproduction in manufacturing. Reversing both problematic trends was critical. The Agricultural Adjustment Act (AAA) began direct governmental regulation of the farm economy for the first time. To solve the problem of overproduction, which lowered prices, the AAA provided cash subsidies to farmers who cut production of seven major commodities: wheat, cotton, corn, hogs, rice, tobacco, and dairy products. Policymakers hoped that farm prices would rise as production fell. By dumping cash in farmers’ hands, the AAA briefly stabilized the farm economy. But the act’s benefits were not evenly distributed. Subsidies went primarily to the owners of large and medium-sized farms, who often cut production by reducing the amount of land they rented to tenants and sharecroppers. In Mississippi, one plantation owner received $26,000 from the federal government, while thousands of black sharecroppers living in the same county received only a few dollars in relief payments. In manufacturing, the New Deal attacked declining production with the National Industrial Recovery Act. A new government agency, the National Recovery Administration (NRA), set up separate self-governing private associations in six hundred industries. Each industry — ranging from large corporations producing coal, cotton textiles, and steel to small businesses making pet food and costume jewelry — regulated itself by agreeing on prices and production quotas. Because large companies usually ran these associations, the NRA solidified their power at the expense of smaller enterprises and consumer interests.

 The AAA and the NRA were designed to rescue the nation’s productive industries and stabilize the economy. The measures had positive effects in some regions, but most historians agree that, overall, they did little to end the depression.

 Unemployment Relief The Roosevelt administration next addressed the massive unemployment problem. By 1933, local governments and private charities had exhausted their resources and were looking to Washington for assistance. Although Roosevelt wanted to avoid a budget deficit, he asked Congress to provide relief for millions of unemployed Americans. In May, Congress established the Federal Emergency Relief Administration (FERA). Directed by Harry Hopkins, a hard-driving social worker from New York, the FERA provided federal funds for state relief programs. Roosevelt and Hopkins had strong reservations about the “dole,” the nickname for government welfare payments. As Hopkins put it, “I don’t think anybody can go year after year, month after month, accepting relief without affecting his character.” To support the traditional values of individualism, the New Deal put people to work. Early in 1933, Congress established the Public Works Administration (PWA), a construction program, and several months later, Roosevelt created the Civil Works Administration (CWA) and named Hopkins its head. Within thirty days, Hopkins had put 2.6 million men and women to work; at its peak in 1934, the CWA provided jobs for 4 million Americans repairing bridges, building highways, and constructing public buildings. A stopgap measure to get the country through the winter of 1933–1934, the CWA lapsed in the spring, when Republican opposition compelled New Dealers to abandon it. A longer-term program, the Civilian Conservation Corps (CCC), mobilized



AMERICAN VOICES
Ordinary People Respond to the New Deal 
 Franklin Roosevelt’s fireside chats and his relief programs prompted thousands of ordinary Americans to write directly to the president and his wife, Eleanor. Taken together, their letters offer a vivid portrait of depression-era America that includes popular support for, and opposition to, the New Deal.

Mrs. M. H. A.
 Mrs. M. H. A. worked in the County Court House in Eureka, California.

June 14, 1934
Dear Mrs. Roosevelt:
 I know you are overburdened with requests for help and if my plea cannot be recognized, I’ll understand it is because you have so many others, all of them worthy. . . . My husband and I are a young couple of very simple, almost poor families. We married eight years ago on the proverbial shoe-string but with a wealth of love. . . . We managed to build our home and furnish it comfortably. . . . Then came the depression. My work has continued and my salary alone has just been sufficient to make our monthly payments on the house and keep our bills paid. . . . But with the exception of two and one-half months work with the U.S. Coast and Geodetic Survey under the C.W.A. [Civil Works Administration], my husband has not had work since August, 1932. My salary could continue to keep us going, but I am to have a baby. . . . I can get a leave of absence from my job for a year. But can’t you, won’t you do something so my husband can have a job, at least during that year? . . . As I said before, if it were only ourselves, or if there were something we could do about it, we would never ask for help. We have always stood on our own feet and been proud and happy. But you are a mother and you’ll understand this crisis. Very sincerely yours, Mrs. M. H. A. Unsigned Letter This unsigned letter came from a factory worker in Paris, Texas.

November 23, 1936
Dear President,
 [N]ow that we have had a land Slide [in the election of 1936] and done just what was best for our country . . .

 I do believe you Will Strain a point to help the ones who helped you mostly & that is the Working Class of People I am not smart or I would be in a different line of work & better up in ever way yet I will know you are the one & only President that ever helped a Working Class of People. . . . I am a White Man American age, 47 married wife 2children in high School am a Finishing room foreman I mean a Working foreman & am in a furniture Factory here in Paris Texas where thaire is 175 to 200 Working & when the NRA [National Recovery Administration] came in I was Proud to See my fellow workmen Rec 30 Per hour in Place of 8 cents to 20 cents Per hour. . . . I can’t see for my life President why a man must toil &work his life out in Such factories 10 long hours ever day except Sunday for a small sum of 15 cents to 35 cents per hour & pay the high cost of honest & deason living expences. . . . please see if something can be done to help this one Class of Working People the factories are a man killer not venelated or kept up just a bunch of Republickins Grafters 90/100 of them Please help us some way I Pray to God for relief. I am a Christian . . . and a truthful man & have not told you wrong & am for you to the end. [not signed] R. A. R. A. was sixty-nine years old and an architect and builder in Lincoln, Nebraska.

May 19/34
Dear Mrs Roosevelt:
 In the Presidents inaugral address delivered from the capitol steps the afternoon of his inaugration he made mention of The Forgotten Man, and I with thousands of others am wondering if the folk who was borned here in America some 60 or 70 years a go are this Forgotten Man, the President had in mind, if we are this Forgotten Man then we are still Forgotten. We who have tried to be diligent in our support of this most wonderful nation of ours boath social and

 other wise, we in our younger days tried to do our duty without complaining. . . . And now a great calamity has come upon us and seemingly no cause of our own it has swept away what little savings we had accumulated and we are left in a condition that is imposible for us to correct, for two very prominent reasons if no more. First we have grown to what is termed Old Age, this befalls every man. Second, . . . we are confronted on every hand with the young generation, taking our places, this of corse is what we have looked forward to in training our children. But with the extra ordinary crisese which left us helpless and placed us in the position that our fathers did not have to contend with. . . . We have been honorable citizens all along our journey, calamity and old age has forced its self upon us please do not send us to the Poor Farm but instead allow us the small pension of $40.00 per month. . . . Mrs. Roosevelt I am asking a personal favor of you as it seems to be the only means through which I may be able to reach the President, some evening very soon, as you and Mr. Roosevelt are having dinner together privately will you ask him to read this. And we American citizens will ever remember your kindness. Yours very truly. R. A. M. A. M. A. was a woman who held a low-level salaried position in a corporation.

Jan. 18, 1937
[Dear Mrs. Roosevelt:]
 I . . . was simply astounded to think that anyone could be nitwit enough to wish to be included in the so called social security act if they could possibly avoid it. Call it by any name you wish it, in my opinion, (and that of many people I know) [it] is nothing but downright stealing. . . . I am not an “economic royalist,” just an ordinary white collar worker at $1600 per [year — about $23,600 in 2009]. Please show this to the president and ask him to remember the wishes of the forgotten man, that is, the one who dared to vote against him. We expect to be tramped on but we do wish the stepping would be a little less hard. Security at the price of freedom is never desired by intelligent people. M. A.

M. A. H.
M. A. H.
was a widow who ran a small farm in Columbus, Indiana. 
December 14, 1937
Mrs. Roosevelt:
 I suppose from your point of view the work relief, old age pensions, slum clearance and all the rest seems like a perfect remedy for all the ills of this country, but I would like for you to see the results, as the other half see them. We have always had a shiftless, never-do-well class of people whose one and only aim in life is to live without work. I have been rubbing elbows with this class for nearly sixty years and have tried to help some of the most promising and have seen others try to help them, but it can’t be done. We cannot help those who will not try to help themselves and if they do try a square deal is all they need, . . . let each one paddle their own canoe, or sink. . . . I live alone on a farm and have not raised any crops for the last two years as there was no help to be had. I am feeding the stock and have been cutting the wood to keep my home fires burning. There are several reliefers around here now who have been kicked off relief but they refuse to work unless they can get relief hours and wages, but they are so worthless no one can afford to hire them. . . . They are just a fair sample of the class of people on whom so much of our hard earned tax-money is being squandered and on whom so much sympathy is being wasted. . . . You people who have plenty of this worlds goods and whose money comes easy have no idea of the heart-breaking toil and self-denial which is the lot of the working people who are trying to make an honest living, and then to have to shoulder all these unjust burdens seems like the last straw. . . . No one should have the right to vote theirself a living at the expense of the tax payers. . . . M. A. H. Sources (in order): Robert S. McElvaine, Down & Out in the Great Depression (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1983), 54–55; Gerald Markowitz and David Rosner, eds., “Slaves of the Depression”: Worker’s Letters About Life on the Job (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1987), 21; Robert S. McElvaine, Down & Out in the Great Depression (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1983), 97, 147, 143.

QUESTIONS FOR ANALYSIS 1.
How do you explain the personal, almost intimate, tone of these letters to the Roosevelts? 2. How have specific New Deal programs helped or hurt the authors of these letters? 3. What are the basic values of the authors? Do the values of those who support the New Deal differ from the values of those who oppose it? 




 PART 7

DOMESTIC AND GLOBAL CHALLENGES, 1890–1945

Selling the NRA in Chinatown
 To mobilize support for its program, the National Recovery Administration (NRA) distributed millions of posters to businesses and families, urging them to display its symbol, the Blue Eagle, in shops, factories, and homes. Here Constance King and Mae Chinn of the Chinese YMCA affix a poster (and a Chinese translation) to a shop in San Francisco that is complying with the NRA codes. © Bettmann/Corbis.

 250,000 young men to do reforestation and conservation work. Over the course of the 1930s, the “CCC boys” built thousands of bridges, roads, trails, and other structures in state and national parks, bolstering the national infrastructure (Map 23.2).

 Housing Crisis Millions of Americans also faced the devastating prospect of losing their homes. The economic expansion of the 1920s had produced the largest inflationary housing bubble in American history to that point, a scenario in which home prices rose wildly, fueled by excessive borrowing. In the early 1930s, as

 home prices collapsed and banks closed, home owners were dragged down with them. More than half a million Americans lost their homes between 1930 and 1932, and in cities such as Cleveland and Indianapolis, half of all home mortgage holders faced possible foreclosure. In response, Congress created the Home Owners Loan Corporation (HOLC) to refinance home mortgages. In just two years, the HOLC helped more than a million Americans retain their homes. The Federal Housing Act of 1934 would extend this program under a new agency, the Federal Housing Administration (FHA). Together, the HOLC, the FHA,

 CHAPTER 23

North Cascades


C A N A D A


Olympic
Mount
Rainier


Glacier


 WA

Voyageurs
 ND

Craters of
 the Moon ID

Redwood


 NY

 SD

UT
Capitol Reef Zion 
Kings
Canyon
Sequoia
Death
Valley


Rocky Mountain


 IL

 CO

Joshua
Tree


 MO

NC N

Big
Bend


E


 SC

AR MS

 AL

W


 GA

S


 TX

ATLANTIC OCEAN

Shenandoah
 VA

TN
Great Smoky Mountains 
White Sands


 DE

 KY

OK
El Malpais NM 
 NJ

 IN

KS
Great Sand Dunes 
PACIFIC OCEAN

 MD

OH WV

Canyonlands


Petrified
Mojave Forest
Natonal AZ
Preserve
Saguaro


RI PA

 IA

Grand Canyon
Channel
Islands


 CT

 MI

Dinosaur


NH MA

 WI

NE NV

Acadia
 VT

 WY

Yosemite


 ME

MN
Yellowstone Grand Teton 
Lassen
Volcanic


 CA

Isle
Royale


Pictured Rocks


MT
Crater Lake OR 


Managing the Great Depression, Forging the New Deal, 1929–1939


 LA





 300 miles

 300 kilometers

 FL

CCC
Camp 
 MEXICO

Gulf of Mexico


Everglades


U.S.
National Park 

 MAP 23.2 Civilian Conservation Corps Camps The Civilian Conservation Corps (CCC) gave hope to unemployed young men during the Great Depression. The first camp opened in Big Meadows, Virginia, in July 1933, and by the end of the decade CCC camps had appeared across the length of the country, located in rural, mountainous, and forested regions alike. Young men constructed bridges and roads, built hiking trails, erected public campgrounds, and performed other improvements. By the early 1940s, the CCC had planted three billion trees, among its many other contributions to the national infrastructure.

