 This satirical engraving by Amos Doolittle (who created the image of the Battle of Concord in Chapter 5) depicts some of the issues in the debate over the ratification of the Constitution. The wagon in the center is carrying Connecticut and sinking into the mud under the weight of debts and paper money as “Federals” and “Antifederals” try to pull it out. Federals call for the state to “comply with Congress” (that is, to pay money requisitioned by the national government); the Antifederals reply “tax luxury” and “success to Shays,” a reference to Shays’s Rebellion. The Connecticut shoreline and the buildings of Manhattan are on the right. Underneath the three merchant ships is a phrase criticizing the tariffs that states were imposing on imports from one another (which the Constitution prohibited). At the bottom is the biblical motto, “A house divided against itself cannot stand,” later made famous by Abraham Lincoln.

 democracy. “The same enthusiasm, now pervades all classes in favor of government,” observed Benjamin Rush, “that actuated us in favor of liberty in the years 1774 and 1775.” Whether “all classes” truly agreed may be doubted, for the ratification process unleashed a nationwide debate over the best means of preserving American freedom.

T H E R AT I F I C AT I O N D E B AT E A N D
THE ORIGIN OF THE BILL OF RIGHTS THE

 FEDERALIST

 Even though the Constitution provided that it would go into effect when nine states, not all thirteen as required by the Articles of Confederation, had given their approval, ratification was by no means certain. Each state





C H . 7
Founding a Nation, 1783 –1789 

THE RATIFICATION DEBATE AND THE ORIGIN OF THE BILL OF RIGHTS

 held an election for delegates to a special ratifying convention. A fierce public battle ensued, producing hundreds of pamphlets and newspaper articles and spirited campaigns to elect delegates. To generate support, Hamilton, Madison, and Jay composed a series of eighty-five essays that appeared in newspapers under the pen name Publius and were gathered as a book, The Federalist, in 1788. Hamilton wrote fifty, Madison thirty, and Jay the remainder. Today, the essays are regarded as among the most important American contributions to political thought. At the time, however, they represented only one part of a much larger national debate over ratification, reflected in innumerable pamphlets, newspaper articles, and public meetings. Again and again, Hamilton and Madison repeated that rather than posing a danger to Americans’ liberties, the Constitution in fact protected them. Hamilton’s essays sought to disabuse Americans of their fear of political power. Government, he insisted, was an expression of freedom, not its enemy. Any government could become oppressive, but with its checks and balances and division of power, the Constitution made political tyranny almost impossible. Hamilton insisted that he was “as zealous an advocate for liberty as any man whatever.” But “want of power” had been the fatal flaw of the Articles. At the New York ratifying convention, Hamilton assured the delegates that the Constitution had created “the perfect balance between liberty and power.” “EXTEND

 THE

 SPHERE

”


 Madison, too, emphasized how the Constitution was structured to prevent abuses of authority. But in several essays, especially Federalist nos. 10 and 51, he moved beyond such assurances to develop a strikingly new vision of the relationship between government and society in the United States. Madison identified the essential dilemma, as he saw it, of the new republic—government must be based on the will of the people, yet the people had shown themselves susceptible to dangerous enthusiasms. Most worrisome, they had threatened property rights, whose protection was the “first object of government.” The problem of balancing democracy and respect for property would only grow in the years ahead because, he warned, economic development would inevitably increase the numbers of poor. What was to prevent them from using their political power to secure “a more equal distribution” of wealth? The answer, Madison explained, lay not simply in the way power balanced power in the structure of government, but in the nation’s size and diversity. Previous republics had existed only in small territories—the Dutch republic, or Italian city-states of the Renaissance. But, argued Madison, the very size of the United States was a source of stability, not, as many feared, weakness. “Extend the sphere,” he wrote. The multiplicity of religious denominations, he argued, offered the best security for religious liberty. Likewise, in a nation as large as the United States, so many distinct interests—economic, regional, and political—would arise, that no single one would ever be able to take over the government and oppress the rest. Every majority would be a coalition of minorities, and thus “the rights of individuals” would be secure. Madison’s writings did much to shape the early nation’s understanding

H o w d i d A n t i - Fe d e r a l i s t c o n c e r n s r a i s e d d u r i n g t h e r a t i f i c a t i o n
 p r o c e s s l e a d t o t h e c r e a t i o n o f t h e B i l l o f Ri g h t s ?



 of its new political institutions. In arguing that the size of the republic helped to secure Americans’ rights, they reinforced the tradition that saw continuous westward expansion as essential to freedom. And in basing the preservation of freedom on the structure of government and size of the republic, not the character of the people, his essays represented a major shift away from the “republican” emphasis on a virtuous citizenry devoted to the common good as the foundation of proper government. Madison helped to popularize the “liberal” idea that men are generally motivated by self-interest, and that the good of society arises from the clash of these private interests. THE

 ANTI

 -FEDERALISTS

 Opponents of ratification, called Anti-Federalists, insisted that the Constitution shifted the balance between liberty and power too far in the direction of the latter. Anti-Federalists lacked the coherent leadership of the Constitution’s defenders. They included state politicians fearful of seeing their influence diminish, among them such revolutionary heroes as Samuel Adams, John Hancock, and Patrick Henry. Small farmers, many of whom supported the state debtor-relief measures of the 1780s that the Constitution’s supporters deplored, also saw no need for a stronger central government. Some opponents of the Constitution denounced the document’s protections for slavery; others warned that the powers of Congress were so broad that it might enact a law for abolition. Anti-Federalists repeatedly predicted that the new government would fall under the sway of merchants, creditors, and others hostile to the interests of ordinary Americans. Repudiating Madison’s arguments in Federalist nos. 10 and 51, Anti-Federalists insisted that “a very extensive territory cannot be governed on the principles of freedom.” Popular self-government, they claimed, flourished best in small communities, where rulers and ruled interacted daily. Only men of wealth, “ignorant of the sentiments of the middling and lower class of citizens,” would have the resources to win election to a national government. The result of the Constitution, warned Melancton Smith of New York, a member of Congress under the Articles of Confederation, would be domination of the “common people” by the “wellborn.” “This,” Smith predicted, “will be a government of oppression.” Liberty was the Anti-Federalists’ watchword. America’s happiness, they insisted, “arises from the freedom of our institutions and the limited nature of our government,” both threatened by the new Constitution. Maryland Anti-Federalists had caps manufactured bearing the word “Liberty,” to wear to the polls when members of the state’s ratification convention were elected. To the vision of the United States as an energetic great power, AntiFederalists counterposed a way of life grounded in local, democratic institutions. “What is Liberty?” asked James Lincoln of South Carolina. “The power of governing yourselves. If you adopt this constitution, have you this power? No.” Anti-Federalists also pointed to the Constitution’s lack of a Bill of Rights, which left unprotected rights such as trial by jury and freedom of speech and the press. The absence of a Bill of Rights, declared Patrick Henry, was “the most absurd thing to mankind that ever the world saw.” State constitutions had bills of rights, yet the states, Henry claimed, were now being

 In New York City’s Grand Federal Procession of 1788, celebrating the ratification of the Constitution, members of each trade and occupation marched together. This document illustrates the variety of crafts in the pre-industrial city.


VOICES OF FREEDOM F R O M DAV I D R A M S AY ,

The History of the American
Re v o l u t i o n ( 1 7 8 9 )


 A member of the Continental Congress from South Carolina, David Ramsay published his history of the Revolution the year after the Constitution was ratified. In this excerpt,

 of legislature are miniature pictures of the community, and from their mode of election are

 government and the right of future amendment,

 likely to be influenced by the same interests and feelings with the people whom they represent. . . . In no age before, and in no other country, did man

 embodied in the state constitutions and adopted

 ever possess an election of the kind of government,

 he lauds the principles of representative

 in the national one, as unique American political principles and the best ways of securing liberty.

 The world has not hitherto exhibited so fair an opportunity for promoting social happiness. It is hoped for the honor of human nature, that the result will prove the fallacy of those theories that mankind are incapable of self government. The ancients, not knowing the doctrine of representation, were apt in their public meetings to run into confusion, but in America this mode of taking the sense of the people, is so well understood, and so completely reduced to system, that its most populous states are often peaceably convened in an assembly of deputies, not too large



 for orderly deliberation, and yet representing the whole in equal proportion. These popular branches

 under which he would choose to live. The constituent parts of the ancient free governments were thrown together by accident. The freedom of modern European governments was, for the most part, obtained by concessions, or liberality of monarchs, or military leaders. In America alone, reason and liberty concurred in the formation of constitutions . . . In one thing they were all perfect. They left the people in the power of altering and amending them, whenever they pleased. In this happy peculiarity they placed the science of politics on a footing with the other sciences, by opening it to improvements from experience, and the discoveries of future ages. By means of this power of amending American constitutions, the friends of mankind have fondly hoped that oppression will one day be no more.

FROM JAMES WINTHROP, A
n t i - Fe d e r a l i s t E s s a y S i g n e d “A g r i p p a ” ( 1 7 8 7 ) 
 A local official in Middlesex, Massachusetts, James Winthrop published sixteen public letters between November 1787 and February 1788 opposing ratification of the Constitution.

 It is the opinion of the ablest writers on the subject, that no extensive empire can be governed upon republican principles, and that such a government will degenerate into a despotism, unless it be made up of a confederacy of smaller states, each having the full powers of internal regulation. This is precisely the principle which has hitherto preserved our freedom. No instance can be found of any free government of considerable extent which has been supported upon any other plan. Large and consolidated empires may indeed dazzle the eyes of a distant spectator with their splendor, but if examined more nearly are always found to be full of misery. . . . It is under such tyranny that the Spanish provinces languish, and such would be our misfortune and degradation, if we should submit to have the concerns of the whole empire managed by one empire. To promote the happiness of the people it is necessary that there should be local laws; and it is necessary that those laws should be made by the representatives of those who are immediately subject to [them]. . . . It is impossible for one code of laws to suit Georgia and Massachusetts. They must, therefore,

 legislate for themselves. Yet there is, I believe, not one point of legislation that is not surrendered in the proposed plan. Questions of every kind respecting property are determinable in a continental court, and so are all kinds of criminal causes. The continental legislature has, therefore, a right to make rules in all cases. . . . No rights are reserved to the citizens. . . . This new system is, therefore, a consolidation of all the states into one large mass, however diverse the parts may be of which it is composed. . . . A bill of rights . . . serves to secure the minority against the usurpation and tyranny of the majority. . . . The experience of all mankind has proved the prevalence of a disposition to use power wantonly. It is therefore as necessary to defend an individual against the majority in a republic as against the king in a monarchy.

 QUESTIONS

 1. Why does Ramsay feel that the power to amend the Constitution is so important a political innovation? 2. Why does Winthrop believe that a Bill of Rights is essential in the Constitution? 3. How do Ramsay and Winthrop differ concerning how the principle of representation operates in the United States?





C H . 7
Founding a Nation, 1783 –1789 

THE RATIFICATION DEBATE AND THE ORIGIN OF THE BILL OF RIGHTS

 asked to surrender most of their powers to the federal government, with no requirement that it respect Americans’ basic liberties. In general, pro-Constitution sentiment flourished in the nation’s cities and in rural areas closely tied to the commercial marketplace. The Constitution’s most energetic supporters were men of substantial property. But what George Bryan of Pennsylvania, a supporter of ratification, called the “golden phantom” of prosperity also swung urban artisans, laborers, and sailors behind the movement for a government that would use its “energy and power” to revive the depressed economy. Anti-Federalism drew its support from small farmers in more isolated rural areas such as the Hudson Valley of New York, western Massachusetts, and the southern backcountry. In the end, the supporters’ energy and organization, coupled with their domination of the colonial press, carried the day. Ninety-two newspapers and magazines existed in the United States in 1787. Of these, only twelve published a significant number of Anti-Federalist pieces. Madison also won support for the new Constitution by promising that the first Congress would enact a Bill of Rights. By mid-1788, the required nine states had ratified. Although there was strong dissent in Massachusetts, New York, and Virginia, only Rhode Island and North Carolina voted against ratification, and they subsequently had little choice but to join the new government. Anti-Federalism died. But as with other movements in American history that did not immediately achieve their goals—for example, the Populists of the late nineteenth century—some of the Anti-Federalists’ ideas eventually entered the political mainstream. To this day, their belief that a too-powerful central government is a threat to liberty continues to influence American political culture. THE

 BILL

 OF

 RIGHTS

 Ironically, the parts of the Constitution Americans most value today—the freedoms of speech, the press, and religion; protection against unjust criminal procedures; equality before the law—were not in the original document. All of these but the last (which was enshrined in the Fourteenth Amendment after the Civil War) were contained in the first ten amendments, known as the Bill of Rights. Madison was so convinced that the balances of the Constitution would protect liberty that he believed a Bill of Rights “redundant or pointless.” Amendments restraining federal power, he believed, would have no effect on the danger to liberty posed by unchecked majorities in the states, and no list of rights could ever anticipate the numerous ways that Congress might operate in the future. “Parchment barriers” to the abuse of authority, he observed, would prove least effective when most needed. Madison’s prediction would be amply borne out at future times of popular hysteria, such as during the Red Scare following World War I and the McCarthy era of the 1950s, when all branches of government joined in trampling on freedom of expression, and during World War II, when hatred of a foreign enemy led to the internment of more than 100,000 Japanese-Americans, most of them citizens of the United States. Nevertheless, every new state constitution contained some kind of declaration of citizens’ rights, and large numbers of Americans—Federalist


VISIONS OF FREEDOM

 Banner of the Society of Pewterers. A banner carried by one of the many artisan groups that took part in New York City’s Grand Federal Procession of 1788 celebrating the ratification of the Constitution. The banner depicts artisans at work in their shop and some of their products. The words “Solid and Pure,” and the inscription at the upper right, link the quality of their pewter to their opinion of the new frame of government and hopes for the future. The inscription reads:

 QUESTIONS

 1. Why do you think the pewterers believed that the new Constitution would promote Americans’ freedom and prosperity, as stated in the inscription? 2. How does the banner reflect the pewterers’ pride in their craft?

The Federal Plan Most Solid and Secure
Americans Their Freedom Will Endure
 All Arts Shall Flourish in Columbia’s Land And All Her Sons Join as One Social Band





C H . 7
Founding a Nation, 1783 –1789 

 An engraving and poem, published in 1788 in an American newspaper, after New York became the eleventh state to ratify the new Constitution. North Carolina would ratify in 1789 and Rhode Island in 1790.

THE RATIFICATION DEBATE AND THE ORIGIN OF THE BILL OF RIGHTS

 and Anti-Federalist alike—believed the new national Constitution should also have one. In order to “conciliate the minds of the people,” as Madison put it, he presented to Congress a series of amendments that became the basis of the Bill of Rights, which was ratified by the states in 1791. The First Amendment prohibited Congress from legislating with regard to religion or infringing on freedom of speech, freedom of the press, or the right of assembly. The Second upheld the people’s right to “keep and bear arms” in conjunction with “a well-regulated militia.” Others prohibited abuses such as arrests without warrants and forcing a person accused of a crime to testify against himself, and reaffirmed the right to trial by jury. In a sense, the Bill of Rights offered a definition of the “unalienable rights” Jefferson had mentioned in the Declaration of Independence—rights inherent in the human condition. Not having been granted by government in the first place, they could not be rescinded by government. In case any had been accidentally omitted, the Ninth Amendment declared that rights not specifically mentioned in the Constitution were “retained by the people.” Its suggestion that the Constitution was not meant to be complete opened the door to future legal recognition of rights not grounded in the actual text (such as the right to privacy). The Tenth Amendment, meant to answer fears that the federal government would ride roughshod over the states, affirmed that powers not delegated to the national government or prohibited to the states continued to reside with the states. The roots and even the specific language of some parts of the Bill of Rights lay far back in English history. The Eighth Amendment, prohibiting excessive bail and cruel and unusual punishments, incorporates language that originated in a declaration by the House of Lords in 1316 and was repeated centuries later in the English Bill of Rights and the constitutions of a number of American states. Other provisions reflected the changes in American life brought about by the Revolution. The most remarkable of these was constitutional recognition of religious freedom. Unlike the Declaration of Independence, which invokes the blessing of divine providence, the Constitution is a purely secular document that contains no reference to God and bars religious tests for federal officeholders. The First Amendment prohibits the federal government from legislating on the subject of religion—a complete departure from British and colonial precedent. Under the Constitution it was and remains possible, as one critic complained, for “a papist, a Mohomatan, a deist, yea an atheist” to become president of the United States. Madison was so adamant about separating church and state that he even opposed the appointment of chaplains to serve Congress and the military. Today, when Americans are asked to define freedom, they instinctively

H o w d i d A n t i - Fe d e r a l i s t c o n c e r n s r a i s e d d u r i n g t h e r a t i f i c a t i o n
 p r o c e s s l e a d t o t h e c r e a t i o n o f t h e B i l l o f Ri g h t s ?

 OF

 r

R
 ce

.


BRITISH CANADA

 w

 n re

 MAINE (part of Massachusetts)

L


 an Lake Michig

 u ro n

 iss ipp iR

 eH

 is s

 ak

M


 erio

 CONSTITUTION

 a

Lake Sup


 THE

St. L


 RATIFICATION



.


Lake


Er


 e Lak

 Ontario NEW YORK

NEW HAMPSHIRE MASSACHUSETTS

 ie

RHODE ISLAND PENNSYLVANIA

NEW JERSEY

 CONNECTICUT

 MARYLAND souri

.


DELAWARE R.

 hi oR

Mis


 VIRGINIA

O


Mi
 ssis sip p

 i R.

NORTH CAROLINA

SOUTH CAROLINA GEORGIA

SPANISH FLORIDA



 200 miles

Gulf of Mexico


 200 kilometers

 Federalists—those who supported the new Constitution—tended to be concentrated in cities and nearby rural areas, while backcountry farmers were more likely to oppose the new frame of government.

 Atl anti c O cean

 Federalist majority (for ratification) Anti-Federalist majority (against ratification) Evenly divided Politically unorganized



C H . 7
Founding a Nation, 1783 –1789 

THE PEOPLE”

 turn to the Bill of Rights and especially the First Amendment, with its guarantees of freedom of speech, the press, and religion. Yet the Bill of Rights aroused little enthusiasm on ratification and for decades was all but ignored. Not until the twentieth century would it come to be revered as an indispensable expression of American freedom. Nonetheless, the Bill of Rights subtly affected the language of liberty. Applying only to the federal government, not the states, it reinforced the idea that concentrated national power posed the greatest threat to freedom. And it contributed to the long process whereby freedom came to be discussed in the vocabulary of rights. Among the most important rights were freedom of speech and the press, vital building blocks of a democratic public sphere. Once an entitlement of members of Parliament and colonial assemblies, free speech came to be seen as a basic right of citizenship. Although the legal implementation remained to be worked out, and serious infringements would occur at many points in American history, the Bill of Rights did much to establish freedom of expression as a cornerstone of the popular understanding of American freedom.

THE PEOPLE” NATIONAL

 A medal issued to Red Jacket, a Seneca chief, during his visit to Philadelphia (then the national capital) in 1792. It depicts George Washington offering an Indian a peace pipe. The agricultural scene in the background was intended to suggest that Indians should take up farming.

 IDENTITY

 The colonial population had been divided by ethnicity, religion, class, and status and united largely by virtue of their allegiance to Britain. The Revolution created not only a new nation but also a new collective body, the American people, whose members were to enjoy freedom as citizens in a new political community. Since government in the United States rested on the will of the people, it was all the more important to identify who the people were. The Constitution opens with the words, “We the People,” describing those who, among other things, are to possess “the Blessings of Liberty” as a birthright and pass them on to “Posterity.” (Abraham Lincoln would later cite these words to argue that since the nation had been created by the people, not the states, the states could not dissolve it.) Although one might assume that the “people” of the United States included all those living within the nation’s borders, the text made clear that this was not the case. The Constitution identifies three populations inhabiting the United States: Indians, treated as members of independent tribes and not part of the American body politic; “other persons”—that is, slaves; and the “people.” Only the third were entitled to American freedom. Every nation confronts the task of defining its identity. Historians have traditionally distinguished between “civic nationalism,” which envisions the nation as a community open to all those devoted to its political institutions and social values, and “ethnic nationalism,” which defines the nation as a community of descent based on a shared ethnic heritage, language, and culture. At first glance, the United States appears to conform to the civic model. It lacked a clear ethnic identity or long-established national boundaries—the political principles of the Revolution held Americans together. To be an American, all one had to do was commit oneself to an ideology of liberty, equality, and democracy. From the outset, however,

 How did the definition of citizenship in the new republic exclude Na t i v e A m e r i c a n s a n d A f r i c a n - A m e r i c a n s ?

 American nationality combined both civic and ethnic definitions. For most of our history, American citizenship has been defined by blood as well as by political allegiance. INDIANS

 IN

 THE

 NEW

 NATION

 The early republic’s policies toward Indians and African-Americans illustrate the conflicting principles that shaped American nationality. American leaders agreed that the West should not be left in Indian hands, but they disagreed about the Indians’ ultimate fate. The government hoped to encourage the westward expansion of white settlement, which implied one of three things: the removal of the Indian population to lands even farther west, their total disappearance, or their incorporation into white “civilization” with the expectation that they might one day become part of American society. Many white Americans, probably most, deemed Indians savages unfit for citizenship. Indian tribes had no representation in the new government, and the Constitution excluded Indians “not taxed” from being counted in determining each state’s number of congressmen. The treaty system gave them a unique status within the American political system. But despite this recognition of their sovereignty, treaties were essentially ways of transferring land from Indians to the federal government or the states. Often, a



 The signing of the Treaty of Greenville of 1795, painted by an unknown member of General Anthony Wayne’s staff. In the treaty, a group of tribes ceded most of the area of the current state of Ohio, along with the site that became the city of Chicago, to the United States.



C H . 7
Founding a Nation, 1783 –1789 

 INDIAN

 TRIBES,

 erio

Q
AMA PASS

Lake Sup


THE PEOPLE”

 r

 UOD

 CHIPPEWA

 DY

 PENOBS

 COT

La


 an

 chig Lake Mi

 EBAGO

L


WY AN

POTAWATOMI AW ISH

 EN

 MA

SCA UT

NK PIA

RIA IA PEOKASK KIA S KA AHO C

 PIAN

 KISH

 ke

Eri


 AW

 e

 SENECA

DO T DELAWARE MOHICAN

 KASKASKIA

 KICKAPOO

La


ONEIDA TUSCARORA A ONONDAG CAYUGA MOHAWK

MUNSEE DELAWARE SOPOONEE

TROY E MARSHPEPO ND HERRING

SETT AGAN NARR N INGTO STON ON GROT AN EG MOH

 OTTAWA

 rio ake Onta SENECA

 WINN

 on

 IN

Hur


S
SAC ISCON W FOX

 ke

 MENOMINEES

 MONTAUK

I
MIAEMA W IVER E NE EEL R AWINGO H S M

 Atl anti c O cean

 CH

E
 CH

K
 RO

CA TA WB

 ICK

A


ASA W

NOTTAWAY PAMUNKEY MATTAPONIES

 EE

UPPER CREEKS

LOWER CREEKS CHOCTAW

 SEMINOLE

Gulf of Mexico






 200 miles

 200 kilometers

 By 1790, the Indian population had declined significantly from the early colonial era, but the area west of the Appalachian Mountains was still known as “Indian country.”

 How did the definition of citizenship in the new republic exclude Na t i v e A m e r i c a n s a n d A f r i c a n - A m e r i c a n s ?

 treaty was agreed to by only a small portion of a tribe, but the whole tribe was then forced to accept its legitimacy. During Washington’s administration, Secretary of War Henry Knox hoped to deal with Indians with a minimum of warfare and without undermining the new nation’s honor. He recognized, he said in 1794, that American treatment of the continent’s native inhabitants had been even “more destructive to the Indian” than Spain’s conduct in Mexico and Peru. His conciliatory policy had mixed results. Congress forbade the transfer of Indian land without federal approval. But several states ignored this directive and continued to negotiate their own agreements. Open warfare continued in the Ohio Valley. In 1791, Little Turtle, leader of the Miami Confederacy, inflicted a humiliating defeat on American forces led by Arthur St. Clair, the American governor of the Northwest Territory. With 630 dead, this was the costliest loss ever suffered by the United States Army at the hands of Indians. In 1794, 3,000 American troops under Anthony Wayne defeated Little Turtle’s forces at the Battle of Fallen Timbers. This led directly to the Treaty of Greenville of 1795, in which twelve Indian tribes ceded most of Ohio and Indiana to the federal government. The treaty also established the “annuity” system—yearly grants of federal money to Indian tribes that institutionalized continuing government influence in tribal affairs and gave outsiders considerable control over Indian life. Many prominent figures, however, rejected the idea that Indians were innately inferior to white Americans. Thomas Jefferson believed that Indians merely lived at a less advanced stage of civilization. Indians could become full-fledged members of the republic by abandoning communal landholding and hunting in favor of small-scale farming. Once they “possessed property,” Jefferson told one Indian group, they could “join us in our government” and, indeed, “mix your blood with ours.” To pursue the goal of assimilation, Congress in the 1790s authorized President Washington to distribute agricultural tools and livestock to Indian men and spinning wheels and looms to Indian women. To whites, the adoption of American gender norms, with men working the land and women tending to their homes, would be a crucial sign that the Indians were becoming “civilized.” But the American notion of civilization required so great a transformation of Indian life that most tribes rejected it. One missionary was told, “If we want to work, we know how to do it according to our own way and as it pleases us.” To Indians, freedom meant retaining tribal autonomy and identity, including the ability to travel widely in search of game. “Since our acquaintance with our brother white people,” declared a Mohawk speaker at a 1796 treaty council, “that which we call freedom and liberty, becomes an entire stranger to us.” There was no room for Indians who desired to retain their traditional way of life in the American empire of liberty. BLACKS

 AND

 THE

 REPUBLIC

 By 1790, the number of African-Americans far exceeded the Indian population within the United States. The status of free blacks was somewhat indeterminate. Nowhere does the original Constitution define who in fact are





C H . 7
Founding a Nation, 1783 –1789 

 Table 7.1 TOTAL POPULATION AND BLACK POPULATION OF THE UNITED STATES, 1790

State


Total
Free
Population Slaves Blacks


New
England:
New
Hampshire


141,899






Vermont*


85,341






Massachusetts


378,556




5,369


Connecticut


237,655


2,764


2,771


Rhode Island


69,112




3,484


Maine**


96,643






New York


340,241


21,324


4,682


New Jersey


184,139


11,423


2,762


Pennsylvania


433,611


3,737


6,531


Delaware


59,096


8,887


3,899


Maryland


319,728


103,036


8,043


Virginia


747,610


292,627


12,866


North
Carolina


395,005


100,572


5,041


South
Carolina


249,073


107,094


1,801


Georgia


82,548


29,264




Kentucky*


73,677


12,430




Tennessee*


35,691


3,417




3,929,625


697,624


59,557


Middle
States:


South:


Total


 *Vermont, Kentucky, and Tennessee were territories that had not yet been admitted as states. **Maine was part of Massachusetts in 1790.

THE PEOPLE”

 citizens of the United States. The individual states were left free to determine the boundaries of liberty. The North’s gradual emancipation acts assumed that former slaves would remain in the country, not be colonized abroad. Northern statesmen like Hamilton, Jay, and Franklin worked for abolition, and some helped to establish schools for black children. During the era of the Revolution, free blacks enjoyed at least some of the legal rights accorded to whites, including, in most states, the right to vote. Some cast ballots in the election of delegates to conventions that ratified the Constitution. The large majority of blacks, of course, were slaves, and slavery rendered them all but invisible to those imagining the American community. Slaves, as Edmund Randolph, the nation’s first attorney general, put it, were “not . . . constituent members of our society,” and the language of liberty did not apply to them. One of the era’s most widely read books, Letters from an American Farmer, published in France in 1782 by Hector St. John de Crèvecoeur, strikingly illustrated this process of exclusion. Born in France, Crèvecoeur had taken part in the unsuccessful defense of Quebec during the Seven Years’ War. Instead of returning home, he came to New York City in 1759. As a trader and explorer, he visited most of the British mainland colonies, as well as the Ohio and Mississippi Valleys. Crèvecoeur eventually married the daughter of a prominent New York landowner and lived with his own family on a farm in Orange County. Seeking to remain neutral during the War of Independence, he suffered persecution by both patriots and the British, and eventually returned to France. In Letters from an American Farmer, Crèvecoeur popularized the idea, which would become so common in the twentieth century, of the United States as a melting pot. “Here,” he wrote, “individuals of all nations are melted into a new one.” The American left behind “all his ancient prejudices and manners [and received] new ones from the new mode of life he has embraced.” Crèvecoeur was well aware of what he called “the horrors of slavery.” But when he posed the famous question, “What then is the American, this new man?” he answered, “a mixture of English, Scotch, Irish, French, Dutch, Germans, and Swedes. . . . He is either a European, or the descendant of a European.” This at a time when fully one-fifth of the population (the highest proportion in U.S. history) consisted of Africans and their descendants. Like Crèvecoeur, many white Americans excluded blacks from their conception of the American people. The Constitution empowered Congress to create a uniform system by which immigrants became citizens, and the Naturalization Act of 1790 offered the first legislative definition of American nationality. With no debate, Congress restricted the process of becoming a citizen from abroad to “free white persons.” The law initiated a policy that some historians, with only partial accuracy, call “open immigration.” For Europeans, the process was indeed open. Only in the last quarter of the nineteenth century were groups of whites, beginning with prostitutes, convicted felons, lunatics, and persons likely to become a “public charge,” barred from entering the country. For the first century of the republic, virtually the only white persons in the entire world ineligible to claim American citizenship were those unwilling to renounce hereditary titles of nobility, as required in an act of

 How did the definition of citizenship in the new republic exclude Na t i v e A m e r i c a n s a n d A f r i c a n - A m e r i c a n s ?



 1795. And yet, the word “white” in the Naturalization Act excluded a large majority of the world’s population from emigrating to the “asylum for mankind” and partaking in the blessings of American freedom. For eighty years, no non-white immigrant could become a naturalized citizen. Africans were allowed to do so in 1870, but not until the 1940s did persons of Asian origin become eligible. (Native Americans were granted American citizenship in 1924.) JEFFERSON

,


S L A V E R Y,


 AND

 RACE

 Man’s liberty, John Locke had written, flowed from “his having reason.” To deny liberty to those who were not considered rational beings did not seem to be a contradiction. White Americans increasingly viewed blacks as permanently deficient in the qualities that made freedom possible—the capacity for self-control, reason, and devotion to the larger community. These were the characteristics that Jefferson, in a famous comparison of the races in his book Notes on the State of Virginia, published in 1785, claimed blacks lacked, partly due to natural incapacity and partly because the bitter experience of slavery had (quite understandably, he felt) rendered them disloyal to the nation. Jefferson was reluctant to “degrade a whole race of men from the rank in the scale of beings which their Creator may perhaps have given them.” He therefore voiced the idea “as a suspicion only,” that blacks “are inferior to the whites in the endowments both of body and mind.” Yet this “unfortunate” circumstance, he went on, “is a powerful obstacle to the emancipation of these people.” Jefferson was obsessed with the connection between heredity and environment, race and intelligence. His belief that individuals’ abilities and achievements are shaped by social conditions inclined him to hope that no group was fixed permanently in a status of inferiority. He applied this principle, as has been noted, to Indians, whom he believed naturally the equal of whites in intelligence. In the case of blacks, however, he could not avoid the “suspicion” that nature had permanently deprived them of the qualities that made republican citizenship possible. Benjamin Banneker, a free African-American from Maryland who had taught himself the principles of mathematics, sent Jefferson a copy of an astronomical almanac he had published, along with a plea for the abolition of slavery. Jefferson replied, “Nobody wishes more than I do to see such proofs as you exhibit, that nature has given to our black brethren, talents equal to the other colors of men.” To his friend Joel Barlow, however, Jefferson suggested that a white person must have helped Banneker with his calculations. “Nothing is more certainly written in the book of fate,” wrote Jefferson, “than that these people are to be free.” Yet he felt that America should have a homogeneous citizenry with common experiences, values, and inborn abilities. Americans’ essential sameness would underpin the ideal of equal rights for all, making it possible to realize the idea of the public good. Black Americans, Jefferson affirmed, should eventually enjoy the natural rights enumerated in the Declaration of Independence, but in Africa or the Caribbean, not in the United States. He foresaw Indians merging with whites into a single people, but he was horrified by the idea of miscegenation between blacks and whites. Unlike Indians, blacks, he believed, were unfit

 The artist John Singleton Copley, best known for his portraits of prominent Americans and Britons, painted this young African-American in the late 1770s. The subject probably worked on a New England fishing boat. This is one of the era’s very few portraits of a black person.



C H . 7
Founding a Nation, 1783 –1789 

THE PEOPLE”

 for economic independence and political self-government. Freeing the slaves without removing them from the country would endanger the nation’s freedom. In his will, Tadeusz Kosciuszko, a Polish aristocrat who fought for American independence, left funds for Jefferson to purchase and free slaves, “giving them liberty in my name.” But when his friend died in 1817, Jefferson transferred the money to an official of the American Colonization Society, an organization dedicated to sending freed slaves to Africa. Eventually, the funds were divided among Kosciuszko’s heirs in Europe. Jefferson reflected the divided mind of his generation. Some prominent Virginians assumed that blacks could become part of the American nation. Edward Coles, an early governor of Illinois, brought his slaves from Virginia, freed them, and settled them on farms. Washington, who died in 1799, provided in his will that his 277 slaves would become free after the death of his wife, Martha. (Feeling uncomfortable living among men and women who looked forward to her death, she emancipated them the following year.) Jefferson thought of himself as a humane owner. The slave cabins at his estate, Monticello, one visitor wrote, “are all much better than I have seen on any other plantation,” although he could not help adding that “their cabins form a most unpleasant contrast with the palace that rises so near them.” Believing the slave trade immoral, Jefferson tried to avoid selling slaves to pay off his mounting debts. But his will provided for the freedom of only five, all relatives of his slave Sally Hemings, with whom he appears to have had fathered one or more children. When he died in 1826, Jefferson owed so much money that his property, including the majority of his more than 200 slaves, was sold at auction, thus destroying the slave community he had tried to keep intact. PRINCIPLES

 OF

 FREEDOM

 Even as the decline of apprenticeship and indentured servitude narrowed the gradations of freedom among the white population, the Revolution widened the divide between free Americans and those who remained in slavery. Race, one among many kinds of legal and social inequality in colonial America, now emerged as a convenient justification for the existence of slavery in a land that claimed to be committed to freedom. Blacks’ “natural faculties,” Alexander Hamilton noted in 1779, were “probably as good as ours.” But the existence of slavery, he added, “makes us fancy many things that are founded neither in reason or experience.” “We the people” increasingly meant only white Americans. “Principles of freedom, which embrace only half mankind, are only half systems,” declared the anonymous author of a Fourth of July speech in Hartford, Connecticut, in 1800. “Declaration of Independence,” he wondered, “where art thou now?” The answer came from a Richmond newspaper: “Tell us not of principles. Those principles have been annihilated by the existence of slavery among us.”

Suggested Reading


SUGGESTED READING BOOKS

 Amar, Akhil Reed. Bill of Rights: Creation and Reconstruction (1998). Presents the history of the Bill of Rights from its ratification through the Reconstruction era. Berkin, Carol. A Brilliant Solution: Inventing the American Constitution (2002). A lively account of the proceedings of the Constitutional Convention. Cornell, Saul. The Other Founders: Anti-Federalism and the Dissenting Tradition in America, 1788–1828 (1999). A careful examination of the ideas of those who opposed ratification of the Constitution. Dowd, Gregory E. A Spirited Resistance: The North American Indian Struggle for Unity, 1745–1815 (1992). Contains an important discussion of the place of Indians in the new American nation. Holton, Woody. Unruly Americans and the Origins of the Constitution (2007). Argues that the political activities of ordinary Americans helped to shape the Constitution. Kettner, James T. The Development of American Citizenship, 1608–1870 (1978). Traces the development of the definition of American citizenship from early colonization to the aftermath of the Civil War. Levy, Leonard. The Establishment Clause: Religion and the First Amendment (1994). A historical account of one of the key components of the Bill of Rights. MacLeod, Duncan J. Slavery, Race, and the American Revolution (1974). A British scholar’s interpretation of the role of race and slavery in the revolutionary era. McMillin, James A. The Final Victims: Foreign Slave Trade to North America, 1783–1810 (2004). A study of the last phase of the American slave trade, as made possible by the new Constitution. Morris, Richard B. The Forging of the Union, 1781–1789 (1987). A comprehensive account of the nation’s history under the Articles of Confederation. Nash, Gary. The Forgotten Fifth: African Americans in the Age of Revolution (2006). A comprehensive survey of the Revolution’s impact on blacks, slave and free. Nedelsky, Jennifer. Private Property and the Limits of American Constitutionalism (1990). Analyzes how the protection of private property shaped the writing of the Constitution. Rakove, Jack. Original Meanings: Politics and Ideas in the Making of the Constitution (1996). An influential interpretation of the ideas that went into the drafting of the Constitution. Richards, Leonard L. Shays’s Rebellion: The American Revolution’s Final Battle (2002). The most recent study of the uprising that helped to produce the Constitution. Wood, Gordon S. The Creation of the American Republic, 1776–1789 (1969). Presents the evolution of American political ideas and institutions from the Declaration of Independence to the ratification of the Constitution. WEBSITES

 Creating the United States: http://myloc.gov/exhibitions/creatingtheus/Pages/ default.aspx Explore the Constitution: www.constitutioncenter.org



C HAPTER R EVIEW REVIEW QUESTIONS 1.
How did the limited central government created by the Articles of Confederation reflect the issues behind the Revolution and fears for individual liberties? 2. Explain the importance of the Land Ordinances of 1784 and 1785, as well as the Northwest Ordinance of 1787, both for the early republic and future generations. 3. Who were the nationalists of the late 1780s, and why did they believe a new national constitution was necessary? 4. The Constitution has been described as a “bundle of compromises.” Which compromises were the most significant in shaping the direction of the new nation and why? 5. What were the major arguments against the Constitution put forth by the Anti-Federalists? 6. How accurate was Hector St. John de Crèvecoeur’s description of America as a melting pot? 



FREEDOM QUESTIONS 1.
Why did settlers believe that the right to take possession of western lands and use them as they saw fit was an essential part of American freedom? Why did this same freedom not apply to the Native Americans already on the land? 2. James Madison argued that “Liberty may be endangered by the abuses of liberty as well as the abuse of power.” Explain what Madison meant, and how this statement affected the ideas of freedom for the participants at the Constitutional Convention. 3. Why and how did the framers of the Constitution design a government that protected slavery and its advocates? 4. How important was the Bill of Rights at the time it was enacted, and how important is it now? 5. Why does the Constitution never use the word “slavery”? 


 Study and Review at wwnorton.com/studyspace

KEY TERMS

R E V I E W TA B L E


Land Ordinances of 1784 and
 1785 (pp. 262–263)

Debates Surrounding the Constitutional Convention


 Shays’s Rebellion (p. 265)

Interests
 at Stake

Northwest Ordinance of 1787
 (p. 266)

Issue


Resolution


Big v.
 small states

Representation in Congress
 • Virginia plan • New Jersey plan

• Proportional
 representation in House • Equal representation in Senate

Slave v.
 non-slave states

 • Size of population in determining proportional representation • When to stop the slave trade

 • Three-fifths clause • Twenty years after ratification Congress could ban the slave trade

Advocates
 of strong v. weak central government

 • Preventing one branch of the government from dominating the others • Preventing the federal government from dominating state governments

 • Separation of powers • Division of powers

Common
 people v. wealthy elite

 The role of citizens in the new government

 Voters excluded from direct election of Senate and president

 international commerce (p. 266) checks and balances (p. 269) separation of powers (p. 269) “high crimes and misdemeanors” (p. 270) three-fifths clause (p. 270) The Federalist (p. 273) Anti-Federalists (p. 275) Bill of Rights (p. 275) civic nationalism (p. 282) ethnic nationalism (p. 282) Miami Confederacy (p. 285) Battle of Fallen Timbers (p. 285) Treaty of Greenville (p. 285) “annuity” system (p. 285) gradual emancipation (p. 286) Letters from an American Farmer (p. 286) “open immigration” (p. 286) Notes on the State of Virginia (p. 287)



C HAPTER 8

Inauguration of George
Washington
 French Revolution begins



Bank of the United States
Report on Manufactures


1791– Haitian Revolution


 Sarah Morton’s The African Chief Mary Wollstonecraft’s A Vindication of the Rights of Woman Thomas Paine’s Rights of Man



 Washington’s neutrality proclamation First federal fugitive slave law



 Jay’s Treaty Whiskey Rebellion



Inauguration of John Adams




 XYZ affair Alien and Sedition Acts



 John Fries’s Rebellion



 Gabriel’s Rebellion



Inauguration of Thomas
Jefferson




Louisiana Purchase
Marbury v. Madison


 1804– Lewis and Clark expedition

Embargo Act




Inauguration of James
Madison




Battle of Tippecanoe


1812– War of 1812


Hartford Convention
Treaty of Ghent




Battle of New Orleans


Securing the Republic,
1790–1815
POLITICS IN AN AGE OF PASSION
Hamilton’s Program The Emergence of Opposition The Jefferson-Hamilton Bargain The Impact of the French Revolution Political Parties The Whiskey Rebellion The Republican Party An Expanding Public Sphere The Democratic-Republican Societies The Rights of Women Women and the Republic 
THE ADAMS PRESIDENCY
The Election of 1796 The “Reign of Witches” The Virginia and Kentucky Resolutions 
The “Revolution of 1800”
Slavery and Politics
The Haitian Revolution
 Gabriel’s Rebellion

JEFFERSON IN POWER
Judicial Review The Louisiana Purchase Lewis and Clark Incorporating Louisiana The Barbary Wars The Embargo Madison and Pressure for War 
THE “SECOND WAR OF INDEPENDENCE”
The Indian Response Tecumseh’s Vision The War of 1812 The War’s Aftermath The End of the Federalist Party 
 This colorful image from around the time of the War of 1812 contains numerous symbols of freedom, among them the goddess of liberty with her liberty cap, a broken chain at the sailor’s feet, the fallen crown (under his left foot), a broken royal scepter, and the sailor himself, since English interference with American shipping was one of the war’s causes.

F OCUS Q UESTIONS
• What issues made the politics of the 1790s so divisive? • How did competing views of freedom and global events promote the political divisions of the 1790s? • What were the achievements and failures of Jefferson’s presidency? • What were the causes and significant results of the War of 1812? 
 An early American coin, bearing an image of liberty and the word itself, as directed by Congress in a 1792 law.

 l©O

 n April 30, 1789, in New York City, the nation’s temporary capital, George Washington became the first president under the new Constitution. All sixty-nine electors had awarded him their votes. Dressed in a plain suit of “superfine American broad cloth” rather than European finery, Washington took the oath of office on the balcony of Federal Hall before a large crowd that reacted with “loud and repeated shouts” of approval. He then retreated inside to deliver his inaugural address before members of Congress and other dignitaries. Washington’s speech expressed the revolutionary generation’s conviction that it had embarked on an experiment of enormous historical importance, whose outcome was by no means certain. “The preservation of the sacred fire of liberty and the destiny of the republican model of government,” Washington proclaimed, depended on the success of the American experiment in self-government. Most Americans seemed to agree that freedom was the special genius of American institutions. In a resolution congratulating Washington on his inauguration, the House of Representatives observed that he had been chosen by “the freest people on the face of the earth.” When the time came to issue the nation’s first coins, Congress directed that they bear the image not of the head of state (as would be the case in a monarchy) but “an impression emblematic of liberty,” with the word itself prominently displayed. American leaders believed that the success of the new government depended, above all, on maintaining political harmony. They were especially anxious to avoid the emergence of organized political parties, which had already appeared in several states. Parties were considered divisive and disloyal. “They serve to organize faction,” Washington would later declare, and to substitute the aims of “a small but artful” minority for the “will of the nation.” The Constitution makes no mention of political parties, and the original method of electing the president assumes that candidates will run as individuals, not on a party ticket (otherwise, the second-place finisher would not have become vice president). Nonetheless, national political parties quickly arose. Originating in Congress, they soon spread to the general populace. Instead of harmony, the 1790s became, in the words of one historian, an “age of passion,” with each party questioning the loyalty of the other and lambasting its opponent in the most extreme terms. Political rhetoric became inflamed because the stakes seemed so high—nothing less than the legacy of the Revolution, the new nation’s future, and the survival of American freedom.

 What issues made the politics of the 1790s so divisive?



P O L I T I C S I N A N A G E O F PA S S I O N


 President Washington provided a much-needed symbol of national unity. Having retired to private life after the War of Independence (despite some army officers’ suggestion that he set himself up as a dictator), he was a model of self-sacrificing republican virtue. His vice president, John Adams, was widely respected as one of the main leaders in the drive for independence. Washington brought into his cabinet some of the new nation’s most prominent political leaders, including Thomas Jefferson as secretary of state and Alexander Hamilton to head the Treasury Department. He also appointed a Supreme Court of six members, headed by John Jay of New York. But harmonious government proved short-lived. H A M I LT O N ’ S

 PROGRAM

 Political divisions first surfaced over the financial plan developed by Secretary of the Treasury Hamilton in 1790 and 1791. Hamilton’s immediate aims were to establish the nation’s financial stability, bring to the government’s support the country’s most powerful financial interests, and encourage economic development. His long-term goal was to make the United States a major commercial and military power. Hamilton’s model was Great Britain. The goal of national greatness, he believed, could never be realized if the government suffered from the same weaknesses as under the Articles of Confederation. Hamilton’s program had five parts. The first step was to establish the new nation’s credit-worthiness—that is, to create conditions under which persons would loan money to the government by purchasing its bonds, confident that they would be repaid. Hamilton proposed that the federal government assume responsibility for paying off at its full face value the national debt inherited from the War of Independence, as well as outstanding debts of the states. Second, he called for the creation of a new national debt. The old debts would be replaced by new interest-bearing bonds issued to the government’s creditors. This would give men of economic substance a stake in promoting the new nation’s stability, since the stronger and more economically secure the federal government, the more likely it would be to pay its debts. The third part of Hamilton’s program called for the creation of a Bank of the United States, modeled on the Bank of England, to serve as the nation’s main financial agent. A private corporation rather than a branch of the government, it would hold public funds, issue bank notes that would serve as currency, and make loans to the government when necessary, all the while returning a tidy profit to its stockholders. Fourth, to raise revenue, Hamilton proposed a tax on producers of whiskey. Finally, in a Report on Manufactures delivered to Congress in December 1791, Hamilton called for the imposition of a tariff (a tax on imported foreign goods) and government subsidies to encourage the development of factories that could manufacture products currently purchased from abroad. Privately, Hamilton promoted an unsuccessful effort to build an industrial city at present-day Paterson, New Jersey. He also proposed the creation of a national army to deal with uprisings like Shays’s Rebellion.

 Liberty and Washington, painted by an unknown artist around 1800, depicts a female figure of liberty placing a wreath on a bust of the first president. She carries an American flag and stands on a royal crown, which has been thrown to the ground. In the background is a liberty cap. Washington had died in 1799 and was now immortalized as a symbol of freedom, independence, and national pride.



C H . 8
Securing the Republic, 1790–1815 

The Bank of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia.
 Designed by the architect Benjamin Latrobe and built between 1798 and 1801, this elegant structure with Greek columns housed one of the country’s first banks. Hamilton’s program was intended to give the country’s financial leaders a stake in the stability of the federal government.

 THE

 EMERGENCE

POLITICS IN AN AGE OF PASSION

 OF

 OPPOSITION

 Hamilton’s vision of a powerful commercial republic won strong support from American financiers, manufacturers, and merchants. But it alarmed those who believed the new nation’s destiny lay in charting a different path of development. Hamilton’s plans hinged on close ties with Britain, America’s main trading partner. To James Madison and Thomas Jefferson, the future lay in westward expansion, not connections with Europe. They had little desire to promote manufacturing or urban growth or to see economic policy shaped in the interests of bankers and business leaders. Their goal was a republic of independent farmers marketing grain, tobacco, and other products freely to the entire world. Free trade, they believed, not a system of government favoritism through tariffs and subsidies, would promote American prosperity while fostering greater social equality. Jefferson and Madison quickly concluded that the greatest threat to American freedom lay in the alliance of a powerful central government with an emerging class of commercial capitalists, such as Hamilton appeared to envision. To Jefferson, Hamilton’s system “flowed from principles adverse to liberty, and was calculated to undermine and demolish the republic.” Hamilton’s plans for a standing army seemed to his critics a bold threat to freedom. The national bank and assumption of state debts, they feared, would introduce into American politics the same corruption that had undermined British liberty, and enrich those already wealthy at the expense of ordinary Americans. During the 1780s, speculators had bought up at great discounts (often only a few cents on the dollar) government bonds and paper notes that had been used to pay those who fought in the Revolution or supplied the army. Under Hamilton’s plan, speculators would reap a windfall by being paid at face value while the original holders received nothing. Because transportation was so poor, moreover, many backcountry farmers were used to distilling their grain harvest into whiskey, which could then be carried more easily to market. Hamilton’s whiskey tax seemed to single them out unfairly in order to enrich bondholders.

 What issues made the politics of the 1790s so divisive?

 THE

 JEFFERSON

H A M I LT O N


 BARGAIN

 At first, opposition to Hamilton’s program arose almost entirely from the South, the region that had the least interest in manufacturing development and the least diversified economy. It also had fewer holders of federal bonds than the Middle States and New England. (Virginia had pretty much paid off its war debt; it did not see why it should be taxed to benefit states like Massachusetts that had failed to do so.) Hamilton insisted that all his plans were authorized by the Constitution’s ambiguous clause empowering Congress to enact laws for the “general welfare.” As a result, many southerners who had supported the new Constitution now became “strict constructionists,” who insisted that the federal government could only exercise powers specifically listed in the document. Jefferson, for example, believed the new national bank unconstitutional, since the right of Congress to create a bank was not mentioned in the Constitution. Opposition in Congress threatened the enactment of Hamilton’s plans. Behind-the-scenes negotiations followed. They culminated at a famous dinner in 1790 at which Jefferson brokered an agreement whereby southerners accepted Hamilton’s fiscal program (with the exception of subsidies to manufacturers) in exchange for the establishment of the permanent national capital on the Potomac River between Maryland and Virginia. Southerners hoped that the location would enhance their own power in the government while removing it from the influence of the northern financiers and merchants with whom Hamilton seemed to be allied. Major Pierre-Charles L’Enfant, a French-born veteran of the War of Independence, designed a grandiose plan for the “federal city” modeled on the great urban centers of Europe, with wide boulevards, parks, and fountains. The job of surveying was done, in part, by Benjamin Banneker, the free AfricanAmerican scientist mentioned in the previous chapter. When it came to constructing public buildings in the nation’s new capital, most of the labor was done by slaves. THE

 IMPACT

 OF

 THE



 FRENCH

 REVOLUTION

 Political divisions began over Hamilton’s fiscal program, but they deepened in response to events in Europe. When it began in 1789, nearly all Americans welcomed the French Revolution, inspired in part by the example of their own rebellion. John Marshall, a Virginian who would become chief justice of the Supreme Court, later recalled, “I sincerely believed human liberty to depend in a great measure on the success of the French Revolution.” But in 1793, the Revolution took a more radical turn with the execution of King Louis XVI along with numerous aristocrats and other foes of the new government, and war broke out between France and Great Britain. Events in France became a source of bitter conflict in America. Jefferson and his followers believed that despite its excesses the Revolution marked a historic victory for the idea of popular self-government, which must be defended at all costs. Enthusiasm for France inspired a rebirth of symbols of liberty. Liberty poles and caps reappeared on the streets of American towns and cities. To Washington, Hamilton, and their supporters, however, the Revolution raised the specter of anarchy. America, they believed, had no choice but to draw closer to Britain.

 Venerate the Plough, a medal of the Philadelphia Society for the Promotion of Agriculture, 1786. Americans like Jefferson and Madison believed that farmers were the most virtuous citizens and therefore agriculture must remain the foundation of American life.



C H . 8
Securing the Republic, 1790–1815 

 Pierre-Charles L’Enfant’s 1791 plan for Washington, D.C., includes broad avenues that crisscross the city and that are named for the thirteen states, and a long mall stretching from the Potomac River to the Capitol building, slightly to the right of center.

POLITICS IN AN AGE OF PASSION

 American leaders feared being divided into parties “swayed by rival European powers,” in the words of John Quincy Adams. But the rivalry between Britain and France did much to shape early American politics. The “permanent” alliance between France and the United States, which dated to 1778, complicated the situation. No one advocated that the United States should become involved in the European war, and Washington in April 1793 issued a proclamation of American neutrality. But that spring the French Revolution’s American admirers organized tumultuous welcomes for Edmond Genet, a French envoy seeking to arouse support for his beleaguered government. When Genet began commissioning American ships to attack British vessels under the French flag, the Washington administration asked for his recall. (Deeming the situation in France too dangerous, he decided to remain in America and married the daughter of George Clinton, the governor of New York.) Meanwhile, the British seized hundreds of American ships trading with the French West Indies and resumed the hated practice of impressment— kidnapping sailors, including American citizens of British origin, to serve in their navy. Sent to London to present objections, while still serving as chief justice, John Jay negotiated an agreement in 1794 that produced the greatest public controversy of Washington’s presidency. Jay’s Treaty contained no British concessions on impressment or the rights of American shipping. Britain did agree to abandon outposts on the western frontier, which it was supposed to have done in 1783. In return, the United States guaranteed favored treatment to British imported goods. In effect, the treaty canceled the American-French alliance and recognized British economic and naval supremacy as unavoidable facts of life. Critics of the

 What issues made the politics of the 1790s so divisive?

 administration charged that it aligned the United States with monarchical Britain in its conflict with republican France. Ultimately, Jay’s Treaty sharpened political divisions in the United States and led directly to the formation of an organized opposition party. POLITICAL

 PARTIES

 By the mid-1790s, two increasingly coherent parties had appeared in Congress, calling themselves Federalists and Republicans. (The latter had no connection with today’s Republican Party, which was founded in the 1850s.) Both parties laid claim to the language of liberty, and each accused its opponent of engaging in a conspiracy to destroy it. The Federalists, supporters of the Washington administration, favored Hamilton’s economic program and close ties with Britain. Prosperous merchants, farmers, lawyers, and established political leaders (especially outside the South) tended to support the Federalists. Their outlook was generally elitist, reflecting the traditional eighteenth-century view of society as a fixed hierarchy and of public office as reserved for men of economic substance—the “rich, the able, and the well-born,” as Hamilton put it. Freedom, Federalists insisted, rested on deference to authority. It did not mean the right to stand up in opposition to government. Federalists feared that the “spirit of liberty” unleashed by the American Revolution was degenerating into anarchy and “licentiousness.” When the New York Federalist leader Rufus King wrote an essay on the “words . . . with wrong meaning” that had “done great harm” to American society, his first example was “Liberty.” THE

 WHISKEY

 REBELLION

 The Federalists may have been the only major party in American history forthrightly to proclaim democracy and freedom dangerous in the hands of



Infant Liberty Nursed by Mother Mob,
 a Federalist cartoon from 1807, illustrates the party’s fear that the spirit of liberty was degenerating into anarchy. In the background, a mob assaults a building, while in the foreground a pile of books burn.



C H . 8
Securing the Republic, 1790–1815 

 A 1794 painting by the Baltimore artist and sign painter Frederick Kemmelmayer depicting President George Washington as commander-in-chief of the army dispatched to put down the Whiskey Rebellion.

POLITICS IN AN AGE OF PASSION

 ordinary citizens. The Whiskey Rebellion of 1794, which broke out when backcountry Pennsylvania farmers sought to block collection of the new tax on distilled spirits, reinforced this conviction. The “rebels” invoked the symbols of 1776, displaying liberty poles and banners reading “Liberty or Death.” “The citizens of the western country,” one group wrote to the president, “consider [the tax] as repugnant to liberty, [and] an invasion of those privileges which the revolution bestowed upon them.” But Washington dispatched 13,000 militiamen to western Pennsylvania (a larger force than he had commanded during the Revolution). He accompanied them part of the way to the scene of the disturbances, the only time in American history that the president has actually commanded an army in the field. The “rebels” offered no resistance. His vigorous response, Washington wrote, was motivated in part by concern for “the impression” the restoration of public order “will make on others”—the “others” being Europeans who did not believe the American experiment in self-government could survive. THE

 REPUBLICAN

 PARTY

 Republicans, led by Madison and Jefferson, were more sympathetic to France than the Federalists and had more faith in democratic self-government. They drew their support from an unusual alliance of wealthy southern planters and ordinary farmers throughout the country. Enthusiasm for the French Revolution increasingly drew urban artisans into Republican ranks as well. Republicans preferred what a New Hampshire editor called the “boisterous sea of liberty” to the “calm of despotism.” They were far more critical than the Federalists of social and economic inequality, and more accepting of broad democratic participation as essential to freedom. Each emerging party considered itself the representative of the nation and the other an illegitimate “faction.” As early as 1792, Madison composed an imaginary dialogue between spokesmen for the two groups. The Federalist described ordinary people as “stupid, suspicious, licentious” and accused the Republican of being “an accomplice of atheism and anarchy.” The latter called the Federalist an opponent of liberty and “an idolater of tyranny.” In real life, too, political language became more and more heated. Federalists denounced Republicans as French agents, anarchists, and traitors. Republicans called their opponents monarchists intent on transforming the new national government into a corrupt, British-style aristocracy. Each charged the other with betraying the principles of the War of Independence and of American freedom. Washington himself received mounting abuse. When he left office, a Republican newspaper declared

 What issues made the politics of the 1790s so divisive?



 that his name had become synonymous with “political iniquity” and “legalized corruption.” One contemporary complained that the American press, “one of the great safeguards of free government,” had become “the most scurrilous in the civilized world.” AN

 EXPANDING

 PUBLIC

 SPHERE

 The debates of the 1790s produced not only one of the most intense periods of partisan warfare in American history but also an enduring expansion of the public sphere, and with it the democratic content of American freedom. More and more citizens attended political meetings and became avid readers of pamphlets and newspapers. The establishment of nearly 1,000 post offices made possible the wider circulation of personal letters and printed materials. The era witnessed the rapid growth of the American press—the number of newspapers rose from around 100 to 260 during the 1790s, and reached nearly 400 by 1810. Hundreds of “obscure men” wrote pamphlets and newspaper essays and formed political organizations. The decade’s democratic ferment was reflected in writings like The Key of Liberty by William Manning, a selfeducated Massachusetts farmer who had fought at the battle of Concord that began the War of Independence. Although not published until many years later, Manning’s work, addressed to “friends to liberty and free government,” reflected the era’s popular political thought. The most important division in society, Manning declared, was between the “few” and the “many.” He called for the latter to form a national political association to prevent the “few” from destroying “free government” and “tyrannizing over” the people. THE

 DEMOCRATIC

 -REPUBLICAN

 SOCIETIES

 Inspired by the Jacobin clubs of Paris, supporters of the French Revolution and critics of the Washington administration in 1793 and 1794 formed nearly fifty Democratic-Republican societies. The Republican press publicized their meetings, replete with toasts to French and American liberty. The declaration of the Democratic Society of Addison County, Vermont, was typical: “That all men are naturally free, and possess equal rights. That all legitimate government originates in the voluntary social compact of the people.” Federalists saw the societies as another example of how liberty was getting out of hand. The government, not “self-created societies,” declared the president, was the authentic voice of the American people. Forced to justify their existence, the societies developed a defense of the right of the people to debate political issues and organize to affect public policy. To the societies, “free inquiry” and “free communication” formed the first line of defense of “the unalienable rights of free men.” Political liberty meant not simply voting at elections but constant involvement in public affairs. “We make no apology for thus associating ourselves,” declared the Addison

 A print shop in the early republic. The increasing number of newspapers played a major role in the expansion of the public sphere.

RECENT H1


VOICES OF FREEDOM

FROM
Address of the Democratic-Republican Society o f Pe n n s y l v a n i a ( D e c e m b e r 1 8 , 1 7 9 4 ) 
 The creation of around fifty DemocraticRepublican societies in 1793 and 1794 reflected the expansion of the public sphere. The Pennsylvania society issued an address defending itself against critics who questioned its right to criticize the administration of George Washington.

 thinking merely; for of this right the greatest Tyrant cannot deprive his meanest slave; but, it is freedom in the communication of sentiments [by] speech or through the press. This liberty is an imprescriptable [unlimitable] right, independent of any Constitution or social compact; it is as complete a right as that which any man has to the enjoyment of his life. These principles are eternal—they are recognized by our Constitution; and that nation is already enslaved that does not acknowledge their

 The principles and proceedings of our Association have lately been caluminated [tarred by malicious falsehoods]. We should think ourselves unworthy to be ranked as Freemen, if awed by the name of any man, however he may command the public gratitude for past services, we could suffer in silence so sacred a right, so important a principle, as the freedom of opinion to be infringed, by attack on Societies which stand on that constitutional basis. Freedom of thought, and a free communication of opinions by speech through the medium of the press, are the safeguards of our Liberties. . . . By the freedom of opinion, cannot be meant the right of



 truth. . . . If freedom of opinion, in the sense we understand it, is the right of every Citizen, by what mode of reasoning can that right be denied to an assemblage of Citizens? . . . The Society are free to declare that they never were more strongly impressed with . . . the importance of associations . . . than at the present time. The germ of an odious Aristocracy is planted among us—it has taken root. . . . Let us remain firm in attachment to principles. . . . Let us be particularly watchful to preserve inviolate the freedom of opinion, assured that it is the most effectual weapon for the protection of our liberty.

F R O M J U D I T H S A R G E N T M U R R AY , “ O
n t h e E q u a l i t y  of the Sexes” (1790)

 A prominent writer of plays, novels, and poetry,

 wonder at the apparent superiority. . . . At length

Judith Sargent Murray of Massachusetts was one


 arrived at womanhood, the uncultivated fair one feels a void, which the employments allotted her are by no means capable of filling. . . . She herself is most unhappy; she feels the want of a cultivated

 of the first women to demand equal educational opportunities for women.

 Is it upon mature consideration we adopt the idea, that nature is thus partial in her distributions? Is it indeed a fact, that she hath yielded to one half of the human species so unquestionable a mental superiority? I know that to both sexes elevated understandings, and the reverse, are common. But, suffer me to ask, in what the minds of females are so notoriously deficient, or unequal. . . . Are we deficient in reason? We can only reason from what we know, and if an opportunity of

 mind. . . . Should it . . . be vociferated, ‘Your domestic employments are sufficient’—I would calmly ask, is it reasonable, that a candidate for immortality, for the joys of heaven, an intelligent being, who is to spend an eternity in contemplating the works of Deity, should at present be so degraded, as to be allowed no other ideas, than those which are suggested by the mechanism of a pudding, or the sewing the seams of a garment? . . . Yes, ye lordly, ye haughty sex, our souls are by nature equal to yours.

 acquiring knowledge hath been denied us, the inferiority of our sex cannot fairly be deduced from thence. . . . Will it be said that the judgment of a male of two years old, is more sage than that of a female’s of the same age? I believe the reverse is generally observed to be true. But from that period what partiality! How is the one exalted, and the other depressed, by the contrary modes of education which are adopted! The one is taught to aspire, and the other is early confined and limited. As their years increase, the sister must be wholly domesticated, while the brother is led by the hand through all the flowery paths of science. Grant that their minds are by nature equal, yet who shall

 QUESTIONS

 1. Why does the Democratic-Republican society insist on the centrality of “free communication of opinions” in preserving American liberty? 2. How does Murray answer the argument that offering education to women will lead them to neglect their “domestic employments”? 3. How do these documents reflect expanding ideas about who should enjoy the freedom to express one’s ideas in the early republic?





C H . 8
Securing the Republic, 1790–1815 

 An engraving from The Lady’s Magazine and Repository of Entertaining Knowledge, published in Philadelphia in 1792. A woman identified as the “Genius of the Ladies Magazine” kneels before Liberty, presenting a petition for the “Rights of Women.” In the foreground are symbols of the arts, science, and literature—knowledge that should be available to women as well as men.

 Mary Wollstonecraft, author of the pioneering work A Vindication of the Rights of Woman, in a 1797 portrait.

POLITICS IN AN AGE OF PASSION

 County society. “Political freedom” included the right to “exercise watchfulness and inspection, upon the conduct of public officers.” Blamed by Federalists for helping to inspire the Whiskey Rebellion, the societies disappeared by the end of 1795. But much of their organization and outlook was absorbed into the emerging Republican Party. They helped to legitimize the right of “any portion of the people,” regardless of station in life, to express political opinions and take an active role in public life. The Republicans also gained support from immigrants from the British Isles, where war with France inspired a severe crackdown on dissent. Thomas Paine had returned to Britain in 1787. Five years later, after publishing The Rights of Man, a defense of the French Revolution and a stirring call for democratic change at home, he was forced to flee to France one step ahead of the law. But his writings inspired the emergence of a mass movement for political and social change, which authorities brutally suppressed. Threatened with arrest for treason, a number of British and Irish radicals emigrated to America. They included journalists like Joseph Gales and John D. Burk, who soon found themselves editing Republican newspapers that condemned social privilege on both sides of the Atlantic and charged the Federalists with attempting to introduce European tyranny in America. THE

 RIGHTS

 OF

 WOMEN

 The democratic ferment of the 1790s inspired renewed discussion about women’s rights. In 1792, Mary Wollstonecraft published in England her extraordinary pamphlet, A Vindication of the Rights of Woman. Inspired by Paine’s Rights of Man, she asserted that the “rights of humanity” should not be “confined to the male line.” Wollstonecraft did not directly challenge traditional gender roles. Her call for greater access to education and to paid employment for women rested on the idea that this would enable single women to support themselves and married women to perform more capably as wives and mothers. But she did “drop a hint,” as she put it, that women “ought to have representation” in government. Within two years, American editions of Wollstonecraft’s work had appeared, along with pamphlets defending and attacking her arguments. A short-lived women’s rights magazine was published in 1795 in New York City. The expansion of the public sphere offered new opportunities to women. Increasing numbers began expressing their thoughts in print. Hannah Adams of Massachusetts became the first American woman to support herself as an author, publishing works on religious history and the history of New England. Other women took part in political discussions, read newspapers, and listened to orations, even though outside of New Jersey none could vote. In 1792, Sarah W. Morton of Boston published The African Chief, a lengthy poem recounting the enslavement of an African. Judith Sargent Murray, one of the era’s most accomplished American women, wrote essays for the Massachusetts Magazine under the pen name “The Gleaner.” Murray’s father, a prosperous Massachusetts merchant, had taken an enlightened view of his daughter’s education. Although Judith could not attend college because of her sex, she studied alongside her brother with a tutor preparing the young man for admission to Harvard. In her essay “On the Equality of the Sexes,” written in 1779 and published in

 What issues made the politics of the 1790s so divisive?



 1790, Murray insisted that women had as much right as men to exercise all their talents and should be allowed equal educational opportunities to enable them to do so. Women’s apparent mental inferiority to men, she insisted, simply reflected the fact that they had been denied “the opportunity of acquiring knowledge.” “The idea of the incapability of women,” she maintained, was “totally inadmissable in this enlightened age.” WOMEN

 AND

 THE

 REPUBLIC

 Were women part of the new body politic? Until after the Civil War, the word “male” did not appear in the Constitution. Women were counted fully in determining representation in Congress, and there was nothing explicitly limiting the rights outlined in the Constitution to men. A few contributors to the pamphlet debate on women’s rights admitted that, according to the logic of democracy, women ought to have a voice in government. The Constitution’s use of the word “he” to describe officeholders, however, reflected an assumption so widespread that it scarcely required explicit defense: politics was a realm for men. The time had not yet arrived for a broad assault on gender inequality. But like the activities of the Democratic-Republican societies, the discussion of women’s status helped to popularize the language of rights in the new republic. The men who wrote the Constitution did not envision the active and continuing involvement of ordinary citizens in affairs of state. But the rise of political parties seeking to mobilize voters in hotly contested elections, the emergence of the “self-created societies,” the stirrings of women’s political consciousness, and even armed uprisings like the Whiskey Rebellion broadened and deepened the democratization of public life set in motion by the American Revolution.

THE ADAMS PRESIDENCY

 In 1792, Washington won unanimous reelection. Four years later, he decided to retire from public life, in part to establish the precedent that the presidency is not a life office. In his Farewell Address (mostly drafted by Hamilton and published in the newspapers rather than delivered orally; see the Appendix for excerpts from the speech), Washington defended his administration against criticism, warned against the party spirit, and advised his countrymen to steer clear of international power politics by avoiding “permanent alliances with any portion of the foreign world.” THE

 ELECTION

 OF



 George Washington’s departure unleashed fierce party competition over the choice of his successor. In this, the first contested presidential election,

 This sampler was made by Peggy Castleman, a student in Frederick County, Virginia, in 1802. It includes an American eagle, a symbol of patriotism, along with more conventional decorations and domestic imagery. Women as well as men shared in the enthusiasm for early American nationalism.



C H . 8
Securing the Republic, 1790–1815 

THE ADAMS PRESIDENCY

 two tickets presented themselves: John Adams, with Thomas Pinckney of South Carolina for vice president, representing the Federalists, and Thomas Jefferson, with Aaron Burr of New York, for the Republicans. In a majority of the sixteen states (Vermont, Kentucky, and Tennessee had been added to the original thirteen during Washington’s presidency), the legislature still chose presidential electors. But in the six states where the people voted for electors directly, intense campaigning took place. Adams received seventy-one electoral votes to Jefferson’s sixty-eight. Because of factionalism among the Federalists, Pinckney received only fifty-nine votes, so Jefferson, the leader of the opposition party, became vice president. Voting fell almost entirely along sectional lines: Adams carried New England, New York, and New Jersey, while Jefferson swept the South, along with Pennsylvania. In 1797, John Adams assumed leadership of a divided nation. Brilliant but austere, stubborn, and self-important, he was disliked even by those who honored his long career of service to the cause of independence. His presidency was beset by crises. On the international front, the country was nearly dragged into the ongoing European war. As a neutral nation, the United States claimed the right to trade nonmilitary goods with both Britain and France, but both countries seized American ships with impunity. In 1797, American diplomats were sent to Paris to negotiate a treaty to replace the old alliance of 1778. French officials presented them with a demand for bribes before negotiations could proceed. When Adams made public the envoys’ dispatches, the French officials were designated by the last three letters of the alphabet. This “XYZ affair” poisoned America’s relations with its former ally. By 1798, the United States and France were engaged in a “quasi-war” at sea, with French ships seizing American vessels in the Caribbean and a newly enlarged American navy harassing the French. In effect, the United States had become a military ally of Great Britain. Despite pressure from Hamilton, who desired a declaration of war, Adams in 1800 negotiated peace with France. Adams was less cautious in domestic affairs. Unrest continued in many rural areas. In 1799, farmers in southeastern Pennsylvania obstructed the assessment of a tax on land and houses that Congress had imposed to help fund an expanded army and navy. A crowd led by John Fries, a local militia leader and auctioneer, released arrested men from prison. No shots were fired in what came to be called Fries’s Rebellion, but Adams dispatched units of the federal army to the area. The army arrested Fries for treason and proceeded to terrorize his supporters, tear down liberty poles, and whip Republican newspaper editors. Adams pardoned Fries in 1800, but the area, which had supported his election in 1796, never again voted Federalist. THE

 “REIGN

 OF

 WITCHES

”


 But the greatest crisis of the Adams administration arose over the Alien and Sedition Acts of 1798. Confronted with mounting opposition, some of it voiced by immigrant pamphleteers and editors, Federalists moved to silence their critics. A new Naturalization Act extended from five to fourteen years the residency requirement for immigrants seeking American citizenship. The Alien Act allowed the deportation of persons from abroad deemed “dangerous” by federal authorities. The Sedition Act (which was set to expire in 1801, by which time Adams hoped to have been reelected) authorized the prosecu-

 How did competing views of freedom and global events promote the political divisions of the 1790s?

 tion of virtually any public assembly or publication critical of the government. While more lenient than many such measures in Europe (it did not authorize legal action before publication and allowed for trials by jury), the new law meant that opposition editors could be prosecuted for almost any political comment they printed. The main target was the Republican press, seen by Federalists as a group of upstart workingmen (most editors had started out as printers) whose persistent criticism of the administration fomented popular rebelliousness and endangered “genuine liberty.” The passage of these measures launched what Jefferson—recalling events in Salem, Massachusetts, a century earlier—termed a “reign of witches.” Eighteen individuals, including several Republican newspaper editors, were charged under the Sedition Act. Ten were convicted for spreading “false, scandalous, and malicious” information about the government. Matthew Lyon, a member of Congress from Vermont and editor of a Republican newspaper, The Scourge of Aristocracy, received a sentence of four months in prison and a fine of $1,000. (Lyon had been the first former printer and most likely the first former indentured servant elected to Congress.) The government also imprisoned Thomas Cooper, a lawyer and physician in Pennsylvania who had emigrated from England in 1794, for writings accusing the Adams administration of pro-British bias. In Massachusetts, authorities indicted several men for erecting a liberty pole bearing the inscription, “No Stamp Act, no Sedition, no Alien Bill, no Land Tax; Downfall to the Tyrants of America.” THE

 VIRGINIA

 AND

 KENTUCKY

 RESOLUTIONS

 The Alien and Sedition Acts failed to silence the Republican press. Some newspapers ceased publication, but new ones, with names like Sun of Liberty and Tree of Liberty, entered the field. The Sedition Act thrust freedom of expression to the center of discussions of American liberty. Madison and Jefferson mobilized opposition, drafting resolutions adopted by the Virginia and Kentucky legislatures. Both resolutions attacked the Sedition Act as an unconstitutional violation of the First Amendment. Virginia’s, written by Madison, called on the federal courts to protect free speech. The original version of Jefferson’s Kentucky resolution went further, asserting that states could nullify laws of Congress that violated the Constitution— that is, states could unilaterally prevent the enforcement of such laws within their borders. The legislature prudently deleted this passage. The resolutions were directed against assaults on freedom of expression by the federal government, not the states. Jefferson took care to insist that the states “fully possessed” the authority to punish “seditious” speech, even if the national government did not. Indeed, state-level prosecutions of newspapers for seditious libel did not end when the Sedition Act expired in 1801.



 Congressional Pugilists, a 1798 cartoon depicting a fight on the floor of Congress between Connecticut Federalist Roger Griswold and Matthew Lyon, a Republican from Vermont. Lyon would soon be jailed under the Sedition Act for criticizing the Adams administration in his newspaper.



C H . 8
Securing the Republic, 1790–1815 

THE ADAMS PRESIDENCY

 No other state endorsed the Virginia and Kentucky resolutions. Many Americans, including many Republicans, were horrified by the idea of state action that might endanger the Union. But the “crisis of freedom” of the late 1790s strongly reinforced the idea that “freedom of discussion” was an indispensable attribute of American liberty and of democratic government. Free speech, as Massachusetts Federalist Harrison Gray Otis noted, had become the people’s “darling privilege.” The broad revulsion against the Alien and Sedition Acts contributed greatly to Jefferson’s election as president in 1800. THE

 An 1800 campaign banner, with a portrait of Thomas Jefferson and the words, “John Adams is no more.”

 “REVOLUTION

 OF

1800”


 “Jefferson and Liberty” became the watchword of the Republican campaign. By this time, Republicans had developed effective techniques for mobilizing voters, such as printing pamphlets, handbills, and newspapers and holding mass meetings to promote their cause. The Federalists, who viewed politics as an activity for a small group of elite men, found it difficult to match their opponents’ mobilization. Nonetheless, they still dominated New England and enjoyed considerable support in the Middle Atlantic states. Jefferson triumphed, with seventy-three electoral votes to Adams’s sixty-five. Before assuming office, Jefferson was forced to weather an unusual constitutional crisis. Each party arranged to have an elector throw away one of his two votes for president, so that its presidential candidate would come out a vote ahead of the vice presidential. But the designated Republican elector failed to do so. As a result, both Jefferson and his running mate, Aaron Burr, received seventy-three electoral votes. With no candidate having a majority, the election was thrown into the House of Representatives that had been elected in 1798, where the Federalists enjoyed a slight majority. For thirty-five ballots, neither man received a majority of the votes. Finally, Hamilton intervened. He disliked Jefferson but believed him enough of a statesman to recognize that the Federalist financial system could not be dismantled. Burr, he warned, was obsessed with power, “an embryo Caesar.” Hamilton’s support for Jefferson tipped the balance. To avoid a repetition of the crisis, Congress and the states soon adopted the Twelfth Amendment to the Constitution, requiring electors to cast separate votes for president and vice president. The election of 1800 also set in motion a chain of events that culminated four years later when Burr killed Hamilton in a duel. Burr appears to have subsequently engaged in a plot to form a new nation in the West from land detached from the United States and the Spanish empire. Acquitted of treason in 1807, he went into exile in Europe, eventually returning to New York, where he practiced law until his death in 1836. The events of the 1790s demonstrated that a majority of Americans believed ordinary people had a right to play an active role in politics,

 How did competing views of freedom and global events promote the political divisions of the 1790s?



 express their opinions freely, and contest the policies of their government. His party, wrote Samuel Goodrich, a prominent Connecticut Federalist, was overthrown because democracy had become “the watchword of popular liberty.” To their credit, Federalists never considered resistance to the election result. Adams’s acceptance of defeat established the vital precedent of a peaceful transfer of power from a defeated party to its successor. SLAVERY

 AND

 POLITICS

 Lurking behind the political battles of the 1790s lay the potentially divisive issue of slavery. Jefferson, after all, received every one of the South’s fortyone electoral votes. He always referred to his victory as the “Revolution of 1800” and saw it not simply as a party success but as a vindication of American freedom, securing for posterity the fruits of independence. Yet the triumph of “Jefferson and Liberty” would not have been possible without slavery. Had three-fifths of the slaves not been counted in apportionment, John Adams would have been reelected in 1800. The issue of slavery would not disappear. The very first Congress under the new Constitution received petitions calling for emancipation. One bore the weighty signature of Benjamin Franklin, who in 1787 had agreed to serve as president of the Pennsylvania Abolition Society. The blessings of liberty, Franklin’s petition insisted, should be available “without distinction of color to all descriptions of people.” A long debate followed, in which speakers from Georgia and South Carolina vigorously defended the institution and warned that behind northern criticism of slavery they heard “the trumpets of civil war.” Madison found their forthright defense of slavery an embarrassment. But he concluded that the slavery question was so divisive that it must be kept out of national politics. He opposed Congress’s even receiving a petition from North Carolina slaves on the grounds that they were not part of the American people and had “no claim” on the lawmakers’ “attention.” In 1793, to implement the Constitution’s fugitive slave clause, Congress enacted a law providing for federal and state judges and local officials to facilitate the return of escaped slaves. THE

 HAITIAN

 REVOLUTION

 Events during the 1790s underscored how powerfully slavery defined and distorted American freedom. The same Jeffersonians who hailed the French Revolution as a step in the universal progress of liberty reacted in horror against the slave revolution that began in 1791 in Saint Domingue, the jewel of the French overseas empire situated not far from the southern coast of the United States. Toussaint L’Ouverture, an educated slave on a sugar plantation, forged the rebellious slaves into an army able to defeat British forces seeking to seize the island and then an expedition hoping to reestablish French authority. The slave uprising led to the establishment of Haiti as an independent nation in 1804. Although much of the country was left in ruins by years of warfare, the Haitian Revolution affirmed the universality of the revolutionary era’s creed of liberty. It inspired hopes for freedom among slaves in the United States. Throughout the nineteenth century, black Americans would look to

The Providential Detection, a Federalist
 political cartoon from 1800 attacking Thomas Jefferson. An eagle rescues the Constitution and Declaration of Independence before Jefferson can burn them on an “altar to Gallic [French] despotism.” Feeding the flames are writings despised by Federalists, including Thomas Paine’s The Age of Reason, which attacked organized religion, and the Aurora, a Jeffersonian newspaper. Jefferson drops a 1796 letter to his Italian friend Philip Mazzei that criticized President Washington.



C H . 8
Securing the Republic, 1790–1815 

THE PRESIDENTIAL ELECTION OF 1800





8 7 7 9








 Non-voting territory

Party
Republican


Candidate
Jefferson*
Burr**


Federalist


Adams
Pinckney
Jay


 * Chosen as president by House of Representatives

Electoral
Vote


Share of
Electoral Vote
53%




47%


 ** Chosen as vice president by House of Representatives

G A B R I E L’ S


THE ADAMS PRESIDENCY

 Toussaint as a hero and celebrate the winning of Haitian independence. During the 1820s, several thousand free African-Americans emigrated to Haiti, whose government promised newcomers political rights and economic opportunity they did not enjoy in the United States. Among white Americans, the response to the Haitian Revolution was different. Thousands of refugees from Haiti poured into the United States, fleeing the upheaval. Many spread tales of the massacres of slaveowners and the burning of their plantations, which reinforced white Americans’ fears of slave insurrection at home. To most whites, the rebellious slaves seemed not men and women seeking liberty in the tradition of 1776, but a danger to American institutions. That the slaves had resorted to violence was widely taken to illustrate blacks’ unfitness for republican freedom. Ironically, the Adams administration, which hoped that American merchants could replace their French counterparts in the island’s lucrative sugar trade, encouraged the independence of black Haiti. When Jefferson became president, on the other hand, he sought to quarantine and destroy the hemisphere’s second independent republic. REBELLION

 The momentous year of 1800 witnessed not only the “revolution” of Jefferson’s election but an attempted real one, a plot by slaves in Virginia itself to gain their freedom. It was organized by a Richmond blacksmith, Gabriel, and his brothers Solomon, also a blacksmith, and Martin, a slave preacher. The conspirators planned to march on the city, which had recently become the state capital, from surrounding plantations. They would kill some white inhabitants and hold the rest, including Governor James Monroe, hostage until their demand for the abolition of slavery was met. Gabriel hoped that “poor white people” would join the insurrection, and he ordered that Quakers and Methodists (many of whom were critics of slavery) and “French people” (whose country was engaged in the “quasiwar” with the United States described earlier) be spared. On the night when the slaves were to gather, a storm washed out the roads to Richmond. The plot was soon discovered and the leaders arrested. Twentysix slaves, including Gabriel, were hanged and dozens more transported out of the state. Blacks in 1800 made up half of Richmond’s population. One-fifth were free. A black community had emerged in the 1780s and 1790s, and the conspiracy was rooted in its institutions. Gabriel gathered recruits at black Baptist churches, funerals, barbecues, and other gatherings. In cities like Richmond, many skilled slave craftsmen, including Gabriel himself, could read and write and enjoyed the privilege of hiring themselves out to employers—that is, negotiating their own labor arrangements, with their owner receiving their “wages.” Their relative autonomy helps account for slave artisans’ prominent role in the conspiracy. Gabriel’s Rebellion was a product of its age. Gabriel himself had been

 How did competing views of freedom and global events promote the political divisions of the 1790s?

 born in 1776. Like other Virginians, the participants in the conspiracy spoke the language of liberty forged in the American Revolution and reinvigorated during the 1790s. The rebels even planned to carry a banner emblazoned with the slogan, reminiscent of Patrick Henry, “Death or Liberty.” “We have as much right,” one conspirator declared, “to fight for our liberty as any men.” Another likened himself to George Washington, who had rebelled against established authority to “obtain the liberty of [his] countrymen.” (This analogy carried the disturbing implication that Virginia officials had now replaced the British as enemies of freedom.) If Gabriel’s conspiracy demonstrated anything, commented the prominent Virginian George Tucker, it was that slaves possessed “the love of freedom” as fully as other men. Gabriel’s words, he added, reflected “the advance of knowledge” among Virginia’s slaves, including knowledge of the American language of liberty. When slaves escaped to join Lord Dunmore during the War of Independence, he wrote, “they sought freedom merely as a good; now they also claim it as a right.” Tucker believed Virginians should emancipate their slaves and settle them outside of the state. The legislature, however, moved in the opposite direction. It tightened controls over the black population—making it illegal for them to congregate on Sundays without white supervision—and severely restricted the possibility of masters voluntarily freeing their slaves. Any slave freed after 1806 was required to leave Virginia or be sold back into slavery. The door to emancipation, thrown open during the American Revolution, had been slammed shut.

JEFFERSON IN POWER

 The first president to begin his term in Washington, D.C., Jefferson assumed office on March 4, 1801. The city, with its unpaved streets, impoverished residents, and unfinished public buildings, scarcely resembled L’Enfant’s grand plan. At one point, part of the roof of the Capitol collapsed, narrowly missing the vice president. The capital’s condition seemed to symbolize Jefferson’s intention to reduce the importance of the national government in American life. Jefferson’s inaugural address was conciliatory toward his opponents. “Every difference of opinion,” he declared, “is not a difference of principle. . . . We are all Republicans, we are all Federalists.” He went on to expound the policies his administration would follow—economy in government, unrestricted trade, freedom of religion and the press, friendship to all nations but “entangling alliances” with none. America, “the world’s best hope,” would flourish if a limited government allowed its citizens to be “free to regulate their own pursuits.” Jefferson hoped to dismantle as much of the Federalist system as possible. Among his first acts as president was to pardon all those imprisoned under the Sedition Act. During his eight years as president, he reduced the number of government employees and slashed the army and navy. He abolished all taxes except the tariff, including the hated tax on whiskey, and paid off part of the national debt. He aimed to minimize federal power and eliminate government oversight of the economy. His policies ensured that the United States would not become a centralized state on a European model, as Hamilton had envisioned.



 Toussaint L’Ouverture, leader of the slave revolution in Saint Domingue, in a portrait from a history of the island published in 1805.



C H . 8
Securing the Republic, 1790–1815 

JEFFERSON IN POWER

 JUDICIAL

 A watercolor by the artist William Russell Birch depicts the Capitol in 1800, the year Congress first occupied the building. Washington, D.C., was clearly a small community at the time.

 REVIEW

 Nonetheless, as Hamilton predicted, it proved impossible to uproot national authority entirely. Jefferson distrusted the unelected judiciary and always believed in the primacy of local self-government. But during his presidency, and for many years thereafter, Federalist John Marshall headed the Supreme Court. Marshall had served John Adams as secretary of state and was appointed by the president to the Court shortly before Jefferson took office. A strong believer in national supremacy, Marshall established the Court’s power to review laws of Congress and the states. The first landmark decision of the Marshall Court came in 1803, in the case of Marbury v. Madison. On the eve of leaving office, Adams had appointed a number of justices of the peace for the District of Columbia. Madison, Jefferson’s secretary of state, refused to issue commissions (the official documents entitling them to assume their posts) to these “midnight judges.” Four, including William Marbury, sued for their offices. Marshall’s decision declared unconstitutional the section of the Judiciary Act of 1789 that allowed the courts to order executive officials to deliver judges’ commissions. It exceeded the power of Congress as outlined in the Constitution and was therefore void. Marbury, in other words, may have been entitled to his commission, but the Court had no power under the Constitution to order Madison to deliver it. On the immediate issue, therefore, the administration got its way. But the cost, as Jefferson saw it, was high. The Supreme Court had assumed the right to determine whether an act of Congress violates the Constitution—a power known as “judicial review.” Seven years later, in Fletcher v. Peck, the Court extended judicial review to state laws. In 1794, four land companies had paid nearly every member of the state legislature, Georgia’s two U.S. senators, and a number of federal judges, to secure their right to purchase land in present-day Alabama and Mississippi claimed by Georgia. They then sold the land to individual buyers at a large profit. Two years later, many of the corrupt lawmakers were defeated for reelection and the new legislature rescinded the land grant and subsequent sales. Whatever the circumstances of the legislature’s initial action, Marshall declared, the Constitution forbade Georgia from taking any action that impaired a contract. Therefore, the individual purchasers could keep their land and the legislature could not repeal the original grant. THE

 LOUISIANA

 PURCHASE

 But the greatest irony of Jefferson’s presidency involved his greatest achievement, the Louisiana Purchase. This resulted not from astute

 What were the achievements and failures of Jefferson’s presidency?



 American diplomacy but because the rebellious slaves of Saint Domingue defeated forces sent by the ruler of France, Napoleon Bonaparte, to reconquer the island. Moreover, to take advantage of the sudden opportunity to purchase Louisiana, Jefferson had to abandon his conviction that the federal government was limited to powers specifically mentioned in the Constitution, since the document said nothing about buying territory from a foreign power. This vast Louisiana Territory, which stretched from the Gulf of Mexico to Canada and from the Mississippi River to the Rocky Mountains, had been ceded by France to Spain in 1762 as part of the reshuffling of colonial possessions at the end of the Seven Years’ War. France secretly reacquired it in 1800. Soon after taking office, Jefferson learned of the arrangement. He had long been concerned about American access to the port of New Orleans, which lay within Louisiana at the mouth of the Mississippi River. The right to trade through New Orleans, essential to western farmers, had been acknowledged in the Treaty of San Lorenzo (also known as Pinckney’s Treaty) of 1795 between the United States and Spain. But Jefferson feared that the far more powerful French might try to interfere with American commerce. He dispatched envoys to France offering to purchase the city. Needing money for military campaigns in Europe and with his dreams of American empire in ruins because of his inability to reestablish control over Saint Domingue, Napoleon offered to sell the entire Louisiana Territory. The cost, $15 million (the equivalent of perhaps $250 million in today’s money), made the Louisiana Purchase one of history’s greatest realestate bargains. In a stroke, Jefferson had doubled the size of the United States and ended the French presence in North America. Federalists were appalled. “We are to give money, of which we have too little,” one declared, “for land, of which we already have too much.” Jefferson admitted that he had “done an act beyond the Constitution.” But he believed the benefits justified his transgression. Farmers, Jefferson had written, were “the chosen people of God,” and the country would remain “virtuous” as long as it was “chiefly agricultural.” Madison, in Federalist no. 10, had explained that

 White Hall Plantation, painted around 1800, depicts a Louisiana plantation and the dynamism of the region’s economy on the eve of its acquisition by the United States. Black oarsmen man a boat carrying bales of cotton for sale in New Orleans.

C H . 8
Securing the Republic, 1790–1815  LOUISIANA

PURCHASE
Hudson Bay 
MISSISSIPPI TERRITORY

 PENNSYLVANIA

RHODE ISLAND CONNECTICUT NEW JERSEY DELAWARE MARYLAND

NORTH CAROLINA SOUTH CAROLINA

 TENNESSEE

Missi
 ssip pi

Red R.


 n

 s an Ark

R.


 YORK

 rie

 VIRGINIA

 KENTUCKY

 MAINE (part of Massachusetts)

 io Ontar NEW MASSACHUSETTS

 OHIO

St. Louis o R.
Ohi


 MISSOURI as COUNTRY

 e nd ra Rio G

SPANISH TERRITORY



L.


L. E


INDIANA TERRITORY

 d

Cla
 rk 18

 u ro

R.


Santa Fe


 GEORGIA

Atlantic
Ocean


 SPA

Pacific
Ocean


 i R.

 an Lewis

R.


R.


 ur

 o

 t te

 p

 pi

 ss Mi

Pla


 ssi

L.
Michigan 

S


 ssi

Great
Salt Lake


NEW HAMPSHIRE VERMONT

L.
Superior  i M

Lemhi Pass
 na ke R.

Mandan Villages


L. H


Lewis 1806
Great
Falls ark 1806 .
Cl
 eR owston Yell

Colu
 mbia R.

 o ad lor o C

 nce

BRITISH NORTH AMERICA

Lewis and
Clark Pass


R.


Fort Clatsop


R.


OREGON COUNTRY
(claimed by Spain, Britain, and the United States) 
 aw re

 THE

JEFFERSON IN POWER

St
.L




New Orleans


 500 miles

 IDA

 The Louisiana Purchase of 1803 doubled the land area of the United States.



R
 LO



 HF

 NIS

Gulf of Mexico


 Lewis and Clark's expedition, 1804–1806 Louisiana Purchase, 1803 United States, 1803

 500 kilometers

 the large size of the republic made self-government possible—“extend the sphere,” he had proclaimed. Now, Jefferson believed, he had ensured the agrarian character of the United States and its political stability for centuries to come. LEWIS

 AND

 CLARK

 Within a year of the purchase, Jefferson dispatched an expedition led by Meriwether Lewis and William Clark, two Virginia-born veterans of Indian wars in the Ohio Valley, to explore the new territory. Their objects were both scientific and commercial—to study the area’s plants, animal life, and geography, and to discover how the region could be exploited economically. Jefferson hoped the explorers would establish trading relations with western Indians and locate a water route to the Pacific Ocean—an updated version of the old dream of a Northwest Passage that could facilitate commerce with Asia.

 What were the achievements and failures of Jefferson’s presidency?



 In the spring of 1804, Lewis and Clark’s fifty-member “corps of discovery” set out from St. Louis on the most famous exploring party in American history. They spent the winter in the area of present-day North Dakota and then resumed their journey in April 1805. They were now accompanied by a fifteen-year-old Shoshone Indian woman, Sacajawea, the wife of a French fur trader, who served as their guide and interpreter. After crossing the Rocky Mountains, the expedition reached the Pacific Ocean in the area of present-day Oregon (which lay beyond the nation’s new boundaries) in November 1805. They returned in 1806, bringing with them an immense amount of information about the region as well as numerous plant and animal specimens. Reports about geography, plant and animal life, and Indian cultures filled their daily journals. Although Lewis and Clark failed to find a commercial route to Asia, they demonstrated the possibility of overland travel to the Pacific coast. They found Indians in the trans-Mississippi West accustomed to dealing with European traders and already connected to global markets. The success of their journey helped to strengthen the idea that American territory was destined to reach all the way to the Pacific. INCORPORATING

 LOUISIANA

 The only part of the Louisiana Purchase with a significant non-Indian population in 1803 was the region around New Orleans. When the United States took control, the city had around 8,000 inhabitants, including nearly 3,000 slaves and 1,300 free persons of color. Incorporating this diverse population into the United States was by no means easy. French and Spanish law accorded free blacks, many of whom were the offspring of unions between white military officers and slave women, nearly all the rights of white citizens. Slaves in Louisiana, as in Florida and Texas under Spanish rule, enjoyed legal protections unknown in the United States. Spain made it easy for slaves to obtain their freedom through purchase or voluntary emancipation by the owners. Slave women had the right to go to court for protection against cruelty or rape by their owners. The treaty that transferred Louisiana to the United States promised that all free inhabitants would enjoy “the rights, advantages, and immunities of citizens.” Spanish and French civil codes, unlike British and American law, recognized women as co-owners of family property. Under American rule, Louisiana retained this principle of “community property” within marriage. But free blacks suffered a steady decline in status. And the local legislature soon adopted one of the most sweeping slave codes in the South, forbidding blacks to “ever consider themselves the equal of whites” and limiting the practice of manumission and access to the courts. Louisiana’s slaves had enjoyed far more freedom under the rule of tyrannical Spain than as part of the liberty-loving United States. THE

 BARBARY

 WARS

 Among other things, the Louisiana Purchase demonstrated that despite its vaunted isolation from the Old World, the United States continued to be deeply affected by events throughout the Atlantic world. At a time when Americans still relied on British markets to purchase their farm produce

 A page from William Clark’s journal of the Lewis and Clark expedition, depicting a salmon. Among their tasks was to record information about the West’s plants, animal life, and geography.



C H . 8
Securing the Republic, 1790–1815 

 New Orleans in 1803, at the time of the Louisiana Purchase. The painting shows a view of the city from a nearby plantation. The town houses of merchants and plantation owners line the broad promenade along the waterfront. At the lower center, a slave goes about his work. An eagle holds aloft a banner that suggests the heady optimism of the young republic: Under My Wings Every Thing Prospers.

JEFFERSON IN POWER

 and British suppliers for imported manufactured goods, European wars directly influenced the livelihood of American farmers, merchants, and artisans. Jefferson hoped to avoid foreign entanglements, but he found it impossible as president to avoid being drawn into the continuing wars of Europe. Even as he sought to limit the power of the national government, foreign relations compelled him to expand it. The first war fought by the United States was to protect American commerce in a dangerous world. Only a few months after taking office, Jefferson employed the very navy whose expansion by John Adams he had strongly criticized. The Barbary states on the northern coast of Africa had long preyed on shipping in the Mediterranean and Atlantic, receiving tribute from several countries, including the United States, to protect their vessels. Between 1785 and 1796, pirates captured thirteen American ships and held more than 100 sailors as “slaves,” paralyzing American trade with the Mediterranean. The federal government paid hundreds of thousands of dollars in ransom and agreed to annual sums to purchase peace. In 1801, Jefferson refused demands for increased payments and the pasha of Tripoli declared war on the United States. The naval conflict lasted until 1804, when an American squadron won a victory at Tripoli harbor (a victory commemorated in the official hymn of the Marine Corps, which mentions fighting on “the shores of Tripoli”). The treaty ending the war guaranteed the freedom of American commerce, but Tripoli soon resumed harassing American ships. Only after the War of 1812 and one final American show of force did Barbary interference with American shipping end. The Barbary Wars were the new nation’s first encounter with the Islamic world. In the 1790s, as part of an attempt to establish peaceful relations, the federal government declared that the United States was “not, in any sense, founded on the Christian religion.” But the conflicts helped to establish a long-lasting pattern in which Americans viewed Muslims as an exotic people whose way of life did not adhere to Western standards. In the eyes

 What were the achievements and failures of Jefferson’s presidency?

 of many Americans, Islam joined monarchy and aristocracy as forms of Old World despotism that stood as opposites to freedom. THE

 EMBARGO

 Far more serious in its impact on the United States was warfare between Britain and France, which resumed in 1803 after a brief lull. According to international law, neutral nations had a right to trade nonmilitary goods with countries at war. By 1806, however, each combatant had declared the other under blockade, seeking to deny trade with America to its rival. The Royal Navy resumed the practice of impressment. By the end of 1807, it had seized more than 6,000 American sailors (claiming they were British citizens and deserters), including men from the U.S. warship Chesapeake, which the British frigate Leopard bombarded and boarded in American waters off the coast of Maryland. To Jefferson, the economic health of the United States required freedom of trade with which no foreign government had a right to interfere. American farmers needed access to markets in Europe and the Caribbean. As colonial patriots had done in the 1760s and 1770s, he decided to use trade as weapon. In December 1807, he persuaded Congress to enact the Embargo, a ban on all American vessels sailing for foreign ports. For a believer in limited government, this was an amazing exercise of federal power. Enforcement of the Embargo brought back memories of the Intolerable Acts of 1774, with the navy sealing off ports and seizing goods without warrants and the army arresting accused smugglers. Jefferson hoped it would lead Europeans to stop their interference with American shipping and also reduce the occasion for impressment. In 1808, American exports plummeted by 80 percent. Unfortunately, neither Britain nor France, locked in a death struggle, took much notice. But the Embargo devastated the economies of American port cities. Just before his term ended, in March 1809, Jefferson signed the Non-Intercourse Act, banning trade only with Britain and France but providing that if either side rescinded its edicts against American shipping, commerce with that country would resume. MADISON

 AND

 PRESSURE

 FOR

 WAR

 Jefferson left office at the lowest point of his career. He had won a sweeping reelection in 1804, receiving 162 electoral votes to only 14 for the Federalist candidate, Charles C. Pinckney. With the exception of Connecticut, he even carried the Federalist stronghold of New England. Four years later, his handpicked successor, James Madison, also won an easy victory. The Embargo, however, had failed to achieve its diplomatic aims and was increasingly violated by American shippers and resented by persons whose livelihoods depended on trade. In 1810, Madison adopted a new policy. Congress enacted a measure known as Macon’s Bill No. 2, which allowed trade to resume but provided that if either France or Britain ceased interfering with American rights, the president could reimpose an embargo on the other. With little to lose, since Britain controlled the seas, the French emperor Napoleon announced that he had repealed his decrees against neutral shipping. But the British continued to attack American vessels and, with their navy hard-pressed for manpower, stepped up the impressment





C H . 8
Securing the Republic, 1790–1815 

O-Grab-Me, or, the American
 Snapping-Turtle, a cartoon criticizing Jefferson’s Embargo (spelled backward as o-grab-me), which banned all American shipping to foreign ports.

THE “SECOND WAR OF INDEPENDENCE”

 of American sailors. In the spring of 1812, Madison reimposed the embargo on trade with Britain. Meanwhile, a group of younger congressmen, mostly from the West, were calling for war with Britain. Known as the War Hawks, this new generation of political leaders had come of age after the winning of independence and were ardent nationalists. Their leaders included Henry Clay of Kentucky, elected Speaker of the House of Representatives in 1810, and John C. Calhoun of South Carolina. The War Hawks spoke passionately of defending the national honor against British insults, but they also had more practical goals in mind, notably the annexation of Canada. “Agrarian cupidity [greed], not maritime rights,” declared Congressman John Randolph of Virginia, “urges the war. We have heard but one word . . . Canada! Canada! Canada!” Randolph exaggerated, for many southern War Hawks also pressed for the conquest of Florida, a haven for fugitive slaves owned by Britain’s ally Spain. Members of Congress also spoke of the necessity of upholding the principle of free trade and liberating the United States once and for all from European infringements on its independence. Unimpeded access to overseas markets was essential if the agrarian republic were to prosper.

T H E “ S E C O N D WA R O F I N D E P E N D E N C E ”


 The growing crisis between the United States and Britain took place against the background of deteriorating Indian relations in the West, which also helped propel the United States down the road to war. Jefferson had long favored the removal beyond the Mississippi River of Indian tribes who refused to cooperate in “civilizing” themselves. The Louisiana Purchase made this policy more feasible. “The acquisition of Louisiana,” he wrote, “will, it is hoped, put in our power the means of inducing all the Indians on this side [of the Mississippi River] to transplant themselves to the other side.” Jefferson enthusiastically pursued efforts to purchase Indian lands west of the Appalachian Mountains. He encouraged traders to lend money to Indians, in the hope that accumulating debt would force them to sell some of their holdings, thus freeing up more land for “our increasing numbers.” On the other hand, the government continued President Washington’s policy of promoting settled farming among the Indians. Benjamin Hawkins, a friend of Jefferson who served as American agent for Indian affairs south of the Ohio River, also encouraged the expansion of African-American slavery among the tribes as one of the elements of advancing civilization. THE

 INDIAN

 RESPONSE

 By 1800, nearly 400,000 American settlers lived west of the Appalachian Mountains. They far outnumbered the remaining Indians, whose seemingly

W h a t w e r e t h e c a u s e s a n d s i g n i f i c a n t r e s u l t s o f t h e Wa r o f 1 8 1 2 ?


 irreversible decline in power led some Indians to rethink their opposition to assimilation. Among the Creek and Cherokee, a group led by men of mixed Indian-white ancestry like Major Ridge and John Ross enthusiastically endorsed the federal policy of promoting “civilization.” Many had established businesses as traders and slaveowning farmers with the help of their white fathers. Their views, in turn, infuriated “nativists,” who wished to root out European influences and resist further white encroachment on Indian lands. The period from 1800 to 1812 was an “age of prophecy” among the Indians. Movements for the revitalization of Indian life arose among the Creeks, Cherokees, Shawnees, Iroquois, and other tribes. Handsome Lake of the Seneca, who had overcome an earlier addiction to alcohol, preached that Indians must refrain from fighting, gambling, drinking, and sexual promiscuity. He believed Indians could regain their autonomy without directly challenging whites or repudiating all white ways, and he urged his people to take up farming and attend school. TECUMSEH

’S


 VISION

 A more militant message was expounded by two Shawnee brothers— Tecumseh, a chief who had refused to sign the Treaty of Greenville in 1795, and Tenskwatawa, a religious prophet who called for complete separation from whites, the revival of traditional Indian culture, and resistance to federal policies. White people, Tenskwatawa preached, were the source of all evil in the world, and Indians should abandon American alcohol, clothing, food, and manufactured goods. His followers gathered at Prophetstown, located on the Wabash River in Indiana. Tecumseh meanwhile traversed the Mississippi Valley, seeking to revive Neolin’s pan-Indian alliance of the 1760s (discussed in Chapter 4). The alternative to resistance was extermination. “Where today are the Pequot?” he asked. “Where are the Narragansett, the Mohican, the Pocanet, and other powerful tribes of our people? They have vanished before the avarice [greed] and oppression of the white man, as snow before the summer sun.” Indians, he proclaimed, must recognize that they were a single people and unite in claiming “a common and equal right in the land.” He repudiated chiefs who had sold land to the federal government: “Sell a country! Why not sell the air, the great sea, as well as the earth? Did not the Great Spirit make them all for the use of his children?” In 1810, Tecumseh called for attacks on American frontier settlements. In November 1811, while he was absent, American forces under William Henry Harrison destroyed Prophetstown in the Battle of Tippecanoe. THE

 WAR

 OF



 In 1795, James Madison had written that war is the greatest enemy of “true liberty.” “War,” he explained, “is the parent of armies; from these proceed debts and taxes, and armies, and debts, and taxes are the known instruments for bringing the many under the domination of the few.” Nonetheless, Madison became a war president. Reports that the British were encouraging Tecumseh’s efforts contributed to the coming of the War of 1812. In June 1812, with assaults on American shipping continuing,




VISIONS OF FREEDOM

 Benjamin Hawkins Trading with the Creek Indians. Painted around 1805 by an unidentified artist, this work depicts Hawkins explaining the advantages of settled agriculture as part of a plan to promote “civilization” among Native Americans. Having served in the Continental army during the War of Independence and as a senator from North Carolina, Hawkins was appointed in 1795 Superintendent of Indian Affairs for the southeastern United States. He supplied the Creeks, Cherokees, and Choctaws with agricultural training and farm implements and married a Creek woman.



 QUESTIONS

 1. In what ways does the artist depict Indians having adopted the kind of social order Hawkins is encouraging? 2. What elements of traditional Indian culture remain?

W h a t w e r e t h e c a u s e s a n d s i g n i f i c a n t r e s u l t s o f t h e Wa r o f 1 8 1 2 ?


 Madison asked Congress for a declaration of war. American nationality, the president declared, was at stake—would Americans remain “an independent people” or become “colonists and vassals” of Great Britain? The vote revealed a deeply divided country. Both Federalists and Republicans representing the states from New Jersey northward, where most of the mercantile and financial resources of the country were concentrated, voted against war. The South and West were strongly in favor. The bill passed the House by a vote of 79–49 and the Senate by 19–13. It was the first time the United States declared war on another country, and was approved by the smallest margin of any declaration of war in American history. In retrospect, it seems remarkably foolhardy for a disunited and militarily unprepared nation to go to war with one of the world’s two major powers. And with the expiration in 1811 of the charter of the Bank of the United States and the refusal of northern merchants and bankers to loan money, the federal government found it increasingly difficult to finance the war. Before the conflict ended, it was essentially bankrupt. Fortunately for the United States, Great Britain at the outset was preoccupied with the struggle in Europe. But it easily repelled two feeble American invasions of Canada and imposed a blockade that all but destroyed American commerce. In 1814, having finally defeated Napoleon, Britain invaded the United States. Its forces seized Washington, D.C., and burned the White House, while the government fled for safety. Americans did enjoy a few military successes. In August 1812, the American frigate Constitution defeated the British warship Guerriere. Commodore Oliver H. Perry defeated a British naval force in September 1813 on Lake Erie (a startling result considering that Britain prided itself on having the world’s most powerful navy—although the Americans outgunned them on the Great Lakes). In the following year, a British assault on Baltimore was repulsed when Fort McHenry at the entrance to the harbor withstood a British bombardment. This was the occasion when Francis Scott Key composed “The Star-Spangled Banner,” an ode to the “land of the free and home of the brave” that became the national anthem during the 1930s. Like the War of Independence, the War of 1812 was a two-front struggle—against the British and against the Indians. The war produced significant victories over western Indians who sided with the British. In 1813, pan-Indian forces led by Tecumseh (who had been commissioned a general in the British army) were defeated, and he himself was killed, at the Battle of the Thames, near Detroit, by an American force led by William Henry Harrison. In March 1814, an army of Americans and pro-assimilation Cherokees and Creeks under the command of Andrew Jackson defeated hostile Creeks known as the Red Sticks at the Battle of Horseshoe Bend in Alabama, killing more than 800 of them. “The power of the Creeks is forever broken,” Jackson wrote, and he dictated terms of surrender that



 The lid of a chest decorated with scenes from the War of 1812. Images of Hope, on the left, and Liberty flank a picture of the naval battle in which the USS Constitution defeated a British warship. Liberty holds a paper that reads, “Free Trade and Sailors Rights,” two of the issues that drew the United States into the war.



 THE

C H . 8
Securing the Republic, 1790–1815  WAR

 OF

THE “SECOND WAR OF INDEPENDENCE”



BRITISH NORTH AMERICA (CANADA)

 ior

St. L
 a

Lake Super


 ak

MICHIGAN TERRITORY

Fort Niagara


Battle of the Thames
October 5, 1813
Fort Dearborn


L


Er
 ake

Oh


Cincinnati


UNORGANIZED TERRITORY

 io

 Americans defend Fort McHenry from British attack (August, 1814) Baltimore R.

 iss iss ipp iR .

 MARYLAND

.


NORTH CAROLINA

 Atl anti c O cean

M


T


 British set up blockade of American ports

 DELAWARE

 VIRGINIA

 ee R ess n en

RHODE ISLAND CONNECTICUT

NEW JERSEY

 British capture and burn Washington, D.C. August 24, 1814

 KENTUCKY

 TENNESSEE

 MASSACHUSETTS

 PENNSYLVANIA

 OHIO

INDIANA TERRITORY

NEW YORK

 ie

Commodore Perry
 defeats British navy September, 1813

Tippecanoe
November 7, 1811


VERMONT NEW HAMPSHIRE

Lake Ontario


Hudson R.


 ichi

 u ro n

Lake M


R.


Lake
Champlain


 eH

 pi

ILLINOIS TERRITORY

LOUISIANA
General Jackson wins Battle of New Orleans January 8, 1815 
 n kso Jac

MISSISSIPPI TERRITORY

Horseshoe Bend
March 27, 1814


SOUTH CAROLINA

 GEORGIA

Pensacola


SPANISH TERRITORY

Gulf of Mexico


 Although the British burned the nation’s capital, the War of 1812 essentially was a military draw.

R.


 MAINE (part of Massachusetts)

Montreal


L


 n

 ssi p

 ga

 i M

 ssi

 w

 ce ren





 200 miles

 200 kilometers

 U.S. victory U.S. victory over Native Americans British victory U.S. forces British forces British naval blockade

 required the Indians, hostile and friendly alike, to cede more than half their land, over 23 million acres in all, to the federal government. Jackson then proceeded to New Orleans, where he engineered the war’s greatest American victory, fighting off a British invasion in January 1815. Although a slaveholder, Jackson recruited the city’s free men of color into his forces, appealing to them as “sons of freedom” and promising them the

W h a t w e r e t h e c a u s e s a n d s i g n i f i c a n t r e s u l t s o f t h e Wa r o f 1 8 1 2 ?


 same pay and land bounties as white recruits. A number of prominent political careers flowed from American victories. Jackson and Harrison would ride their reputations as military heroes all the way to the White House. Colonel Richard M. Johnson, who claimed to have actually killed Tecumseh, would later be elected vice president. With neither side wishing to continue the conflict, the United States and Britain signed the Treaty of Ghent, ending the war. Although the treaty was signed in December 1814, ships carrying news of the agreement did not reach America until after the Battle of New Orleans had been fought. The treaty restored the previous status quo. No territory exchanged hands, nor did any provisions relate to impressment or neutral shipping rights. Considering that the war had not been a military success for the United States, the Treaty of Ghent was about as good an outcome as could be expected. THE

 WAR’S

 AFTERMATH

 A number of contemporaries called the War of 1812 the Second War of Independence. Despite widespread opposition to the conflict, it confirmed the ability of a republican government to conduct a war without surrendering its institutions. Jackson’s victory at New Orleans not only made him a national hero but also became a celebrated example of the ability of virtuous citizens of a republic to defeat the forces of despotic Europe. Moreover, the war completed the conquest of the area east of the Mississippi River, which had begun during the Revolution. Never again would the British or Indians pose a threat to American control of this vast region. The war also broke the remaining power of Indians in the Old Northwest and significantly reduced their holdings in the South, opening rich new lands to American settlers. In its aftermath, white settlers poured into Indiana, Michigan, Alabama, and Mississippi, bringing with them their distinctive forms of social organization. “I have no doubt,” Jackson wrote to his wife, “but in a few years the banks of the Alabama will present a beautiful view of elegant mansions and extensive rich and productive farms.” He did not mention that those mansions would be built and the farms worked by slaves. Britain’s defeat of Napoleon inaugurated a long period of peace in Europe. With diplomatic affairs playing less and less of a role in American public life, Americans’ sense of separateness from the Old World grew ever stronger. The war also strengthened a growing sense of nationalism in Canada, based in part on separateness from the United States. As in 1775, Canadians did not rise up to welcome an invading army from the south, to the puzzlement of Americans who could not understand why they did not wish to become part of the empire of liberty.



The Taking of the City of Washington,
 an 1814 engraving produced in London, portrays the assault during which British forces captured the undefended city and burned the White House, the Capitol, and several warships.



C H . 8
Securing the Republic, 1790–1815 

THE “SECOND WAR OF INDEPENDENCE”

 THE

 END

 OF

 FEDERALIST

 The bombardment of Baltimore’s Fort McHenry in September 1814 was of minor military importance, but it is remembered as the inspiration for Francis Scott Key’s poem “The Star-Spangled Banner.”

THE PARTY

 Jefferson and Madison succeeded in one major political aim—the elimination of the Federalist Party. At first, the war led to a revival of Federalist fortunes. With antiwar sentiment at its peak in 1812, Madison had been reelected by the relatively narrow margin of 128 electoral votes to 89 over his Federalist opponent, DeWitt Clinton of New York. But then came a self-inflicted blow. In December 1814, a group of New England Federalists gathered at Hartford, Connecticut, to give voice to their party’s long-standing grievances, especially the domination of the federal government by Virginia presidents and their own region’s declining influence as new western states entered the Union. They called for amending the Constitution to eliminate the three-fifths clause that strengthened southern political power, and to require a two-thirds vote of Congress for the admission of new states, declarations of war, and laws restricting trade. Contrary to later myth, the Hartford Convention did not call for secession or disunion. But it affirmed the right of a state to “interpose” its authority if the federal government violated the Constitution. The Hartford Convention had barely adjourned before Jackson electrified the nation with his victory at New Orleans. “Rising Glory of the American Republic,” one newspaper exulted. In speeches and sermons, political and religious leaders alike proclaimed that Jackson’s triumph revealed, once again, that a divine hand oversaw America’s destiny. The Federalists could not free themselves from the charge of lacking patriotism. Within a few years, their party no longer existed. Its stance on the war was only one cause of the party’s demise. The urban commercial and financial interests it championed represented a small minority in an expanding agricultural nation. Their elitism and distrust of popular self-government placed Federalists more and more at odds with the new nation’s democratic ethos. Yet in their dying moments Federalists had raised an issue—southern domination of the national government—that would long outlive their political party. And the country stood on the verge of a profound economic and social transformation that strengthened the very forces of commercial development that Federalists had welcomed and many Republicans feared.

Suggested Reading


SUGGESTED READING BOOKS

 Appleby, Joyce. Capitalism and a New Social Order: The Republican Vision of the 1790s (1984). Explores how the Jeffersonians sought simultaneously to expand economic enterprise and equality of opportunity. Banning, Lance. The Jeffersonian Persuasion: Evolution of a Party Ideology (1978). A careful examination of Jeffersonian ideas, relating them to the ideological origins of the American Revolution. Egerton, Douglas R. Gabriel’s Rebellion: The Virginia Slave Conspiracies of 1800 and 1802 (1993). The most comprehensive account of one the most important slave conspiracies in American history. Elkins, Stanley, and Eric L. McKitrick. The Age of Federalism (1993). A detailed account of the politics of the 1790s. Hofstadter, Richard. The Idea of a Party System: The Rise of Legitimate Opposition in the United States, 1780–1840 (1969). Considers how Americans began by rejecting the idea of organized political parties and ended up accepting their legitimacy. Kerber, Linda K. Women of the Republic: Intellect and Ideology in Revolutionary America (1980). A study of prevailing ideas about women’s place in the new republic. Lambert, Frank. The Barbary Wars: American Independence in the Atlantic World (2005). An account of the first foreign military conflict conducted by the newly independent United States. McCoy, Drew. The Elusive Republic: Political Economy in Jeffersonian America (1980). An influential study of the economic and political outlooks and policies of Federalists and Jeffersonians. Miller, John C. Crisis in Freedom: The Alien and Sedition Acts (1952). Examines how the Adams administration sought to use the power of the federal government to stifle dissent and the free press. Ronda, James P. Lewis and Clark among the Indians (1984). An account of the most famous exploring party in American history. Rothman, Adam. Slave Country: American Expansion and the Origins of the Deep South (2005). A pioneering study of how the United States secured control of what are now the Gulf states, opening the door for the expansion of slavery. Smelser, Marshall. The Democratic Republic, 1801–1815 (1968). Still the best narrative history of the presidencies of Jefferson and Madison. Sugden, John. Tecumseh’s Last Stand (1985). Relates the rise and fall of the era’s most prominent Indian leader. Waldstreicher, David. In the Midst of Perpetual Fetes: The Making of American Nationalism, 1776–1820 (1997). Explores how Americans celebrated and thought about their nation’s independence in the years of the early republic. WEBSITES

Rivers, Edens, Empires: Lewis and Clark and the Revealing of America: www
 .loc.gov/exhibits/lewisandclark/lewisandclark.html



C HAPTER R EVIEW REVIEW QUESTIONS 1.
Identify the major parts of Hamilton’s financial plan, who supported these proposals, and why they created such passionate opposition. 2. How did the French Revolution and ensuing global struggle between Great Britain and France shape early American politics? 3. How did each of the following demonstrate a growing U.S. involvement in the world: Washington’s Farewell Address, Jefferson’s response to the Haitian Revolution, and the Barbary Wars. 4. How did the expansion of the public sphere offer new opportunities to women? 5. How did the Virginia and Kentucky resolutions of 1798 threaten government stability and the future of the republic? 6. Thomas Jefferson spoke of creating an “Empire of Liberty.” What actions did he take to achieve such a goal, and was a universal expansion of freedom the result? 7. Why did contemporaries refer to the War of 1812 as the Second War of Independence, and was this name accurate? 8. Whose status was changed the most by the War of 1812—Great Britain, the United States, or Native Americans? 



FREEDOM QUESTIONS 1.
Why did Jefferson believe Hamilton’s financial plan would destroy both freedom and the republic? 2. Identify the key components of liberty endorsed by the Democratic-Republican societies. Why did Federalists view such societies and ideas as evidence that liberty was getting “out of hand”? 3. Why were the Alien and Sedition Acts of 1798 viewed as assaults on freedom by Jefferson’s supporters, but justified as a defense of a stable republic by the Federalists? 4. The divide between the ideals of American liberty and the institution of slavery grew during the first quarter century of the American republic. Explain how and why, using examples. 


 Study and Review at wwnorton.com/studyspace

KEY TERMS

R E V I E W TA B L E


Bank of the United States (p. 295)


Growing Global Involvement
Report on Manufactures (p. 295)
 “strict constructionists” (p. 297) the Genet affair (p. 298)

Event


Date


National Issue


Response


French Revolution
 and war in Europe

1789–1815


 Uphold alliance and go to war, or benefit economically by neutrality

Neutrality
 proclamation

Haitian Revolution


1791–1804


 Increased fear of slave insurrections

Quarantine
 trade with Haiti

 British seizure of ships and impressments

1793–1796


 War or peace

 Jay’s Treaty keeps peace until 1812

Barbary Wars


1801–1804


 Pirates seizing ships and enslaving Americans; forcing ransom payments

Naval war v.
Tripoli


 impressment (p. 298) Jay’s Treaty (p. 298) Whiskey Rebellion (p. 299) The Key of Liberty (p. 301) A Vindication of the Rights of Woman (p. 304) Judith Sargent Murray (p. 304) XYZ affair (p. 306) Alien and Sedition Acts (p. 306) Matthew Lyon (p. 307) Virginia and Kentucky resolutions (p. 307) first fugitive slave law (p. 309) Gabriel’s Rebellion (p. 310) Marbury v. Madison (p. 312) Louisiana Purchase (p. 312) Embargo Act (p. 317) Tecumseh and Tenskwatawa (p. 319) Hartford Convention (p. 324)



C HAPTER 9

 Eli Whitney invents cotton gin



 Congress approves funds for the National Road



 Robert Fulton’s Steamboat navigates Hudson River



 Congress abolishes international slave trade



 Adams-Onís Treaty with Spain Dartmouth College v. Woodward



Gibbons v. Ogden




 Erie Canal opens



 Lydia Maria Child’s The Frugal Housewife



 Cyrus McCormick introduces the reaper



 John Deere introduces the steel plow Depression begins Ralph Waldo Emerson’s “The American Scholar”

 1820s– Second Great Awakening 1830s

 Telegraph put into commercial operation



 John O’Sullivan coins phrase “manifest destiny”

 1845– Ireland’s Potato Famine Factory Life as it Is



 Henry David Thoreau’s Walden

The Market Revolution,
1800–1840
A NEW ECONOMY

THE FREE INDIVIDUAL

Roads and Steamboats
The Erie Canal
Railroads and the Telegraph
The Rise of the West
The Cotton Kingdom
The Unfree Westward Movement


The West and Freedom
The Transcendentalists
Individualism
The Second Great Awakening
 The Awakening’s Impact

THE LIMITS OF PROSPERITY MARKET SOCIETY
Commercial Farmers The Growth of Cities The Factory System The Industrial Worker The “Mill Girls” The Growth of Immigration Irish and German Newcomers The Rise of Nativism The Transformation of Law 
Liberty and Prosperity
Race and Opportunity
The Cult of Domesticity
Women and Work
The Early Labor Movement
The “Liberty of Living”


 Painted around 1850, this work depicts the city of Lowell, Massachusetts, the most famous of the early factory towns and a center of the cotton textile industry. The factories sit alongside the Merrimack River, which supplies them with water power. The artist’s prominent depiction of trees suggests that nature and industry can coexist harmoniously.

F OCUS Q UESTIONS
• What were the main elements of the market revolution? • How did the market revolution spark social change? • How did the meanings of American freedom change in this period? • How did the market revolution affect the lives of workers, women, and African-Americans? 
 l©I

 n 1824, the Marquis de Lafayette visited the United States. Nearly fifty years had passed since, as a youth of twenty, the French nobleman fought at Washington’s side in the War of Independence. Now, his thirteen-month tour became a triumphant Jubilee of Liberty. Americans had good reason to celebrate Lafayette’s visit and their own freedom. Since 1784, when he had last journeyed to the United States, the nation’s population had tripled to nearly 12 million, its land area had more than doubled, and its political institutions had thrived. Lafayette’s tour demonstrated how profoundly the nation had changed. The thirteen states of 1784 had grown to twenty-four, and he visited every one—a journey that would have been almost impossible forty years earlier. Lafayette traveled up the Mississippi and Ohio Rivers by steamboat, a recent invention that was helping to bring economic development to the trans-Appalachian West, and crossed upstate New York via the Erie Canal, the world’s longest man-made waterway, which linked the region around the Great Lakes with the Atlantic coast via the Hudson River. Americans in the first half of the nineteenth century were fond of describing liberty as the defining quality of their new nation, the unique genius of its institutions. The poet Walt Whitman wrote of his countrymen’s “deathless attachment to freedom.” Likenesses of the goddess of Liberty, a familiar figure in eighteenth-century British visual imagery, became even more common in the United States, appearing in paintings and sculpture and on folk art from weather vanes to quilts and tavern signs. Never, declared President Andrew Jackson in his farewell address in 1837, had any population “enjoyed so much freedom and happiness as the people of these United States.” The celebration of freedom could be found in sermons, newspaper editorials, and political pronouncements in every region of the country. In Democracy in America, the French historian and politician Alexis de Tocqueville wrote of the “holy cult of freedom” he encountered on his own visit to the United States during the early 1830s. “For fifty years,” he wrote, “the inhabitants of the United States have been repeatedly and constantly told that they are the only religious, enlightened, and free people. They . . . have an immensely high opinion of themselves and are not far from believing that they form a species apart from the rest of the human race.” Even as Lafayette, Tocqueville, and numerous other visitors from abroad toured the United States, however, Americans’ understandings of freedom were changing. Three historical processes unleashed by the Revolution accelerated after the War of 1812: the spread of market relations, the westward movement of the population, and the rise of a vigorous political democracy. (The first two will be discussed in this chapter, the third in Chapter 10.) All powerfully affected the

 What were the main elements of the market revolution?



 development of American society. They also helped to reshape the idea of freedom, identifying it ever more closely with economic opportunity, physical mobility, and participation in a vibrantly democratic political system. But American freedom also continued to be shaped by the presence of slavery. Lafayette, who had purchased a plantation in the West Indies and freed its slaves, once wrote, “I would never have drawn my sword in the cause of America if I could have conceived that thereby I was founding a land of slavery.” Yet slavery was moving westward with the young republic. The same steamboats and canals that enabled millions of farm families to send their goods to market also facilitated the growth of slave-based cotton plantations in the South. And slavery drew a strict racial boundary around American democracy, making voting, officeholding, and participation in the public sphere privileges for whites alone. In several southern cities, public notices warned “persons of color” to stay away from the ceremonies honoring Lafayette. Half a century after the winning of independence, the coexistence of liberty and slavery, and their simultaneous expansion, remained the central contradiction of American life.

A NEW ECONOMY

 In the first half of the nineteenth century, an economic transformation known to historians as the market revolution swept over the United States. Its catalyst was a series of innovations in transportation and communication. American technology had hardly changed during the colonial era. No important alterations were made in sailing ships, no major canals were built, and manufacturing continued to be done by hand, with skills passed on from artisan to journeyman and apprentice. At the dawn of the nineteenth century, most roads were little more than rutted paths through the woods. Apart from sailing ships plying the Atlantic coast and flatboats floating downstream on major rivers, trade within the new nation faced insuperable barriers. Transporting goods thirty miles inland by road cost as much as shipping the same cargo from England. In 1800, it took fifty days to move goods from Cincinnati to New York City, via a flatboat ride down the Mississippi River to New Orleans and then a journey by sail along the Gulf and Atlantic coasts. The market revolution represented an acceleration of developments already under way in the colonial era. As noted in previous chapters, southern planters were marketing the products of slave labor in the international market as early as the seventeenth century. By the eighteenth, many colonists had been drawn into Britain’s commercial empire. Consumer goods like

 An 1810 advertisement for a stagecoach route linking Boston and Sandwich, Massachusetts, reveals the slow speed and high cost of land transportation in the early nineteenth century. It took the entire day (beginning at 5 A.M.), and cost around fifty dollars in today’s money to travel the fifty-seven miles between the towns, with stops along the way for breakfast and lunch.



C H . 9
The Market Revolution, 1800–1840 

A NEW ECONOMY

 sugar and tea, and market-oriented tactics like the boycott of British goods, had been central to the political battles leading up to independence. Nonetheless, as Americans moved across the Appalachian Mountains, and into interior regions of the states along the Atlantic coast, they found themselves more and more isolated from markets. In 1800, American farm families produced at home most of what they needed, from clothing to farm implements. What they could not make themselves, they obtained by bartering with their neighbors or purchasing from local stores and from rural craftsmen like blacksmiths and shoemakers. Those farmers not located near cities or navigable waterways found it almost impossible to market their produce. The early life of Abraham Lincoln was typical of those who grew up in the pre-market world. Lincoln was born in Kentucky in 1809 and seven years later moved with his family to Indiana, where he lived until 1831. His father occasionally took pork down the Ohio and Mississippi Rivers to market in New Orleans, and Lincoln himself at age nineteen traveled by flatboat to that city to sell the goods of a local merchant. But essentially, the Lincoln family was self-sufficient. They hunted game for much of their food and sewed most of their clothing at home. They relied little on cash; Lincoln’s father sometimes sent young Abraham to work for neighbors as a way of settling debts. As an adult, however, Lincoln embraced the market revolution. In the Illinois legislature in the 1830s, he eagerly promoted the improvement of rivers to facilitate access to markets. As a lawyer, he eventually came to represent the Illinois Central Railroad, which opened large areas of Illinois to commercial farming. Many Americans devoted their energies to solving the technological problems that inhibited commerce within the country. Thomas Paine spent the 1780s and 1790s not only promoting democracy in America and Europe but also developing a design for an iron bridge, so that rivers could be crossed in all seasons of the year without impeding river traffic.

 An 1837 copy of a color drawing that accompanied a patent application for a type of raft designed in 1818. For many years, rafts like this were used to transport goods to market on western rivers.

 What were the main elements of the market revolution?

 ROADS

 AND

 STEAMBOATS

 In the first half of the nineteenth century, in rapid succession, the steamboat, canal, railroad, and telegraph wrenched America out of its economic past. These innovations opened new land to settlement, lowered transportation costs, and made it far easier for economic enterprises to sell their products. They linked farmers to national and world markets and made them major consumers of manufactured goods. Americans, wrote Tocqueville, had “annihilated space and time.” The first advance in overland transportation came through the construction of toll roads, or “turnpikes,” by localities, states, and private companies. Between 1800 and 1830, the New England and Middle Atlantic states alone chartered more than 900 companies to build new roads. In 1806, Congress authorized the construction of the paved National Road from Cumberland, Maryland, to the Old Northwest. It reached Wheeling, on the Ohio River, in 1818 and by 1838 extended to Illinois, where it ended. Because maintenance costs were higher than expected and many towns built “shunpikes”—short detours that enabled residents to avoid tollgates, most private toll roads never turned a profit. Even on the new roads, horsedrawn wagons remained an inefficient mode of getting goods to market, except over short distances. It was improved water transportation that most dramatically increased the speed and lowered the expense of commerce. Robert Fulton, a Pennsylvania-born artist and engineer, had experimented with steamboat designs while living in France during the 1790s. He even launched a steamboat on the Seine River in Paris in 1803. But not until 1807, when Fulton’s ship, the Clermont, navigated the Hudson River from New York City to Albany, was the steamboat’s technological and commercial feasibility demonstrated. The invention made possible upstream commerce (that is, travel against the current) on the country’s major rivers as well as rapid transport across the Great Lakes and, eventually, the Atlantic Ocean. By 1811, the first steamboat had been introduced on the Mississippi River; twenty years later some 200 plied its waters.



 A view of New York City, in 1849, by the noted lithographer Nathaniel Currier. Steamships and sailing vessels of various sizes crowd the harbor of the nation’s largest city and busiest port.



C H . 9
The Market Revolution, 1800–1840  THE

 ERIE

A NEW ECONOMY

 CANAL

 The completion in 1825 of the 363-mile Erie Canal across upstate New York (a remarkable feat of engineering at a time when America’s next largest canal was only twenty-eight miles long) allowed goods to flow between the Great Lakes and New York City. Almost instantaneously, the canal attracted an influx of farmers migrating from New England, giving birth to cities like Buffalo, Rochester, and Syracuse along its path. Its water, wrote the novelist Nathaniel Hawthorne after a trip on the canal, served as a miraculous “fertilizer,” for “it causes towns with their masses of brick and stone, their churches and theaters, their business . . . to spring up.” New York governor DeWitt Clinton, who oversaw the construction of the state-financed canal, predicted that it would make New York City “the granary of the world, the emporium of commerce, the seat of manufactures, the focus of great moneyed operations.” And, indeed, the canal gave New York City primacy over competing ports in access to trade with the Old Northwest. In its financing by the state government, the Erie Canal typified the developing transportation infrastructure. With the federal government generally under the control of political leaders hostile to federal funding for internal improvements, the burden fell on the states. Between 1787 and 1860, the federal government spent about $60 million building roads and canals and improving harbors; the states spent nearly ten times that sum. The completion of the Erie Canal set off a scramble among other states to match New York’s success. Several borrowed so much money to finance elaborate programs of canal construction that they went bankrupt during the economic depression that began in 1837. By then, however, more than 3,000 miles of canals had been built, creating a network linking the Atlantic states with the Ohio and Mississippi Valleys and drastically reducing the cost of transportation.

 A watercolor from 1830 depicts the Erie Canal five years after it opened. Boats carrying passengers and goods traverse the waterway, along whose banks farms and villages have sprung up.



 What were the main elements of the market revolution?

 REVOLUTION:

 l l l l

 l l

 l

 l

 l

 l l l l

 e

 l

 l

 l l

 l l l l l l l l l l

 l

 l

Philadelphia


Baltimore


 l l l l

Oh


 l l l l l

 l l l l l l l l l l l l

R


 l l l l l l l l

Illi
 n

.


RHODE ISLAND CONNECTICUT

 l

 as

 iss ipp iR

New York


 l

Nashville


DELAWARE MARYLAND

 l

 l

 l l l l l l l

 l l l l l l l l l l

Richmond


 se e nes Ten

R.


NORTH CAROLINA

 TENNESSEE

M
 iss

R.


Memphis


 l l l l l l

VIRGINIA KENTUCKY

Ark
 an s

 l l l

 l l l l l l l l l

Cumberland


 l

Wab
 ash

 l l l l

 l

Louisville


 l l l l l l l l l l l

 l

 l l l l l l

 l Road Wheeling Nationa R. io

 l

 MISSOURI

.


 l

 l l l l l l

 l l

Boston


 l l

St. Louis


 l l l l

Pittsburgh


 l l l l l l l l l

 l l

 l l

 l l l l l l l

 l

 PENNSYLVANIA

 l l l l l l l l l l

 iga ich

Lake M


 l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l

 l

La


 ri ke E l l l l l l l

Vandalia


 OHIO

 l l

 l l l l l l l l

 ro n

 INDIANA

 l l l l

Hu


Missouri R.


 l

 l l l l l l l l l l l

 ILLINOIS

 MAINE

VERMONT NEW
o i r a t n O Lake Rochester Erie Ca HAMPSHIRE n a Lockport l Buffalo NEW YORK Albany MASSACHUSETTS 
Cleveland
 ois

R.


 l

 MICHIGAN

R.


 ce ren

Lake
Champlain


 ke

.


IOWA TERRITORY



BRITISH CANADA

 ior

 n

WISCONSIN TERRITORY

 iR pp ssi

 i

 CANALS,

La


M
 iss

 AND

St. L
 aw

Lake Super


 ROADS

 l

 MARKET

 l

 THE

ARKANSAS R.
Red 
 MISSISSIPPI

 ALABAMA

 GEORGIA

SOUTH CAROLINA

 Atl anti c O cean

Charleston
Natchez
Savannah


 LOUISIANA

Mobile


Gulf of Mexico




FLORIDA TERRITORY

 200 miles

 l l l l l

 Main road Navigable section of river Main canal Canal under construction

 200 kilometers

 RAILROADS

 AND

 THE

 TELEGRAPH

 Canals connected existing waterways. The railroad opened vast new areas of the American interior to settlement, while stimulating the mining of coal for fuel and the manufacture of iron for locomotives and rails. Work on the Baltimore and Ohio, the nation’s first commercial railroad, began in 1828.

 The improvement of existing roads and building of new roads and canals sharply reduced transportation times and costs and stimulated the growth of the market economy.



C H . 9
The Market Revolution, 1800–1840 

 An 1827 engraving designed to show the feasibility of railroads driven by steampowered locomotives, and dedicated to the president of the Baltimore and Ohio Railroad, which began construction in the following year. The engraver placed passengers as far from the locomotive as possible to ensure their safety in case of an explosion.

A NEW ECONOMY

 Five years later, the South Carolina Canal and Railroad, which stretched from Charleston across the state to Hamburg, became the first long-distance line to begin operation. By 1860, the railroad network had grown to 30,000 miles, more than the total in the rest of the world combined. At the same time, the telegraph made possible instantaneous communication throughout the nation. The device was invented during the 1830s by Samuel F. B. Morse, an artist and amateur scientist living in New York City, and it was put into commercial operation in 1844. Using Morse code, messages could be sent over electric wires, with each letter and number represented by its own pattern of electrical pulses. Within sixteen years, some 50,000 miles of telegraph wire had been strung. Initially, the telegraph was a service for businesses, and especially newspapers, rather than individuals. It helped speed the flow of information and brought uniformity to prices throughout the country. THE

 RISE

 OF

 THE

 WEST

 Improvements in transportation and communication made possible the rise of the West as a powerful, self-conscious region of the new nation. Between 1790 and 1840, some 4.5 million people crossed the Appalachian Mountains—more than the entire U.S. population at the time of Washington’s first inauguration. Most of this migration took place after the end of the War of 1812, which unleashed a flood of land-hungry settlers moving from eastern states. In the six years following the end of the war in 1815, six new states entered the Union (Indiana, Illinois, Missouri, Alabama, Mississippi, and Maine—the last an eastern frontier for New England). Few Americans moved west as lone pioneers. More frequently, people traveled in groups and, once they arrived in the West, cooperated with each other to clear land, build houses and barns, and establish communities. One stream of migration, including both small farmers and planters with their slaves, flowed out of the South to create the new Cotton Kingdom of Alabama, Mississippi, Louisiana, and Arkansas. Many farm families from the Upper South crossed into southern Ohio, Indiana, and Illinois. A third population stream moved from New England across New York to the

 What were the main elements of the market revolution?

 Upper Northwest—northern Ohio, Indiana, and Illinois, and Michigan and Wisconsin. Some western migrants became “squatters,” setting up farms on unoccupied land without a clear legal title. Those who purchased land acquired it either from the federal government, at the price, after 1820, of $1.25 per acre payable in cash, or from land speculators on long-term credit. By 1840, settlement had reached the Mississippi River and two large new regions—the Old Northwest and Old Southwest—had entered the Union. The West became the home of regional cultures very much like those the migrants had left behind. Upstate New York and the Upper Northwest resembled New England, with its small towns, churches, and schools, while the Lower South replicated the plantation-based society of the southern Atlantic states. As population moved west, the nation’s borders expanded. National boundaries made little difference to territorial expansion—in Florida, and later in Texas and Oregon, American settlers rushed in to claim land under the jurisdiction of foreign countries (Spain, Mexico, and Britain) or Indian tribes, confident that American sovereignty would soon follow in their wake. Nor did the desire of local inhabitants to remain outside the American republic deter the nation’s expansion. Florida, for example, fell into American hands despite the resistance of local Indians and Spain’s rejection of American offers to buy the area. In 1810, American residents of West Florida rebelled and seized Baton Rouge, and the United States soon annexed the area. The drive for the acquisition of East Florida was spurred by Georgia and Alabama planters who wished to eliminate a refuge for fugitive slaves and hostile Seminole Indians. Andrew Jackson led troops into the area in 1818. While on foreign soil, he created an international crisis by executing two British traders and a number of Indian chiefs. Although Jackson withdrew, Spain, aware that it could not defend the territory, sold it to the United States in the Adams-Onís Treaty of 1819. Successive censuses told the remarkable story of western growth. In 1840, by which time the government had sold to settlers and land companies nearly 43 million acres of land, 7 million Americans—two-fifths of the



 A watercolor by the artist Edwin Whitefield depicts a squatter’s cabin in the Minnesota woods.

C H . 9
The Market Revolution, 1800–1840  REVOLUTION:

Lake Super


S E T T L E M E N T,


BRITISH CANADA

 ior

 k

 hig

 u ro n

 sip

Lake Mic


 n re

 ce

 MAINE

 VERMONT

 eH

 an

La
Mi
 ssi s

 WESTERN

R.


THE MARKET 1800–1820

A NEW ECONOMY

St. L
 aw



 p i R.

Lake


 r i R. Missou

 e Lak

Er


Ontar


NEW HAMPSHIRE MASSACHUSETTS

 io

NEW YORK

 ie

RHODE ISLAND CONNECTICUT PENNSYLVANIA NEW JERSEY

 ILLINOIS

 OHIO

 INDIANA

 DELAWARE

Ohio R.


MARYLAND VIRGINIA

 KENTUCKY

Arkansas


 TENNESSEE

R


 e ess nn e T

.
 eR

NORTH CAROLINA

.


SOUTH CAROLINA MISSISSIPPI

 ALABAMA

 Atl anti c O cean

 GEORGIA

 LOUISIANA

SPANISH FLORIDA
Gulf of Mexico 


 200 miles

 100 200 kilometers

 In the first two decades of the nineteenth century, the westward movement of the population brought settlement to and across the Mississippi River. Before canals— and later, railroads—opened previously landlocked areas to commercial farming, settlement was concentrated near rivers.

 Areas settled by 1800 Areas settled by 1810 Areas settled by 1820

 total population—lived beyond the Appalachian Mountains. Between 1810 and 1830, Ohio’s population grew from 231,000 to more than 900,000. It reached nearly 2 million in 1850, when it ranked third among all the states. The careers of the era’s leading public figures reflected the westward movement. Andrew Jackson, Henry Clay, and many other statesmen had been born in states along the Atlantic coast but made their mark in politics after moving west.



 What were the main elements of the market revolution?

 TRAVEL

 TIMES

 FROM

 NEW

 YORK

 CITY

 IN



L.
Superior 

 n L. Michiga

 n

L.
Michiga 

 o

 rie

L. E


New York


 tari

 o

 rie

New York


 oR Ohi

.


.


Mi
 ssis

Mi
 ssis sipp

 sip pi R

.


 i R.

L.
On 

 ro n

 ro n

 tari

Hu


Hu


 THE



L.


L.
L. E


L.
On 

 oR Ohi







L.
Superior 



 AND

1 day
 2 days 3 days 4 days 5 days 6 days 1 week 2 weeks 3 weeks 4 weeks 5 weeks 6 weeks

 500 miles

 500 kilometers

 COTTON

 KINGDOM

 Although the market revolution and westward expansion occurred simultaneously in the North and the South, their combined effects heightened the nation’s sectional divisions. In some ways, the most dynamic feature of the American economy in the first thirty years of the nineteenth century was the rise of the Cotton Kingdom. The early industrial revolution, which began in England and soon spread to parts of the North, centered on factories producing cotton textiles with water-powered spinning and weaving machinery. These factories generated an immense demand for cotton, a crop the Deep South was particularly suited to growing because of its climate and soil fertility. Until 1793, the marketing of cotton had been slowed by the laborious task of removing seeds from the plant itself. But in that year, Eli Whitney, a Yale graduate working in Georgia as a private tutor, invented the cotton gin. A fairly simple device consisting of rollers and brushes, the gin quickly separated the seed from the cotton. It made possible the growing and selling of cotton on a large scale. Coupled with rising demand for cotton and the opening of new lands in the West to settlement, Whitney’s invention revolutionized American slavery. An institution that many Americans had expected to die out because its major crop, tobacco, exhausted the soil, now embarked on a period of unprecedented expansion. In the first decade of the nineteenth century, cotton plantations spread into the South Carolina upcountry (the region inland from the Atlantic coast previously dominated by small farms), a major reason why the state reopened the African slave trade between

 These maps illustrate how the transportation revolution of the early nineteenth century made possible much more rapid travel within the United States.

 Table 9.1 POPULATION GROWTH OF SELECTED WESTERN STATES, 1800–1850 (EXCLUDING INDIANS)

State








Alabama


9,000


310,000


772,000


Illinois


12,000


157,000


851,000


Indiana


25,000


343,000


988,000


Louisiana


77,000


216,000


518,000


Mississippi


31,000


137,000


607,000


Missouri


20,000


140,000


682,000


231,000


938,000


1,980,000


Ohio




C H . 9
The Market Revolution, 1800–1840 

MARKET SOCIETY

1803 and 1808. After the War of 1812, the
 federal government moved to consolidate American control over the Deep South, forcing defeated Indians to cede land, encouraging white settlement, and acquiring Florida. With American sovereignty came the expansion of slavery. Settlers from the older southern states flooded into the region. Planters monopolized the most fertile land, while poorer farmers were generally confined to less productive and less accessible areas in the “hill country” and piney woods. After Congress prohibited the Atlantic slave trade in 1808—the earliest date allowed by the Constitution—a massive trade in slaves developed within the United States, supplying the labor force required by the new Cotton Kingdom. THE

 UNFREE

 WESTWARD

 MOVEMENT

Slave Trader, Sold to Tennessee, a
 watercolor sketch by the artist Lewis Miller from the mid-1850s. Miller depicts a group of slaves being marched from Virginia to Tennessee. Once Congress voted to prohibit the further importation of slaves into the country, slaveowners in newly opened areas of the country had to obtain slaves from other parts of the United States.

 Historians estimate that around 1 million slaves were shifted from the older slave states to the Deep South between 1800 and 1860. Some traveled with their owners to newly established plantations, but the majority were transported by slave traders to be sold at auction for work in the cotton fields. Slave trading became a well-organized business, with firms gathering slaves in Maryland, Virginia, and South Carolina and shipping them to markets in Mobile, Natchez, and New Orleans. Slave coffles—groups chained to one another on forced marches to the Deep South—became a common sight. A British visitor to the United States in the 1840s encountered what he called a “disgusting and hideous spectacle,” a file of “about two hundred slaves, manacled and chained together,” being marched from Virginia to Louisiana. A source of greater freedom for many whites, the westward movement meant to African-Americans the destruction of family ties, the breakup of longstanding communities, and receding opportunities for liberty. In 1793, when Whitney designed his invention, the United States produced 5 million pounds of cotton. By 1820, the crop had grown to nearly 170 million pounds. Thomas Jefferson had believed that European demand for American grain would underpin the nation’s economic growth and the small farmer’s independence. But as the southern economy expanded westward, it was cotton produced on slave plantations, not grain grown by sturdy yeomen, that became the linchpin of southern development and by far the most important export of the empire of liberty.

MARKET SOCIETY

 Since cotton was produced solely for sale in national and international markets, the South was in some ways the most commercially oriented



 How did the market revolution spark social change?

THE MARKET REVOLUTION: C U LT I VAT I O N , 1 8 2 0 – 1 8 4 0

 THE

 SPREAD

 OF

 COTTON

MARYLAND ILLINOIS

UNORGANIZED TERRITORY

 OHIO

 INDIANA

 VIRGINIA

 MISSOURI

 KENTUCKY

 TENNESSEE

NORTH CAROLINA

ARKANSAS TERRITORY

 MISSISSIPPI

SPANISH TERRITORY

 DELAWARE

SOUTH CAROLINA

 ALABAMA

 LOUISIANA

 GEORGIA



 INDIANA

 200 miles

 200 kilometers

Cotton Production 1820
 Each dot represents 2,000 bales of cotton

 FLORIDA

 ILLINOIS



MARYLAND DELAWARE

 OHIO

 MISSOURI

VIRGINIA KENTUCKY

INDIAN LANDS

NORTH CAROLINA

 TENNESSEE

 ARKANSAS

 ALABAMA

TEXAS REPUBLIC

SOUTH CAROLINA

 LOUISIANA

 MISSISSIPPI

 GEORGIA



 FLORIDA

 region of the United States. Yet rather than spurring economic change, the South’s expansion westward simply reproduced the same agrarian, slavebased social order of the older states. The region remained overwhelmingly rural. In 1860, roughly 80 percent of southerners worked the land—the same proportion as in 1800. The South’s transportation and banking systems remained adjuncts of the plantation economy, geared largely to



 200 miles

 200 kilometers

Cotton Production 1840
 Each dot represents 2,000 bales of cotton

 Maps of cotton production graphically illustrate the rise of the Cotton Kingdom stretching from South Carolina to Louisiana.



C H . 9
The Market Revolution, 1800–1840 

MARKET SOCIETY

 transporting cotton and other staple crops to market and financing the purchase of land and slaves. COMMERCIAL

 Lagonda Agricultural Works, a color lithograph from 1859 advertising an Ohio manufacturer of agricultural machinery, in this case a horse-drawn reaper.

FA R M E R S

 In the North, however, the market revolution and westward expansion set in motion changes that transformed the region into an integrated economy of commercial farms and manufacturing cities. As in the case of Lincoln’s family, the initial pioneer stage of settlement reinforced the farmer’s self-sufficiency, for the tasks of felling trees, building cabins, breaking the soil, and feeding the family left little time for agriculture geared to the market. But as the Old Northwest became a more settled society, bound by a web of transportation and credit to eastern centers of commerce and banking, farmers found themselves drawn into the new market economy. They increasingly concentrated on growing crops and raising livestock for sale, while purchasing at stores goods previously produced at home. Western farmers found in the growing cities of the East a market for their produce and a source of credit. Loans originating with eastern banks and insurance companies financed the acquisition of land and supplies and, in the 1840s and 1850s, the purchase of fertilizer and new agricultural machinery to expand production. The steel plow, invented by John Deere in 1837 and mass-produced by the 1850s, made possible the rapid subduing of the western prairies. The reaper, a horse-drawn machine that greatly increased the amount of wheat a farmer could harvest, was invented by Cyrus McCormick in 1831 and produced in large quantities soon afterward. Tens of thousands were in use on the eve of the Civil War. Between 1840 and 1860, America’s output of wheat nearly tripled. Unlike cotton, however, the bulk of the crop was consumed within the country. Eastern farmers, unable to grow wheat and corn as cheaply as their western counterparts, increasingly concentrated on producing dairy products, fruits, and vegetables for nearby urban centers. THE

 GROWTH

 OF

 CITIES

 From the beginning, cities formed part of the western frontier. Western cities like Cincinnati and St. Louis that stood at the crossroads of inter-regional trade experienced extraordinary growth. Cincinnati was known as “porkopolis,” after its slaughterhouses where hundreds of thousands of pigs were butchered each year and processed for shipment to eastern consumers of meat. The greatest of all the western cities was Chicago. In the early 1830s, it was a tiny settlement on the shore of Lake Michigan. By 1860, thanks to the railroad, Chicago had become the nation’s fourth largest city,

 How did the market revolution spark social change?



 A painting of Cincinnati, self-styled Queen City of the West, from 1835. Steamboats line the Ohio River waterfront.

 where farm products from throughout the Northwest were gathered to be sent east. Like rural areas, urban centers witnessed dramatic changes due to the market revolution. The number of cities with populations exceeding 5,000 rose from 12 in 1820 to nearly 150 three decades later, by which time the urban population numbered more than 6 million. Urban merchants, bankers, and master craftsmen took advantage of the economic opportunities created by the expanding market among commercial farmers. The drive among these businessmen to increase production and reduce labor costs fundamentally altered the nature of work. Traditionally, skilled artisans had manufactured goods at home, where they controlled the pace and intensity of their own labor. Now, entrepreneurs gathered artisans into large workshops in order to oversee their work and subdivide their tasks. Craftsmen who traditionally produced an entire pair of shoes or piece of furniture saw the labor process broken down into numerous steps requiring far less skill and training. They found themselves subjected to constant supervision by their employers and relentless pressure for greater output and lower wages. THE

FAC T O RY

 SYSTEM

 In some industries, most notably textiles, the factory superceded traditional craft production altogether. Factories gathered large groups of workers under central supervision and replaced hand tools with power-driven machinery. Samuel Slater, an immigrant from England, established America’s first factory in 1790 at Pawtucket, Rhode Island. Since British law made it illegal to export the plans for industrial machinery, Slater, a skilled mechanic, built from memory a power-driven spinning jenny, one of the key inventions of the early industrial revolution.

C H . 9
The Market Revolution, 1800–1840 



 CITIES,



BRITISH CANADA
La 
 ior

 w

 nc re

 MAINE

S t.


Lake Super


 eR

.


 MAJOR

MARKET SOCIETY

La


 k

 VERMONT

 ip iss

Lake Mic


 u ro n

 hig

 an

 eH

Mi
 ss

NEW HAMPSHIRE

 pi R.

Lowell Salem
 rio Utica Albany Lynn MASSACHUSETTS Troy Boston Rochester

Buffalo


Er


 e Lak

 ri Missou

Chicago


Roxbury
Springfield
Poughkeepsie Hartford
New York New Haven


 ie

 PENNSYLVANIA

Oh
 i

Cincinnati


 oR

.


R.


 OHIO

Baltimore
Washington, D.C.
Alexandria


Louisville


 TENNESSEE

R


Petersburg


 e ess nn Te

NEW JERSEY

Philadelphia
Wilmington


DELAWARE MARYLAND
Norfolk 
NORTH CAROLINA

 Atl anti c O cean

.


 ALABAMA

Brooklyn


.
 eR

SOUTH CAROLINA MISSISSIPPI

RHODE ISLAND CONNECTICUT

Richmond


 KENTUCKY

Arkansas


Newark


 VIRGINIA

St. Louis


Providence
New Bedford
Nantucket


NEW YORK

Reading
Pittsburgh Lancaster


 INDIANA

Portland


L.
Onta 

Detroit


 ILLINOIS

Bangor


Charleston


 GEORGIA

Savannah


LOUISIANA
City Population Over 300,000 50,000–299,999 Less than 50,000 
Mobile
New Orleans


SPANISH FLORIDA
Gulf of Mexico 


Population Density
 Less than 6 inhabitants per square mile More than 6 inhabitants per square mile

 200 miles

 100 200 kilometers

 Although the United States was still predominantly agricultural, by 1840 major cities had arisen in the northern and northwestern states. The South lagged far behind in urban growth. Most cities were located on navigable waterways—either the Atlantic coast or inland rivers—or on rivers that provided water power for early factories.

 How did the market revolution spark social change?

 Spinning factories such as Slater’s produced yarn, which was then sent to traditional hand-loom weavers and farm families to be woven into cloth. This “outwork” system, in which rural men and women earned money by taking in jobs from factories, typified early industrialization. Before shoe production was fully mechanized, for example, various parts of the shoe were produced in factories, then stitched together in nearby homes, and then returned to the factories for finishing. Eventually, however, the entire manufacturing process in textiles, shoes, and many other products was brought under a single factory roof. The cutoff of British imports because of the Embargo of 1807 and the War of 1812 stimulated the establishment of the first large-scale American factory utilizing power looms for weaving cotton cloth. This was constructed in 1814 at Waltham, Massachusetts, by a group of merchants who came to be called the Boston Associates. In the 1820s, they expanded their enterprise by creating an entirely new factory town (incorporated as the city of Lowell in 1836) on the Merrimack River, twenty-seven miles from Boston. Here they built a group of modern textile factories that brought together all phases of production from the spinning of thread to the weaving and finishing of cloth. By 1850, Lowell’s fifty-two mills employed more than 10,000 workers. Across New England, small industrial cities sprang up pat-



 A group of shoemakers with their tools, photographed in 1837. Artisan production survived in many crafts, but shoemakers found themselves in dire straits as factories began industrializing shoe production.

Mill on the Brandywine, an 1830
 watercolor of a Pennsylvania paper mill. Because it relied on water power, much early manufacturing took place in the countryside.

C H . 9
The Market Revolution, 1800–1840 



 COTTON

 MILLS,

MARKET SOCIETY

 1820s

 MAINE

Con
 nec ticu t R.

Lake
Champlain


 VERMONT

Lake Ontario


 rrim Me

NEW YORK

NEW HAMPSHIRE

 ack R.

Dover


R.


Hudson


R.


Mohawk


Somersworth


Lowell


 MASSACHUSETTS

Waltham
Cumberland


 Atl anti c O cean

Smithfield
Fall River


 wa re

R.


De
 la

 n

 a ueh Susq

 na

R.


Paterson


CONNECTICUT
Warwick 
RHODE ISLAND

PENNSYLVANIA
Delaware County 
 MARYLAND

NEW JERSEY



 100 miles 100 kilometers

 Towns with 50–499 cotton-mill employees Towns with 500–999 cotton-mill employees Towns with 1,000 or more cotton-mill employees

 DELAWARE

 The early industrial revolution was concentrated in New England, where factories producing textiles from raw cotton sprang up along the region’s many rivers, taking advantage of water power to drive their machinery.

 terned on Waltham and Lowell. Massachusetts soon became the second most industrialized region of the world, after Great Britain. The earliest factories, including those at Pawtucket, Waltham, and Lowell, were located along the “fall line,” where waterfalls and river rapids could be harnessed to provide power for spinning and weaving machinery. By the 1840s, steam power made it possible for factory owners to locate in towns like New Bedford nearer to the coast, and in large cities like Philadelphia and Chicago with their immense local markets. In 1850, manufacturers produced in factories not only textiles but also a wide variety of other goods, including tools, firearms, shoes, clocks, ironware, and agricultural machinery. What came to be called the “American system of manufactures” relied on the mass production of interchangeable parts that could be rapidly assembled into standardized finished products. This technique was first perfected in the manufacture of clocks by Eli Terry, a

 How did the market revolution spark social change?



 Connecticut craftsman, and in small-arms production by Eli Whitney, who had previously invented the cotton gin. More impressive, in a way, than factory production was the wide dispersion of mechanical skills throughout northern society. Every town, it seemed, had its sawmill, paper mill, iron works, shoemaker, hatmaker, tailor, and a host of other such small enterprises. The early industrial revolution was largely confined to New England and a few cities outside it. Lacking a strong internal market, and with its slaveholding class generally opposed to industrial development, the South lagged in factory production. And outside New England, most northern manufacturing was still done in small-scale establishments employing a handful of workers, not in factories. In Cincinnati, for example, most workers in 1850 still labored in small unmechanized workshops. THE

 INDUSTRIAL

 WORKER

 The market revolution helped to change Americans’ conception of time itself. Farm life continued to be regulated by the rhythms of the seasons. But in cities, clocks became part of daily life, and work time and leisure time came to be clearly marked off from one another. In artisan workshops of the colonial and early national eras, bouts of intense work alternated with periods of leisure. Artisans would set down their tools to enjoy a drink at a tavern or attend a political discussion. As the market revolution accelerated, work in factories, workshops, and even for servants in Americans’ homes, took place for a specified number of hours per day. In colonial America, an artisan’s pay was known as his “price,” since it was linked to the goods he produced. In the nineteenth century, pay increasingly became a “wage,” paid according to an hourly or daily rate. The increasing reliance on railroads, which operated according to fixed schedules, also made Americans more conscious of arranging their lives according to “clock time.” Closely supervised work tending a machine for a period determined by a clock seemed to violate the independence Americans considered an essential element of freedom. Consequently, few native-born men could be attracted to work in the early factories. Employers turned instead to those who lacked other ways of earning a living. THE

 “MILL

 GIRLS

 A broadside from 1853, illustrating the long hours of work (twelve hours per day, with thirty minutes for lunch) in the Lowell mills and the way factory labor was strictly regulated by the clock.

”


 While some factories employed entire families, the early New England textile mills relied largely on female and child labor. At Lowell, the most famous center of early textile manufacturing, young unmarried women from Yankee farm families dominated the workforce that tended the spinning machines. To persuade parents to allow their daughters to leave home to work in the mills, Lowell owners set up boarding houses with strict rules regulating personal behavior. They also established lecture halls, churches, and even a periodical edited by factory workers, the Lowell Offering, to occupy the women’s free time. The constant supervision of the workers’ private lives seems impossibly restrictive from a modern point of view. But this was the first time in history that large numbers of women left their homes to participate in the pub-

 Women at work tending machines in the Lowell textile mills.



C H . 9
The Market Revolution, 1800–1840 

MARKET SOCIETY

 lic world. Most valued the opportunity to earn money independently at a time when few other jobs were open to women. Home life, Lucy Larcom later recalled, was narrow and confining, while living and working at Lowell gave the “mill girls” a “larger, firmer idea of womanhood,” teaching them “to go out of themselves and enter into the lives of others. . . . It was like a young man’s pleasure in entering upon business for himself.” But women like Larcom did not become a permanent class of factory workers. They typically remained in the factories for only a few years, after which they left to return home, marry, or move west. Larcom herself migrated to Illinois, where she became a teacher and writer. The shortage of industrial labor continued, easing only when largescale immigration began in the 1840s and 1850s. A photograph from around 1860 of four anonymous working women. Their stance and gaze suggest a spirit of independence.

 Table 9.2 TOTAL NUMBER OF IMMIGRANTS BY FIVE-YEAR PERIOD

Years


Number of Immigrants


1841–1845


430,000


1846–1850


1,283,000


1851–1855


1,748,000


1856–1860


850,000


 THE

 GROWTH

 OF

 IMMIGRATION

 Economic expansion fueled a demand for labor, which was met, in part, by increased immigration from abroad. Between 1790 and 1830, immigrants contributed only marginally to American population growth. But between 1840 and 1860, over 4 million people (more than the entire population of 1790) entered the United States, the majority from Ireland and Germany. About 90 percent headed for the northern states, where job opportunities were most abundant and the new arrivals would not have to compete with slave labor. Immigrants were virtually unknown in the slave states, except in cities on the periphery of the South, such as New Orleans, St. Louis, and Baltimore. In the North, however, they became a visible presence in both urban and rural areas. In 1860, the 814,000 residents of New York City, the major port of entry, included more than 384,000 immigrants, and one-third of the population of Wisconsin was foreign-born. Numerous factors inspired this massive flow of population across the Atlantic. In Europe, the modernization of agriculture and the industrial revolution disrupted centuries-old patterns of life, pushing peasants off the land and eliminating the jobs of traditional craft workers. The introduction of the ocean-going steamship and the railroad made long-distance travel more practical. The Cunard Line began regular sailings with inexpensive fares from Britain to Boston and New York City in the 1840s. Beginning around 1840, emigration from Europe accelerated, not only to the United States but to Canada and Australia as well. Frequently, a male family member emigrated first; he would later send back money for the rest of the family to follow. IRISH

 AND

 GERMAN

 NEWCOMERS

 To everyone discontented in Europe, commented the New York Times, “thoughts come of the New Free World.” America’s political and religious freedoms attracted Europeans who chafed under the continent’s repressive governments and rigid social hierarchies, including political refugees from

 How did the market revolution spark social change?

 the failed revolutions of 1848. “In America,” wrote a German newcomer, “there aren’t any masters, here everyone is a free agent.” The largest number of immigrants, however, were refugees from disaster— Irish men and women fleeing the Great Famine of 1845–1851, when a blight destroyed the potato crop on which the island’s diet rested. An estimated 1 million persons starved to death and another million emigrated in those years, most of them to the United States. Lacking industrial skills and capital, these impoverished agricultural laborers and small farmers ended up filling the low-wage unskilled jobs native-born Americans sought to avoid. Male Irish immigrants built America’s railroads, dug canals, and worked as common laborers, servants, longshoremen, and factory operatives. Irish women frequently went to work as servants in the homes of native-born Americans, although some preferred factory work to domestic service. “It’s the freedom that we want when the day’s work is done,” one Irish woman explained. “Our day is ten hours long, but when it’s done it’s done”; however, servants were on call at any time. By the end of the 1850s, the Lowell textile mills had largely replaced Yankee farm women with immigrant Irish families. Four-fifths of Irish immigrants remained in the Northeast. In Boston, New York, and smaller industrial cities, they congregated in overcrowded urban ghettos notorious for poverty, crime, and disease. The second-largest group of immigrants, Germans, included a considerably larger number of skilled craftsmen than the Irish. Germans also settled in tightly knit neighborhoods in eastern cities, but many were able to move to the West, where they established themselves as craftsmen, shopkeepers, and farmers. The “German triangle,” as the cities of Cincinnati, St. Louis, and Milwaukee were sometimes called, all attracted large German populations. A vibrant German-language culture, with its own schools, newspapers, associations, and churches, developed wherever large numbers of Germans settled. “As one passes along the Bowery,” one observer



 Although our image of the West emphasizes the lone pioneer, many migrants settled in tightly knit communities and worked cooperatively. This painting by Olof Krans, who came to the United States from Sweden with his family in 1850 at the age of twelve, shows a group of women preparing to plant corn at the immigrant settlement of Bishop Hill, Illinois.



C H . 9
The Market Revolution, 1800–1840 

 Figure 9.1 SOURCES OF IMMIGRATION, 1850

Other 21%
(77,700)


England 14%
(51,800)


Germany 21%
(77,700)
Ireland 44%
(162,800)


MARKET SOCIETY

 noted of a part of New York City known as Kleindeutschland (Little Germany), “almost everything is German.” Some 40,000 Scandinavians also emigrated to the United States in these years, most of whom settled on farms in the Old Northwest. The continuing expansion of industry and the failure of the Chartist movement of the 1840s, which sought to democratize the system of government in Britain, also inspired many English workers to emigrate to the United States. THE

 RISE

 OF

 NATIVISM

 Immigrants from England (whose ranks included the actor Junius Brutus Booth, father of John Wilkes Booth) were easily absorbed, but those from Ireland encountered intense hostility. As Roman Catholics, they faced discrimination in a largely Protestant society in which the tradition of “antipopery” still ran deep. The Irish influx greatly enhanced the visibility and power of the Catholic Church, previously a minor presence in most parts of the country. During the 1840s and 1850s, Archbishop John Hughes of New York City made the Church a more assertive institution. Hughes pressed Catholic parents to send their children to an expanding network of parochial schools, and he sought government funding to pay for them. He aggressively attempted to win converts from Protestantism. The idea of the United States as a refuge for those seeking economic opportunity or as an escape from oppression has always coexisted with suspicion of and hostility to foreign newcomers. American history has witnessed periods of intense anxiety over immigration. The Alien Act of 1798 reflected fear of immigrants with radical political views. During the early twentieth century, as will be discussed below, there was widespread hostility to the “new immigration” from southern and eastern Europe. In the early twenty-first century, the question of how many persons should be allowed to enter the United States, and under what circumstances, remains a volatile political issue. The Irish influx of the 1840s and 1850s thoroughly alarmed many native-born Americans. Those who feared the impact of immigration on American political and social life were called “nativists.” They blamed immigrants for urban crime, political corruption, and a fondness for intoxicating liquor, and they accused them of undercutting native-born skilled laborers by working for starvation wages. The Irish were quickly brought into the urban political machines of the Democratic Party, whose local bosses provided jobs and poor relief to struggling newcomers. Nativists contended that the Irish, supposedly unfamiliar with American conceptions of liberty and subservient to the Catholic Church, posed a threat to democratic institutions, social reform, and public education. Stereotypes similar to those directed at blacks flourished regarding the Irish as well— childlike, lazy, and slaves of their passions, they were said to be unsuited for republican freedom. Nativism would not become a national political movement until the 1850s, as we will see in Chapter 13. But in the 1840s, New York City and Philadelphia witnessed violent anti-immigrant riots. Appealing mainly to skilled native-born workers who feared that immigrants were taking their jobs and undercutting their wages, a nativist candidate was elected New York City’s mayor in 1844.

 How did the market revolution spark social change?

 THE

 TRANSFORMATION

 OF

 LAW

 American law increasingly supported the efforts of entrepreneurs to participate in the market revolution, while shielding them from interference by local governments and liability for some of the less desirable results of economic growth. The corporate form of business organization became central to the new market economy. A corporate firm enjoys special privileges and powers granted in a charter from the government, among them that investors and directors are not personally liable for the company’s debts. Unlike companies owned by an individual, family, or limited partnership, in other words, a corporation can fail without ruining its directors and stockholders. Corporations were therefore able to raise far more capital than the traditional forms of enterprise. By the 1830s, many states had replaced the granting of charters through specific acts of legislation with “general incorporation laws,” allowing any company to obtain a corporate charter if it paid a specified fee. Many Americans distrusted corporate charters as a form of governmentgranted special privilege. But the courts upheld their validity, while opposing efforts by established firms to limit competition from newcomers. In Dartmouth College v. Woodward (1819), John Marshall’s Supreme Court defined corporate charters issued by state legislatures as contracts, which future lawmakers could not alter or rescind. Five years later, in Gibbons v. Ogden, the Court struck down a monopoly the New York legislature had granted for steamboat navigation. And in 1837, with Roger B. Taney now the chief justice, the Court ruled that the Massachusetts legislature did not infringe the charter of an existing company that had constructed a bridge over the Charles River when it empowered a second company to build a competing bridge. The community, Taney declared, had a legitimate interest in promoting transportation and prosperity. Local judges, meanwhile, held businessmen blameless for property damage done by factory construction (such as the flooding of upstream farmlands and the disruption of fishing when dams were built to harness water power). Numerous court decisions also affirmed employers’ full authority over the workplace and invoked the old common law of conspiracy to punish workers who sought to strike for higher wages. Not until 1842, in Commonwealth v. Hunt, did Massachusetts chief justice Lemuel Shaw decree that there was nothing inherently illegal in workers organizing a union or a strike. Like changes in work and time, changes in the law illustrated the comment of Horace Bushnell, a Connecticut minister, that the market economy had produced a “complete revolution” in Americans’ “life and manners.”

THE FREE INDIVIDUAL

 By the 1830s, the market revolution and westward expansion had produced a society that amazed European visitors: energetic, materialistic, and seemingly in constant motion. Arriving in Chicago in 1835, the British writer Harriet Martineau found the streets “crowded with land speculators, hurrying from one sale to another. . . . As the gentlemen of our party walked the streets, store-keepers hailed them from their doors,





C H . 9
The Market Revolution, 1800–1840 

THE FREE INDIVIDUAL

 with offers of farms, and all manner of land-lots, advising them to speculate before the price of land rose higher.” Alexis de Tocqueville was struck by Americans’ restless energy and apparent lack of attachment to place. “No sooner do you set foot on American soil,” he observed, “than you find yourself in a sort of tumult. All around you, everything is on the move.” Westward migration and urban development created a large mobile population no longer tied to local communities who sought to seize the opportunities offered by economic change. “In the United States,” wrote Tocqueville, “a man builds a house in which to spend his old age, and sells it before the roof is on; he plants a garden and [rents] it just as the trees are coming into bearing; he brings a field into tillage and leaves other men to gather the crops.” THE

 WEST

 AND

 FREEDOM

 Westward expansion and the market revolution profoundly affected the lives of all Americans. They reinforced some older ideas of freedom and helped to create new ones. American freedom, for example, had long been linked with the availability of land in the West. A New York journalist, John L. O’Sullivan, first employed the phrase “manifest destiny,” meaning that the United States had a divinely appointed mission, so obvious as to be beyond dispute, to occupy all of North America. Americans, he proclaimed, had a far better title to western lands than could be provided by any international treaty, right of discovery, or long-term settlement. Their right to the continent was provided by the nation’s mission to extend the area of freedom. Other peoples’ claims, O’Sullivan wrote, must give way to “our manifest destiny to overspread and to possess the whole of the continent which providence has given us for the development of the great experiment in liberty.” Those who stood in the way of expansion—European powers like Great Britain and Spain, Native Americans, Mexicans—were by definition obstacles to the progress of freedom. O’Sullivan wrote these words in 1845, but the essential idea was familiar much earlier. As the population moved across the Appalachian Mountains, so did the linkage between westward expansion and freedom. “The Goddess of Liberty,” declared Senator John Breckinridge of Kentucky, was not “governed by geographical limits.” A sense of spatial openness, of the constant opportunity to pick up and move when the pursuit of happiness seemed to demand it, became more and more a central component of American freedom. Like its predecessors, this generation of Americans believed that the United States had been selected by God for the greatest experiment in human history, the achievement of liberty, and that westward expansion was part and parcel of this destiny. Freedom in the United States, wrote the French historian Michel Chevalier, one of the many Europeans who visited the country in the 1830s, was a “practical idea” as much as a “mystical one”—it meant “a liberty of action and motion which the American uses to expand over the vast territory that Providence has given him and to subdue it to his uses.” In national myth and ideology, the West would long remain, as the writer Wallace Stegner would later put it, “the last home of the freeborn American.” The settlement and economic exploitation of the West prom-

 How did the meanings of American freedom change in this period?



 ised to prevent the United States from following down the path of Europe and becoming a society with fixed social classes and a large group of wageearning poor. In the West, land was more readily available and oppressive factory labor far less common. With population and the price of land rising dramatically in the older states and young men’s prospects for acquiring a farm or setting up an independent artisan shop declining, the West still held out the chance to achieve economic independence, the social condition of freedom.

 THE

 TRANSCENDENTALISTS

 The restless, competitive world of the market revolution strongly encouraged the identification of American freedom with the absence of restraints on self-directed individuals seeking economic advancement and personal development. The “one important revolution” of the day, the philosopher Ralph Waldo Emerson wrote in the 1830s, was “the new value of the private man.” The opportunity for personal growth offered a new definition of Jefferson’s pursuit of happiness, one well suited to a world in which territorial expansion and the market revolution had shattered traditional spatial and social boundaries and made moving from place to place and status to status common features of American life. In a widely reprinted 1837 address, “The American Scholar,” Emerson called on the person engaged in writing and thinking to “feel all confidence in himself, . . . to never defer to the popular cry,” and to find and trust his own “definition of freedom.” In Emerson’s definition, rather than a preexisting set of rights or privileges, freedom was an open-ended process of selfrealization by which individuals could remake themselves and their own lives. The keynote of the times, he declared, was “the new importance given to the single person” and the “emancipation” of the individual, the “American idea.” Emerson was perhaps the most prominent member of a group of New England intellectuals known as the transcendentalists, who insisted on the primacy of individual judgment over existing social traditions and institutions. Emerson’s Concord, Massachusetts, neighbor, the writer Henry David Thoreau, echoed his call for individual self-reliance. “Any man more right than his neighbors,” Thoreau wrote, “is a majority of one.”

 INDIVIDUALISM

 Ironies abounded in the era’s “individualism” (a term that first entered the language in the 1820s). For even as the market revolution promoted commercial connections between far-flung people, the idea of the “sovereign individual” proclaimed that Americans should depend on no one but themselves. Of course, personal independence had long been associated with American freedom. But eighteenth-century thinkers generally saw no contradiction between private happiness and self-sacrificing public virtue, defined as devotion to the common good. Now, Tocqueville observed, individualism led “each member of the community to sever himself from the mass of his fellows and to draw apart with his family and his

 The daguerreotype, an early form of photography, required the sitter to remain perfectly still for twenty seconds or longer. The philosopher Ralph Waldo Emerson, depicted here, did not like the result. He complained in his journal that in his “zeal not to blur the image,” every muscle had become “rigid” and his face was fixed in a frown as “in madness, or in death.”


VOICES OF FREEDOM

F R O M R A L P H WA L D O E M E R S O N ,


“The American Scholar ” (1837)


 Ralph Waldo Emerson was perhaps the most prominent intellectual in mid-nineteenthcentury America. In this famous address, delivered at Harvard College, he insisted on the primacy of individual judgment over existing social traditions as the essence of freedom.

 [A] sign of the times . . . is the new importance given to the single individual. Every thing that tends to insulate the individual,–to surround him with barriers of natural respect, so that each man shall feel the world is his, and man shall treat with man as a sovereign state with a sovereign state:–tends to true union as well as greatness. ‘I learned,’ said the melancholy Pestalozzi [a Swiss educator], “that no

 Perhaps the time is already come, when . . . the sluggard intellect of this continent will look from under its iron lids and fill the postponed expectation of the world with something better than the exertions of mechanical skill. Our day of dependence, our long apprenticeship to the learning of other lands, draws to a close. . . . In self-trust, all the virtues are comprehended. Free should the scholar be,–free and brave. Free even to the definition of freedom. . . . Not he is great who can alter matter, but he who can alter my state of mind. They are the kings of the world who give the color of their present thought to all nature and all art. . . .



 man in God’s wide earth is either willing or able to help any other man.” Help must come from his bosom alone. . . . We have listened too long to the courtly muses of Europe. The spirit of the American freeman is already suspected to be timid, imitative, tame. . . . The scholar is decent, indolent, complaisant. See already the tragic consequence. The mind of this country taught to aim at low objects, eats upon itself. Young men . . . do not yet see, that if the single man [should] plant himself indomitably on his instincts, and there abide, the huge world will come round to him. . . . We will walk on our own feet; we will work with our own hands; we will speak our own minds.

F R O M “
Fa c t o r y L i f e a s I t I s ,  by an Operative” (1845) Beginning in the 1830s, young women who worked in the cotton textile factories in Lowell, Massachusetts, organized to demand shorter hours of work and better labor conditions. In this pamphlet from 1845, a factory worker details her grievances as well as those of female domestic workers, the largest group of women workers.

 ignorance—and how can it be otherwise? What time has the operative to bestow on moral, religious or intellectual culture? How can our country look for aught but ignorance and vice, under the existing state of things? When the whole system is exhausted by unremitting labor during twelve and thirteen hours per day, can any reasonable being expect that the mind will retain its vigor and energy? Impossible! Common sense will teach every one the utter impossibility of improving the mind under these circumstances,

 Philanthropists of the nineteenth century!—shall not the operatives of our country be permitted to speak for themselves? Shall they be compelled to listen in silence to [those] who speak for gain, and are the mere echo of the will of the corporations? Shall the worthy laborer be awed into silence by wealth and power, and for fear of being deprived of the means of procuring his daily bread? Shall tyranny and cruel oppression be allowed to rivet the chains of physical and mental slavery on the millions of our country who are the real producers of all its improvements and wealth, and they fear to speak out in noble self-defense? Shall they fear to appeal to the sympathies of the people, or the justice of this far-famed republican nation? God forbid! Much has been written and spoken in woman’s behalf, especially in America; and yet a large class of females are, and have been, destined to a state of servitude as degrading as unceasing toil can make it. I refer to the female operatives of New England—the free states of our union—the states where no colored slave can breathe the balmy air, and exist as such;— but yet there are those, a host of them, too, who are in fact nothing more nor less than slaves in every sense of the word! Slaves to a system of labor which requires them to toil from five until seven o’clock, with one hour only to attend to the wants of nature, allowed— slaves to the will and requirements of the “powers that be,” however they may infringe on the rights or conflict with the feelings of the operative—slaves to

 however great the desire may be for knowledge. Again, we hear much said on the subject of benevolence among the wealthy and so called, Christian part of community. Have we not cause to question the sincerity of those who, while they talk benevolence in the parlor, compel their help to labor for a mean, paltry pittance in the kitchen? And while they manifest great concern for the souls of the heathen in distant lands, care nothing for the bodies and intellects of those within their own precincts? . . . In the strength of our united influence we will soon show these drivelling cotton lords, this mushroom aristocracy of New England, who so arrogantly aspire to lord it over God’s heritage, that our rights cannot be trampled upon with impunity; that we WILL not longer submit to that arbitrary power which has for the last ten years been so abundantly exercised over us.

 QUESTIONS

 1. How does Emerson define the freedom of what he calls “the single individual”? 2. Why does the female factory worker compare her conditions with those of slaves? 3. What does the contrast between these two documents suggest about the impact of the market revolution on American thought?





C H . 9
The Market Revolution, 1800–1840 

THE FREE INDIVIDUAL

 Outing on the Hudson, painted by an unknown artist around 1850. The steamboat, pictured in the foreground, made it possible for city dwellers to enjoy rural excursions such as this, although, as the tree stump suggests, they were not experiencing unspoiled nature.

 friends . . . [leaving] society at large to itself.” Americans increasingly understood the realm of the self—which came to be called “privacy”—as one with which neither other individuals nor government had a right to interfere. As will be discussed in the next chapter, individualism also helped to inspire the expansion of democracy. Ownership of one’s self rather than ownership of property now made a person capable of exercising the right to vote. Looking back from the 1880s, Emerson would recall the era before the Civil War as a time when “social existence” gave way to “the enlargement and independency of the individual, . . . driven to find all his resources, hopes, rewards, society, and deity within himself.” In his own life, Thoreau illustrated Emerson’s point about the primacy of individual conscience in matters political, social, and personal, and the need to find one’s own way rather than following the crowd. Like other transcendentalists, he did not approve of the way individuals in a market economy engaged in this pursuit of happiness. Thoreau became persuaded that modern society stifled individual judgment by making men “tools of their tools,” trapped in stultifying jobs by their obsession with acquiring wealth. Even in “this comparatively free country,” he wrote, most persons were so preoccupied with material things that they had no time to contemplate the beauties of nature. To escape this fate, Thoreau retreated for two years to a cabin on Walden Pond near Concord, where he could enjoy the freedom of isolation from the “economical and moral tyranny” he believed ruled American society. He subsequently published Walden (1854), an account of his experiences and a critique of how the market revolution was, in his opinion, degrading both Americans’ values and the natural environment. An area that had been covered with dense forest in his youth, he observed, had been so

 How did the meanings of American freedom change in this period?



 transformed by woodcutters and farmers that it had become almost completely devoid of trees and wild animals. In one famous passage, Thoreau noted how his enjoyment of nature was disturbed by the distant sound of a locomotive whistle—a symbol of how it seemed impossible to escape the market revolution. Thoreau appealed to Americans to “simplify” their lives rather than become obsessed with the accumulation of wealth. Genuine freedom, he insisted, lay within. THE

 SECOND

 GREAT

 AWAKENING

 The popular religious revivals that swept over the country during the Second Great Awakening added a religious underpinning to the celebration of personal self-improvement, self- reliance, and self-determination. These revivals, which began at the turn of the century, were originally organized by established religious leaders alarmed by low levels of church attendance in the young republic (perhaps as few as 10 percent of white Americans regularly attended church during the 1790s). But they quickly expanded far beyond existing churches. They reached a crescendo in the 1820s and early 1830s, when the Reverend Charles Grandison Finney held months-long revival meetings in upstate New York and New York City. The son of Connecticut farmers, Finney had been inspired to preach after attending a religious revival in 1821. Like the evangelists (traveling preachers) of the first Great Awakening of the mid-eighteenth century, discussed in Chapter 4, Finney warned of hell in vivid language while offering the promise of salvation to converts who abandoned their sinful ways. He became a national celebrity after his success in Oneida County in upstate New York. After Finney’s preaching, according to one report, the area had

 Religious Camp Meeting, a watercolor from the late 1830s depicting an evangelical preacher at a revival meeting. Some of the audience members seem inattentive, while others are moved by his fiery sermon.



C H . 9
The Market Revolution, 1800–1840 

THE FREE INDIVIDUAL

 Das neue Jerusalem (The New Jerusalem), an early-nineteenth-century watercolor, in German, illustrates the narrow gateway to heaven and the fate awaiting sinners in hell. These were common themes of preachers in the Second Great Awakening.

 been “completely overthrown by the Holy Ghost” so that “the theater has been deserted, the tavern sanctified . . . and far higher and purer enjoyment has been found in exercises of devotion.” The Second Great Awakening democratized American Christianity, making it a truly mass enterprise. At the time of independence, fewer than 2,000 Christian ministers preached in the United States. In 1845, they numbered 40,000. Evangelical denominations like the Methodists and Baptists enjoyed explosive growth in membership, and smaller sects proliferated. By the 1840s, Methodism, with more than 1 million members, had become the country’s largest denomination. Deism, a form of religious belief hostile to organized churches, had been prominent among the generation of the founding fathers. It now waned, and Christianity became even more central to American culture. Americans, wrote Tocqueville, “combine the notions of Christianity and of liberty so intimately in their minds that it is impossible to make them conceive the one without the other.” New religious prophets seemed to appear regularly in early-nineteenthcentury America, determined, in novelist Herman Melville’s phrase, to “gospelize the world anew.” At large camp meetings, especially prominent on the frontier, fiery revivalist preachers rejected the idea that man is a sinful creature with a preordained fate, promoting instead the doctrine of human free will. At these gatherings, rich and poor, male and female, and in some instances whites and blacks worshiped alongside one another and pledged to abandon worldly sins in favor of the godly life. THE

 AWAKENING

’S


 IMPACT

 Even more than its predecessor of several decades earlier, the Second Great Awakening stressed the right of private judgment in spiritual matters and the possibility of universal salvation through faith and good works. Every


VISIONS OF FREEDOM

Official Seal of Arkansas and Title Page of Walden.
 These images offer two responses to the market revolution. The official seal of Arkansas (1836) juxtaposes a woman holding a cap of liberty with symbols of technological progress (an iron plow and a steamboat) and material prosperity (horns of plenty). The sketch of Henry David Thoreau’s cabin on Walden Pond illustrates his belief that Americans could enjoy what he called “absolute freedom” by rejecting market society and retreating into the wilderness. Only in this way, he insisted, could they preserve both individual independence and the natural environment.

 QUESTIONS

 1. What does each vision of freedom offer that the other lacks? 2. Why do you think that the seal of Arkansas, a slave state, includes no image of slavery?





C H . 9
The Market Revolution, 1800–1840 

THE LIMITS OF PROSPERITY

 person, Finney insisted, was a “moral free agent”—that is, a person free to choose between a Christian life and sin. Sinners could experience a “change of heart” and embrace spiritual freedom, defined, in the words of evangelical minister Jonathan Blanchard, as “Christ ruling in and over rational creatures who are obeying him freely and from choice.” Revivalist ministers seized the opportunities offered by the market revolution to spread their message. They raised funds, embarked on lengthy preaching tours by canal, steamboat, and railroad, and flooded the country with mass-produced, inexpensive religious tracts. The revivals’ opening of religion to mass participation and their message that ordinary Americans could shape their own spiritual destinies resonated with the spread of market values. To be sure, evangelical preachers can hardly be described as cheerleaders for a market society. They regularly railed against greed and indifference to the welfare of others as sins. Finney called selfishness—an extreme form of individualism encouraged by the scramble for wealth produced by the market revolution—“the law of Satan’s empire,” not God’s. Yet the revivals thrived in areas caught up in the rapid expansion of the market economy, such as the region of upstate New York along the path of the Erie Canal. Most of Finney’s converts here came from the commercial and professional classes. Evangelical ministers promoted what might be called a controlled individualism as the essence of freedom. In stressing the importance of industry, sobriety, and self-discipline as examples of freely chosen moral behavior, evangelical preachers promoted the very qualities necessary for success in a market culture.

THE LIMITS OF PROSPERITY LIBERTY

Pat Lyon at the Forge, an 1826–1827
 painting of a prosperous blacksmith. Proud of his accomplishments as a selfmade man who had achieved success through hard work and skill rather than inheritance, Lyon asked the artist to paint him in his shop wearing his work clothes.

 AND

 PROSPERITY

 As the market revolution progressed, the right to compete for economic advancement became a touchstone of American freedom. “The whole question of freedom or slavery for man,” argued Henry C. Carey, perhaps the era’s most prominent economist, was bound up with economic achievement. Official imagery linked the goddess of liberty ever more closely to emblems of material wealth. New Jersey, whose official seal, adopted in 1776, had paired liberty with Ceres, the Roman goddess of agriculture, in 1821 added the motto “Liberty and Prosperity.” The state seal of Arkansas, admitted to the Union in 1836, pictured liberty atop an image of a steamboat and two overflowing horns of plenty. Many enterprising Americans seized the opportunities offered by the market revolution to enrich themselves. John Jacob Astor, the son of a poor German butcher who emigrated to the United States at the end of the War of Independence, earned large profits in the early nineteenth century by shipping furs to China and importing teas and silk. Astor invested his wealth in Manhattan real estate, which was rapidly rising in value, and built Astor House, which quickly became the nation’s most famous hotel. He died in 1848 the richest man in the United States, leaving a fortune of perhaps $10 million, the equivalent of hundreds of millions of dollars today. Astor’s story seemed to exemplify the opportunities open to the “selfmade man,” a term that came into use during his lifetime. According to this

 How did the market revolution affect the lives of workers, women, and African-Americans?



 idea, those who achieved success in America did so not as a result of hereditary privilege or government favoritism as in Europe, but through their own intelligence and hard work. In the extent of his wealth, of course, Astor was hardly typical. But the market revolution and the quickening of commercial life enriched numerous bankers, merchants, industrialists, and planters. It produced a new middle class—an army of clerks, accountants, and other office employees who staffed businesses in Boston, New York, and elsewhere. It created new opportunities for farmers who profited from the growing demand at home and abroad for American agricultural products, and for skilled craftsmen like Thomas Rodgers, a machine builder who established a successful locomotive factory in Paterson, New Jersey. New opportunities for talented men opened in professions like law, medicine, and teaching. By the early 1820s, there were an estimated 10,000 physicians in the United States. RACE

 AND

 OPPORTUNITY

