sail sail thy best ship of democracy of value is thy freight tis not the present only the past is also stored in thee thou holdest not the venture of thyself alone not of the western continent alone earths rsum entire floats on thy keel o ship is steadied by thy spars with thee time voyages in trust the antecedent nations sink or swim with thee with all their ancient struggles martyrs heroes epics wars thou bearst the other continents theirs theirs as much as thine the destination port triumphant.
walt whitman thou mother with thy equal brood 1872 t he american pageant part one founding the new nation ca.
33 000 b c e.
t he european explorers who followed christopher columbus to north america in the sixteenth century had no notion of founding a new nation.
neither did the rst european settlers who peopled the thirteen english colonies on the eastern shores of the continent in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries.
these original colonists may have ed poverty or religious persecution in the old world but they continued to view themselves as europeans and as subjects of the eng lish king.
they regarded america as but the western rim of a transatlantic european world.
yet life in the new world made the colonists different from their european cousins and eventually during the american revolution the americans came to embrace a vision of their country as an independent nation.
how did this epochal transformation come about.
how did the colonists overcome the con icts that divided them unite against britain and declare themselves at great cost to be an american people.
they had much in common to begin with.
most were eng lishspeaking.
most came determined to create an agricultural society modeled on eng lish customs.
conditions in the new world deepened their common bonds.
most colonists strove to live lives unfettered by the tyrannies of royal authority ofcial religion and social hierarchies that they had left behind.
they grew to cherish ideals that became synonymous with american life reverence for individual liberty self government religious tolerance and economic opportunity.
they also commonly algonquin indians fishing by john white the english watercolorist accompanied the rst english expedition to roanoke island later part of virginia in 1585.
his paintings faithfully recorded the indian way of life that was now imperiled by the arrival of the europeans.
founding the new nation displayed a willingness to subjugate outsiders rst indians who were nearly annihilated through war and disease and then africans who were brought in chains to serve as slave labor especially on the tobacco rice and indigo plantations of the southern colonies.
but if the settlement experience gave people a common stock of values both good and bad it also divided them.
the thirteen colonies were quite different from one another.
puritans carved tight pious and relatively democratic communities of small family farms out of rocky soiled new eng land.
theirs was a homogeneous world in comparison to most of the southern colonies where large landholders mostly anglicans built plantations along the coast from which they lorded over a labor force of black slaves and looked down upon the poor white farmers who settled the backcountry.
different still were the middle colonies stretching from new york to delaware.
there diversity reigned.
well to do merchants put their stamp on new york city as quakers did on philadelphia while out in the countryside sprawling estates were interspersed with modest homesteads.
within individual colonies con icts festered over economic interests ethnic rivalries and religious practices.
all those clashes made it difcult for colonists to imagine that they were a single people with a common destiny much less that they ought to break free from britain.
the american colonists in fact had little reason to complain about britain.
each of the thirteen colonies enjoyed a good deal of self rule.
many colonists proted from trade within the british empire.
but by the 1760s this stable arrangement began to crumble a victim of the imperial rivalry between france and britain.
their struggle for supremacy in north america began in the late seventeenth century and nally dragged in the colonists during the french and indian war from 1756 to 1763.
that war in one sense strengthened ties with britain since colonial militias fought triumphantly alongside the british army against their mutual french and indian enemies.
but once the french were driven from the north american continent the colonists no longer needed britain for protection.
more important still after 1763 a nancially overstretched british government made the fateful choice of imposing taxes on colonies that had been accustomed to answering mainly to their own colonial assemblies.
by the 1770s issues of taxation self rule and trade restrictions brought the crisis of imperial authority to a head.
although as late as 1775 most people in the colonies clung to the hope of some kind of accommodation short of outright independence royal intransigence soon thrust the colonists into a war of independence that neither antagonist could have anticipated just a few years before.
eight years of revolutionary war did more than anything in the colonial past to bring americans together as a nation.
comradeship in arms and the struggle to shape a national government forced americans to subdue their differences as best they could.
but the spirit of national unity was hardly universal.
one in ve colonists sided with the british as loyalists and a generation would pass before the wounds of this rst american civil war fully healed.
yet in the end americans won the revolution with no small measure of help from the french because in every colony people shared a rm belief that they were ghting for the unalienable rights of life liberty and the pursuit of happiness in the words of thomas jeffersons magnicent declaration of independence.
almost two hundred years of living a new life had prepared americans to found a new nation.
philadelphia corner of second and high streets delegates to the constitutional convention in 1787 gathered in philadelphia the largest city in north america a vivid symbol of the rise of american society from its precarious beginnings at jamestown and plymouth nearly two centuries earlier.
new world beginnings 33 000 b c e.
i have come to believe that this is a mighty continent which was hitherto unknown.
your highnesses have an other world here.
s everal billion years ago that whirling speck of dust known as the earth fth in size among the planets came into being.
about six thousand years ago only a minute in geological time recorded history of the western world began.
certain peoples of the middle east developing a written culture gradually emerged from the haze of the past.
five hundred years ago only a few seconds guratively speaking european explorers stumbled on the americas.
this dramatic accident forever altered the future of both the old world and the new and of africa and asia as well.
the shaping of north america planet earth took on its present form slowly.
some 225 million years ago a single supercontinent contained all the worlds dry land.
then enormous chunks of terrain began to drift away from this colossal landmass opening the atlantic and indian oceans narrowing the pacic ocean and forming the great continents of eurasia af rica australia antarctica and the americas.
the existence of a single original continent has been proved in part by the discovery of nearly identical species of sh that swim today in long separated freshwater lakes throughout the world.
continued shifting and folding of the earths crust thrust up mountain ranges.
the appalachians were probably formed even before continental separation perhaps 350 million years ago.
the majestic ranges of western north america the rockies the sierra nevada the cascades and the coast ranges arose much more recently geologically speaking some 135 million to 25 million years ago.
they are truly american mountains born after the continent took on its own separate geological identity.
by about 10 million years ago nature had sculpted the basic geological shape of north america.
the continent was anchored in its northeastern corner by the massive canadian shield a zone undergirded by ancient rock probably the rst part of what became the north american landmass to have emerged above sea level.
a narrow eastern coastal plain or tidewater region creased by many river valleys sloped gently up this icon will direct you to interactive activities and study materials on the american pageant website the effects of the great ice age 4 8 b c.
recorded history begins jesus born virginia founded virginia bicenfounded tennial 169 years 169 years 115 years columbus s discovery 4000 b c.
independence declared ward to the timeworn ridges of the appalachians.
those ancient mountains slanted away on their western side into the huge midcontinental basin that rolled downward to the mississippi valley bottom and then rose relentlessly to the towering peaks of the rockies.
from the rocky mountain crest the roof of america the land fell off jaggedly into the intermountain great basin bounded by the rockies on the east and the sierra and cascade ranges on the west.
the valleys of the sacramento and san joaquin rivers and the willamette puget sound trough seamed the interiors of present day cal i fornia oregon and washington.
the land at last met the foaming pacic where the coast ranges rose steeply from the sea.
nature laid a chill hand over much of this terrain in the great ice age beginning about 2 million years ago.
two mile thick ice sheets crept from the polar regions to blanket parts of europe asia and the americas.
in north america the great glaciers carpeted most of present day canada and the united states as far southward as a line stretching from pennsylvania through the ohio country and the dakotas to the pacic northwest.
when the glaciers nally retreated about 10 000 years ago they left the north american landscape transformed and much as we know it today.
the weight of the gargantuan ice mantle had depressed the level of the canadian shield.
the grinding and ushing action of the moving and melting ice had scoured away the shields topsoil pitting its rocky surface with thousands of shallow depressions into which the melting glaciers owed to form lakes.
the same glacial action scooped out and lled the great lakes.
they originally drained southward through the mississippi river system to the gulf of mexico.
when the melting ice unblocked the gulf of st lawrence the lake water sought the st lawrence river outlet to the atlantic ocean lowering the great lakes level and leaving the missouri 1991 2000 46 years world war ii ends 9 years cold war ends new millennium begins mississippi ohio system to drain the enormous midcontinental basin between the appalachians and the rockies.
similarly in the west water from the melting glaciers lled sprawling lake bonneville covering much of present day utah nevada and idaho.
it drained to the pacic ocean through the snake and columbia river systems until diminishing rainfall from the ebbing ice cap lowered the water level cutting off access to the snake river outlet.
deprived of both inow and drainage the giant lake became a gradually shrinking inland sea.
it grew increasingly saline slowly evaporated and left an arid mineral rich desert.
only the great salt lake remained as a relic of bonnevilles former vastness.
today lake bonnevilles ancient beaches are visible on mountainsides up to 1 000 feet above the dry oor of the great basin.
peopling the americas the great ice age shaped more than the geological history of north america.
it also contributed to the origins of the continents human history.
though recent and still highly controversial evidence suggests that some early peoples may have reached the americas in crude boats most probably came by land.
some 35 000 years ago the ice age congealed much of the world oceans into massive ice pack glaciers lowering the level of the sea.
as the sea level dropped it exposed a land bridge connecting eurasia with north america in the area of the present day bering sea between siberia and alaska.
across that bridge probably following migratory herds of game ventured small bands of nomadic asian hunters the immigrant ancestors of the native americans.
they continued to trek across the bering isthmus for some 250 centuries slowly peopling the american continents see map 1 1.
n arctic ocean bering land bridge 40e ci r cl e 160e c cti ar 180 n 20e 160w 0 n 40 140w at l a n t i c o c ea n r f cance tropic o 20n 120w 100w pac i f ic oc ea n equator 0 20w n 20s tropic of capricorn 40s 500 1000 km.
extent of land ca.
33 000 10 500 b c e.
glaciers ca.
15 000 b c e.
probable ancient shoreline probable migratory route 80w 60w map 1 1 the first discoverers of america the origins of the rst americans remain something of a mystery.
according to the most plausible theory of how the americas were populated for some 25 000 years people crossed the bering land bridge from eurasia to north america.
gradually they dispersed southward down ice free valleys populating both the american continents.
40w selected paleo indian site interactive map making sense of the new world his map from 1546 by sebastian mnster represents one of the earliest efforts to make geographic sense out of the new world nouus orbis and die nuw welt on the map.
the very phrase new world suggests just how staggering a blow to the european imagination was the discovery of the americas.
europeans reached instinctively for the most expansive of all possible terms world not simply places or even continents to comprehend columbuss startling report that lands and peoples previously unimagined lay beyond the horizon of europes western sea.
gradually the immense implications of the new worlds existence began to impress themselves on europe with consequences for literature art politics the economy and of course cartography.
maps t can only be representations of reality and are therefore necessarily distortions.
this map bears a recognizable resemblance to modern mapmakers renderings of the american continents but it also contains gross geographic inaccuracies note the location of japan zipangri relative to the north american west coast as well as telling commentaries on what sixteenth century europeans found remarkable note the land of giants regio gigantum and the indication of cannibals canibali in present day argentina and brazil respectively.
what further clues to the european mentality of the time does the map offer.
in what ways might misconceptions about the geography of the americas have inuenced further exploration and settlement patterns.
chapter 1 new world beginnings 33 000 b c e 1769 c e.
as the ice age ended and the glaciers melted the sea level rose again inundating the land bridge about 10 000 years ago.
nature thus barred the door to further immigration for many thousands of years leaving this part of the human family marooned for millennia on the now isolated american continents.
time did not stand still for these original americans.
the same climatic warming that melted the ice and drowned the bridge to eurasia gradually opened ice free valleys through which vanguard bands groped their way southward and eastward across the americas.
roaming slowly through this awesome wilderness they eventually reached the far tip of south america some 15 000 miles from siberia.
by the time europeans arrived in america in 1492 perhaps 54 million people inhabited the two american continents.
over the centuries they split into countless tribes evolved more than 2 000 separate languages and developed many diverse religions cultures and ways of life.
incas in peru mayans in central america and aztecs in mexico shaped stunningly sophisticated civilizations.
their advanced agricultural practices based primarily on the cultivation of maize which is indian corn fed large populations perhaps as many as 20 million in mexico alone.
although without large draft animals such as horses and oxen and lacking even the simple technology of the wheel these peoples built elaborate cities and carried on far ung commerce.
talented mathematicians they made strikingly accurate astronomical observations.
the aztecs also routinely sought the favor of their gods by offering human sacrices cutting the hearts out of the chests of living victims who were often captives conquered in battle.
by some accounts more than 5 000 people were ritually slaughtered to celebrate the crowning of one aztec chieftain.
the earliest americans agriculture especially corn growing accounted for the size and sophistication of the native american civilizations in mexico and south america.
about 5000 b c e.
hunter gatherers in highland mexico developed a wild much controversy surrounds estimates of the pre columbian native american population.
the gures here are from william m denevan ed the native population of the americas in 1492 rev.
madison university of wisconsin press 1992.
corn culture this statue of a corn goddess from the moche culture of present day coastal peru made between 200 and 600 b c e.
vividly illustrates the centrality of corn to native american peoples a thousand years before the rise of the great incan and aztec empires that the europeans later encountered.
grass into the staple crop of corn which became their staff of life and the foundation of the complex largescale centralized aztec and incan civilizations that eventually emerged.
cultivation of corn spread across the americas from the mexican heartland.
everywhere it was planted corn began to transform nomadic hunting bands into settled agricultural villagers but this process went forward slowly and unevenly.
corn planting reached the present day american southwest as early as 2000 b c e.
and powerfully molded pueblo culture.
the pueblo peoples in the rio grande valley constructed intricate irrigation systems to water their cornelds.
they were dwelling in villages of multistoried terraced buildings when spanish explorers made contact with them in the sixteenth century.
pueblo means village in spanish.
corn cultivation reached other parts of north america considerably later.
the timing of its arrival in dif ferent localities explains much about the relative rates of development of different native american peoples see map 1 2.
throughout the continent to the north and east of the land of the pueblos social life was less elaborately developed indeed societies in the modern sense of the word scarcely existed.
no dense concentrations of population or complex nation states comparable to the aztec empire existed in north america outside of mexico at the time of the europeans arrival one of the reasons for the relative ease with which the european colonizers subdued the native north americans.
the mound builders of the ohio river valley the mississippian culture of the lower midwest and the desert dwelling anasazi peoples of the southwest did eskimo eskimo tic arc rcle ci yupik 160w aleut 40w dogrib arctic yellowknife n inuit tlingit hudson bay chipewya 140w subarctic haida northwest coast cree cree cree montagnais cree ojibwa cree blackfeet micmac p l ateau makah ojibwa assiniboine great algonquin c abenaki chinook olum spokane issouri r lakes coeur flathead m bia r ojibwa tillamook dalene mandan crow cayuse nez huron menominee massachusett perce iroquois arikara potawatomi winnebago narragansett sioux m shoshone sauk modoc i erie cheyenne yurok northeast fox sioux kickapoo delaware paiute hupa shoshone miami g r eat p la i ns susquehanna yuki maidu great basin shawnee iowa lenape illinois pomo washo arapaho pawnee r powhatan shoshone.
missouri o hi or miwok chickahominy kansa arka ad ute r mono n sas r paiute olo tuscarora c osage kiowa california navajo apache cherokee catawba hopi pueblo chumash mohave creek quapaw zuni chickasaw apache caddo comanche alabama southeast wichita apache choctaw 120w pima natchez kiliwa timucua 60w n is ss o sippi r pac i f i c o c e a n beothuk cree kwakiutl nootka inuit at l a n t i c o c e a n o ri a gr de n pima karankawa s outhwest n gulf of mexico ic trop taino 600 mi.
tribal location sioux at time of contact modern boundaries for reference r ance of c 20n ciboney 600 km.
calusa caribbean aztec caribbean sea mesoamerica 100w 80w map 1 2 north american indian peoples at the time of first contact with europeans because this map depicts the location of various indian peoples at the time of their rst contact with europeans and because initial contacts ranged from the sixteenth to the nineteenth centuries it is necessarily subject to considerable chronological skewing and is only a crude approximation of the original territory of any given group.
the map also cannot capture the uidity and dynamism of native american life even before columbuss discovery for example the navajo and apache peoples had migrated from present day northern canada only shortly before the spanish rst encountered them in the present day american southwest in the 1500s.
the map also places the sioux on the great plains where europeans met up with them in the early nineteenth century but the sioux had spilled onto the plains not long before then from the forests surrounding the great lakes.
the indigenous populations of the southeastern and mid atlantic regions are especially difcult to represent accurately in a map like this because pre columbian intertribal conicts had so scrambled the native inhabitants that it is virtually impossible to determine which groups were originally where.
interactive map chapter 1 new world beginnings 33 000 b c e 1769 c e.
cahokia this artists rendering of cahokia based on archaeological excavations shows the huge central square and the imposing monks mound which rivaled in size the pyramids of egypt.
sustain some large settlements after the incorporation of corn planting into their ways of life during the rst millennium c e.
the mississippian settlement at cahokia near present day east st louis was at one time home to as many as twenty ve thousand people.
the anasazis built an elaborate pueblo of more than six hundred interconnected rooms at chaco canyon in modern day new mexico.
but mysteriously perhaps due to prolonged drought all those ancient cultures fell into decline by about 1300 c e.
the cultivation of maize as well as of high yielding strains of beans and squash reached the southeastern atlantic seaboard region of north america about 1000 c e.
these plants made possible three sister farming with beans growing on the trellis of the cornstalks and squash covering the planting mounds to retain moisture in the soil.
the rich diet provided by this environmentally clever farming technique produced some of the highest population densities on the continent among them the creek choctaw and cherokee peoples.
the iroquois in the northeastern woodlands inspired by a legendary leader named hiawatha created in the sixteenth century perhaps the closest north american approximation to the great empires of mexico and peru.
the iroquois confederacy developed the political and orga ni zational skills to sustain a robust military alliance that menaced its neighbors native american and european alike for well over a century see makers of america the iroquois pp.
but for the most part the native peoples of north america were living in small scattered and impermanent settlements on the eve of the europeans arrival.
in more settled agricultural groups women tended the crops while men hunted shed gathered fuel and cleared elds for planting.
this pattern of life frequently conferred substantial authority on women and many north american native peoples including the iroquois developed matrilineal cultures in which power and possessions passed down the female side of the family line.
unlike the europeans who would soon arrive with the presumption that humans had dominion over the earth and with the technologies to alter the very face of the land the native americans had neither the desire nor the means to manipulate nature aggressively.
they revered the physical world and endowed nature with spiritual properties.
yet they did sometimes ignite massive forest res deliberately torching thousands of acres of trees to create better hunting habitats especially for deer.
this practice accounted for the open parklike appearance of the eastern woodlands that so amazed early european explorers.
but in a broad sense the land did not feel the hand of the native americans heavy upon it partly because they were so few in number.
they were so thinly spread early explorers across the continent that vast areas were virtually untouched by a human presence.
in the fateful year 1492 probably no more than 4 million native americans padded through the whispering primeval forests and paddled across the sparkling virgin waters of the continent north of mexico.
they were blissfully unaware that the historic isolation of the americas was about to end forever as the land and the native peoples alike felt the full shock of the european discovery indirect discoverers of the new world europeans for their part were equally unaware of the existence of the americas.
blond bearded norse seafarers from scandinavia had chanced upon the northeastern shoulder of north america about 1000 c e.
they landed at a place near lanse aux meadows in presentday newfoundland that abounded in wild grapes which led them to name the spot vinland.
but no strong nation state yearning to expand supported these venturesome voyagers.
their imsy settlements consequently were soon abandoned and their discovery was forgotten except in scandinavian saga and song.
for several centuries thereafter other restless europeans with the growing power of ambitious governments behind them sought contact with a wider world whether for conquest or trade.
they thus set in motion the chain of events that led to a drive toward asia the penetration of africa and the completely accidental discovery of the new world.
christian crusaders must rank high among americas indirect discoverers.
clad in shining armor tens of thousands of these european warriors tried from the eleventh to the fourteenth century to wrest the holy land from muslim control.
foiled in their military assaults the crusaders nevertheless acquired a taste for the exotic delights of asia.
goods that had been virtually unknown in europe now were craved silk for cloth ing drugs for aching esh perfumes for unbathed bodies colorful draperies for gloomy castles and spices especially sugar a rare luxury in europe before the crusades for preserving and avoring food.
europes developing sweet tooth would have momentous implications for world history.
the luxuries of the east were prohibitively expensive in europe.
they had to be transported enormous distances from the spice islands indonesia china and india in creaking ships and on swaying camel back.
the journey led across the indian ocean the persian gulf and the red sea or along the tortuous caravan routes of asia or the arabian peninsula ending at the ports of the eastern mediterranean see map 1 3.
muslim middlemen exacted a heavy toll en route.
by the time the strange smelling goods reached italian merchants at venice and genoa they were so costly that purchasers and prots alike were narrowly limited.
european consumers and distributors were naturally eager to nd a less expensive route to the riches of asia or to develop alternate sources of supply.
europeans enter africa european appetites were further whetted when footloose marco polo an italian adventurer returned to europe in 1295 and began telling tales of his nearly twenty year sojourn in china.
though he may in fact never have seen china legend to the contrary the hard evidence is sketchy he must be regarded as an indirect discoverer of the new world for his book with its descriptions of rose tinted pearls and golden pagodas stimulated european desires for a cheaper route to the trea sures of the east.
these accumulating pressures eventually brought a breakthrough for european expansion.
before the middle of the fteenth century european sailors refused to sail southward along the coast of west africa because they could not beat their way home against the prevailing northerly winds and south owing currents.
about 1450 portuguese mariners overcame those obstacles.
not only had they developed the caravel a ship that could sail more closely into the wind but they had discovered that they could return to europe by sailing northwesterly from the african coast toward the azores where the prevailing westward breezes would carry them home.
the new world of sub saharan africa now came within the grasp of questing europeans.
the northern shore of africa as part of the mediterranean world had been known to europe since antiquity.
but because sea travel down the african coast had been virtually impossible africa south of the forbidding sahara desert barrier had remained remote and mysterious.
african gold perhaps two thirds of europes supply crossed the sahara on camelback and shadowy tales may have reached europe about the ourishing west african kingdom of mali in the niger river valley with its impressive islamic university at timbuktu.
but europeans chapter 1 new world beginnings 33 000 b c e 1769 c e.
150w 120w 90w 30w 60w 0 60e 30e 90e 150e 120e greenland arctic circle iceland 60n england genoa portugal north america venice constantinople spain azores asia e ur o p e france japan persi a canary is.
30n beijing hangzhou delhi alexandria tropic of cancer cape a t l a n t i c verde is.
ocean sa h a r a m ali a rabi a c h in a india timbuktu africa 0 equator pacific ocean pacific ocean guangzhou canton malacca spice islands prncipe so tom south america madagascar indian ocean tropic of capricorn aus tralia 30s n the world known to europe 1492 60s antarctic circle 3000 km.
portuguese exploration the silk road daz 1488 other land trade routes da gama 1498 ocean trade routes prevailing wind map 1 3 the world known to europe and major trade routes with asia 1492 goods on the early routes passed through so many hands along the way that their ultimate source remained mysterious to europeans.
had no direct access to sub saharan africa until the portuguese navigators began to creep down the west african coast in the middle of the fteenth century.
the portuguese promptly set up trading posts along the african shore for the purchase of gold and slaves.
arab esh merchants and africans themselves had traded slaves for centuries before the europeans arrived.
the slavers routinely charged higher prices for captives from distant sources because they could not easily ee to their native villages or be easily rescued by their kin.
slave brokers also deliberately separated persons from the same tribes and mixed unlike people together to frustrate orga nized resistance.
thus from its interactive map earliest days slavery by its very nature inhibited the expression of regional african cultures and tribal identities.
the portuguese adopted these arab and african practices.
they built up their own systematic trafc in slaves to work the sugar plantations that portugal and later spain established on the african coastal islands of madeira the canaries so tom and principe.
the portuguese appetite for slaves was enormous and dwarfed the modest scale of the pre european trafc.
slave trading became a big business.
some forty thousand africans were carried away to the atlantic sugar islands in the last half of the fteenth century.
millions european trade and exploration marco polo passing through the strait of hormuz this illustration from the rst printed edition of the travels of marco polo in 1477 shows the traveler crossing the persian gulf between the arabian peninsula and persia presentday iran.
more were to be wrenched from their home continent after the discovery of the americas.
in these fteenthcentury portuguese adventures in africa were to be found the origins of the modern plantation system based on large scale commercial agriculture and the wholesale exploitation of slave labor.
this kind of plantation economy would shape the destiny of much of the new world.
the seafaring portuguese pushed still farther southward in search of the water route to asia.
edging cautiously down the african coast bartholomeu dias rounded the southernmost tip of the dark continent in 1488.
ten years later vasco da gama nally reached india hence the name indies given by europeans to all the mysterious lands of the orient and returned home with a small but tantalizing cargo of jewels and spices.
meanwhile the kingdom of spain became united an event pregnant with destiny in the late fteenth century.
this new unity resulted primarily from the marriage of two sovereigns ferdinand of aragon and isabella of castile and from the brutal expulsion of the indel muslim moors from spain after centuries of christian islamic warfare.
glorying in their sudden strength the spaniards were eager to outstrip their portuguese rivals in the race to tap the wealth of the indies.
to the south and east portugal controlled the african coast and thus controlled the gateway to the round africa water route to india.
of necessity therefore spain looked westward.
chapter 1 new world beginnings 33 000 b c e 1769 c e.
columbus comes upon a new world gore island slave fortress from this holding station off the coast of senegal thousands of african captives passed through the door of no return into a lifetime of slavery in the new world.
the stage was now set for a cataclysmic shift in the course of history the history not only of europe but of all the world.
europeans clamored for more and cheaper products from the lands beyond the mediterranean.
africa had been established as a source of cheap slave labor for plantation agriculture.
the portuguese voyages had demonstrated the feasibility of long range ocean navigation.
in spain a modern national state was taking shape with the unity wealth and power to shoulder the formidable tasks of discovery conquest and colonization.
the dawn of the renaissance in the fourteenth century nurtured an ambitious spirit of optimism and adventure.
printing presses introduced about 1450 facilitated the spread of scientic knowledge.
the mariners compass possibly borrowed from the arabs eliminated some of the uncertainties of sea travel.
meanwhile across the ocean the unsuspecting new world innocently awaited its european discoverers onto this stage stepped christopher columbus.
this skilled italian seafarer persuaded the spanish monarchs to outt him with three tiny but seaworthy ships manned by a motley crew.
daringly he unfurled the sails of his cockleshell craft and headed westward.
his superstitious sailors fearful of venturing into the oceanic unknown grew increasingly mutinous.
after six weeks at sea failure loomed until on october 12 1492 the crew sighted an island in the bahamas.
a new world thus swam within the vision of europeans.
the impact of discovery nished the labor and the new world offered its raw materials especially its precious metals and its soil for the cultivation of sugar cane.
for europeans as well as for africans and native americans the world after 1492 would never be the same for better or worse.
when worlds collide christopher columbus 1451 1506 by ridolfo di domenico ghirlandaio no portrait from life exists of columbus so all likenesses of him including this one are somewhat fanciful.
columbuss sensational achievement obscures the fact that he was one of the most successful failures in history.
seeking a new water route to the fabled indies he in fact had bumped into an enormous land barrier blocking the ocean pathway.
for decades thereafter explorers strove to get through it or around it.
the truth gradually dawned that sprawling new continents had been discovered.
yet columbus was at rst so certain that he had skirted the rim of the indies that he called the native peoples indians a gross geographical misnomer that somehow stuck.
columbuss discovery would eventually convulse four continents europe africa and the two americas.
thanks to his epochal voyage an interdependent global economic system emerged on a scale undreamedof before he set sail.
its workings touched every shore washed by the atlantic ocean.
europe provided the markets the capital and the technology africa fur two ecosystems the fragile naturally evolved networks of relations among organisms in a stable environment commingled and clashed when columbus waded ashore.
the reverberations from that historic encounter often called the columbian exchange see figure 1 1 echoed for centuries after 1492.
the ora and fauna of the old and new worlds had been separated for thousands of years.
european explorers marveled at the strange sights that greeted them including exotic beasts such as iguanas and snakes with castanets rattlesnakes.
native new world plants such as tobacco maize beans tomatoes and especially the lowly potato eventually revolutionized the international economy as well as the european diet feeding the rapid population growth of the old world.
these foodstuffs were among the most important indian gifts to the europeans and to the rest of the world.
perhaps three fths of the crops cultivated around the globe today originated in the americas.
ironically the introduction into africa of new world foodstuffs like maize manioc and sweet potatoes may have fed an african population boom that numerically though not morally more than offset the losses inicted by the slave trade.
in exchange the europeans introduced old world crops and animals to the americas.
columbus returned to the caribbean island of hispaniola present day haiti and the dominican republic in 1493 with seventeen ships that unloaded twelve hundred men and a virtual noahs ark of cattle swine and horses.
the horses soon reached the north american mainland through mex ico and in less than two centuries had spread as far as canada.
north american indian tribes like the apaches sioux and blackfeet swiftly adopted the horse transforming their cultures into highly mobile wide ranging hunter societies that roamed the grassy great plains in pursuit of the shaggy buffalo.
columbus also brought seedlings of sugar cane which thrived in the warm car ibbean climate.
a sugar revolution consequently took place in the european diet fueled by the forced migration of millions of africans to work the caneelds and sugar mills of the new world.
chapter 1 new world beginnings 33 000 b c e 1769 c e.
gold silver corn potatoes pineapples tomatoes tobacco beans vanilla chocolate syphilis old world new world wheat sugar rice coffee horses cows pigs smallpox measles bubonic plague influenza typhus diphtheria scarlet fever slave labor africa figure 1 1 the columbian exchange columbuss discovery initiated the kind of explosion in international commerce that a later age would call globalization source adapted from out of many a history of the american people third edition combined edition by faragher buhle czitrom and armitage.
copyright 1999.
by permission of prentice hall inc upper saddle river nj.
unwittingly the europeans also brought other organisms in the dirt on their boots and the dust on their clothes such as the seeds of kentucky bluegrass dandelions and daisies.
most ominous of all in their bodies they carried the germs that caused smallpox yellow fever and malaria.
indeed old world diseases would quickly devastate the native americans.
during the indians millennia of isolation in the americas most of the old worlds killer maladies had disappeared from among them.
but generations of freedom from those illnesses had also wiped out protective antibodies.
devoid of natural resistance to old world sicknesses indians died in droves.
within fty years of the spanish arrival the population of the taino natives in hispaniola dwindled from some 1 million people to about 200.
enslavement and armed aggression took their toll but the deadliest killers were microbes not muskets.
the lethal germs spread among the new world peoples with the speed and force of a hurricane swiftly sweeping far ahead of the human invaders most of those af icted never laid eyes on a european.
in the centuries after columbuss landfall as many as 90 percent of the native americans perished a demographic catastrophe without parallel in human history.
this depopulation was surely not intended by the spanish but it was nevertheless so severe that entire cultures and ancient ways of life were extinguished forever.
bafed enraged and vengeful indian slaves sometimes kneaded tainted blood into their masters bread to little effect.
perhaps it was poetic justice that the indians unintentionally did take a kind of revenge by infecting the early explorers with syphilis injecting that lethal sexually transmitted disease for the rst time into europe.
the spanish conquistadores gradually europeans realized that the american continents held rich prizes especially the gold and silver of the advanced indian civilizations in mexico and peru.
spanish explorers and conquistadores the scourge of smallpox this peruvian infant depicted about 1700 was ravaged by the dread european disease and placed in a crude quarantine.
spain secured its claim to columbuss discovery in the treaty of tordesillas 1494 dividing with portugal the heathen lands of the new world see map 1 4.
the lions share went to spain but portugal received compensating territory in africa and asia as well as title to lands that one day would be brazil.
spain became the dominant exploring and colonizing power in the 1500s.
in the ser vice of god as well as in search of gold and glory spanish conquistadores conquerors fanned out across the caribbean and eventually onto the mainland of the american continents see makers of america the spanish conquistadores pp.
on spains long roster of notable deeds two spectacular exploits must be headlined.
vasco nuez balboa hailed as the discoverer of the pa cic ocean waded into the foaming waves off panama in 1513 and boldly claimed for his king all the lands washed by that sea see map 1 5.
ferdinand magellan started from spain in 1519 with ve tiny ships.
after beating through the storm lashed strait off the tip of south america that still bears his name he was slain by the inhabitants of the philippines.
his one remaining vessel creaked home in 1522 completing the rst circumnavigation of the globe.
other ambitious spaniards ventured into north america.
in 1513 and 1521 juan ponce de len explored florida which he at rst thought was an island.
seeking gold and probably not the mythical fountain of youth he instead met with death by an indian arrow.
in 1540 1542 francisco coronado in quest of fabled golden cities that turned out to be adobe pueblos wandered with a clanking cavalcade through arizona and new mexico penetrating as far east as kansas.
en route his expedition discovered two awesome natural wonders the grand canyon of the colorado river and enormous herds of buffalo bison.
hernando de soto with six hundred armor plated men undertook a fantastic gold seeking expedition during 1539 1542.
floundering through marshes and pine barrens from florida westward he discovered and crossed the majestic mississippi river just north of its junction with the arkansas river.
after brutally mistreating the indians with iron collars and erce dogs he at length died of fever and wounds.
his troops secretly disposed of his remains at night in the mississippi lest the indians exhume and abuse their abusers corpse.
meanwhile in south america the ironsted conqueror francisco pizarro crushed the incas of peru in 1532 and added a huge hoard of booty to spanish coffers.
by 1600 spain was swimming in new world silver mostly from the fabulously rich mines at potos in present day bolivia as well as from mexico.
this ood of precious metal touched off a price revolution in europe that increased consumer costs by as much as 500 percent in the hundred years after the midsixteenth century.
some scholars see in this ballooning european money supply the fuel that fed the growth of the economic system known as capitalism.
certainly new world bullion helped transform the world economy.
it swelled the vaults of bankers from spain to italy laying the foundations of the modern commercial banking system.
it clinked in the purses of merchants in france and holland stimulating the spread of commerce and manu facturing.
and it paid for much of the burgeoning international trade with asia whose sellers had little use for any european good except silver.
arctic circle missis sippi r north america coronado 1540 1542 c a b o t 1 4 97 europe portugal central america west indies ibbe 30n tropic of cancer at l a n t i c arabia o c e a n an sea balboa med it sea erranean verrazano ponce de len bus colum car asia spain de soto 1539 1542 corts tenochtitln mexico city 60n england newfoundland france gulf of mexico cabeza de vaca 1528 1536 cartier 1535 1536 c vespuc i africa arabian sea 0 at l a n t i c ed itio oc ea n n1 9 portuguese claims ocean currents 150w 2000 km.
120w 90w 60w ion 14 marcat line of de ation emarc line of d spanish claims tropic of capricorn ans 30s va agell n of m n 1522 r tu e r itio no exped an del ca sti seba n 30w 0 map 1 4 principal voyages of discovery spain portugal france and england reaped the greatest advantages from the new world but much of the earliest exploration was done by italians notably christopher columbus of genoa.
john cabot another native of genoa his original name was giovanni caboto sailed for englands king henry vii.
giovanni da verrazano was a florentine employed by france.
the islands of the caribbean sea the west indies as they came to be called in yet another perpetuation of columbuss geographic confusion served as offshore bases for the staging of the spanish invasion of the mainland americas.
here supplies could be stored and men and horses could be rested and acclimated before proceeding to the conquest of the continents.
the loosely orga nized and vulnerable native communities of the west indies also provided laboratories for testing the techniques that would eventually subdue the advanced indian civilizations of mexico and peru.
the most important such technique was the institution known as the encomienda.
it allowed the government ocean ma exp ga ns da lla indian o ge south america pizarro 1531 1533 sc ma o c ean 1 4 97 pac i f ic 149 8 equator 30e 60e interactive map to commend or give indians to certain colonists in return for the promise to try to christianize them.
in all but name it was slavery.
spanish missionary bartolom de las casas appalled by the encomienda system in hispaniola called it a moral pestilence invented by satan the conquest of mexico in 1519 hernn corts set sail from cuba with sixteen fresh horses and several hundred men aboard eleven ships bound for mexico and for destiny.
on the island of m is.
or north america santa f san diego ad e nd gra r on o pon 1 110w pacific ocean ce de gulf of mexico map 1 5 principal early spanish explorations and conquests note that coronado traversed northern texas and oklahoma.
in present day eastern kansas he found instead of the great golden city he sought a drab encampment probably of wichita indians.
n 30 st augustine 1565 rio co 120w atlantic ocean de s oto 9 15 l co a or sippi r sis d corts conquers mexico new spain le n 1 n 20 cuba co rt veracruz mexico city s 1519 caribbean sea 80w n 250 500 km.
balboa 500 mi.
pizarro 1531 1533 100w 90w 70w 10n south america to peru interactive map bartolom de las casas 1474 1566 a reformminded dominican friar wrote the destruction of the indies in 1542 to chronicle the awful fate of the native americans and to protest spanish policies in the new world.
he was especially horried at the catastrophic effects of disease on the native peoples who of those in future centuries will believe this.
i myself who am writing this and saw it and know the most about it can hardly believe that such was possible.
cozumel off the yucatn peninsula he rescued a spanish castaway who had been enslaved for several years by the mayan speaking indians.
a short distance farther on he picked up the female indian slave malinche who knew both mayan and nahuatl the language of the powerful aztec rulers of the great empire in the highlands of central mexico.
in addition to his superior repower corts now had the advantage through these two interpreters of understanding the speech of the native peoples whom he was about to encounter including the aztecs.
malinche eventually learned spanish and was baptized with the spanish name of doa marina.
near present day veracruz corts made his nal land fall.
through his interpreters he learned of unrest within the aztec empire among the peoples from whom the aztecs demanded tribute.
he also heard alluring tales of the gold and other wealth stored up in the legendary aztec capital of tenochtitln.
he lusted to tear open the coffers of the aztec kingdom.
to quell his mutinous troops he boldly burned his ships cutting off any hope of retreat.
gathering a force of some twenty thousand indian allies he marched on tenochtitln and toward one of historys most dramatic and fateful encounters.
as corts proceeded the aztec chieftain moctezuma sent ambassadors bearing fabulous gifts to welcome the approaching spaniards.
these only whetted the conquistadors appetite.
we spanish suffer from a strange disease of the heart corts allegedly informed the emissaries for which the only known remedy is gold the ambassadors reported this comment to moctezuma along with the astonishing fact that the newcomers rode on the backs of deer horses.
the superstitious moctezuma also believed that corts was the god quetzalcoatl whose return from the eastern sea was predicted in aztec legends.
expectant yet apprehensive moctezuma allowed the conquistadores to approach his capital unopposed.
as the spaniards entered the valley of mexico the sight of the aztec capital of tenochtitln amazed them.
with 300 000 inhabitants spread over ten square miles it rivaled in size and pomp any city in contemporary makers of america the spanish the great africanconquistadores american migration i n 1492 the same year that columbus sighted america the great moorish city of granada in spain fell after a ten year siege.
for ve centuries the christian kingdoms of spain had been trying to drive the north african muslim moors the dark ones in spanish off the iberian peninsula and with the fall of granada they succeeded.
but the lengthy reconquista had left its mark on spanish society.
centuries of military and religious confrontation nurtured an obsession with status and honor bred religious zealotry and intolerance and created a large class of men who regarded manual labor and commerce contemptuously.
with the reconquista ended some of these men turned their restless gaze to spains new world frontier.
at rst spanish hopes for america focused on the caribbean and on nding a sea route to asia.
gradually however word ltered back of rich kingdoms on the mainland.
between 1519 and 1540 spanish conquistadores swept across the americas in two wide arcs of conquest one driv ing from cuba through mexico conquistadores ca.
1534 this illustration for a book called the khler codex of nuremberg may be the earliest depiction of the conquistadores in the americas.
it portrays men and horses alike as steadfast and self assured in their work of conquest.
into what is now the southwestern united states the other starting from panama and pushing south into peru.
within half a century of columbuss arrival in the americas the conquistadores had extinguished the great aztec and incan empires and claimed for church and crown a territory that extended from colorado to argentina including much of what is now the continental united states.
the military conquest of this vast region was achieved by just ten thousand men orga nized in a series of private expeditions.
hernn corts francisco pizarro and other aspiring conquerors signed contracts with the spanish monarch raised money from investors and then went about recruiting an army.
only a small minority of the conquistadores leaders or followers were nobles.
about half were professional soldiers and sailors the rest comprised peasants artisans and members of the middling classes.
most were in their twenties and early thirties and all knew how to wield a sword.
diverse motives spurred these motley adventurers.
some hoped to win royal titles and favors by bringing new peoples under the spanish ag.
others sought to ensure gods favor by spreading christianity to the pagans.
some men hoped to escape dubious pasts and others sought the kind of historical adventure experienced by heroes of classical antiquity.
nearly all shared a lust for gold.
as one of cortss foot soldiers put it we came here to serve god and the king and also to get rich one historian adds that the conquistadores rst fell on their knees and then fell upon the aborigines.
armed with horses and gunpowder and preceded by disease the conquistadores quickly overpowered the indians.
but most never achieved their dreams of glory.
few received titles of nobility and many of the rank and le remained permanently indebted to the absentee investors who paid for their equipment.
even when an expedition captured exceptionally rich booty the spoils were unevenly divided men from the command ers home region often received more and men on horseback generally got two shares to the infantrymans one.
the conquistadores lost still more power as the crown gradually tightened its control in the new world.
by the 1530s in mexico and the 1550s in peru colorless colonial administrators had replaced the freebooting conquistadores.
nevertheless the conquistadores achieved a kind of immortality.
because of a scarcity of spanish women in the early days of the conquest many of the conquistadores married indian women.
the soldiers who conquered paraguay received three native women each and cortss soldiers in mexico who were forbidden to consort with pagan women quickly had their lovers baptized into the catholic faith.
their offspring the new race of mestizos formed a cultural and a biological bridge between latin americas european and indian races.
an aztec view of the conquest 1531 produced just a dozen years after cortss arrival in 1519 this drawing by an aztec artist pictures the indians rendering tribute to their conquerors.
the inclusion of the banner showing the madonna and child also illustrates the early incorporation of christian beliefs by the indians.
chapter 1 new world beginnings 33 000 b c e 1769 c e.
the aztec metropolis rose from an island in the center of a lake surrounded by oating gardens of extraordinary beauty.
it was connected to the mainland by a series of causeways and supplied with fresh water by an artfully designed aqueduct.
moctezuma treated corts hospitably at rst but soon the spaniards hunger for gold and power exhausted their welcome.
they thirsted mightily for gold they stuffed themselves with it they starved for it they lusted for it like pigs said one aztec.
on the noche triste sad night of june 30 1520 the aztecs attacked driv ing the spanish down the causeways from tenochtitln in a frantic bloody retreat.
corts then laid siege to the city and it capitulated on august 13 1521.
that same year a smallpox epidemic burned through the valley of mexico.
the combination of conquest and disease took a grisly toll.
the aztec empire gave way to three centuries of spanish rule.
the temples of tenochtitln were destroyed to make way for the christian cathedrals of mexico city built on the site of the ruined indian capital.
and the native population of mexico winnowed mercilessly by the invaders dis eases shrank from some 20 million to 2 million people in less than a century.
yet the invader brought more than conquest and death.
he brought his crops and his animals his language and his laws his customs and his religion all of which proved adaptable to the peoples of mexico.
he intermarried with the surviving indians creating a distinctive culture of mestizos people of mixed indian and european heritage.
to this day mexican civilization remains a unique blend of the old world and the new producing both ambivalence and pride among people of mexican heritage.
cortss translator malinche for example has given her name to the mexican language in the word malinchista or traitor but mexicans also celebrate columbus day as the dia de la raza the birthday of a wholly new race of people.
the spread of spanish america spains colonial empire grew swiftly and impressively.
within about half a century of columbuss landfall artists rendering of tenochtitln amid tribal strife in the fourteenth century the aztecs built a capital on a small island in a lake in the central valley of mexico.
from here they oversaw the most powerful empire yet to arise in mesoamerica.
two main temples stood at the citys sacred center one dedicated to tlaloc the ancient rain god and the other to huitzilopochtli the tribal god who was believed to require human hearts for sustenance.
spain s new world empire corts and malinche ca.
1540 detail though done by an indian artist this drawing identies malinche by her christian name marina.
she eventually married one of cortss soldiers with whom she traveled to spain and was received at the spanish court.
hundreds of spanish cities and towns ourished in the americas especially in the great silver producing centers of peru and mexico.
some 160 000 spaniards mostly men had subjugated millions of indians.
majestic cathedrals dotted the land printing presses turned out books and scholars studied at distinguished universities including those at mexico city and lima peru both founded in 1551 eighty ve years before harvard the rst college established in the eng lish colonies.
but how secure were these imperial possessions.
other powers were already snif ng around the edges of the spanish domain eager to bite off their share of the promised wealth of the new lands.
the upstart eng lish sent giovanni caboto known in eng lish as john cabot to explore the northeastern coast of north america in 1497 and 1498.
the french king dispatched another italian mariner giovanni da verrazano to probe the eastern seaboard in 1524.
ten years later the frenchman jacques cartier journeyed hundreds of miles up the st lawrence river.
to secure the northern periphery of their new world domain against such encroachments and to convert more indian souls to christianity the spanish began to fortify and settle their north american borderlands.
in a move to block french ambitions and to protect the sea lanes to the caribbean the spanish erected a fortress at st augustine florida in 1565 thus founding the oldest continually inhabited european settlement in the future united states.
in mexico the tales of coronados expedition of the 1540s to the upper rio grande and colorado river regions continued to beckon the conquistadores northward.
a dust begrimed expeditionary column with eighty three rumbling wagons and hundreds of grumbling men traversed the bare sonora desert from mexico into the rio grande valley in 1598.
led by don juan de oate the spaniards cruelly abused the pueblo peoples they encountered.
in the battle of acoma in 1599 the spanish severed one foot of each survivor.
they proclaimed the area to be the province of new mexico in 1609 and founded its capital at santa f the following year see map 1 6.
the spanish settlers in new mexico found a few furs and precious little gold but they did discover a wealth of souls to be harvested for the christian religion.
the roman catholic mission became the central institution in colonial new mexico until the missionaries efforts to suppress native religious customs provoked an indian uprising called pops rebellion in 1680.
the pueblo rebels destroyed every catholic church in the province and killed a score of priests and hundreds of spanish settlers.
in a reversal of cortss treatment of the aztec temples more than a century earlier the indians rebuilt a kiva or ceremonial religious chamber on the ruins of the spanish plaza at santa f.
it took nearly half a century for the spanish fully to reclaim new mexico from the insurrectionary indians.
meanwhile as a further hedge against the everthreatening french who had sent an expedition under robert de la salle down the mississippi river in the 1680s the spanish began around 1716 to establish settlements in texas.
some refugees from the pueblo uprising trickled into texas and a few missions were established there including the one at san antonio later known as the alamo.
but for at least another century the spanish presence remained weak in this distant northeastern outpost of spains mexican empire.
to the west in cal i fornia no serious foreign threat loomed and spain directed its attention there only belatedly.
juan rodriguez cabrillo had explored the cal ifornia coast in 1542 but he failed to nd san francisco bay or anything else of much interest.
for some two centuries thereafter cal i fornia slumbered undisturbed by european intruders.
then in 1769 spanish missionaries led by father junipero serra founded at san diego the rst of a chain of twenty one missions that wound chapter 1 new world beginnings 33 000 b c e 1769 c e.
120w do r co l california missions 1769 1823 a or 100w 105w y ck ro ts.
m 35n 110w 115w arkansas r.
quivira taos santa f ca acoma red r gila r sonora desert cab pacific ocean nad ian r rillo br az os r 154 tucson r ad mission san antonio a nt ni e dr ma l ta ra er rien o 1598 or de lif ci ca oc si re of al e ate de o m lf 100 200 km.
os and ra gu 25n pec o gr er n ri el paso si 30n durango 200 mi.
m e x ic o present day new mexico map 1 6 spains north american frontier 1542 1823 interactive map up the coast as far as sonoma north of san francisco bay.
father serras brown robed franciscan friars toiled with zealous devotion to christianize the three hundred thousand native cal i fornians.
they gathered the seminomadic indians into fortied missions and taught them horticulture and basic crafts.
these mission indians did adopt christianity but they also lost contact with their native cultures and often lost their lives as well as the white mans diseases doomed these biologically vulnerable peoples.
the misdeeds of the spanish in the new world obscured their substantial achievements and helped give birth to the black legend.
this false concept held that the conquerors merely tortured and butchered the indians kill ing for christ stole their gold infected them with smallpox and left little but misery behind.
the spanish invaders did indeed kill enslave and infect countless natives but they also erected a colossal empire sprawling from cal i fornia and florida to tierra del fuego.
they grafted their culture laws religion and language onto a wide array of native societies laying the foundations for a score of spanish speaking nations.
clearly the spaniards who had more than a centurys head start over the eng lish were genuine empire builders and cultural innovators in the new world.
as compared with their anglo saxon rivals their colonial establishment was larger and richer and it was destined to endure more than a quarter of a century longer.
and in the last analysis the spanish paid the native americans the high compliment of fusing with them through marriage and incorporating indigenous culture into their own rather than shunning and eventually isolating the indians as their eng lish adversaries would do.
chronology chronology ca.
33 000 8000 b c e.
first humans cross into americas from asia 1519 corts conquers mexico for spain ca.
5000 b c e.
corn is developed as a staple crop in highland mexico magellans vessel completes circumnavigation of the world ca.
4000 b c e.
first civilized societies develop in the middle east verrazano explores eastern seaboard of north america for france ca.
1200 b c e.
corn planting reaches present day american southwest pizarro crushes incas ca.
cartier journeys up the st lawrence river norse voyagers discover and briey settle in northeastern north america corn cultivation reaches midwest and southeastern atlantic seaboard 1539 de soto explores the southeast and discovers the mississippi river 1540 coronado explores present day southwest ca.
height of mississippian settlement at cahokia ca.
1100 1300 c e.
cabrillo explores cal i fornia coast for spain christian crusades arouse european interest in the east spanish build fortress at st augustine marco polo returns to europe late 1500s late 1400s iroquois confederacy founded according to iroquois legend spain becomes united dias rounds southern tip of africa ca.
1598 spanish under oate conquer pueblo peoples of rio grande valley columbus lands in the bahamas spanish found new mexico treaty of tordesillas between spain and portugal pops rebellion in new mexico 1680s da gama reaches india cabot explores northeastern coast of north america for eng land french expedition down mississippi river under la salle serra founds rst cal i fornia mission at san diego balboa claims all lands touched by the pacic ocean for spain 1513 ponce de len explores florida chapter 1 new world beginnings 33 000 b c e 1769 c e.
key terms canadian shield 4 incas 8 aztecs 8 nation states 8 cahokia 10 three sister farming 10 middlemen 11 caravel 11 plantation 13 columbian exchange 15 people to know tordesillas treaty of 17 conquistadores 17 capitalism 17 encomienda 18 noche triste 22 mestizos 22 acoma battle of 23 pops rebellion 23 black legend 24 ferdinand of aragon isabella of castile christopher columbus francisco coronado francisco pizarro bartolom de las casas hernn corts malinche doa marina moctezuma giovanni caboto john cabot robert de la salle father junipero serra to learn more mark a burkholder and lyman l johnson colonial latin america 2000 alfred w crosby jr the columbian exchange biological and cultural consequences of 1492 1972 jared diamond guns germs and steel the fates of human societies 1998 tom dillehay the settlement of the americas a new prehistory 2000 j h elliott empires of the atlantic world 2006 olaudah equiano equianos travels 1789 steven w hackel children of coyote missionaries of saint francis indian spanish relations in colonial california 1769 1850 2005 hugh honour the new golden land 1975 alice beck keyhoe america before the european invasions 2002 lyle n mcalister spain and portugal in the new world 1492 1700 1984 anthony pagden peoples and empires a short history of european migration exploration and conquest from greece to the present 2003 john thornton africa and africans in the making of the atlantic world 1400 1800 1992 david j weber brbaros spaniards and their savages in the age of enlightenment 2005 a complete annotated bibliography for this chapter along with brief descriptions of the people to know and additional review materials may be found at the planting of english america 1500 1733.
for i shall yet live to see it virginia an inglishe nation.
a s the seventeenth century dawned scarcely a hundred years after columbuss momentous landfall the face of much of the new world had already been profoundly transformed.
european crops and livestock had begun to alter the very landscape touching off an ecological revolution that would reverberate for centuries to come.
from tierra del fuego in the south to hudson bay in the north disease and armed conquest had cruelly winnowed and disrupted the native peoples.
several hundred thousand enslaved africans toiled on caribbean and brazilian sugar plantations.
from florida and new mexico southward most of the new world lay rmly within the grip of imperial spain.
but north of mexico america in 1600 remained largely unexplored and effectively unclaimed by europeans.
then as if to herald the coming century of colonization and con ict in the northern continent three european powers planted three primitive outposts in three distant corners of the continent within three years of one another the spanish at santa f in 1610 the french at qubec in 1608 and most consequentially for the future united states the eng lish at jamestown virginia in 1607.
englands imperial stirrings feeble indeed were eng lands efforts in the 1500s to compete with the sprawling spanish empire.
as spains ally in the rst half of the century eng land took little interest in establishing its own overseas colonies.
religious con ict also disrupted eng land in midcentury after king henry viii broke with the roman catholic church in the 1530s launching the eng lish protestant reformation.
catholics battled protestants for decades and the religious balance of power seesawed.
but after this icon will direct you to interactive activities and study materials on the american pageant website.
