548 CHAPTER 17

Reading Social Studies
Politics
Economics	Geography
Society and Culture
Science and Technology
Focus on Themes In this chapter you will read about the time immediately after the Civil War. You will see how the government tried to rebuild the South and will learn about how life changed for African Americans after slavery was declared illegal.
You will read about the political conflicts that emerged as southern leadership worked to gain control of Reconstruction efforts. Throughout the chapter, you will read how the culture of the South changed after the War.


Predicting
FOCUS on Reading When you read a story, you can often predict what might come next in the story's logical progression by understanding what has already happened.
Understanding Predicting Likewise, when you study history, you can use your knowledge of the past to predict a likely outcome of an event. If you see a pattern to historical events, the same pattern could apply to future events. You have learned about
the ways that Americans have moved into new lands and the economic and political changes that have occurred in U.S history. Recognizing a pattern to these changes can give you a better understanding of the past and help you make a prediction about how people responded or might respond to similar occurrences.
Notice how one reader uses prior knowledge to predict what may happen.
By 1870, only small portions of the Great Plains remained unsettled. For s most of the next two decades, this land remained open range. In March , 1889, government officials announced that homesteaders could file claims J on land in what is now the state of Oklahoma. This land had belonged | to Creek and Seminole Indians. Within a month, about 50,000 people ’ rushed to Oklahoma to stake their claims.
In all, settlers claimed more than 2 million acres of former Indian land in the famous Oklahoma land rush and another 9 million over the next several years. This huge wave of pioneers was the last chapter of the ■ westward movement. By the early 1890s, the frontier had largely ceased to exist in the United States.
After reading this section, one reader thought:
I have read about the ways in which previous waves of settlers changed the areas into which they moved. Colonists founded towns and cities, and population increased. New economic opportunities were created. What happened in those regions that might happen in the rest of the United States once the West was settled?
550 CHAPTER 17
You Try It!
The following passage is from the chapter you are getting ready to read. As you read the passage, look for the facts that can help you predict what might happen in the future.
Redeemers set up the poll tax in an effort to deny the vote to African Americans. The poll tax was a special tax people had to pay before they could vote. Some states also targeted African American voters by requiring them to pass a literacy test. A so-called grandfather clause written into law affected men whose fathers or grandfathers could vote before 1867. In those cases, a voter did not have to pay a poll tax or pass a literacy test. As a result, almost every white man could escape the voting restrictions.
From
Chapter 17, p.568
After you read the passage, answer the following questions.
1.	What do you know about African Americans' right to vote prior to and during Reconstruction?
2.	What do you know about the importance of the right to vote?
3.	How do you think restrictions on their right to vote would affect African Americans after Reconstruction?
Chapter 17
Section 1
Reconstruction (p. 552)
Ten Percent Plan (p. 553)
Thirteenth Amendment (p. 554) Freedmen's Bureau (p. 556)
Andrew Johnson (p. 557)
Section 2
Black Codes (p. 558)
Radical Republicans (p. 559)
Civil Rights Act of 1866 (p. 560) Fourteenth Amendment (p. 561) Reconstruction Acts (p. 561) impeachment (p. 562)
Fifteenth Amendment (p. 563)
Section 3
Hiram Revels (p. 565)
Ku Klux Kian (p. 566)
Compromise of 1877 (p. 568) poll tax (p. 568) segregation (p. 569)
Jim Crow laws (p. 569)
Plessyv. Ferguson (p. 569) sharecropping (p. 570)
Section 4
Homestead Act, p. 571b
Morrill Act, p. 571c
Exodusters, p. 571c
buffalo soldiers, p. 571f
Dawes General Allotment Act, p. 571 f
Academic Vocabulary
Success in school is related to knowing academic vocabulary— the words that are frequently used in school assignments and discussions. In this chapter, you will learn the following academic words:
procedure (p. 553) principle (p. 560)
As you read Chapter 17, use the
information given to predict what might happen in American society after Reconstruction
k
RECONSTRUCTION 55,
TEKS 1A, 8B, 9C, 16B, 21A, 22A, 23C
Rebuilding the South
What You Will Learn...
Main Ideas
President Lincoln and Congress differed in their views as Reconstruction began.
The end of the Civil War meant freedom for African Americans in the South. President Johnson's plan began the process of Reconstruction.
The Big Idea
If YOU were there...
You are a young soldier who has been fighting in the Civil War for many months. Now that the war is over, you are on your way home. During your journey, you pass plantation manor homes, houses, and barns that have been burned down. No one is doing spring planting in the fields. As you near your family's farm, you see that fences and sheds have been destroyed. You wonder what is left of your home and family.
What would you think your future on the farm would he like?
The nation faced many problems in rebuilding the Union.
Key Terms and People
Reconstruction, p. 552 Ten Percent Plan, p. 553 Thirteenth Amendment, p. 554 Freedmen's Bureau, p. 556 Andrew Johnson, p. 557
hmhsocialstudies.com
I TAKING NOTES
wniiiini rii;nw-> nmi n iihilmimminMuniiiw mini i iiiiiw«iiw»m<iw»iMW>il>iiiwn«iW'»»»’
Use the graphic organizer online to take notes on the different ways the U.S. government attempted to reconstruct the South after the Civil War.
BUILDING BACKGROUND
When the Civil War ended, much of the South lay in ruins. Like the young soldier above, many people returned to destroyed homes and farms. Harvests of corn, cotton, rice, and other crops fell far below normal. Many farm animals had been killed or were roaming free. These were some of the challenges in restoring the nation. Reconstruction Begins
After the Civil War ended in 1865, the U.S. government faced the problem of dealing with the defeated southern states. The challenges of Reconstruction, the process of readmitting the former Confederate states to the Union, lasted from 1865 to 1877.
552 CHAPTER 17
Damaged South
Tired southern soldiers returned home to find that the world they had known before the war was gone. Cities, towns, and farms had been ruined. Because of high food prices and widespread crop failures, many southerners faced starvation. The Confederate money held by most southerners was now worthless. Banks failed, and merchants had gone bankrupt because people could not pay their debts.
Former Confederate general Braxton Bragg was one of many southerners who faced economic hardship. He found that "all, all was lost, except my debts." In South Carolina, Mary Boykin Chesnut wrote in her diary about the isolation she experienced after the war. "We are shut in here ... All RR's [railroads] destroyed—bridges gone. We are cut off from the world."
Lincoln's Plan
President Abraham Lincoln wanted to reunite the nation as quickly and painlessly as possible. He had proposed a plan for readmitting the southern states even before the war ended. Called the Ten Percent Plan, it offered southerners amnesty, or official pardon, for all illegal acts supporting the rebellion. To receive amnesty, southerners had to do two things. They had to swear an oath of loyalty to the United States. They also had to agree that slavery was illegal. Once 10 percent of voters in
a state made these pledges, they could form a new government. The state then could be readmitted to the Union.
Louisiana quickly elected a new state legislature under the Ten Percent Plan. Other southern states that had been occupied by Union troops soon followed Louisiana back into the United States.
Wade-Davis Bill
Some politicians argued that Congress, not the president, should control the southern states' return to the Union. They believed that Congress had the power to admit new states. Also, many Republican members of Congress thought the Ten Percent Plan did not go far enough. A senator from Michigan expressed their views.
^The people of the North are not such fools as to... turn around and say to the traitors, 'all you have to do [to return] is... take an oath that henceforth you will be true to the Government.'"
-Senator Jacob Howard, quoted in Reconstruction: America's Unfinished Revolution, 1863-1877, by Eric Foner
Two Republicans—Senator Benjamin
Wade and Representative Henry Davis—had an alternative to Lincoln's plan. Following procedures of the Wade-Davis bill, a state had to meet two conditions before it could rejoin the Union. First, it had to ban slavery. Second, a majority of adult males in the state had to take the loyalty oath.
War destroyed Richmond, Virginia, once the capital of the Confederacy.
Academic
Vocabulary
procedure
a series of steps taken to accomplish a task
Under the Wade-Davis bill, only southerners who swore that they had never supported the Confederacy could vote or hold office. In general, the bill was much stricter than the Ten Percent Plan. Its provisions would make it harder for southern states to rejoin the Union quickly.
President Lincoln therefore refused to sign the bill into law. He thought that few southern states would agree to meet its requirements. He believed that his plan would help restore order more quickly.
Reading check
Contrasting How was the Ten Percent Plan different from the Wade-Davis bill?
Freedom for African
Americans
One thing Republicans agreed on was abolishing slavery. The Emancipation Proclamation had freed slaves only in areas that had not been occupied by Union forces, not in the border states. Many people feared that the federal courts might someday declare the proclamation unconstitutional.
Slavery Ends
On January 31, 1865, at President Lincoln's urging, Congress proposed the Thirteenth Amendment. This amendment made slavery illegal throughout the United States.
554 CHAPTER 17
The amendment was ratified and took effect on December 18, 1865. When abolitionist William Lloyd Garrison heard the news, he declared that his work was now finished. He called for the American Anti-Slavery Society to break up. Not all abolitionists agreed that their work was done, however. Frederick Douglass insisted that "slavery is not abolished until the black man has the ballot [vote]."
Freedom brought important changes to newly freed slaves. Many couples held ceremonies to legalize marriages that had not been recognized under slavery. Many freedpeople searched for relatives who had been sold away from their families years
earlier. Others placed newspaper ads seeking information about their children. Many women began to work at home instead of in the fields. Still others adopted children of dead relatives to keep families together. Church members established voluntary associations and mutual-aid societies to help those in need.
Now that they could travel without a pass, many freedpeople moved from mostly white counties to places with more African Americans. Other freedpeople traveled simply to test their new freedom of movement. A South Carolina woman explained this need. "I must go, if I stay here I'll never know I'm free."
For most former slaves, freedom to travel was just the first step on a long road toward equal rights and new ways of life. Adults took new last names and began to insist on being called Mr. or Mrs. as a sign of respect, rather than by their first names or by nicknames. Freedpeople began to demand the same economic and political rights as white citizens. Henry Adams, a former slave, argued that "if I cannot do like a white man I am not free."
Forty Acres to Farm?
Many former slaves wanted their own land to farm. Near the end of the Civil War, Union general William Tecumseh Sherman had issued an order to break up plantations in coastal South Carolina and Georgia. He wanted to divide the land into 40-acre plots and give them to former slaves as compensation for their forced labor before the war.
Many white planters refused to surrender their land. Some freedpeople pointed out that it was only fair that they receive some of this land because their labor had made the plantations prosper. In the end, the U.S. government returned the land to its original owners. At this time, many freedpeople were unsure about where they would live, what kind of work they would do, and what rights they had. Freedoms that were theirs by law were difficult to enforce.

RECONSTRUCTION 55
Freedmen's Bureau
In 1865 Congress established the Freedmen's Bureau, an agency providing relief for freed-people and certain poor people in the South. The Bureau had a difficult job. At its high point, about 900 agents served the entire South. Bureau commissioner Oliver O. Howard eventually decided to use the Bureau's limited budget to distribute food to the poor and to provide education and legal help for freed-people. The Bureau also helped African American war veterans.
The Freedmen's Bureau played an important role in establishing more schools in the South. Laws against educating slaves meant that most freedpeople had never learned to read or write. Before the war ended, however, northern groups, such as the American Missionary Association, began providing books and teachers to African Americans. The teachers were mostly women who were committed to helping freedpeople. One teacher said of her students, "I never before saw children so eager to learn ... It is wonderful how [they]... can have so great a desire for
knowledge, and such a capacity for attaining [reaching] it."
After the war, some freedpeople organized their own education efforts. For example, Freedmen's Bureau agents found that some African Americans had opened schools in abandoned buildings. Many white southerners continued to believe that African Americans should not be educated. Despite opposition, by 1869 more than 150,000 African American students were attending more than 3,000 schools. The Freedmen's Bureau also helped establish a number of universities for African Americans, including Howard and Fisk universities.
Students quickly filled the new classrooms. Working adults attended classes in the evening. African Americans hoped that education would help them to understand and protect their rights and to enable them to find better jobs. Both black and white southerners benefited from the effort to provide greater access to education in the South.
Reading Check
Analyzing How did the Freedmen's Bureau help reform education in the South?
Helping the Freedpeople
Congress created the Freedmen's Bureau to help freedpeople and poor southerners recover from the Civil War. The Bureau assisted people by:
providing supplies and medical
What role did the Freedmen's Bureau play during Reconstruction?
$

fWW
rui
establishing schools
supervising contracts between freedpeople and employers taking care of lands abandoned or captured during the war
’J	>
1	■	/ i 1»,
- -








President Johnson's
Reconstruction Plan
While the Freedmen's Bureau was helping African Americans, the issue of how the South would rejoin the Union was unresolved. Soon, however, Lincoln's dream of peacefully reuniting the country ended tragically.
A
New President On the evening of April 14, 1865, President Lincoln and his wife attended a play at Ford's Theater in Washington, D.C. During the play, John Wilkes Booth, a southerner who opposed Lincoln's policies, sneaked into the president's theater box and shot him. Lincoln was rushed to a boardinghouse across the street, where he died early the next morning. Lincoln, his leadership remembered for its honesty, deep intelligence, and high morals, became a symbol for the nation of the struggle of the Civil War.
Vice President Andrew Johnson was sworn into office quickly. Reconstruction had now become his responsibility. He would have to win the trust of a nation shocked at its leader's death. Johnson's plan was similar to Lincoln's. However, he decided that wealthy southerners and former Confederate officials would need a presidential pardon to receive amnesty. Johnson shocked Radical Republicans by eventually pardoning more than 7,000 people by 1866.
New State Governments
Johnson was a Democrat whom Republicans had put on the ticket to appeal to the border states. A former slaveholder, he was a stubborn man who would face a hostile Congress.
Johnson offered a mild program for setting up new southern state governments. First, he appointed a temporary governor for each state. Then he required that the states revise their constitutions. Next, voters elected state and federal representatives. The new state government had to declare that secession was illegal. It also had to ratify the Thirteenth Amendment and refuse to pay Confederate debts.
By the end of 1865, all the southern states except Texas had created new governments. Johnson approved them all and declared that the United States was restored. Newly elected representatives came to Washington from each reconstructed southern state. However, Republicans complained that many new representatives had been leaders of the Confederacy. Congress therefore refused to readmit the southern states into the Union. Clearly, the nation was still divided.
READING CHECK
Summarizing What was
President Johnson's plan for Reconstruction?
I
Summary and Preview In this section I you learned about early plans for Reconstruction. In the next section, you will learn that disagreements about Reconstruction became so serious that the presi- dent was almost removed from office.
Section 1 Assessment
hmhsocialstudies.com
Reviewing Ideas, Terms, and People
1.	a. Identify What does Reconstruction mean?
b. Summarize What was President Lincoln's plan for Reconstruction?
2.	a. Recall What effect did the Thirteenth Amendment have on life in the United States?
b. Elaborate In your opinion, what was the most important accomplishment of the Freedmen's Bureau? Explain.
3.	a. Recall Why was President Lincoln killed? What kind of leader is he remembered as?
b. Analyze Why did some Americans oppose President Johnson's Reconstruction plan?
Critical Thinking
4.	Summarizing Review your notes on Reconstruction. Then copy the graphic organizer below and use it to show how African Americans were affected by the end of the war.
''African Americans and Recon- ]
struction
Marriages are legalized.
5. Considering Historical Context Many people planned to continue life as before the war. Others planned to start a new life. How do you think events and conditions you just read about might have affected their plans?
RECONSTRUCTION 5!
TEKS 1A,9A,9C,21A, 23C
The Fight over
Reconstruction
What You Will Learn...
. Black Codes led to opposition to President Johnson's plan for Reconstruction.
, The Fourteenth Amendment ensured citizenship for African Americans.
Radical Republicans in Congress took charge of Reconstruction.
The Fifteenth Amendment gave African Americans the right to vote.
If YOU were there...
A member of Congress, you belong to the same political party as the president. But you strongly disagree with his ideas about Reconstruction and civil rights for African Americans. Now some of the president's opponents are trying to remove him from office. You do not think he is a good president. On the other hand, you think removing him would be bad for the unity of the country.
Will you vote to remove the president?
T
The return to power of the pre-war southern leadership led Republicans in Congress to take control of Reconstruction.
I BUILDING BACKGROUND
Americans were bitterly divided about I what should happen in the South during Reconstruction. They dis-* agreed about ending racial inequality and guaranteeing civil rights for African Americans. These conflicts split political parties. They led to showdowns between Congress and the president. Political fights even threatened the president's job.
Key Terms and People
Black Codes, p. 558 Radical Republicans, p. 559 Civil Rights Act of 1866, p. 560 Fourteenth Amendment, p. 561 Reconstruction Acts, p. 561 impeachment, p. 562 Fifteenth Amendment, p. 563
hmhsocialstudies.com
I TAKING NOTES
j. Use the graphic organizer online to take notes on how Republicans in Congress took over Reconstruction and how they changed Reconstruction policies.
Opposition to President Johnson
In 1866 Congress continued to debate the rules for restoring the Union. Meanwhile, new state legislatures approved by President Johnson had already begun passing laws to deny African Americans' civil rights. "This is a white man's government, and intended for white men only," declared Governor Benjamin F. Perry of South Carolina.
Black Codes
Soon, every southern state passed Black Codes, or laws that greatly limited the freedom of African Americans. They required African Americans to sign work contracts, creating working conditions similar to those under slavery. In most southern states, any African Americans who could not prove they were employed could be arrested. Their punishment might be one year of work without pay. African Americans were also prevented from owning guns. In addition, they were not allowed to rent property except in cities.
The Black Codes alarmed many Americans. As one Civil War veteran asked, "If you call this freedom, what do you call slavery?"
558 CHAPTER 17
African Americans organized to oppose the codes. One group sent a petition to officials in South Carolina.
We simply ask... that the same laws which govern white men shall govern black men... that, in short, we be dealt with as others are—in equity [equality] and justice/^
—Petition from an African American convention held in South Carolina, quoted in There Is a River: The Black
Struggle for Freedom in America by Vincent Harding
Radical Republicans
The Black Codes angered many Republicans. They thought the South was returning to its old ways. Most Republicans were moderates who wanted the South to have loyal state
governments. They also believed that African Americans should have rights as citizens. They hoped that the government would not have to force the South to follow federal laws.
Radical Republicans, on the other hand, took a harsher stance. They wanted the federal government to force change in the South. Like the moderates, they thought the Black Codes were cruel and unjust. The Radicals, however, wanted the federal government to be much more involved in Reconstruction. They feared that too many southern leaders remained loyal to the former Confederacy and would not enforce the new laws. Thaddeus Stevens
Primary Source
POLITICAL CARTOON
Supporting Radical Republican Ideas
Republicans were outraged to see former Confederates return to power as leaders of the Democratic Party. This 1868political cartoon shows former Confederates Raphael Semmes and Nathan Bedford Forrest Semmes
was a Confederate admiral who had captured 62 Union merchant ships during the Civil War. Forrest was a cavalry officer known for brutality who later founded the Ku Klux Kian.
THE BUTCHER FORREST.
How do the actions of the people in these illustrations support the artist's point of view?
THE PIRATE SEMMES.
Forrest Haji's: * No quarter! no quarter! Kill 'em! kill 'em! i . not to leave one alive,*—Mntf't Qffleitil Jirooi t.
'em!' Tint's Forrest’s
1 desire to acknowledge the prompt action of Brigadier Genera) Chsl* art Pillow. His faithful execution of a

Primary Source
POINTS OF VIEW
Johnson vs. Stevens
President Andrew Johnson argued that the South should not be placed under military control.
^Military governments ... established for an indefinite period, would have divided the people into the vanquishers and the vanquished, and would have envenomed [made poisonous] hatred rather than have restored affection/*
—Andrew Johnson
Thaddeus Stevens believed that Congress had the power to treat the South as conquered territory.
**The future condition of the conquered power depends on the will of the conqueror.
They must come in as new states or remain as conquered provinces. Congress... is the only power that can act in the matter/*
—Thaddeus Stevens
SKILL! IDENTIFYING POINTS OF VIEW
How did Johnson's and Stevens's views on the South differ?
of Pennsylvania and Charles Sumner of Massachusetts were the leaders of the Radical Republicans.
A harsh critic of President Johnson, Stevens was known for his honesty and sharp tongue. He wanted economic and political justice for both African Americans and poor white southerners. Sumner had been a strong opponent of slavery ’'efore the Civil War. He continued to argue tirelessly for African Americans' civil rights, including the right to vote and the right to fair laws.
Both Stevens and Sumner believed that President Johnson's Reconstruction plan was a failure. Although the Radicals did not control Congress, they began to gain support among moderates when President Johnson ignored criticism of the Black Codes. Stevens believed the federal government could not allow racial inequality to survive.
Academic Vocabulary principle basic belief, rule, or law
Reading check
Comparing and Contrasting
How were Radical Republicans and moderate Republicans similar and different?
Fourteenth Amendment
Urged on by the Radicals in 1866, Congress proposed a new bill. It would give the Freed-men's Bureau more powers. The law would allow the Freedmen's Bureau to use military courts to try people accused of violating African Americans' rights. The bill's supporters hoped that these courts would be fairer than local courts in the South.
Johnson versus Congress
Surprising many members of Congress, Johnson vetoed the Freedmen's Bureau Bill. He insisted that Congress could not pass any new laws until the southern states were represented in Congress. Johnson also argued that the Freedmen's Bureau was unconstitutional.
Republicans responded with the Civil Rights Act of 1866. This act provided African Americans with the same legal rights as white Americans. President Johnson once again used his veto power. He argued that the act gave too much power to the federal government. He also rejected the principle of equal
560 CHAPTER 17
rights for African Americans. Congress, however, overrode Johnson's veto.
Many Republicans worried about what would happen when the southern states were readmitted. Fearing that the Civil Rights Act might be overturned, the Republicans proposed the Fourteenth Amendment in the summer of 1866. The Fourteenth Amendment included the following provisions.
1.	It defined all people born or naturalized within the United States, except Native Americans, as citizens.
2.	It guaranteed citizens the equal protection of the laws.
3.	It said that states could not “deprive any person of life, liberty, or property, without due process of law."
4.	It banned many former Confederate officials from holding state or federal offices.
5.	It made state laws subject to federal court review.
6.	It gave Congress the power to pass any laws needed to enforce it.
1866 Elections
President Johnson and most Democrats opposed the Fourteenth Amendment. As a result, civil rights for African Americans became a key issue in the 1866 congressional elections. To help the Democrats, Johnson traveled around the country defending his Reconstruction plan. Johnson's speaking tour was a disaster. It did little to win votes for the Democratic Party. Johnson even got into arguments with people in the audiences of some of his speaking engagements.
Two major riots in the South also hurt Johnson's campaign. On May 1, 1866, a dispute in Memphis, Tennessee, took place between local police and black Union soldiers. The dispute turned into a three-day wave of violence against African Americans. About three months later, another riot took place during a political demonstration in New Orleans. During that dispute, 34 African Americans and three white Republicans were killed.
REAPING CHECK J
Summarizing What issue did the Fourteenth Amendment address, and how did it affect the congressional elections of 1866?
Congress Takes Control of Reconstruction
The 1866 elections gave the Republican Party a commanding two-thirds majority in both the House and the Senate. This majority gave the Republicans the power to override any presidential veto. In addition, the Republicans became united as the moderates joined with the Radicals. Together, they called for a new form of Reconstruction.
Reconstruction Acts
In March 1867, Congress passed the first of several Reconstruction Acts. These laws divided the South into five districts. A U.S. military commander controlled each district.
The military would remain in control of the South until the southern states rejoined the Union. To be readmitted, a state had to write a new state constitution supporting the Fourteenth Amendment. Finally, the state had to give African American men the right to vote.
Thaddeus Stevens was one of the new Reconstruction Acts' most enthusiastic supporters. He spoke in Congress to defend the acts.

Have not loyal blacks quite as good a right to choose rulers and make laws as rebel whites? Every man, no matter what his race or color.. .
The Reconstruction Amendments FACf$
jiblll

J	“ N 'I

i’


c < ‘‘•v

snffj

has an equal right to justice, honesty, and fair play with every other man; and the law should secure him those rights.
-Thaddeus Stevens, quoted in Sources of the American Republic, edited by Marvin Meyers et al.
President on Trial
President Johnson strongly disagreed with Stevens. He argued that African Americans did not deserve the same treatment as white people. The Reconstruction Acts, he said, used "powers not granted to the federal government or any one of its branches." Knowing that Johnson did not support its Reconstruction policies, Congress passed a law limiting his power. This law prevented the president from removing cabinet officials without Senate approval. Johnson quickly broke the law by firing Edwin Stanton, the secretary of war.
For the first time in United States history, the House of Representatives responded by voting to impeach the president. Impeachment is the process used by a legislative body to bring charges of wrongdoing against a public official. The next step, under Article I of the Constitution, was a trial in the Senate. A two-thirds majority was required to find Johnson guilty and remove him from office.
Although Johnson was unpopular with Republicans, some of them believed he was being judged unfairly. Others did not trust the president pro tempore of the Senate, Benjamin Wade. He would become president if Johnson were removed from office. By a single vote, Senate Republicans failed to convict Johnson. Even so, the trial weakened his power as president.
IBS




Thirteenth Amendment (1865)
Banned slavery throughout the United States

Fourteenth Amendment (1868)
Overturned the DredScott case by granting citizenship to all people born in the United States (except for Native Americans)
w'
4
tv?
This Reconstruction-era
Fifteenth Amendment (1870)
Gave African American men the right to vote
painting shows African American men voting after passage of the Fifteenth Amendment.
What right did the Fifteenth Amendment protect?
Election of 1868
Johnson did not run for another term in 1868. The Democrats chose
562 CHAPTER 17
former New York governor Horatio Seymour as their presidential candidate. The Republicans chose Ulysses S. Grant. As a war hero, Grant appealed to many northern voters. He had no political experience but supported the congressional Reconstruction plan. He ran under the slogan "Let Us Have Peace."
Shortly after Grant was nominated, Congress readmitted seven southern states— Alabama, Arkansas, Florida, Georgia, Louisiana, North Carolina, and South Carolina. (Tennessee had already been readmitted in 1866.) Under the terms of readmission, these seven states approved the Fourteenth Amendment. They also agreed to let African American men vote. However, white southerners used violence to try to keep African Americans away from the polls.
Despite such tactics, hundreds of thousands of African Americans voted for Grant and the "party of Lincoln." The New Orleans Tribune reported that many former slaves "see clearly enough that the Republican party [is] their political life boat." African American votes helped Grant to win a narrow victory.
Analyzing To what voters did
Grant appeal in the presidential election of 1868?
READING CHECK
Fifteenth Amendment
After Grant's victory, Congressional Republicans wanted to protect their Reconstruction plan. They worried that the southern states might try to keep black voters from the polls in future elections. Also, some Radical Republicans argued that it was not fair that many northern states still had laws preventing African Americans from voting. After all, every southern state was required to grant suffrage to African American men.
In 1869 Congress proposed the Fifteenth Amendment, which gave African American men the right to vote. Abolitionist William Lloyd Garrison praised what he saw as "this wonderful, quiet, sudden transformation of four millions of human beings from ... the auction block to the ballot-box." The amendment went
into effect in 1870 as one of the last Reconstruction laws passed at the federal level.
The Fifteenth Amendment did not please every reformer, however. Many women were angry because the amendment did not also grant them the right to vote.
Finding Main Ideas How did
Radical Republicans take control of Reconstruction?
READING CHECK
THE IMPACT
TODAY
The Voting Rights Act of 1965 enforces and expands the voting protections of the Fifteenth Amendment.
I
Summary and Preview in this section I you learned that Congress took control of Reconstruction and took steps to protect the rights of African Americans. In the next section you will learn about increasing opposition to Reconstruction.
C **	A	*	hmhsocialstudies.com
MSS€SSlTlGlll	S’
Reviewing Ideas, Terms, and People
1.	a. Describe What were Black Codes?
b. Make Inferences Why did Republicans think Johnson's Reconstruction plan was a failure?
2.	a. Recall What was the Civil Rights Act of 1866?
b. Summarize Why was the Fourteenth Amendment important? How did it affect life in the United States?
3.	a. Recall Why was President Johnson impeached?
b. Evaluate Which element of the Reconstruction Acts do you believe was most important? Why?
4.	a. Recall What does the Fifteenth Amendment state? How did it affect life in the United States?
b. Elaborate Do you think that women should have been included in the Fifteenth Amendment? Explain.
Critical Thinking
5.	Identify Review your notes on the issues that led Republicans to take over Reconstruction. Then copy the graphic organizer below and use it to identify the main provisions of the Fourteenth Amendment and their effects.
Provisions	Effects
	
	
^WriteSmart
6. Recognizing Cause-and-Effect Relationships As you
have read in this section, social and political unrest continued long after the war ended. How could this unrest cause people to leave their jobs? What new jobs might they find?
RECONSTRUCTION
SECTION
3
TEKS 1A, 9A, 9B,9C, 18A, 18C,21C, 23C,24B,28B
What You Will Learn...
1.	Reconstruction governments helped reform the South.
2.	The Ku Klux Kian was organized as African Americans moved into positions of power.
3.	As Reconstruction ended, the rights of African Americans were restricted.
4.	Southern business leaders relied on industry to rebuild the South.

V,
t
As Reconstruction ended, African Americans faced new hurdles and the South attempted to rebuild.
Key Terms and People
Hiram Revels, p. 565 Ku Klux Kian, p. 566 Compromise of 1877, p. 568 poll tax, p. 568 segregation, p. 569 Jim Crow laws, p. 569 Plessyv. Ferguson, p. 569 sharecropping, p. 570
hmhsocialstudies.com
TAKING NOTES ,
Use the graphic organizer online to take notes on the South's efforts to rebuild and the effects of those efforts on African Americans.
RcHConstr ucltion in th© South
If YOU were there...
You live on a farm in the South in the 1870s. Times are hard because you do not own your farm. Instead, you and your family work in a landowner's cotton fields. You never seem to earn enough to buy land of your own. Some of your neighbors have decided to give up farming and move to the city. Others are going to work in the textile mills. But you have always been a farmer.
Will you decide to change your way of life?
BUILDING BACKGROUND
Reconstruction affected politics and I economics in the South. Republican and Democratic politicians fought I over policies and programs. New state governments began reforms, but i ' later leaders ended many of them. Some parts of the southern economy ' improved. However, many farmers, like the family above, wentthrough i hard times.
Reconstruction Governments
After Grant became president in 1869, the Republicans seemed stronger than ever. They controlled most southern governments, partly because of the support of African American voters. However, Republican officeholders were unpopular with white southerners.
Carpetbaggers and Scalawags
Some of these office-holders were northern-born Republicans who had moved South after the war. Many white southerners called them carpetbaggers. Supposedly, they had rushed South carrying all their possessions in bags made from carpeting. Many southerners resented these northerners, accusing them—often unfairly— of trying to profit from Reconstruction. Because the South needed both physical and economic rebuilding, there were many business opportunities. Northerners who had not been devastated by the war had more money to invest and could therefore profit from these opportunities.
564 CHAPTER 17
1.	Location Which state had the most African American state legislators?
2.	Region Which states had the least African American representation?
Southern Democrats cared even less for white southern Republicans. They referred to them as scalawags, or greedy rascals. Democrats believed that these southerners had betrayed the South by voting for the Republican Party. Many southern Republicans were small farmers who had supported the Union during the war. Others, like Mississippi governor James Alcorn, were former members of the Whig Party. They preferred to become Republicans rather than join the Democrats.
African American Leaders
African Americans were the largest group of southern Republican voters. During Reconstruction, more than 600 African Americans won election to state legislatures. Some 16 of these politicians were elected to Congress. Other African Americans held local offices in counties throughout the South.
African American politicians came from many backgrounds. Hiram Revels was born free in North Carolina and went to college in Illinois. He became a Methodist minister and served as a chaplain in the Union army. In
1870, after many debates at the national and state levels about his eligibility and citizenship, Revels became the first African American in the U.S. Senate. He took over the seat previously held by Confederate president Jefferson Davis. Revels held a moderate view of the readmission of former Confederates. Education and employment for African Americans were two of his top priorities. Revels helped display the ability of African Americans to take part in governing.
Unlike Revels, Blanche K. Bruce grew up in slavery in Virginia. Bruce became an important Republican in Mississippi and served one term as a U.S. senator. He worked to integrate the military while in office. After completing his term, he became the first president of Alcorn University.
Reconstructed State Governments
The new Reconstruction state governments made policies that increased civil and voting rights for African Americans. They passed laws that ensured African Americans were allowed to vote in every community. In
FOCUS ON
Reading What might you predict would change with African Americans serving as elected representatives?
RECONSTRUCTION 56!'
many places, however, there was still resistance by whites. Because former Confederates could usually not vote, they struggled to maintain political influence.
Reconstruction governments provided money for many new programs and organizations in the South. Lawmakers hoped that these organizations would help southerners adjust to the new economic and social structure. They helped to establish some of the first state-funded public school systems in the South. They also built new hospitals, prisons, and orphanages and passed laws prohibiting discrimination against African Americans. Many of these programs improved the lives of African Americans and whites in the South, and gave people economic opportunities and access to political offices. However, racism and the dramatically different culture of groups led to conflicting expectations, and sometimes tensions led to violence.
Southern states under Republican control spent large amounts of money. They aided the construction of railroads, bridges, and public buildings. These improvements were intended to help the southern
economy recover from the war. To get the money for these projects, the Reconstruction governments raised taxes and issued bonds. Although some people protested the increased taxes, the improved infrastructure helped the South to increase its trade and production capabilities.
READING CHECK
Summarizing What reforms did Reconstruction state governments carry out?
Ku Klux Kian
As more African Americans took office, resistance to Reconstruction increased among white southerners. Democrats claimed that the Reconstruction governments were corrupt, illegal, and unjust. They also disliked having federal soldiers stationed in their states. Many white southerners disapproved of African American officeholders. One Democrat noted, '"A white man's government' [is] the most popular rallying cry we have." In 1866 a group of white southerners in Tennessee created the Ku Klux Kian. This secret society opposed civil rights, particularly suffrage, for African Americans. The Kian used
READING CHECK .
violence and tenor against African Americans. The group's membership grew rapidly as it spread throughout the South. Kian members wore robes and disguises to hide their identities. They attacked—and even murdered— African Americans, white Republican voters, and public officials, usually at night.
Local governments did little to stop the violence. Many officials feared the Kian or were sympathetic to its activities. In 1870 and 1871 the federal government took action. Congress passed laws that made it a federal crime to interfere with elections or to deny citizens equal protection under the law.
Within a few years, the Kian was no longer an organized threat. But groups of whites continued to assault African Americans and Republicans throughout the 1870s.
Drawing Conclusions Why
did southerners join the Ku Klux Kian?
Reconstruction Ends
The violence of the Ku Klux Kian was not the only challenge to Reconstruction. Republicans slowly lost control of southern state governments to the Democratic Party. The General Amnesty Act of 1872 allowed former Confederates, except those who had held high ranks, to serve in public office. Many of these former Confederates, most of whom were Democrats, were soon elected to southern governments.
The Republican Party also began losing its power in the North. Although President Grant was re-elected in 1872, financial and political scandals in his administration upset voters. In his first term, a gold-buying scheme in which Grant's cousin took a leading role led to a brief crisis on the stock market called Black Friday. During his second term, his personal secretary was involved in the Whiskey Ring scandal, in which whiskey distillers and public officials worked together to steal liquor taxes from the federal government. Furthermore, people blamed Republican policies for the Panic of 1873.
Panic of 1873
This severe economic downturn began in September 1873 when Jay Cooke and Company, a major investor in railroads and the largest financier of the Union's Civil War effort, declared bankruptcy. The company had lied about the value of land along the side of the Northern Pacific Railroad that it owned and was trying to sell. When the truth leaked out, the company failed.
The failure of such an important business sent panic through the stock market, and investors began selling shares of stock more rapidly than people wanted to buy them. Companies had to buy their shares back from the investors. Soon, 89 of the nation's 364 railroads had failed as well. The failure of almost 18,000 other businesses followed within two years, leaving the nation in an economic crisis. By 1876 unemployment had risen to 14 percent, with an estimated 2 million people out of work. The high unemployment rate set off numerous strikes and protests around the nation, many involving railroad workers. In 1874 the Democrats gained control of the House of Representatives. Northerners were becoming less concerned about southern racism and more concerned about their financial well-being.
Election of 1876
Republicans could tell that northern support for Reconstruction was fading. Voters' attention was shifting to economic problems. In 1874 the Republican Party lost control of the House of Representatives to the Democrats. The Republicans in Congress managed to pass one last civil rights law. The Civil Rights Act of 1875 guaranteed African Americans equal rights in public places, such as theaters and public transportation. But as Americans became increasingly worried about economic problems and government corruption, the Republican Party began to abandon Reconstruction.
RECONSTRUCTION 56
Plessy v. Ferguson (1896)
Background of the Case In 1892, Homer Plessy took a seat in the "whites only" car of a train in Louisiana. He was arrested, put on trial, and convicted of violating Louisiana's segregation law. Plessy argued that the Louisiana law violated the Thirteenth Amendment and denied him the equal protection of the law
The Court's Ruling
The Court ruled that the Louisiana "separate-but-equal" law was constitutional.
The Court's Reasoning
The Court stated that the Thirteenth and Fourteenth Amendments did not apply. The Court decided that the case had nothing to do with the abolition of slavery mentioned in the Thirteenth Amendment. The justices also ruled that the Fourteenth Amendment was not designed to eliminate social barriers to equality between the races, only political barriers.
Justice John Marshall Harlan disagreed with the Court's ruling. In a dissenting opinion, he wrote that "in respect of civil rights, all citizens are equal before the law."
.........1,L......-— - -.
Why It Matters
Plessy was important because it	\
approved the idea of separate-but-equal \ facilities for people based on race. The doctrine of separate-but- equal led to segregation in trains, buses, schools, restaurants, and many other social	\
institutions.	i
The separate-but-equal doctrine led < to unequal treatment of minority groups \ for decades. It was finally struck down by ’ another Supreme Court ruling, Brown v. Board of Education, in 1954.
ANALYSIS
SKILL
Analyzing Information 1.	Why did the Court reject Plessy's arguments?
2.	Why was Plessyv. Ferguson an important Supreme Court case?
Republicans selected Ohio governor Rutherford B. Hayes as their 1876 presidential candidate. He believed in ending federal support of the Reconstruction governments. The Democrats nominated New York governor Samuel J. Tilden. During the election, Democrats in the South again used violence at the polls to keep Republican voters away.
The election between Hayes and Tilden was close. Tilden appeared to have won. Republicans challenged the electoral votes in Oregon and three southern states. A special commission of members of Congress and Supreme Court justices was appointed to settle the issue.
The commission narrowly decided to give all the disputed votes to Hayes. Hayes thus won the presidency by one electoral vote. In the Compromise of 1877, the Democrats agreed to accept Hayes's victory. In return, they wanted all remaining federal troops removed from the South. They also asked for funding for internal improvements and the appointment of a southern Democrat to the president's cabinet. Shortly after he took office in 1877, President Hayes removed the last of the federal troops from the South.
Redeemers
Gradually, Democrats regained control of state governments in the South. In each state, they moved quickly to get rid of the Reconstruction reforms.
Democrats who brought their party back to power in the South were called Redeemers. They came from a variety of backgrounds. For instance, U.S. senator John T. Morgan of Alabama was a former general in the Confederate army. Newspaper editor Henry Grady of Georgia was interested in promoting southern industry.
Redeemers wanted to reduce the size of state government and limit the rights of African Americans. They lowered state budgets and got rid of a variety of social programs. The Redeemers cut property taxes and cut public funding for schools. They also succeeded in limiting African Americans' civil rights.
African Americans' Rights Restricted
Redeemers set up the poll tax in an effort to deny the vote to African Americans. The poll tax was a special tax people had to pay before they could vote.
568 CHAPTER 17
Some states also targeted African American voters by requiring them to pass a literacy test. A so-called grandfather clause written into law affected men whose fathers or grandfathers could vote before 1867. In those cases, a voter did not have to pay a poll tax or pass a literacy test. As a result, almost every white man could escape the voting restrictions.
Redeemer governments also introduced legal segregation, the forced separation of whites and African Americans in public places. Jim Crow laws—laws that enforced segregation—became common in southern states in the 1880s.
African Americans challenged Jim Crow laws in court. In 1883, however, the U.S. Supreme Court ruled that the Civil Rights Act of 1875 was unconstitutional. The Court also ruled that the Fourteenth Amendment applied only to the actions of state governments. This ruling allowed private individuals and businesses to practice segregation. Plessy \r. Ferguson
In 1896 the U.S. Supreme Court returned to the issue of segregation. When Homer Plessy, an African American, refused to leave the whites-only Louisiana train car he was riding on, he was arrested and accused of breaking a state law requiring separate cars for blacks and whites. Plessy sued the railroad company and lost. His lawyers argued that the law violated his right to equal treatment under the Four-
teenth Amendment. He then appealed to the U.S. Supreme Court. The Supreme Court ruled against Plessy in Plessy v. Ferguson. Segregation was allowed, said the Court, if "separate-but-equal" facilities were provided. Among the justices, only John Marshall Harlan disagreed with the Court's decision. He explained his disagreement in a dissenting opinion:
" In the eye of the law, there is in the country no superior, dominant [controlling], ruling class of citizens ... Our constitution is color-blind, and neither knows nor tolerates classes among citizens. In respect of civil rights, all citizens are equal before the law/'
—John Marshall Harlan, quoted in Plessyv. Ferguson:
A
Brief History with Documents, edited by Brook Thomas Despite Harlan's view, segregation became widespread across the country. African Americans were forced to use separate public schools, libraries, and parks. When they existed, these facilities were usually of poorer quality than those created for whites. In practice, these so-called separate-but-equal facilities were separate and unequal. Neither Congress nor the president would make significant actions to overturn the doctrine until the 1900s.
Farming in the South
Few African Americans in the South could afford to buy or even rent farms. Moving West also was costly. Many African Americans therefore remained on plantations. Others tried to make a living in the cities.
Hopes Raised and Denied
Slavery
•	No rights
•	Forced labor	I
•	No freedom of movement	I
without permission	I
•	Family members sold away	®
from one another
•	No representation in government
Freedom
•	Slavery banned
•	Free to work for wages
•	Could move and live anywhere
•	Many families reunited
•	Could serve in political office
Rights Denied
•	Sharecropping system putin place
•	Ability to vote and hold office restricted
•	White leadership regained control of southern state governments
RECONSTRUCTION 5<
pressure from banks and others to keep raising cotton.
African Americans who stayed on plantations often became part of a system known as sharecropping, or sharing the crop. Land-owners provided the land, tools, and supplies, and sharecroppers provided the labor. At harvest time, the sharecropper usually had to give most of the crop to the land-owner. Whatever remained belonged to the sharecropper. Many sharecroppers hoped to save enough money from selling their share of the crops to one day be able to buy a farm. Unfortunately, only a few ever succeeded.
Instead, most sharecroppers lived in a cycle of debt. When they needed food, clothing, or supplies, most families had to buy goods on credit because they had little cash. When sharecroppers sold their crops, they hoped to be able to pay off these debts. However, bad weather, poor harvests, or low crop prices often made this dream impossible.
Sharecroppers usually grew cotton, one of the South's most important cash crops. When too many farmers planted cotton, however, the supply became excessive. As a result, the price per bale of cotton dropped. Many farmers understood the drawbacks of planting cotton. However, farmers felt
READING CHECK
Finding Main Ideas How
were African Americans' rights restricted?
Rebuilding Industry
The southern economy suffered through cycles of good and bad years as cotton prices went up and down. Some business leaders hoped industry would strengthen the southern economy and create a New South.
Southern Industry
Henry Grady, an Atlanta newspaper editor, was a leader of the New South movement. "The new South presents... a diversified [varied] industry that meets the complex needs of this complex age," he wrote. Grady and his supporters felt that with its cheap and abundant labor, the South could build factories and provide a workforce for them.
The most successful industrial development in the South involved textile production. Businesspeople built textile mills in many small towns to produce cotton fabric. Many
570 CHAPTER 17
"The New South...is stirred with the breath
of a new life."
—Henry Grady
Atlanta rebuilt quickly after the war, becoming a leading railroad and industrial center. Newspaper editor Henry Grady gave stirring speeches about the need for industry in the South. He became one of the best-known spokesmen of the "New South"
Why might Grady point to Atlanta as a model for economic change?
people from rural areas came to work in the mills, but African Americans were not allowed to work in most of them.
Southern Mill Life
Work in the cotton mills appealed to farm families who had trouble making ends meet. As one mill worker explained, "It was a necessity to move and get a job, rather than depend on the farm." Recruiters sent out by the mills promised good wages and steady work.
Entire families often worked in the same cotton mill. Mills employed large numbers of women and children. Many children started working at about the age of 12. Some children started working at an even earlier age. Women did most of the spinning and were valued workers. However, few women had the opportunity to advance within the company.
Many mill workers were proud of the skills they used, but they did not enjoy their work. One unhappy worker described it as "the same thing over and over again... The more you do, the more they want done." Workers often labored 12 hours a day, six days a week. Cotton dust and lint filled the air, causing asthma and an illness known as brown-lung
disease. Fast-moving machinery caused injuries and even deaths. Despite the long hours and dangerous working conditions, wages remained low. However, mill work did offer an alternative to farming.
READING CHECK
Finding Main Ideas What did southern business leaders hope industry would do?
Reconstruction in the North
Although most federal Reconstruction policies were designed to reform the South, they affected groups in the North as well. There were many groups who worked to advance their own rights and interests during this time.
Women and Northern African Americans
The Radical Republicans passed many federal laws that required Southern states to allow African American men to vote. They based their cause on the ideal of equality found in the Declaration of Independence and the Constitution. Women's suffragists began using these same arguments to support their own suffrage. Wyoming and Utah granted women the vote in 1869, but their motivations were not just to ensure equal rights for women. Wyoming leaders hoped to attract more women residents, while Utahans hoped to counteract the rising number of non-Mormon voters.
African Americans in the North faced less social discrimination than they did in the South but still faced racism and segregation. In response, some state governments passed laws that made segregation illegal. Some integrated their school systems. Still, most states upheld the principle of separate-but-equal facilities.
A
Changing Economy During the war and Reconstruction, the economy of the North and the West grew rapidly. Manufacturing, commerce, and rail transportation generated tremendous
RECONSTRUCTION 57’
As the economy grew, unions such as the United Mine Workers of America grew in membership and influence.
fortunes. Large companies grew by buying smaller companies, and railroads made huge profits transporting goods and people. Tax revenue increased as well, and governments were able to provide more services and make more investments.
Between 1865 and 1873, almost 3 million immigrants arrived in the United States. They provided a new pool of labor for the growing industrial economy. The number
of labor unions increased, and they began to push for policies that protected workers. Reformers pressed for eight-hour-workday and fair-pay laws. In addition, the increase in commercial and trading businesses led to a shift in the make up of the working class. It now included a majority of professionals and white-collar workers.
Eventually the focus of the Republican Party began to move away from civil rights for African Americans and toward reducing government corruption. The acceptance of the Compromise of 1877 signaled the end of the Republican focus on reforming racial politics in the South.
READING CHECK
Comparing and Contrasting
How was Reconstruction in the North similar to and different from Reconstruction in the South?
I
Summary and Preview In this section I you learned about the end of Reconstruction. In the next chapter you will leam about America's continued westward expansion.
Section 3 Assessment
jk hmhsocialstudies.com
Reviewing Ideas, Terms, and People
1.	a. Identify Who were some prominent African
American leaders during Reconstruction? Why was the election of Hiram Rhodes Revels significant?
b. Evaluate What do you think was the most important change made by Reconstruction state governments? Explain your answer.
2.	a. Recall For what reasons did some local govern-
ments not stop the Ku Klux Kian? b. Draw Conclusions How did the Ku Klux Kian's
use of terror interfere with elections in the South?
3.	a. Summarize What was the Compromise of 1877?
b.	Evaluate How did Plessy v. Ferguson affect life in the United States?
c.	Explain What was the relationship between Jim Crow laws and segregation?
4.	a. Identify Who was Henry Grady, and why was he
important?
b. Predict What are some possible results of the rise of the "New South"? How did life change with the increase in industry?
c. Identify How were women affected by Reconstruction? What political effects did women have?
Critical Thinking
5. Identifying Causes and Effects Review your notes on Reconstruction governments. Then copy the graphic organizer below and use it to show why Reconstruction ended, as well as the results of its end.
Causes
•>
Effect/Cause
End of
Reconstruction
Effects
->
",yWriteSmart
6. Relating Historical Change to Individual
Choice Despite the difficulties of Reconstruction, the Freedmen's Bureau and plans to bring industry to the "New South" did create new jobs. What might have led people to leave their jobs for new ones?
571a CHAPTER 17
in the West
TEKS 1A, 9D, 10A, 11A, 11B, 11C, 12A, 23A, 23C, 27A, 27B, 27C, 27D
What You Will Learn..
Main Ideas
If YOU were there...
You are a female schoolteacher in Wisconsin in 1880. You live and teach in a small town, but you grew up on a farm and are used to hard work. Now you are thinking about moving West to claim free land from the government. You could teach in a school there too. You think it would be an exciting adventure, but your family is horrified that a single woman would move West on her own.
Would you decide to become a homesteader?
BUILDING BACKGROUND
Before the Civil War, most Americans thought of the Great Plains and other western lands as the Great American Desert. But in the years following the war, the U.S. population grew and settlement spread throughout the West 
New Lives on the Plains
The frontier changed dramatically as more and more people moved westward. Settlers built homes, fenced off land, and set up ranches and farms. Miners, ranchers, and farmers remade the landscape of the West as they adapted to their new surroundings. The geography of the West was further changed by the development and expansion of a large and successful railroad industry that moved the region's natural resources and goods to eastern markets.
In 1862 Congress passed two important land grant acts that helped open the West to settlers. The Homestead Act gave government-owned land to small farmers. Any adult who was a U.S. citizen or planned to become one could receive 160 acres of land. In exchange, homesteaders promised to build a house, live on the land for five years, and grow crops. After five years, the homesteader could file for his or her title to the land. Former Union soldiers could get land even more quickly. People could also buy the land after six months if they had the money to do so. The system of dividing the land into lots was the same system of townships, sections, and acres that was authorized by the Land Ordinance of 1785.
1.	The U.S. government encouraged the settlement of the Great Plains.
2.	Farms, ranches, and railroads were the basis of the economy that developed on the Plains.
3.	Economic challenges led to the creation of farmers' political groups.
4.	Native Americans and the U.S. government came into conflict over land in the West.
The Great Plains provided new opportunities for Americans but also caused conflict with Native Americans in the region.
Key Terms and People
Homestead Act, p. 571b Morrill Act, p.571c Exodusters, p. 571c buffalo soldiers, p. 571e Dawes General Allotment Act,
p. 571f
hmhsocialstudies.com
I TAKING NOTES I
As you read this section, take notes on the government laws and policies that affected life on the Great Plains.
5711
Primary Source
LETTER
Letter from the Plains, 1863
In a letter to her family in Norway, immigrant Gro Svendsen describes her new life as a farmer on the plains of Iowa.
“i reueewober I wsed to wo rosier wtoero 1 heard that bt would be brrc/yossbble to keep, the wddk, here ses we dbd sot heme. Now I hwe learned tluot bt bs btotleed brrepossbbbe because of the hesot here bn, the suercrner' time. . . It’s difficult, too, to preserve the bwtter. One must pour brine [salt water] over bt or salt bt.
The thunderstorms sorb so violent that one rrcight think, bt was the, erod of the world,... Quite often, the llphtnlrop strikes down, both, cattle aud people, dsorrosopes property, sored splinters sturdy oak, trees into rrosoroy pieces”
-quoted in Sources in American History
ANALYZING PRIMARY SOURCES
ANALYSIS ,
SKILL
What might be some of the differences between Norway and Svendsen's new home in Iowa?
The Morrill Act granted more than 17 million acres of federal land to the states. The act required each state to sell this land and use the money to build colleges to teach agriculture and engineering. Eventually these 69 universities were the first in most western states, and still exist today. Iowa State, Purdue, and Texas A&M are all land grant colleges. In 1890 a second Morrill Act was passed that required states to also provide university facilities for African Americans. The Acts made living in western states much more attractive to people and created more educated voters and leaders.
The promise of land and a life free of discrimination drew a large number of African Americans to the West. In 1879 some 20,000
Reading Check ,
to 40,000 southern African Americans moved to Kansas. Known as Exodusters, these African Americans made an exodus, or mass departure, from the South. A number of black communities soon developed.
Western homesteads also were attractive to immigrants. Norwegian, Swedish, Danish, German, and Czech immigrants formed many small communities on the Great Plains. In addition, many single women moved west. The Homestead Act allowed unmarried women to own land, which was unusual for the time.
Analyzing Information How
did the government encourage westward expansion?
The Plains Economy
Most new residents planned to farm. But farmers from the eastern and midwestern states, as well as those from other countries, were not accustomed to the growing conditions in the Plains. Many struggled to survive. They faced unique challenges. Weather could be extreme and destroy crops. Also, the root-filled sod, or dirt, beneath the Plains grass was very tough. The hard work of breaking up the sod earned Plains farmers the nickname "sodbusters."
The cattle industry also grew rapidly. Following the Civil War, a growing economy and population created a greater demand for beef in the East. As the cattle business boomed, ranchers faced more competition for use of the open range. Farmers began to buy the rangeland on the Great Plains where cattle had once grazed freely.
The Railroad Empire
As more Americans moved west, the need to send goods and information between the East and West increased. Some wanted to build a transcontinental railroad—a railroad that would cross the continent and connect the East to the West. To encourage construe-
571C CHAPTER 17
tion, Congress passed the Pacific Railway Acts in 1862 and 1864. These acts gave railroad companies loans and large land grants that could be sold to pay for construction costs. Railroad companies sold this land to settlers, which encouraged people to move west.
Railroad companies also encouraged people to put their money into the railroad business, which they did—sometimes unwisely. Occasionally, companies would lie about, the value of the land they sold to hopeful settlers. By the 1880s, many small western railroads were deeply in debt. Despite such setbacks, Americans remained interested in railroad investments. By 1890, there were about 164,000 more miles of track in operation than in 1865. Railroads had become one of the biggest industries in the United States.
Railroad companies offered better shipping rates to large companies, causing small farmers and businesses to complain about unfair business practices. In February 1887, Congress passed the Interstate Commerce Act, providing national regulation over trade between states and creating the Interstate Commerce Commission to ensure fair railroad rates. However, the commission lacked power to enforce its regulations.
Farm Incomes Fall
By the 1880s mechanical farming became more common. Using machines, farmers
could work much more quickly on large fields with fewer workers. Farmers shipped their harvest east by train and from there overseas. The Great Plains became known as the breadbasket of the world.
The combination of more farms and greater productivity led to the overproduction of some crops. Overproduction resulted in lower prices. As profits decreased, many farmers found it difficult to pay bills. Farmers who could not make their mortgage payments lost their farms and homes. Many of these homeless farmers became tenant farmers who worked land owned by others. By 1880, one-fourth of all farms were rented by tenants, and the number continued to grow.
READING CHECK
Finding Main Ideas What kinds of businesses supported the western economy?
Clashes for the West
As miners and settlers began crossing the Great Plains in the mid-1800s, they pressured the federal government for more access to western lands. To protect these travelers, U.S. officials sent agents to negotiate treaties with the Plains Indians.
The Struggle for Land
The Plains Indians lived throughout the Great Plains, from Canada south into Texas.
Time Line
Ha
Native American Land Loss in the West, 1850-1890
Battles and Treaties of the Indian Wars
GEOGRAPHY
SKILLS!
Interpreting Maps Region In what regions did Native Americans lose land in the late 1800s?
Q
Treaties at Fort Laramie, 1851 and 1868
Q
Treaty at Fort Atkinson, 1853 & Sand Creek Massacre, 1864 & Fetterman Massacre, 1866 Q Treaty of Medicine Lodge, 1867 Battle of the Little Bighorn, 1876 ft Battle of the Rosebud, 1876 & Wounded Knee Massacre, 1890 ATLANTI
OCEAN
Land lost by Native Americans
|	| 1850-1870
■ 1870-1890
Reservations in 1890
□TE Native American group
0	200	400 Miles
Indian groups such as the Apache and the Comanche lived in and around Texas and what is now Oklahoma. To the north were the Sioux. These groups spoke many different languages. However, they used a common sign language to communicate, and they shared a similar lifestyle.
Miners and settlers were increasing in numbers—and they wanted Indians' land. The U.S. government tried to avoid disputes by negotiating the treaties of Fort Laramie and Fort Atkinson, the first major treaties between the U.S. government and Plains Indians. These treaties recognized Indian claims to most of the Great Plains. They also allowed United States troops to build forts and roads and to travel across Indian homelands. The U.S. government promised to pay for any damages to Indian lands.
The treaties did not keep the peace for long. In 1858, the discovery of gold in what
is now Colorado brought thousands of miners to the West. They soon clashed with the Cheyenne and the Arapaho. In 1861, the U.S. government negotiated new treaties with Plains Indians. These treaties created reservations, areas of federal land set aside for Native Americans. The government expected Indians to stay on the reservations. This made hunting the buffalo that Plains Indians relied on almost impossible.
In the northern Plains, Southwest, and Far West, Native Americans resisted being moved to and confined on reservations. The U.S. government sent troops, including African American cavalry—called buffalo soldiers by the Indians—to force the Indians to leave. Battles between U.S. troops and Native Americans occurred throughout the Great Plains. Brutal attacks against each side occurred, sometimes including attacks on civilians, women, and children.
571e CHAPTER 17
Reforming Government Policies
By the 1870s, many Native Americans lived on reservations, where land was usually not useful for farming or buffalo hunting. Many Indians were starving. Government policies and corrupt officials kept supplies promised to the reservations from being delivered. In 1869, Ely S. Parker was appointed to head the Bureau of Indian Affairs, the first Native American to hold that post. During his two years in office, the number of incidents between U.S. Army troops and Native American groups fell.
Many social reformers believed that Native Americans should adopt the ways of white people in order to survive. Special schools were established that taught Native American children Anglo customs, sometimes against the wishes of the children's parents. In the late 1870s, a Paiute Indian named Sarah Winnemucca called for reform. She gave lectures on problems of the reservation system. In 1881, writer Helen Hunt Jackson published an influential book that pushed for reform of U.S. Indian policy.
The Dawes General Allotment Act of 1887 tried to lessen traditional influences on Indian society by making land ownership private rather than shared. The act also promised—but failed to deliver—U.S. citizenship to Native Americans. After breaking up reservation land and giving parcels to individuals, the government sold the remaining acreage. The Act took about two-thirds of Indian land.
End of the Frontier
By 1870, only small portions of the Great Plains remained unsettled. For most of the next two decades, this land remained open range. In March 1889, government officials announced that homesteaders could file claims on land in what is now Oklahoma. Within a month, about 50,000 people rushed to Oklahoma to stake their claims.
In all, settlers claimed more than 2 million acres of former Indian land in the famous Oklahoma land rush and another 9 million over the next several years. This huge wave of
pioneers was the last chapter of the westward movement. By the early 1890s, the U.S. frontier had largely ceased to exist.
Understanding Cause and
Effect How did the closing of the frontier affect Native Americans?
READING CHECK .
SUMMARY
In this section you learned about the final stages of western settlement and how they affected Native Americans. Section 4 Assessment
"jjji hmhsocialstudies.com
^WriteSmart
5. Understanding the Effects of Government Policies
Government policies affected the jobs available to people in the West. How might people have adjusted their lives to make use of the policies and laws?
Reviewing Ideas, Terms, and People
1.	a. Identify What effect did the Homestead Act have on
settlers? How was it related to the Northwest Ordinance?
b.	Describe How did the Morrill Act benefit settlers?
c.	Draw Conclusions Why might so many African Americans have been attracted to living in the West?
d.	Describe What ethnic groups settled in the West? Why did immigrants find the West especially hard to live in?
2.	a. Identify Who were the sodbusters?
b.	Analyze How did railroads affect the economy of the West?
c.	Evaluate Which aspect of the western economy do you think was most important?
3.	a. Define Who were the buffalo soldiers?
b.	Explain Why did U.S. troops come into conflict with Native Americans? How was the conflict resolved?
c.	Identify What were the effects of the Dawes General Allotment Act?
Critical Thinking
4. Finding the Main Idea Review your notes on the U.S. policies and laws that affected settlement in the West. Then copy the graphic organizer below. Use it to rank the importance of each policy in the settlement of the West. Explain your reasons for your ranking order.

RECONSTRUCTION 571 fj
Social
Studies Skills
Analysis
Critical Thinking
Civic
Participation
Study
Using Databases and Modeling Information
Using Databases
Modeling Information
Understand the Skill
Understand the Skill
A database is a collection of information that is organized to be searched for a specific piece of data. Almost any kind of information can be stored in a database, including statistics or text. It can be in print or digital, and it can be simple or complex. The table of state facts in the back of this book is a database. So is the U.S. Census Web site.
Learn the Skill
Learn how to read a database to create one.
1.	Look at the title to identify the topic.
2.	Read the column and row headings. These keywords tell what data is included. Locate specific data where rows and columns intersect.
3.	Use critical thinking to organize and interpret data, identify relationships, and note patterns.
When you use or create a model, you show a place, process, relationship, or event in a visual way. A model might be a sketch, diagram, or three-dimensional construction such as a globe or diorama.
Learn the Skill
Titles and labels are important for explaining the information in a model. This information must be researched in primary and secondary sources just as they would be for written reports. If you build a relief map of the United States, for example, you must research the altitudes of different mountain ranges to make your map is accurate. Take notes on and sketch the information you want to include. These sketches will help you draw or build the final model.
Practice the Skill
Practice the Skill
Use the database of state facts on pages R20 and R21 to answer the following questions.
1.	What is the capital of New Mexico? What year did Texas become a state?
2.	Organize the information in the order of population from highest to lowest.
3.	Using reports from official sources, locate information about the birthrate in each state. Then organize the information into a database. Then write a summary of the population of five states.
Using library and Internet research, find information on housing used by pioneers on the Great Plains. Then build a three-dimensional model of one type of dwelling. Present your model to the class, and lead a discussion of the facts that you discovered during your research. Answer any questions that are posed by other students, and ask other students questions about their projects as they present them to you.
572 CHAPTER 17
CHAPTER
17
Chapter Review
Visual Summary
Use the visual summary below to help you enhance and confirm your understanding of the main ideas of the chapter.
Reviewing Vocabulary,
Terms, and People
Complete each sentence by filling in the blank with the correct term or person from the chapter.
1.	______________were laws that allowed racial
segregation in public places.
2.	The Radical Republicans were led by___,
a member of Congress from Pennsylvania.
3.	The period from 1865 to 1877 that focused
on reuniting the nation is known as____.
4.	After opposing Congress, Andrew Johnson
became the first president to face_
proceedings.
5.	The____Amendment made slavery in the
United States illegal.
6.	Many western states established colleges after 	gave them land to self for the purpose
7.	In 1887 the________changed the way land
was allotted on reservations.
Comprehension and
Critical Thinking
SECTION 1 (Pages 552-557)
8.	a. Describe How did the lives of African Ameri-
cans change after the Civil War?
b.	Explain Why was Lincoln's assassination significant for Reconstruction?
c.	Compare and Contrast How was Johnson's Reconstruction plan similar to and different from Lincoln's Ten Percent Plan?
d.	Evaluate Which of the three Reconstruction plans that were originally proposed do you think would have been the most successful? Why?
SECTION 2 (Pages 558-563)
9.	a. Identify Who were the Radical Republicans, and how did they change Reconstruction?
b. Analyze How did the debate over the Fourteenth Amendment affect the election of 1866?
RECONSTRUCTION 57!
c. Elaborate Do you think the House of Representatives was right to impeach President Andrew Johnson? Explain.
SECTION 3 (Pages 564-571a)
10.	a. Describe What economic problems did the
South face during and after Reconstruction? What reforms did Reconstruction governments in the South support?
b.	Draw Conclusions In what ways did southern governments attempt to reverse the accomplishments of Reconstruction?
c.	Evaluate Do you think the South was successful or unsuccessful in its rebuilding efforts? Explain your answer.
SECTION 4 (Pages S71b-571f)
11.	a. Identify What acts did Congress pass to
encourage settlement in the West? What were their effects?
b.	Explain How did the Dawes Act change life on reservations?
c.	Generalize How did the Transcontinental Railroad affect the growth and development of the United States?
Reviewing Themes
12.	Politics Explain the political struggles that took place during Reconstruction.
13.	Society and Culture What were the social problems during Reconstruction? Describe how the economic, political, and social problems of Reconstruction affected different groups, including Southern African Americans and whites, Northerners, and women.
Using the Internet
14.	Activity: Drawing Conclusions A challenge for anyone trying to understand Reconstruction is drawing conclusions from primary and secondary sources from the time period. Through your online textbook, rate the credibility of the sources provided. Make sure you explain whether the source is a primary or secondary source, whether you think the source is credible or not, and your reasons.
7\1 hmhsocialstudies.com!
Reading Skills
'TUT'*’-
Predicting Use the Reading Skills taught in this chapter to answer the question below.
15.	What might you predict for the future of society and the economy in the United States after Reconstruction? How might American politics stay the same or change? What ideas lead you to these conclusions?
Social Studies Skills fepSuwr
Using Databases and Modeling Information Use the
Social Studies Skills taught in this chapter to answer the questions below.
16.	Research online to find a database that contains information related to the chapter. Then prepare a report in which you organize and interpret the information. Use your knowledge of the topics to pose and answer questions about the information. Then research other information on the topic to create your own database.
17.	Think of a model to build that will describe the information you found for the question above. Build the model, and use it to pose and answer questions about it. Present your model to the class. When watching other people's presentations, organize and interpret the information in their models. Then write a brief summary of that information.
"J'WriteSmart
18. Writing a Job History Review your notes about the changing jobs during Reconstruction. Put yourself in the shoes of a person living then. What jobs would that person seek? Why would he or she leave one job for another?
Write a brief job history for that person during Reconstruction. Include at least four jobs. Make each job description two to four sentences long. End each one with a sentence or two about why the person left that job. Add one sentence explaining why he or she took the next job. Be sure to include specific historical details.
Now pair with a partner and alternate playing the roles of job applicant and company interviewer. Enact a job interview for the person you have written about, using the vocabulary and expressions you've learned in this chapter to give information that the interviewer asks for.
574 CHAPTER 17
CHAPTER
Texas Test Practice

DIRECTIONS:
Read each question and write the letter of the best response. 1	Use the map below to answer the following question.
Which military district contained the largest number of states?
A
Military District 2 B
Military District 3 C
Military District 4 D
Military District 5 2	What can you infer from the map information?
F
South Carolina was difficult to reconstruct. G
The largest number of troops was in Military District 1.
H
Military District 5 was the last district to end Reconstruction. 4	Which of the following limited opportunities for African Americans in the South after Reconstruction ended?
F
Ten Percent plan G Radical Republicans H Jim Crow laws J carpetbaggers 5	Which act gave land to anyone who would live and farm the plot?
A
Dawes General Allottment Act B Morrill Act C
Transcontinental Railroad Act D Homestead Act 6	Examine the following passage from a northern schoolteacher’s letter home and then use it to answer the question.
^Wishing to work where there was the most need—there are so many places where nothing has been done for the freed-men, and where they are sorely persecuted—we came here. A schoolhouse built by the soldiers had just been destroyed by the citizens. The feeling is intensely bitter against anything northern. The affairs of the [Freedmen’s] Bureau have been very much mismanaged in Columbus, and our government has been disgraced by the troops who were stationed here."
-Sarah Chase, from Dear Ones at Home
J
Tennessee was readmitted to the Union before the other southern states. 3	The quickest approach to reuniting the nation was proposed by the
A
Ten Percent Plan. B
Wade-Davis Bill. C
Civil Rights Act of 1866. D
Compromise of 1877. Document-Based Question What were some of the problems facing the Freedmen’s Bureau in the South?
RECONSTRUCTION 57i
Collect information and write an informative report on a topic related to the Civil War.
A
Social Studies Report All research begins with a question. Why did the North win the Civil War? Why did Abraham Lincoln choose Ulysses S. Grant? In a research report, you find answers to
V questions like these and share what you leam with your reader.
<z> Narrowing the Task The key I
to a successful research report is picking a topic that is broad enough that you can find information, but narrow enough that you can cover it in detail. To narrow a subject, focus on one aspect of the larger subject. Then think about whether that one aspect can be broken down into smaller parts. Here's an example of howto narrow a topic:
Too Broad: Civil War Leaders Less Broad: Civil War Generals Narrower: Robert E. Lee's Role in the Civil War
1.	Prewrite
Choosing a Subject
Since you will spend a lot of time researching and writing about your topic, pick one that interests you. First, think of several topics related to the Civil War. Narrow your list to one topic by thinking about what interests you and where you can find information about the topic.
Developing a Research Question
A guiding question related to your topic will help focus your research. For example, here is a research question for the topic "Robert E. Lee's Role in the Civil War": How did Lee's decision to turn down the leadership of the Union army affect the Civil War? The answer to this question becomes the thesis, or the big idea of your report.
Finding Historical Information
Use at least three sources of historical information besides your textbook. Good sources include
■	books, maps, magazines, newspapers
■	television programs, movies, Internet sites, CD-ROMs.
For each source, write down the kinds of information shown below. When taking notes, put a circled number next to each source. Encyclopedia article
(?) “Title of Article.” Name of Encyclopedia. Edition or year published.
Book
(2)	Author. Title. City of Publication: Publisher, year published.
Magazine or newspaper article
(3)	Author. “Title of Article.” Publication name. Pate: page number(s).
Internet site
(4)	Author (if known). “Document title.” Web site. Date of electronic publication. Date information was accessed <url>.
576 unit 5
Taking Notes
As you read the source material, take thorough notes on facts, statistics, comparisons, and quotations. Take special care to spell names correctly and to record dates and facts accurately. If you use a direct quotation from a source, copy it word for word and enclose it in quotation marks. Along with each note, include the number of its source and its page number.
Organizing Your Ideas and Information
Informative research reports are usually organized in one of these ways:
■	Chronological order (the order in which events occurred)
■	Order of importance
■	Causes (actions or situations that make something else happen) and effects (what happened as a result of something else).
Use one of these orders to organize your notes in an outline. Here is a partial outline for a paper on Robert E. Lee.
    
The Thes>i5/S>ig Idea: Robert E. Veez decision to decline the leadership of the Union army had serious consequences for the path of the Civil War.
I.
Lee’s Military Expertise A.
Achievements at the U.S. Military Academy B.
Achievements during the Mexican War II.
Lee’s Personality and Character A.
Intelligence and strength B.
Honesty and fairness C.
Daring and courage III.
Lee’s Military Victories A.
Battle of Fredericksburg B.
Battle of Chancellorsville Seeing Different Viewpoints I
Consult a variety of sources, including those with different points of view on the topic. Reading sources with different opinions will give you a more complete picture of your subject. For example, reading articles about Robert E. Lee written by a southern writer as well as a northern writer may give you a more balanced view of Lee.
Recording Others' Ideas You
taking three types of notes. Paraphrases Restatements of all the ideas in your own words.
Summaries Brief restatements of only the most important parts.
Direct quotations The writer's exact words inside quotation marks.
2.	Write
You can use this framework to help you write your first draft.
A
Writer's Framework 1 j Introduction 1 ■ Start with a quote or an interesting 1 historical detail to grab your reader's 1 attention. | ■ State the main idea of your report. I ■ Provide any historical background I readers need to understand your I main idea.	Body ■	Present your information under at least three main ideas, using logical order. ■	Write at least one paragraph for each of these main ideas. ■	Add supporting details, facts, or examples to each paragraph.	Conclusion ■	Restate your main idea, using slightly different words. ■	Include a general comment about your topic. ■	You might comment on how the historical information in your report relates to later historical events.	’
THE NATION BREAKS APART 5"
Studying a Model
Here is a model of a research report. Study it to see how one student developed a paper. The first and the concluding paragraphs are shown in full. The paragraphs in the body of the paper are summarized.
INTRODUCTORY PARAGRAPH
Attention grabber
Statement of thesis
“I cannot raise my hand against my birthplace, my home, my children.” With these words, Robert E. Lee changed the course of the Civil War. Abraham Lincoln had turned to Lee as his first choice for commander of the Union army. However, Lee turned Lincoln down, choosing instead to side with his home state of Virginia and take command of the Confederate army. Lee’s decision to turn Lincoln down weakened the North and strengthened the Confederates, turning what might have been an easy victory for the North into a long, costly war.
BODY PARAGRAPHS
In the first part of the body, the student points out that Lee graduated from the U.S. Military Academy at West Point, served in the Mexican War, and was a member of the Union army. She goes on to explain that he would have been a strong leader for the North, and his absence made the North weaker. In the middle of the report, the writer discusses Lee's personality and character. She includes information about the strength of character he showed while in the military academy and while leading the Confederate army. She discusses and gives examples of his intelligence, his daring, his courage, and his honesty.
In the last part of the body of the report, the student provides examples of Lee leading the outnumbered Confederate army to a series of victories. The student provides details of the battles of Fredericksburg and Chancellorsville and explains how a lesser general than Lee may have lost both battles.
CONCLUDING PARAGRAPH
Summary of main points Restatement of big idea
Lee’s brilliant and resourceful leadership bedeviled a series of Union generals. He won battles that most generals would have lost. If Lee had used these skills to lead the larger and more powerful Union army, the Civil War might have ended in months instead of years.
578 UNIT5
3. Evaluate and Revise
Evaluating and Revising Your Draft
Evaluate your first draft by carefully reading it twice. Ask the questions below to decide which parts of your first draft should be revised.
Evaluation Questions for an Informative Report
Organizing Your Time By
creating a schedule and following it, you can avoid that panicky moment when the due date is near and you haven't even started your research. To create your schedule and manage your time, include these six steps.
■ Does the introduction attract the readers' interest and state the big idea/thesis of your report?
J ■ Does the body of your report have at I least three paragraphs that develop I your big idea? Is the main idea in
each paragraph clearly stated?
; ■ Have you included enough
information to support each of your main ideas? Are all facts, details,
I	and examples accurate? Are all I of them clearly related to the main I ideas they support?
I ■ Is the report clearly organized? Does
it use chronological order, order of
1 importance, or cause and effect?
■	Does the conclusion restate the big idea of your report? Does it end with a general comment about the i importance or significance of i your topic?
■	Are you using correct grammar, i spelling, sentence structure, punctuation, and appropriate citation of your sources?
■	Have you included at least three sources in your bibliography? Have < you included all the sources you I used and not any you did not use? )
1	Develop a question and research your topic (10% of your total time).
2	Research and take notes (25%).
3	Write your main idea statement and create an outline (15%).
4	Write a first draft (25%).
5	Evaluate and revise your first draft (15%).
6	Proofread and publish your report (10%).
4. Proofread and Publish
Proofreading
To improve your report before sharing it, check the following:
■	The spelling and capitalization of all proper names for people, places, things, and events.
■	Punctuation marks around any direct quotation.
■	Your list of sources (Works Cited or Bibliography) against a guide to writing research papers. Make sure you follow the examples in the guide when punctuating and capitalizing your source listings.
Publishing
Choose one or more of these ideas to publish your report.
■	Share your report with your classmates by turning it into an informative speech.
■	Submit your report to an online discussion group that focuses on the Civil War and ask for feedback.
■	With your classmates, create a magazine that includes reports on several different topics or post the reports on your school Web site.
^WriteSmartj
Use myWriteSmartto create, share, and revise your paper.
• 5. Practice and Apply
Use the steps and strategies outlined in this workshop to research and write an informative report on the Civil War.
THE NATION BREAKS APART 5
EPILOGUE
PaeGG®
America became a global power in the 1900s as U.S. troops fought in two world wars.
America Since 1877
The United States of America is a very different place today than it was in 1877. The nation is now bigger, more powerful, and more involved in world affairs. It has changed from a nation where most people lived in small towns to one in which most people live in cities, many with populations of more than 1 million people. The nation is also a more democratic place today—more Americans have access to the privileges and responsibilities of citizenship than at any other time in the country's history.
Despite these differences, America faces many of the same challenges that it faced in 1877. For example, Americans still debate questions about civil rights, religion, taxes, and the role of government in their lives. They also worry about the health of the environment, children, and the poor.
Americans do not always agree on these issues. But they do believe strongly in their right to debate and to disagree. The debates are usually led by elected leaders from the two major political parties. Almost all of the elected representatives in the nation belong to either the Republican or the Democratic Party. The Republican Party tends to support more conservative policies, such as low taxes and few regulations on businesses. The Democratic Party, on the other hand, usually supports more liberal policies such as environmental protection and government-supported social programs. The two sides must work together towards compromises that work best for the entire nation.
One of the most important and heavily debated issues today is health care reform. In an effort to extend health insurance coverage to all Americans, the Democrats passed the Affordable Care Act in 2010. Many Republicans initially voted against it, and the law has remained controversial. Different interest groups support each side of the debate. The American Medical Association, for example, supports the law, while the conservative group Americans for Prosperity opposes it. The freedom to disagree and debate—in peaceful and productive ways—is an indication of the fundamental health of the nation.
America as a Global Power
After the Civil War, the United States increasingly came into conflict with Native Americans in the West. After the massacre at Wounded Knee in 1890, American settlers began moving west in even greater numbers.
l.U.E.
ah no
FOX
FULL
meti-
CHUl
/ ■, i
WE MARCH
- JOB
>BS
* ALL
tW!
JOBS
FOR all T ffly
NOW/
fmn
lawwl
1ew [
I 1
Martin Luther King, Jr., (center) helped lead the fight for civil rights in America.
The United States and Spain went to war in 1898. The two countries battled each other in the Caribbean and the Philippines. The war began a period of American expansionism during which U.S. influence spread throughout many nations.
In 1914 World War I began in Europe. By 1917 the United States had entered the war. The experience forever changed the United States. America had stepped onto the world stage with its military and industrial might. War tore Europe apart again in the 1930s and 1940s during World War II. When Japan attacked the United States at Pearl Harbor in late 1941, the nation entered the global struggle.
The Civil Rights Era
After the Allied victory in World War II,
millions of veterans returned home ready
to start new lives. They enrolled in college
in record numbers, settled into the nation's
cities and new suburbs, and started families.
Soldiers who had fought on the side of democracy abroad also fought for democracy at home. This was especially true of the nation's African-American and Mexican-American soldiers. Their efforts to seek greater access to the rights of citizenship helped invigorate the civil rights movement. They were joined in these efforts by Americans from all walks of life—people who believed that America worked best when the promises of freedom were open to all.
By the 1960s, the push for greater civil rights had become a true social movement in America. It was a grassroots effort on the part of ordinary Americans to change both people's attitudes and federal laws. Cesar Chavez, for example, led the fight to win more rights for migrant workers. This movement for greater civil, educational, and political rights among racial and ethnic groups helped spur the women's rights movement of the 1960s and 1970s as well. Women began entering the workforce in larger numbers. More enrolled in college, and they began to have access to higher-paying jobs.
LINKING PASTTO PRESENT 58’
Economic Changes and Challenges
The U.S. economy has also changed dramatically since 1877. Changes in technology led to a second industrial revolution. In the 1930s, millions of Americans were affected by the huge economic collapse known as the Great Depression. After World War II, the U.S. economy recovered, and the nation enjoyed a long period of prosperity. Many Americans joined the middle class for the first time, buying homes, televisions and appliances, and cars in record numbers.
Since the 1970s, the U.S. economy has had more ups and downs. Many American companies have moved their factories overseas where wages are lower, causing hardship for many American workers. Technology and housing booms during the 1990s and early 2000s created prosperity. In the late 2000s, however, a severe economic crisis emerged. The banking system nearly collapsed, houses and stocks plummeted in value, and millions of people lost their jobs. The economic downturn resulted in a series of protests by a movement known as Occupy Wall Street. Groups met in cities across the nation to support the movement. Many economists think it may take a decade or more for the U.S. economy to fully recover.
Immigration and Democracy
Immigration has always been important to the United States. Since 1877, this strong tradition of immigration has continued. During the 1900s, people from every comer of the world came to America to settle. These new immigrants were Buddhists, Christians, Muslims, and Sikhs. They came from Latin America, Africa, Asia, and Europe. Many have moved away from their home countries in order to experience democracy and to take part in America's booming economy. They came in search of a brighter future, greater freedom, and a chance to start their lives over again—and they came to become Americans. The decade between 2000 and 2010 saw the highest number of immigrants in the nation's history: nearly 14 million.
The United States has become a place with many different cultures living side by side. Our national identity includes aspects of a variety of races and cultures. The nation's popular music, for example, is often based on an African American style of music called the blues. We are recognized for our acceptance of different religions and our landscape is full of a variety of places of worship. American food has been influenced by that of nations ranging from Germany and Italy to England and Mexico.
America Then and Now
In the years since 1877, the United States has faced challenges and experienced triumphs. The threat of terrorism—made clear by the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001— remains an ongoing challenge. Another challenge came in 2005 when Hurricane Katrina hit the Gulf Coast and New Orleans, causing the city's levees to fail. The disaster displaced hundreds of thousands of people and caused more than $80 billion in damage to the Gulf Coast region. But for many Americans, especially those who toiled for the civil rights, a
triumph came with the election of Barack Obama, our nation's first African-American president, in 2008.
Challenges and triumphs alike highlight the importance of our nation's founding principles. More than 200 years ago, the Founding Fathers insisted that the United States was an experiment—a new nation devoted to the possibility that the ideals of equality and freedom could be supported by democracy, justice, and the rule of law. Today, just as then, this experiment works best when Americans exercise their rights seriously.
Reviewing Ideas, Terms, and People
1.	a. Identify What views do Democrats and Republicans usually hold about the role of government? How are they similar and how are they different?
b.	Identify What views do different interest groups hold on the Affordable Care Act?
c.	Analyze Why is it important for citizens to organize into political parties and interest groups?
2.	a. Recall When did the United States first become a major force in international affairs?
b. Explain How did American influence in the world change from 1898 to the end of World War II?
3.	a. Define What was the Civil Rights Movement?
b.	Make Inferences How did the struggle for rights among racial and ethnic groups lead to the growth of the women's rights movement?
c.	Explain How did World War II help lead to the Civil Rights Movement?
4.	a. Identify What was the Great Depression and when did it occur?
b. Evaluate What do you think the effects of the financial events of the late 2000s will be?
5.	a. Identify What are some contributions of racial and ethnic groups to the American national identity? b. Analyze How do immigrants affect life in the United States?
6.	a. Analyze How did Hurricane Katrina affect the United States?
b. Evaluate Why is it important for Americans to exercise their rights responsibly?
Critical Thinking
7.	Draw Conclusions Describe the influences of different groups on the American national identity.
m>'WriteSmart
7. Writing a Report You have studied a wide variety of people, events, and themes in U.S. history. Choose a broad topic that has affected the economy, politics, or daily life throughout the nation's history. Create a thesis on the topic. Using the research and writing skills that you have learned throughout the year, research, outline, and prepare a report that supports your topic. Locate primary and secondary sources, both written and visual, to research information.
Look at maps, charts, graphs, and other representations of geographic and statistical data to inform your report. Pose questions about the material you find, and research the answers. Remember to use standard spelling, grammar, sentence structure, and punctuation in your writing, and to cite all sources that you have used in your report.
Then prepare a visual presentation of your report.
For your presentation, organize the information you found in written and visual sources, maps, graphs, charts, and databases into your own diagrams, charts, maps, or models. As you present your report, speak clearly and use the vocabulary you have learned. As you present your work to the class, summarize your report. As you listen to others' presentations, write a summary of their reports. Look for any bias in their sources or their report, and ask for clarification of any ideas or words you don't understand.
LINKING PASTTO PRESENT 583,
