’0 CHAPTER 3
You Try It!
The following passage of a primary source can be found in the chapter you are about to read. As you read this passage, ask yourself what you could learn from this source.

The Mayflower Compact
We whose names are underwritten ... having undertaken, for the glory of God, and advancement of the Christian faith, and the honour of our King and country, a voyage to plant the first colony in the northern parts of Virginia, do by these presents solemnly and mutually in the presence of God, and one of another, covenant and combine ourselves together into a civil body politic for our better ordering and preservation and furtherance of the ends aforesaid; and by virtue hereof, to enact, constitute, and frame such just and equal laws, ordinances, acts, constitutions, and offices ... as shall be thought most meet and convenient for the general good of the colony unto which we promise all due ... obedience.
Answer the questions about the sentences you read.
1.	The passage you have just read is from a document outlining the government of the colony at Plymouth. If a historian wanted to study the reasons the colony made the laws that it did, would this be a good source to use? Why or why not?
2.	Where else might a historian look to verify the information found in this source?
3.	Would this be a good source to study to learn how the U.S. government functions today? Why or why not?
As you read Chapter 3, look at the primary sources included in the chapter. Why do you think these sources were included?
Chapter 3
Section 1
Jamestown (p. 72)
John Smith (p. 73)
Pocahontas (p. 73)
indentured servants (p. 74) Bacon's Rebellion (p. 74) Toleration Act of 1649 (p. 75) Olaudah Equiano (p. 77) slave codes (p. 77)
Section 2
Puritans (p. 78)
Pilgrims (p. 78)
immigrants (p. 78)
Mayflower Compact (p. 79) Squanto (p. 79)
John Winthrop (p. 80)
Anne Hutchinson (p. 82)
Section 3
Peter Stuyvesant (p. 85)
Quakers (p. 86)
William Penn (p. 86) staple crops (p. 87)
Section 4
town meeting (p. 91)
English Bill of Rights (p. 91) triangular trade (p. 93)
Great Awakening (p. 94)
Jonathan Edwards (p. 94) Enlightenment (p. 95)
John Locke (p. 95)
Pontiac (p. 97)
Section 5
Samuel Adams (p. 99)
Committees of Correspondence
(p. 99)
Stamp Act of 1765 (p. 100)
Boston Massacre (p. 101)
Tea Act (p. 102)
Boston Tea Party (p. 102) Intolerable Acts (p. 102) Quartering Act (p. 102)
Academic Vocabulary
In this chapter, you will learn the following academic words:
authority (p. 73)
factors (p. 74)
THE ENGLISH COLONIES 71
TEKS 1C,2A,2B, 10A, 11A, 11C, 12B, 23A, 25A
The Southern Colonies
What You Will Learn...
1. Jamestown was the first permanent English settlement in America.
2.	Daily life in Virginia was challenging to the colonists.
3.	Religious freedom and economic opportunities were motives for founding other southern colonies, including Maryland, the Carolinas, and Georgia.
4.	Farming and slavery were important to the economies of the southern colonies.
If YOU were there...
A year ago, in 1609, you moved to the colony of Virginia. Life here has been hard. During the winter many people died of cold or sickness. Food is always scarce. Now it is spring, and a ship has come from England bringing supplies. In a week it will sail home. Some of your neighbors are giving up and returning to England. They ask you to come, too.
Would you take the ship back to England?
Despite a difficult beginning, the southern colonies soon flourished.
J
Key Terms and People
Jamestown, p. 12 John Smith, p. 73 Pocahontas, p. 73 indentured servants, p. 74 Bacon's Rebellion, p. 74 Toleration Act of 1649, p. 75 Olaudah Equiano, p. 77 slave codes, p. 77
hmhsocialstudies.com
Bf TAKING NOTES	1
Use the graphic organizer online to take notes on the founding of the southern colonies.
BDING BACKGROUND
Several European nations took part in ce to claim lands in the Americas. Their next step was to establish • iesinthe lands thatthey claimed. The first English colonies were
started in the late 1500s but failed. Even in successful colonies, colonists s faced hardships and challenges.
Settlement in Jamestown
In 1605 a company of English merchants asked King James I for the right to found, or establish, a settlement. In 1606 the king granted the request of the company to settle in a region called Virginia.
Founding a New Colony
The investors in the new settlement formed a joint-stock company called the London Company. This allowed the group to share the cost and risk of establishing the colony. On April 26,1607, the first 105 colonists sent by the London Company arrived in America. On May 14, about 40 miles up the James River in Virginia, the colonists founded Jamestown, the first permanent English settlement in North America.
A lack of preparation cost a lot of the colonists their lives. Most of the men who came to Jamestown were adventurers with no farming experience or useful skills such as carpentry. Jamestown was surrounded by marshes full of disease-carrying mosquitoes. By the time winter arrived, two-thirds of the original colonists had died.
2 CHAPTER 3
Jamestown on a river?
2. Human-Environment Interaction What do you think would have been a commonly used method of transportation for people in this region?
Powhatan Confederacy
Jamestown fared better under John Smith, who took control of the colony and built a fort in 1608. He forced the settlers to work harder and to build better housing by creating rules that rewarded harder workers with food. The colonists received help from the powerful Powhatan Confederacy of Native Americans after Smith made an agreement with them. The Powhatan brought food to help the colonists and taught them how to grow com.
In 1609 some 400 more settlers arrived in Jamestown. That winter, disease and famine once again hit the colony. The colonists called this period the starving time. By the spring of 1610, only 60 colonists were still alive. Jamestown failed to make a profit until colonist John Rolfe introduced a new type of tobacco that sold well in England.
War in Virginia
John Rolfe married Pocahontas, daughter of the Powhatan leader, in 1614. Their marriage helped the colonists form more peaceful relations with the Powhatan. However, Pocahontas died three years later in England, where she was visiting with Rolfe.
In 1622, colonists killed a Powhatan leader. The Powhatan responded by attacking the Virginia settlers later that year. Fighting between the colonists and the Powhatan continued for the next 20 years. Because the London Company could not protect its colonists, the English Crown canceled the company's charter in 1624. Virginia became a royal colony and existed under the authority of a governor chosen by the king.
Finding Main Ideas What
problems did the Jamestown colonists face?

d
HISTORY
VIDEO
Save Our History: Secrets of Jamestown
SBBBBBS
Reading Check
Academic
Vocabulary
authority
power, right to rule
THE ENGLISH COLONIES 73
Academic
Vocabulary
factors
causes
Daily Life in Virginia
In early Virginia, people lived on scattered farms rather than in towns. Tobacco farmers established large farms called plantations. Tobacco was so valuable that it was sometimes used as money.
Headright System
These plantations were made possible in part by the headright system, which was started by the London Company. Under this system, colonists who paid their own way to Virginia received 50 acres of land. A colonist could earn another 50 acres for every additional person brought from England. Rich colonists who brought servants or relatives to Virginia gained large amounts of land.
Primary Source
LETTER
A
Note from Virginia In this 1619 letter, the secretary of the Virginia colony,
John Pory, encouraged people to move to Virginia.
“As touching the quality of this country, three things there be, which in ferny ears may bring this co bony to perfection; the English glow, vineyards, &, cattle... All our riches for the present do consist in tobacco, wherein one man by his own labor has in one year, raised to himself to the vadue of ZOO pounds sterlings and another by the means of sir. servants has cleared at one crop n thousand pound English. These be true, yet indeed rare examples,yet possible to be done by others.”
—from The Power of Words, edited by T. H. Breen
analysis
SKILL j Analyzing primary sources
How does this letter indicate the importance of tobacco in Virginia?
Labor in Virginia
Colonists in Virginia suffered very high death rates, which led to labor shortages. The majority of workers were indentured servants. These servants signed a contract to work for four to seven years for those who paid for their journey to America.
Expansion of Slavery
Not all laborers in Virginia came from Europe. A Dutch ship brought the first Africans to Virginia in 1619. Some Africans were servants; others had been enslaved. Some African servants became successful farmers when their contracts ended.
The demand for workers was soon greater than the supply of people willing to work as indentured servants. Over time, the cost of slaves fell. These factors led some colonists to turn to slave labor. By the mid-1600s most Africans in Virginia were being kept in lifelong slavery.
Bacon's Rebellion
As plantations grew, the economy of Jamestown began to expand. Soon, colonial officials began to ask for more taxes. During the mid-1600s poor colonists protested the higher taxes. They were also upset about the governor's policies toward Native Americans. They thought the colony was not well protected against attack. In 1676 a group of former indentured servants led by Nathaniel Bacon attacked some friendly American Indians. Bacon opposed the governor's policies promoting trade with American Indians. He also thought the colonists should be able to take the Indians' land. When the governor tried to stop him, Bacon and his followers attacked and burned Jamestown in an uprising known as Bacon's Rebellion.
At one point, Bacon controlled much of the colony. He died of fever, however, and the rebellion soon ended.
Analyzing What factors led
to the increased use of slave labor in Virginia?
READING CHECK ,
'4 CHAPTER 3
Colonial Williamsburg Foundation
Other Southern Colonies
As Jamestown was developing in Virginia, new groups of colonists began planning their move to America. Many English Catholics came to America to escape religious persecution. English Catholics had long been against England's separation from the Roman Catholic Church. For this reason they were not allowed by the Church of England to worship freely. English leaders also feared that English Catholics would ally with Catholic countries such as France and Spain in conflicts. Maryland
In the 1620s George Calvert, the first Lord Baltimore, asked King Charles I for a charter establishing a new colony in America for Catholics. In 1632 Charles issued the charter to Calvert's son, Cecilius, who took over the planning of the colony. Cecilius, known as the second Lord Baltimore, named the colony Maryland in honor of England's queen, Henrietta Maria. It was located just north of Virginia in the Chesapeake Bay area. Calvert intended for the colony to be a refuge for English Catholics. It would also be a proprietary colony.
This meant that the colony's proprietors, or owners, controlled the government.
In 1634 a group of 200 English Catholics came to Maryland. Included in the group were wealthy landowners, servants, craftspeople, and farmers. Settlers in Maryland benefited from the lessons learned by the Jamestown colonists. They spent their time raising corn, cattle, and hogs so that they would have enough to eat. Before long, many colonists also began growing tobacco for profit.
Although Catholics founded Maryland, a growing number of Protestants began moving there in the 1640s. Soon, religious conflicts arose between Catholics and Protestants in the colony. To reduce tensions, Lord Baltimore presented a bill to the colonial assembly that became known as the Toleration Act of 1649. This bill made it a crime to restrict the religious rights of Christians. This was the first law supporting religious tolerance passed in the English colonies.
The Toleration Act did not stop all religious conflict. However, it did show that the government wanted to offer some religious freedom and to protect the rights of minority groups.
THE ENGLISH COLONIES 75
The Southern Colonies
ANALYSIS
SKILL-Interpreting Charts ,
About how many slaves lived in the English colonies in 1700 and in 1750?
The Carolinas and Georgia
Colonies were also established south of Virginia. In 1663 the English king, Charles II, gave much of the land between Virginia and Spanish Florida to eight of his supporters. At first Carolina was a single colony. However, the settlements were far apart, and it was hard to govern them. In 1712 the colony separated into North and South Carolina.
Most of the colonists in North Carolina were farmers who had moved south from Virginia. Colonists primarily from Europe settled South Carolina. Those who paid their own way received large grants of land, and some brought enslaved Africans with them. By 1730 about 20,000 enslaved Africans were living in the colony, compared to some 10,000 white settlers.
South Carolina's proprietors managed the colony poorly, and in 1719 the proprietary government was overthrown. The
James Oglethorpe tried to prevent slavery in Georgia. But slaves soon provided the labor for the colony's many rice plantations.
Crown then purchased North and South Carolina in 1729, making them royal colonies.
In 1732 King George II granted a charter to James Oglethorpe and other trustees to found Georgia. The king hoped that Georgia would shield Britain's other colonies from Spanish Florida. Oglethorpe wanted the new colony to be a place where debtors, who had been jailed for their debts in England, could make a new start. In 1733 Oglethorpe and 120 colonists, mostly from England, founded the city of Savannah.
Oglethorpe did not want Georgia to have large plantations owned by a few wealthy individuals. He wanted many small farmers. To reach this goal, Oglethorpe outlawed slavery and limited the size of land grants. Soon, however, the settlers grew unhappy with Oglethorpe's strict rules. In 1752 the British government made Georgia a royal colony with new laws. Coastal Georgia was soon filled with large rice plantations worked by thousands of slaves.
READING CHECK
Finding Main Ideas What were some of the reasons colonists came to the southern colonies?
CHAPTER 3
Economies of the
Southern Colonies
The economies of the southern colonies depended on agriculture. They also exported materials for building ships, such as wood and tar. Some colonies traded with local Indians for deerskins to sell.
The colonies had many small farms and some large plantations. Farms did well because the South enjoyed a warm climate and a long growing season. Many farms grew cash crops that were sold for profit. Tobacco, rice, and indigo—a plant used to make blue dye—were the most important cash crops.
The southern colonies' cash crops required a great deal of difficult work to grow and harvest. This meant a large workforce was needed. By the 1700s enslaved Africans, rather than indentured servants, had become the main source of labor. African slaves brought with them knowledge that helped turn the wild environment into profitable farms. Many had previous experience raising cattle and knew the method for clearing brush using fire.
Slavery was a viciously brutal condition for many inhabitants of the southern
colonies. One former slave named Olaudah Equiano recorded his experiences.
^Tortures, murder, and every other imaginable barbarity... are practiced upon the poor slaves with impunity [no punishment]. I hope the slave-trade will be abolished/'
—Olaudah Equiano, from The Interesting Narrative of the Life of Olaudah Equiano, or Gustavus Vassa, the African
Most of the southern colonies passed slave codes, or laws to control slaves. Colonies with large numbers of slaves had the strictest slave codes. For example, South Carolina's slaveholders feared that slaves would revolt. As a result, South Carolina's code said slaves could not hold meetings or own weapons. Some colonies did not allow slaveholders to free their slaves.
Reading Check
FOCUS ON READING
What is the source of this quote? Is it a primary or secondary source? Do you think it is a valid source?
Summarizing What role did slavery play in the southern plantation economy? How was it regulated?
SUMMARY AND
I you read about
PREVIEW
In this section life in the southern colonies. In the next section you will learn about the New England colonies. Section 1 Assessment
-jji hmhsocialstudies.com
Reviewing Ideas, Terms, and People
1.	a. Describe What happened in 1607 and why is it important? How did John Smith improve conditions in Jamestown?
b. Explain What events led to a conflict between the Jamestown settlers and the Powhatan Confederacy?
2.	a. Recall Why were indentured servants necessary in Virginia? Why did the number of slaves increase? b. Evaluate What do you think was the most serious problem faced by settlers in Virginia? Why?
3.	a. Describe Why were the colonies of Maryland, Carolina, and Georgia founded? Describe their locations.
b.	Analyze Why did more enslaved Africans live in South Carolina than did white settlers?
c.	Predict How might the colony of Georgia have been different if Oglethorpe's plan had succeeded?
4.	a. Recall What was the purpose of slave codes?
b. Analyze Why were slaves in high demand in the southern colonies?
Critical Thinking
5. Summarizing Review your notes on the southern colonies. Then add a new column to your chart that summarizes the successes and/or failures of each colony and the effect the environment had on colonists there.
6. Gathering Some Ideas Take notes on the early colonies of Virginia, Maryland, the Carolinas, and Georgia. Be sure to note what advantages they offered to settlers and what difficulties settlers faced. Start to think about the people who would be most likely to settle in the southern colonies.
THE ENGLISH COLONIES 77
!1IIS(I!
2
*1

HI
SECTION
TEKS 1C,2B,3B,4B,11A,15A,20A, 23EZ25A
What You Will Learn...

1 The Pilgrims and Puritans came to America to avoid religious persecution.
Z
Religion and government were closely linked in the New England colonies. X
The New England economy was based on trade and farming. 4. Education was important in the New England colonies.
English colonists traveled to New England to gain religious freedom.

The New England
Colonies
If YOU were there...
You live in a town near London in the early 1700s. Some of your neighbors are starting new lives in the American colonies. You would like to go with them, but you cannot afford the cost of the trip. There is one way you can go, though. You can sign a paper promising to work as a servant for five years. Then you would be free—and in a new country!
Would you sign the paper and go to America?
Key Terms and People
Puritans, p. 78 Pilgrims, p. 78 immigrants, p. 78 Mayflower Compact, p. 79 Squanto, p. 79 John Winthrop, p. 80 Anne Hutchinson, p. 82
hmhsocialstudies.com

I TAKING NOTES
Use the graphic organizer online to take notes on the reasons English colonists came to New England.
B)ING BACKGROUND
England's first successful colonial rients were in Virginia. They were started mainly as business es. Other colonists in North America had different reasons for ‘ leavingtheirhomes. Many, like the Pilgrims and Puritans, came to
have freedom to practice their religious beliefs. Others, like the person ! above, simply wanted a new way of life.
Pilgrims and Puritans
Religious tensions in England remained high after the Protestant Reformation. A Protestant group called the Puritans wanted to purify, or reform, the Anglican Church. The Puritans thought that bishops and priests had too much power over church members.
Pilgrims on the Move
The most extreme English Protestants wanted to separate from the Church of England. These Separatists formed their own churches and cut all ties with the Church of England. In response, Anglican leaders began to punish Separatists.
The Pilgrims were one Separatist group that left England in the early 1600s to escape persecution. The Pilgrims moved to the Netherlands in 1608. The Pilgrims were immigrants—people who have left the country of their birth to live in another country.
The Pilgrims were glad to be able to practice their religion freely. They were not happy, however, that their children were

CHAPTER 3
learning the Dutch language and culture. The Pilgrims feared that their children would forget their English traditions. The Pilgrims decided to leave Europe altogether. They formed a joint-stock company with some merchants and then received permission from England to settle in Virginia.
On September 16,1620, a ship called the Mayflower left England with more than 100 men, women, and children aboard. Not all of these colonists were Pilgrims. However, Pilgrim leaders such as William Bradford sailed with the group.
The Mayflower Compact
After two months of rough ocean travel, the Pilgrims sighted land far north of Virginia. The Pilgrims knew that they would thus be outside the authority of Virginia's colonial government when they landed. Their charter would not apply. So, they decided to establish their own basic laws and social rules to govern the colony they would found.
On November 21, 1620, 41 of the male passengers on the ship signed the Mayflower Compact, a legal contract in which they agreed to have fair laws to protect the general good. The Compact represents one of the first attempts at self-government in the English colonies.
In late 1620 the Pilgrims landed at Plymouth Rock in present-day Massachusetts. The colonists struggled through the winter. Nearly half died during this first winter from sickness and the freezing weather, but the colony became the first permanent European colony in New England.
Pilgrims and Native Americans
In March 1621 a Native American named Samoset walked boldly into the colonists' settlement. He spoke in broken English. Samoset had learned some English from the crews of English fishing boats. He gave the Pilgrims useful information about the peoples and places of the area. He also introduced them to a Patuxet Indian named Squanto. Squanto had at one time lived in Europe and spoke English as well.
Primary Source
HISTORICAL DOCUMENT
The Mayflower Compact
In November 1620, Pilgrim leaders aboard the Mayflower drafted the Mayflower Compact. This excerpt from the Mayflower Compact describes the principles of the Pilgrim colony's government.
The Pilgrims describe the reasons they want to form a colony in North America.
We whose names are underwritten ... having undertaken, for the glory of God, and advancement of the Christian faith, and the honour of our King and country, a voyage to plant the first colony in the northern parts of Virginia, do by these presents solemnly and mutually in the presence of God, and one of another, covenant and combine ourselves together into a civil body politic for our better ordering and preservation and furtherance of the z ends aforesaid; and by virtue hereof, to enact, The Pilgrims constitute, and frame such just and equal laws, promise to
ordinances, acts, constitutions, and offices... Lb,e\LWS tuha,t help the whole
as shall be thought most meet and convenient^ colony for the general good of the colony unto which we promise all due... obedience.
by these presents: by this document covenant: promise civil body politic: group organized to govern
aforesaid: mentioned above virtue: authority ordinances: regulations meet: fitting
ANALYSIS
SKILL!
Analyzing Primary sources 1.	Why do you think the colonists felt the need to establish a government for themselves?
2.	How do you think the Mayflower Compact influenced later governments in America?
From Squanto the Pilgrims learned to fertilize the soil with fish remains. Squanto also helped the Pilgrims establish relations with the local Wampanoag Indians. Conditions in the Plymouth colony began to improve.
The Pilgrims invited Wampanoag chief Massasoit and 90 other guests to celebrate their harvest. This feast became known as the first Thanksgiving. For the event, the Pilgrims killed wild turkeys. This event marked the survival of the Pilgrims in the new colony.
THE ENGLISH COLONIES 79
Pilgrim Community
Although the Pilgrims overcame many problems, their small settlement still struggled. Most Pilgrims became farmers, but the farmland around their settlement was poor. They had hoped to make money by trading furs and by fishing. Unfortunately, fishing and hunting conditions were not good in the area. Some colonists traded corn with American Indians for beaver furs. The Pilgrims made little money but were able to form a strong community. The colony began to grow stronger in the mid-1620s after new settlers arrived and, as in Jamestown, colonists began to have more rights to farm their own land.
The Pilgrims' settlement was different from Virginia's in that it had many families. The Pilgrims taught their children to read and offered some education to their indentured servants. Families served as centers of religious life, health care, and community well-being.
All family members worked together to survive during the early years of the colony. Women generally cooked, spun and wove wool, and sewed clothing. They also made soap and butter, carried water, dried fruit, and cared for livestock. Men spent most of their time repairing tools and working in the fields. They also chopped wood and built shelters.
Women in the Colony
In Plymouth, women had more legal rights than they did in England. In England women were not allowed to make contracts, to sue, or to own property. In America, Pilgrim women had the right to sign contracts and to bring some cases before local courts. Widows could also own property.
From time to time, local courts recognized the ways women helped the business community. Widow Naomi Silvester received a large share of her husband's estate. The court called her "a frugal [thrifty] and laborious [hardworking] woman."
Puritans Leave England
During the 1620s England's economy suffered. Many people lost their jobs. The English king, Charles I, made the situation worse by raising taxes. This unpopular act led to a political crisis. At the same time, the Church of England began to punish Puritans because they were dissenters, or people who disagree with official opinions. King Charles refused to allow Puritans to criticize church actions.
Great Migration
These economic, political, and religious problems in England led to the Great Migration. Between 1629 and 1640 many thousands of English men, women, and children left England. More than 40,000 of these people moved to English colonies in New England and the Caribbean. In 1629, Charles granted a group of Puritans and merchants a charter to settle in New England. They formed the Massachusetts Bay Company.
In 1630 a fleet of ships carrying Puritan colonists left England for Massachusetts to seek religious freedom. They were led by John Winthrop. The Puritans believed that they had made a covenant, or promise, with God to build an ideal Christian community.
A
New Colony The Puritans arrived in New England well prepared to start their colony. They brought large amounts of tools and livestock with them. Like the Pilgrims, the Puritans faced little resistance from local American Indians. Trade with the Plymouth colony helped them too. In addition, the region around Boston had a fairly healthful climate. Thus, few Puritans died from sickness. All of these things helped the Massachusetts Bay Colony do well. By 1691, the Massachusetts Bay Colony had expanded to include the Pilgrims' Plymouth Colony.
READING CHECK
Summarizing What role did religion play in the establishment of the Massachusetts Bay Colony?
CHAPTER 3
History Close-up
Plymouth Colony
The Pilgrims landed in a region of forests, streams, and rocky soil.
Plymouth Colony was surrounded by stakes that formed a wall of protection. Outside the wall were colonists' crop fields.



ANALYSIS ''A
SKILL! ANALYZING VISUALS
i what ways were Plymouth Colony and the Indian village similar and different?
Religion and Government in New England
Massachusetts Bay Colony had to obey English laws. However, its charter provided more independence than did the royal charter of i	Virginia. For example, it created a General
I
Court to help run the Massachusetts colony, t	The Puritan colonists turned this court
into a type of self-government to represent the needs of the people. Each town sent two or three delegates to the Court. After
John Winthrop served as the colony's first governor, the General Court elected the governor and his assistants. In 1644 the General Court became a two-house, or bicameral, legislature.
Politics and religion were closely linked in Puritan New England. Government leaders were also church members, and ministers often had a great deal of power in Puritan communities. Male church members were the only colonists who could vote. Colonists became full members in the church by becoming what the Puritans called God's "elect," or chosen. Reaching this status was a difficult process. Individuals had to pass a public test to prove that their faith was strong.
In 1636 minister Thomas Hooker and his followers left Massachusetts to help found Connecticut, another New England colony.
!
THE ENGLISH COLONIES 81
ri
Biography
Anne Hutchinson
1591-1643
In 1634 Anne Hutchinson emigrated with her family from England to the Massachusetts Bay Colony. After settling in Boston, she worked as a nurse and midwife. She also hosted a Bible-study class that met in her home. Over time, Hutchinson began to question the teachings of the local ministers. Meanwhile, her popularity grew.
After being banished from the colony, Hutchinson settled in Rhode Island and, later, Long Island. She died in an American Indian attack. Today we remember her as a symbol of the struggle for religious freedom.
Drawing Conclusions Why do
you think church leaders disliked Hutchinson's ideas?
Church and State
"crs
-
Religion Affected Government
•	Government leaders were church members.
•	Ministers had great authority.
.. '
Government Affected Religion
•	Government leaders outlawed certain religious views.
•	Government leaders punished dissenters.
In 1639 Hooker wrote the Fundamental Orders of Connecticut. This set of principles made Connecticut's government more democratic. For example, the Orders allowed men who were not church members to vote. As a result, some historians call Hooker the father of American democracy. The Fundamental Orders of Connecticut also outlined the powers of the general courts.
Not all Puritans shared the same religious views. Minister Roger Williams did not agree with Massachusetts leaders. He called for his church to separate completely from the other New England congregations. He also criticized the General Court for taking land from American Indians without paying them.
Puritan leaders worried that Williams's ideas might hurt the unity of the colony, and they made him leave. Williams took his supporters to southern New England. They formed a new settlement called Providence. This settlement later developed into the colony of Rhode Island. In Providence, Williams supported the separation of the church from the state. He also believed in religious tolerance for all members of the community.
In Boston, an outspoken woman also angered Puritan church leaders. Anne Hutchinson publicly discussed religious ideas that some leaders thought were radical. For example, Hutchinson believed that people's relationship with God did not need guidance from ministers.
Hutchinson's views alarmed Puritans such as John Winthrop. Puritan leaders did not believe that women should be religious leaders. Puritan leaders put Hutchinson on trial for her ideas. The court decided to force her out of the colony. With a group of followers, Hutchinson helped found the new colony of Portsmouth, later a part of the colony of Rhode Island. Although these differences among religious views caused some community conflicts, they were also an important step in the development of religious freedom in the colonies.

CHAPTER 3
Reading Check
Perhaps the worst community conflicts in New England involved the witchcraft trials of the early 1690s. The largest number of trials were held in Salem, Massachusetts. In Salem a group of girls had accused people of casting spells on them. The community formed a special court to judge the witchcraft cases. The court often pressured the suspected witches to confess. Before the trials had ended, the Salem witch trials led to 19 people being put to death.
Identifying Cause and
Effect What led to religious disagreements among the Puritans, and what was the result?
New England Economy
Connecticut, Massachusetts, New Hampshire, and Rhode Island were very different from the southern colonies. The often harsh climate and rocky soil meant that few New England farms could grow cash crops. Most farming families grew crops and raised animals for their own use. There was thus little demand for farm laborers. Although some people held slaves, slavery did not become as important to this region.
Merchants
Trade was vital to New England's economy. New England merchants traded goods locally, with other colonies, and overseas. Many of them traded local products such as furs, pickled beef, and pork. Many merchants grew in power and wealth, becoming leading members of the New England colonies. Fishing
Fishing became one of the region's leading industries. The rich waters off New England's coast served as home to many fish, including cod, mackerel, and halibut. Merchants exported dried fish. Colonists also began hunting for whales that swam close to shore. Whales were captured with harpoons, or spears, and dragged to shore. Whaling provided valuable oil for lighting.
Shipbuilding
Shipbuilding became an important industry in New England for several reasons. The area had plenty of forests that provided materials for shipbuilding. As trade—particularly in slaves—in the New England seaports grew, more merchant ships were built. The fishing industry also needed ships. New England shipyards made high-quality, valuable vessels. Ship owners sometimes even told their captains to sell the ship along with the cargo when they reached their destination.
Skilled Craftspeople
The northern economy needed skilled craftspeople. Families often sent younger sons to learn skilled trades such as blacksmithing, weaving, shipbuilding, and printing. The young boys who learned skilled trades were known as apprentices.
Apprentices lived with a master craftsman and learned from him. In exchange, the boys performed simple tasks. Apprentices promised to work for a master craftsman for a set number of years. They learned trades that were essential to the survival of the colonies. Apprentices received food and often clothing from the craftsmen. Gabriel Ginings, for example, was an apprentice in Portsmouth, Rhode Island. He received "sufficient food and raiment [clothing] suitable for such an apprentice," as his 1663 contract stated.
After a certain amount of time had passed, apprentices became journeymen. They usually traveled and learned new skills in their trade. Eventually they would become a master of the trade themselves.
READING CHECK
Categorizing What types of jobs were common in the New England colonies?
THE IMPACT
TODAY
Education in the Colonies
Education was important in colonial New England. Mothers and fathers wanted their children to be able to read the Bible. The
Fishing remains an important industry in New England, earning hundreds of millions of dollars each year.
THE ENGLISH COLONIES 83
Massachusetts Bay Colony passed some of the first laws requiring parents to provide instruction for their children.
Public Education
THE IMPACT
TODAY
Public schools are the main source of education for most children in the United States. About 50 million students are enrolled in the nation's public elementary and secondary schools.
To be sure that future generations would have educated ministers, communities established town schools. In 1647 the General Court of" Massachusetts issued an order that a school be founded in every township of 50 families.
Schoolchildren often used the New England Primer, which had characters and stories from the Bible. They learned to read at the same time that they learned about the community's religious values.
The availability of schooling varied in the colonies. There were more schools in New England than in the other colonies where most children lived far from towns. These children had to be taught by their parents or by private tutors. Most colonial children stopped their education after the elementary grades. Many went to work, either on their family farm or away from home.
Higher Education
Higher education was also important to the colonists. In 1636 John Harvard and the General Court founded Harvard College. Harvard taught ministers and met the colony's need for higher education. The second college founded in the colonies, William and Mary, was established in Virginia in 1693.
By 1700 about 70 percent of men and 45 percent of women in New England could read and write. These figures were much lower in Virginia, where Jamestown was the only major settlement.
READING CHECK
Analyzing Why was education important to the New England colonies?
SUMMARY AND PREVIEW
In this section K you learned about the role that religion played in the New England colonies. In the next section you'll learn about New York, New Jersey, and Pennsylvania.
Section 2 Assessment
^jP( hmhsocialstudies.com"1
Reviewing Ideas, Terms, and People
1. a. Recall Why did the Pilgrims and Puritans leave f Europe for the Americas?
b.	Explain What was significant about the year 1620?
c.	Elaborate Do you think the Pilgrims could have survived without the assistance of Squanto and Massasoit? Explain your answer.
i 2. a. Describe What role did the church play in Mas-! sachusetts? Why did some colonists disagree with the
leaders of Massachusetts?
b.	Explain Why were the colonies of Connecticut and Rhode Island founded?
c.	Analyze How did the Mayflower Compact and the
’	Fundamental Orders of Connecticut encourage self-
;	government?
,	3. a. Identify Describe the economy in the New Eng-
i	land colonies.
b. Analyze Why do you think New England merchants became leading members of society?
4.	a. Describe What steps did the Massachusetts Bay Colony take to promote education?
&
I
I
b. Predict What are some possible benefits that New England's emphasis on education might bring?
Critical Thinking
5. Identifying Cause and Effect Review your notes on the reasons English colonists came to New England. Then copy the diagram below and use it to show how the colonists'experiences caused them to build certain types of colonies.
6. Comparing Colonies Take notes on the early New England colonies. Be sure to note what advantages they offered to settlers and what difficulties settlers faced. Put a star beside the colony or colonies you might use in your infomercial.
I CHAPTER 3
The Aftiddle Colonies
What You Will Learn...
If YOU were there...
You are a farmer in southern Germany in 1730. Religious wars have torn your country apart for many years. Now you hear stories about a place in America where people of all religions are welcome. But the leaders of the colony—and many of its people—are English. You would not know their language or customs. Still, you would be free to live and worship as you like.
How would you feel about moving to a country full of strangers?
•
BUILDING BACKGROUND
The middle section of the Atlantic coast offered good land and a moderate climate. Several prominent English people established colonies that promised religious freedom. To people like the settler above, these colonies promised a new life. New York and New Jersey
The Dutch founded New Netherland in 1613 as a trading post for exchanging furs with the Iroquois. The center of the fur trade in New Netherland was the town of New Amsterdam on Manhattan Island. Generous land grants to patroons, or lords, and religious tolerance soon brought Jews, French Huguenots, Puritans, and others to the colony. Director General Peter Stuyvesant (STY-vuh-suhnt) led the colony beginning in 1647.
Peter Stuyvesant was forced to | surrender New Amsterdam to *
1.	The English created New York and New Jersey from former Dutch territory.
2.	William Penn established the colony of Pennsylvania.
3.	The economy of the middle colonies was supported by trade and staple crops.
r The Big Idea J
People from many nations settled in the middle colonies.
Key Terms and People
Peter Stuyvesant, p. 85 Quakers, p.86 William Penn, p. 86 staple crops, p. 87
'^j'l hmhsocialstudies.com
TAKING NOTES
.................
Use the graphic organizer online to take notes on the founding of the middle colonies.
THE ENGLISH COLONIES 85
Characteristics of the Middle Colonies

Social
•	New York: Dutch influence
•	New Jersey: diverse population
•	Pennsylvania: founded by Quakers
Economic
•	successful farming of staple crops
•	work force of slaves and indentured servants
•	active trade with Britain and West Indies
THE IMPACT
TODAY
Today New York City is the largest city in the United States, with more than 8 million people.
In 1664 an English fleet captured the undefended colony of New Amsterdam with-" out firing a single shot. New Netherland was renamed New York, and New Amsterdam became New York City.
Soon after the English conquest in 1664, the Duke of York made Sir George Carteret and Lord John Berkeley proprietors of New Jersey. This colony occupied lands between the Hudson and Delaware rivers. It had a diverse population, including Dutch, Swedes, Finns, and Scots. The fur trade was important to the economies of New York and New Jersey through the end of the 1600s.
Comparing How were New
York and New Jersey similar?
READING CHECK .
ii lniiin
8
n Penn was bom in London as the if a wealthy admiral. Penn joined the akers in 1666 and became an active eacher and writer of religious works. He supported toleration of dissenters.
In 1681 he received a charter to establish a new colony called Pennsylvania. There, Penn put his beliefs into practice. He insisted on fair dealings with local American Indians, welcomed immigrants, and promised religious toleration.
Making Generalizations How did Penn's ideas influence the rules of the colony?
*******
Penn's Colony
The Society of Friends, or the Quakers, made up one of the largest religious groups in New Jersey. Quakers did not follow formal religious practices and dressed plainly. They believed in the equality of men and women before God. They also supported nonviolence and religious tolerance for all people. At the time, many Quaker beliefs and practices shocked most Christians. As a result, Quakers were persecuted in both England and America.
One proprietor of the New Jersey colony was a Quaker named William Penn. Penn wished to found a larger colony under his own control that would provide a safe home for Quakers. In 1681 King Charles II agreed to grant Penn a charter to begin a colony west of New Jersey.
Penn's colony, known as Pennsylvania, grew rapidly. Penn limited his own power and established an elected assembly. He also promised religious freedom to all Christians. His work made Pennsylvania an important example of representative self-government— a government that reflects its citizens' will— in the colonies.
Penn named the capital of his colony Philadelphia, which means "the city of brotherly love." In 1682 the Duke of York sold Penn a region to the south of Pennsylvania. This area, called Delaware, remained part of Pennsylvania until 1776.
Finding Main Ideas
Why did William Penn establish Pennsylvania, and how did he influence its government?
READING CHECK .
Economy of the
Middle Colonies
The middle colonies combined characteristics of the New England and southern colonies. With a good climate and rich land, farmers there could grow large amounts of staple crops—crops that are always needed. These crops included wheat, barley, and oats. Farmers also raised livestock. However, their use of only one plant in each field made the fields vulnerable to erosion and insects.
Slaves were somewhat more important to the middle colonies than they were to New England. They worked in cities as skilled laborers, such as blacksmiths and carpenters. Other slaves worked on farms, onboard ships, and in the growing shipbuilding industry. However, indentured servants largely filled the middle colonies' growing labor needs. Between 1700 and 1775 about 135,000 indentured servants came to the middle colonies. About half of them moved to Pennsylvania. By 1760 Philadelphia had become the largest British colonial city. Other cities in the middle colonies, such as New York City, also grew quickly.
Trade was important to the economy of the middle colonies. Merchants in Philadelphia and New York City exported colonial goods to markets in Britain and the West Indies. These products included wheat from New York, Pennsylvania, and New Jersey.
Throughout the colonies, women made important contributions to the economy. They ran farms and businesses such as clothing and grocery stores, bakeries, and drugstores. Some women also practiced medicine and worked as nurses and midwives. However, colonial laws and customs limited women's economic opportunities.
Most colonial women worked primarily in the home. Married women managed households and raised children. Sometimes they earned money for their families by selling products like butter or washing clothes.
Finding the Main Idea On what
were the economies of the middle colonies based?
READING CHECK
■Summary
I you learn
AND PREVIEW
In this section ;d about the middle colonies. In the next section you will read about colonial government, the slave trade, and conflicts that arose in the English colonies. Section 3 Assessment
j-jj’ hmhsocialstudies.com | ij i	j f IMMiBMIi'
Reviewing Ideas, Terms, and People
1.	a. Describe Name the middle colonies. Where were they located? How did the region's physical geography compare to that of the northern and southern colonies? b. Draw Inferences What led to the diverse populations of New York and New Jersey?
2.	a. Identify Who are the Quakers?
b. Analyze How did William Penn attempt to create a colonial government that would be fair to all?
3.	a. Describe What different types of jobs did slaves in the middle colonies hold?
b. Evaluate In what ways were women essential to the middle colonies?
Critical Thinking
4.	Sequencing Review your notes about which nation founded each middle colony. Then complete the time line below by listing the event that occurred on each of the dates on the time line.
1613	1647	1664	1681
5. Comparing Colonies You've just read about early colonies in New York, New Jersey, and Pennsylvania. Think about the advantages they offered to settlers and what difficulties settlers faced. In your notes, put a star beside one of the colonies you might use in your infomercial.
THE ENGLISH COLONIES 87

America's

"S.''

r

The English colonies in 1760 were located between the Atlantic Ocean and the Appalachian Mountains. The total population of the colonies was around 1.8 million. Soon, however, the colonies began to grow both in size and in population.
In 1763 Great Britain and France signed the Treaty of Paris, giving Britain control over all lands east of the Mississippi River. With the stroke of a pen, the colonies increased enormously in size. The westward expansion of the English colonies—soon to be the United States—had begun.
rW
America's Population, 1760:1.8 million
1%
Ethnic Groups, 1760
■	White/European
■	African American
■	Native American
■	Other
tseu-?
A
Wall of Mountains The 1,500 mile-long Appalachian Mountain range formed a natural barrier to westward expansion. The Appalachians' dense forests „	and steep terrain made passage on foot or
*4 ?? ki by horse difficult.
„

>1°/<k5%
wito
WISMB
Religions, 1760
■	Protestant
■	Catholic
■	Jewish
■	Other





*




X
Natural Harbors The largest cities in the colonies, such as Philadelphia, New York, and Boston, grew where the best natural ports were. Ships were vital to the colonies: for the growing fishing industry, for overseas trade, and to bring more settlers to the new land.
issiitiar


Boston,
population 16,000
New York, population 25,000
Philadelphia, population 25,000

#811
Boston Harbor provided natural protection for ships.

'	•AV- Jr
"> v:	’
# a ~	>-

V 'X
v \ * ' 'A;> " 17 f	IB*
Jg New England colonies SIS Middle colonies 1	| Southern colonies
A
Flood of People The colonial population doubled between 1750 and 1770. Roughly half of the immigrants to the colonies were English. But the >?. second-largest group of immigrants had no choice in the matter—they were enslaved people from Africa.
150	300 Kilometers
IHBlw
GEOGRAPHY
SKILLS! INTERPRETING MAPS
1.	Location Where were the colonies' largest cities located
at this time?
2.	Human-Environment Interaction How did mountains and seas influence the location of the colonies?

4
SECTION

TEKS 1 A, 3A, 3B, 3C, 4A, 10A, 10B, 11 A, 12A, 12B, 12D, 20A, 20C, 21B
What You Will Learn...
n

1.	Colonial governments were influenced by political changes in England.
2.	English trade laws limited free trade in the colonies.
3.	The Great Awakening and the Enlightenment led to ideas of political equality among many colonists.
4.	The French and Indian War gave England control of more land in North America.
?-----OhHmbIhmO---------'
The English colonies continued to grow despite many challenges.
Key Terms and People
town meeting, p. 9/	1
English Bill of Rights, p. 91	|
triangular trade, p. 93	i
Great Awakening, p. 94	|
Jonathan Edwards, p. 94	j
Enlightenment, p. 95	i
John Locke, p. 95	?
Pontiac, p. 97
hmhsocialstudies.com
f TAKING NOTES	j
Use the graphic organizer online to take notes on developments that affected the growing colonies.
Life m the English Colonies
If YOU were there...
Your family migrated to America in the 1700s and started a small farm in western Pennsylvania. Now, more and more people are moving in. You would like to move farther west, into the Ohio River valley. But a new law says you cannot move west of the mountains because it is too dangerous. Still, you are restless and want more land and more freedom.
Why might you decide to break the law and move west?
F BUILDING BACKGROUND
When they moved to America, the Eng-I lish colonists brought their ideas about government. They expected to j I have the same rights as citizens in England. However, many officials f in England wanted tight control over the colonies. As a result, some j colonists, like this family, were unhappy with the policies of colonial I governments.	i
Colonial Governments
The English colonies in North America all had their own governments. Each government was given power by a charter. The English monarch had ultimate authority over all of the colonies. A group of royal advisers called the Privy Council set English colonial policies.
Colonial Governors and Legislatures
Each colony had a governor who served as head of the government. Most governors were assisted by an advisory council. In royal colonies the English king or queen selected the governor and the council members. In proprietary colonies, the proprietors chose all of these officials. In a few colonies, such as Connecticut, the people elected the governor.
In some colonies the people also elected representatives to help make laws and set policy. These officials served on assemblies. Each colonial assembly passed laws that had to be approved first by the advisory council and then by the governor.
Established in 1619, Virginia's assembly was the first colonial legislature in North America. At first it met as a single body, but it was later split into two houses. The first house was known as the Council of State. The governor's advisory council and the London Company selected its members. The House of Burgesses was the assembly's second house. The members were elected by colonists. It was the first democratically elected body in the English colonies.
In New England the center of politics was the town meeting. In town meetings people talked about and decided on issues of local interest, such as paying for schools.
In the southern colonies, people typically lived farther away from one another. Therefore, many decisions were made at the county level. The middle colonies used both county meetings and town meetings to make laws.
Political Change in England
In 1685 James II became king of England. He was determined to take more control over the English government, both in England and in the colonies. Because the colonies were so distant from the seats of government, they had developed many of their own systems of governing and felt a sense of separation from the British government.
James believed that the colonies were too independent. In 1686 he united the northern colonies under one government called the Dominion of New England. James named Sir Edmund Andros royal governor of the Dominion. The colonists disliked Andros because he used his authority to limit the powers of town meetings.
English Bill of Rights
Parliament replaced the unpopular King James and passed the English Bill of Rights in 1689. This act reduced the powers of the English monarch. At the same time, Parliament gained power. As time went on, the colonists valued their own right to elect
GEOGRAPHY
SKILLS) INTERPRETING MAPS
1.	Location Where were the New England colonies located in relation to the other colonies?
2.	Human-Environment Interaction What natural feature marked the western boundary of the southern colonies?
KHE
ENGLISMZOLONfES representatives to decide local issues. Following these changes, the colonies in the Dominion quickly formed new assemblies and charters.
Colonial Courts
Colonial courts made up another important part of colonial governments. Whenever possible, colonists used the courts to control local affairs. In general, the courts reflected the beliefs of their local communities. For example, many laws in Massachusetts enforced the Puritans' religious beliefs. Laws based on the Bible set the standard for the community's conduct.
Sometimes colonial courts also protected individual freedoms. For example, in 1733 officials arrested John Peter Zenger for printing a statement that damaged the reputation of the governor of New York. Andrew Hamilton, Zenger's attorney, argued that Zenger could publish whatever he wished as long as it was true. Jury members believed that colonists had a right to voice their ideas openly and found him not guilty.
READING CHECK .
Analyzing Information
Why were colonial assemblies and colonial courts created, and what did they do?
English Trade Laws
One of England's main reasons for founding and controlling its American colonies was to earn money from trade. In the late 1600s England, like most western European nations, practiced mercantilism, a system of creating and maintaining wealth through carefully controlled trade. A country gained wealth if it had fewer imports—goods bought from other countries—than exports—goods sold to other countries.
To support this system of mercantilism, between 1650 and 1696 Parliament passed a series of Navigation Acts limiting colonial trade. For example, the Navigation Act of 1660 forbade colonists from trading specific items such as sugar and cotton with any country other than England. The act also required colonists to use English ships to transport goods. Parliament later passed
Triangular Trade
other acts that required all trade goods to pass through English ports, where duties, or import taxes, were added to the items.
England claimed that the Navigation Acts were good for the colonies. After all, the colonies had a steady market in England for their goods. But not all colonists agreed. Many colonists wanted more freedom to buy or sell goods wherever they could get the best price. Local demand for colonial goods was small compared to foreign demand.
Despite colonial complaints, the trade restrictions continued into the 1700s. Some traders turned to smuggling, or illegal trading. They often smuggled sugar, molasses, and rum into the colonies from non-English islands in the Caribbean. Parliament responded with the Molasses Act of 1733, which placed duties on these items. British officials, however, rarely carried out this law.
By the early 1700s English merchants were trading around the world. Most American merchants traded directly with Great Britain or the West Indies. By importing and exporting goods such as sugar and tobacco, some American merchants became wealthy.
Triangular Trade
Trade between the American colonies and Great Britain was not direct. Rather, it generally took the form of triangular trade—a system in which goods and slaves were traded among the Americas, Britain, and Africa. There were several routes of the triangular trade. In one route colonists exchanged goods like beef and flour with plantation owners in the West Indies for sugar, some of which they shipped to Britain. The sugar was then exchanged for manufactured products to be sold in the colonies. Colonial merchants traveled great distances to find the best markets.

Olaudah Equiano
1745-1797
Olaudah Equiano claimed to have been born in Africa in present-day Nigeria.
His autobiography told the story of his enslavement. According to his autobiography, Equiano survived the Middle Passage, traveling in a slave ship across the Atlantic. After arriving in the colonies, a Virginia planter purchased him and again sold him to a British naval officer. While working as a sailor, Equiano eventually earned enough money to purchase his own freedom in 1766. Equiano later settled in England and devoted himself to ending slavery.
Analyzing Information How did
Equiano gain his freedom?



“I received such a salutation [smell] in my nostrils, as I had never experienced in my life;... J became so sick and low that I was not able to eat...
The groans of the dying, rendered [made] the whole a scene of horror almost inconceivable [unbelievable]."
—Olaudah Equiano, from The Interesting Narrative of the Life of Olaudah Equiano, or Gustavus Vassa, the African

III
>1
THE ENGLISH COLONIES 93
The Great Awakening
George Whitefield gives a powerful sermon during the Great Awakening. Ministers like Whitefield emphasized personal religious experiences over official church rules. They also allowed ordinary church members—whatever their race, class, or gender—to play a role in services. The value placed on individuals of all types during the Great Awakening helped shape American political ideas about who should have a say in government.
How do you think religious freedom led to
Middle Passage
One version of the triangular trade began with traders exchanging rum for slaves on the West African coast. The traders then sold the enslaved Africans in the West Indies for molasses or brought them to sell in the mainland American colonies.
The slave trade brought millions of Africans across the Atlantic Ocean in a voyage called the Middle Passage. This was a terrifying and deadly journey that could last as long as three months.
Enslaved Africans lived in a space not even three feet high. Slave traders fit as many slaves as possible on board so they could earn greater profits. Thousands of captives died on slave ships during the Middle Passage. In many cases, they died from diseases such as smallpox. As farmers began to use fewer indentured servants, slaves became even more valuable.
READING CHECK
Identifying Cause and Effect
What factors caused the slave trade to grow? How did this affect conditions on the Middle Passage?
Great Awakening and Enlightenment
In the early 1700s revolutions in both religious and nonreligious thought transformed
the Western world. These European movements affected life in the American colonies.
Great Awakening
Religious leaders wanted to spread religious feeling throughout the growing colonial population. In the late 1730s ministers began holding revivals, emotional gatherings where people came together to hear sermons.
Many American colonists experienced "a great awakening" in their religious lives. This Great Awakening—a religious movement that swept through the colonies in the 1730s and 1740s—changed colonial religion. It also affected social and political life. Jonathan Edwards of Massachusetts was one of the most important leaders of the Great Awakening. His dramatic sermons told sinners to seek forgiveness for their sins or face punishment in Hell forever.
The Great Awakening drew people of different regions, classes, and races. Women, members of minority groups, and poor people often took part in services. Ministers from different colonies met and shared ideas with one another. This represented one of the few exchanges between colonies.
The Great Awakening promoted ideas that may also have affected colonial politics. Sermons about the spiritual equality of all people led some colonists to begin
M CHAPTER 3
demanding more political equality. Revivals became popular places to talk about political and social issues. People from those colonies with less political freedom were thus introduced to more democratic systems used in other colonies. Enlightenment
During the 1600s European scientists began to better understand the basic laws that govern nature. Their new ideas about the universe began the Scientific Revolution. The revolution changed how people thought of the world. In 1675, for example, Anton van Leeuwenhoek became the first to observe microorganisms through a microscope.
Many colonists were also influenced by the Enlightenment. This movement, which took place during the 1700s, spread the idea that reason and logic could improve society. Enlightenment thinkers also formed ideas about how government should work. They based many of their ideas on the concept of using reason to best achieve virtue and social order.
Some Enlightenment thinkers believed that there was a social contract between government and citizens. Philosophers such as John Locke thought that people had natural rights such as equality and liberty. One judge, William Blackstone, published a book describing the system of English law. His ideas about natural laws and rights became influential in colonial legal education. Ideas of the Scientific Revolution and the Enlightenment eventually influenced colonial leaders' desire for self-government.
Summarizing How did new
ideas influence colonial society?
French and Indian War
By the 1670s tensions had arisen between New England colonists and the Wampa-noag. Metacomet, a Wampanoag leader also known as King Philip, opposed the colo-
READING CHECK
nists' efforts to take his people's lands. In 1675 these tensions finally erupted in a conflict known as King Philip's War. The colonial militia—civilians serving as soldiers— fought American Indian warriors. Both sides attacked each other's settlements, killing men, women, and children. The fighting finally ended in 1676, but only after about 600 colonists and some 3,000 Indians had been killed, including Metacomet.
Native American Allies
Some Native Americans allied with the colonists to fight against Metacomet and his forces. These Indians had developed trade relations with colonists. They wanted tools, weapons, and other goods that Europeans could provide. In exchange, the colonists wanted furs, which they sold for large profits in Europe. As a result, each side came to depend upon the other.
French colonists traded and allied with the Algonquian and Huron. English colonists traded and allied with the Iroquois League. This powerful group united American Indians from six different groups. Many American Indians trusted the French more than they did the English. The smaller French settlements were less threatening than the rapidly growing English colonies. No matter who their allies were, many Indian leaders took care to protect their people's independence. As one leader said:
We are born free. We neither depend upon [the governor of New France] nor [the governor of New York]. We may go where we please... and buy and sell what we please/'
—Garangula, quoted in The World Turned Upside Down, edited by Colin G. Calloway
War Erupts
Until the mid-1700s, France and Great Britain struggled for control of territory in North America. British colonists wanted to settle in the Ohio River valley, where they could
THE ENGLISH COLONIES 95
North American Empires before and after the Treaty of Paris
take advantage of the fur trade. The French believed this settlement would hurt their profits. A standoff developed in the Ohio Valley where the French had built three forts. Fighting erupted in 1753 as the British military moved to take over the valley.
When a young Virginian named George Washington arrived with more soldiers, he found the area under French control. Washington and his troops built a small, simple fort that he named Fort Necessity. After his troops suffered many casualties—captured, injured, or killed soldiers—Washington finally surrendered. His defeat in 1754 was the start of the French and Indian War. Leaders from the colonies met to discuss defense. The convention produced a plan for uniting the colonies called the Albany Plan. Meanwhile, in 1756 fighting began in Europe, starting what became known as the Seven Years' War.
Treaty of Paris
The turning point of the war came in 1759. That year British general James Wolfe captured Quebec, gaining the advantage in the war. However, the war dragged on for four more years. Finally, in 1763 Britain and France signed the Treaty of Paris, officially ending the war.
The terms of the treaty gave Canada to Britain. Britain also gained all French lands east of the Mississippi River except the city of New Orleans and two small islands in the Gulf of St. Lawrence. From Spain, which had allied with France in 1762, Britain received Florida. In an earlier treaty, Spain had received Louisiana, the land that France had claimed west of the Mississippi River. The Treaty of Paris changed the balance of power in North America. Soon British settlers began moving west to settle new lands.
Western Frontier
Most colonial settlements were located along the Atlantic coast. Colonial settlers, or pioneers, slowly moved into the Virgin-
ia and Carolina backcountry and the Ohio River valley.
Indian leaders like Chief Pontiac opposed British settlement of this new land. Pontiac's Rebellion began in May 1763 when his forces attacked British forts on the frontier. Within one month, they had destroyed or captured seven forts. Pontiac then led an attack on Fort Detroit. The British held out for months.
British leaders feared that more fighting would take place on the frontier if colonists kept moving onto American Indian lands. To avoid more conflict, King George III issued the Proclamation of 1763. This law banned British settlement west of the Appalachian Mountains. The law also ordered settlers to leave the upper Ohio River valley. These limitations angered many colonists and some began to question British policies.
Summarizing Why did
George III issue the Proclamation of 1763?
READING CHECK
Section 4 Assessment
Pontiac
1720-1769
Pontiac, an Ottawa chief who had fought for France, tried to resist British settlement west of the Appalachians. Calling them "dogs dressed in red who have come to rob us," he attacked the British in the Ohio country in 1763. Pontiac's rebellion was put down, and he surrendered in 1766.
Analyzing Information How did Pontiac try to stop the British?
hmhsocialstudies.com '
■ Summary and Preview In this section I you read about colonial governments, the slave trade, and the conflicts with foreign countries and with Native Americans that the colonies faced as they grew. In the next section you'll learn about the increasing tension between the colonies and Great Britain that led to independence.
Reviewing Ideas, Terms, and People
1.	a. Describe How were colonial governments organized?
b.	Analyze How did political change in England affect colonial governments?
c.	Explain Why did self-government increase in the ; colonies?
2.	a. Explain What is mercantilism?
b.	Analyze How did the Navigation Acts support the system of mercantilism?
c.	Evaluate Did the colonies benefit from mercantilism? Why or why not?
3.	a. Identify What was the Great Awakening and how did it reflect religious freedom? How did the ideas of virtue and the social contract affect colonial government?
b.	Compare How was the Enlightenment similar to the Great Awakening?
c.	Identify How did John Locke and William Black-
I stone contribute to the idea of self-government in the i	colonies?
•	4. a. Explain What caused the French and Indian War?
j	b. Evaluate Where was the colonial western frontier?
| Defend the British decision to ban colonists from set-
tling on the western frontier.
Critical Thinking
5. Summarizing Review your notes on the developments in the colonies during the late 1600s to mid-1700s. Then add a box to the bottom of your chart in which you briefly summarize how the colonies grew and changed during the period, as well as the challenges they faced.
Development	Effects
Establishment of local government	
Political change in England	
Trade laws	
Great Awakening/Enlightenment	
French and Indian War	
T
j How the colonies grew and changed and challenges faced
6. Reviewing the Information This section focused on what life was like in all the English colonies discussed so far. Does this information give you any new ideas about the colony you'll use in your infomercial?
THE ENGLISH COLONIES 97
History and Geography
As you have read, life differed from colony to colony. The colonies were created with very different goals in mind. Many of the northern colonies were established with the goal of -providing religious freedom to the people who lived there. Many of the middle and southern colonies were founded by companies and individual colonists who hoped to make a profit on the resources found there. Eventually, < however, the northern colonies also became centers of business activity.	%
New England colonies Middle colonies Southern colonies
100
200 Miles
100	200 Kilometers
>7a CHAPTER 3

V
Comparing Governments Economic differences would have long-lasting effects on the politics of the regions. Northern merchants and tradespeople began to favor policies that made imported goods more expensive, because this increased demand for the goods they produced themselves. Agricultural colonies, on the other hand, preferred policies that kept the prices of imported goods down, because this kept prices for all goods down. Because agricultural colonies did not produce many goods themselves, they had to buy most of their household goods. All colonies formed both local and county governments in order to provide services such as constables and fence inspectors. Both levels of government, however, had little power because of their limited ability to tax residents.
V
k
loiisswas
SSil
Comparing Economies Economic activities were centered on trade in New England, agriculture based on slavery in the South, and a mix of farming and trade in the Middle Colonies. These differences were a result of the contrast among the natural resources in each area. The South had rich soil and warm temperatures, while New England had more rocky soil and a colder climate. Northern colonies also had access to rich fishing grounds and to timber for shipbuilding. Because the merchants and tradespeople in the North needed to work near each other in order for their businesses to thrive, the largest cities were in the North.
In every colony the majority of people focused on some type of business venture to earn a profit. However, some colonists, especially in the rural areas, developed barter economies.



- r -
7' «

Similarities Although there were many differences among the colonies, there were also many similarities. Almost none of the colonists who arrived from England were members of the English aristocracy. The colonies were seen as a place where anyone could become prosperous. In addition, each colony had small communities of non-English colonists. German, Irish, Scots-Irish, Welsh, and Dutch communities existed throughout the colonies. Each colony at one time or another bordered Native American land. As settlers moved west, they experienced conflict with the people living there. This was one of the situations that drew colonies together.
■MB
■■I
■1»
Oft





■

’RETING MAPS
3BE
1.	What were some similarities and some differences between the geography of the colonies?
2.	Compare and contrast the economies and governments of the different colonies.
tes
ill


^■ll

COMPAR
III
■sllSl
	

-------^CSSBIESSB------------
1.	British efforts to raise taxes on colonists sparked protest
2.	The Boston Massacre caused colonial resentment toward Great Britain.
3.	Colonists protested the British tax on tea with the Boston Tea Party.
4.	Great Britain responded to colonial actions by passing the Intolerable Acts.
Conflict in the Colonies
Tensions developed as the British government placed tax aftertax on the colonies.
If YOU were there...
You live in the New England colonies in the 1700s. Recently,
British officials have placed new taxes on tea—your favorite beverage. You've never been very interested in politics, but you're beginning to think that people far across the ocean in Britain shouldn't be able to tell you what to do. Some of your friends have joined a group that refuses to buy British tea.
Would you give up your favorite drink to join the boycott?
Key Terms and People
Samuel Adams, p. 99	■
Committees of Correspondence, p. 99 Stamp Act of 1765, p. WO Boston Massacre, p. 101	=
Tea Act, p. W2
Boston Tea Party, p. W2 Intolerable Acts, p. W2 Quartering Act, p. W2
I BUILDING BACKGROUND
As the British colonies grew and | became prosperous, the colonists got used to running their own I lives. Britain began to seem very far away. At the same time, officials in Britain still expected the colonies to obey them and to earn money for Britain. Parliament passed new laws and imposed new taxes. But
( the colonists found various ways to challenge them.
hmhsocialstudies.com
w TAKING NOTES
Use the graphic organizer online to take notes on the new laws passed by the British government.
1
3
J
1
j
j
j
j
J
Great Britain Raises Taxes
Great Britain had won the French and Indian War, but Parliament still had to pay for it. The British continued to keep a standing, or permanent, army in North America to protect the colonists against Indian attacks. To help pay for this army, Prime Minister George Grenville asked Parliament to tax the colonists. In 1764 Parliament passed the Sugar Act, which set duties on molasses and sugar imported by colonists. This was the first act passed specifically to raise money in the colonies.
British officials also tried harder to arrest smugglers. Colonial merchants were required to list all the trade goods they carried aboard their ships. These lists had to be approved before ships could leave colonial ports. This made it difficult for traders to avoid paying duties. The British navy also began to stop and search ships for smuggled goods.
'8 CHAPTER 3
Parliament also changed the colonies' legal system by giving greater powers to the vice-admiralty courts. These courts had no juries, and the judges treated suspected smugglers as guilty until proven innocent. In regular British courts, accused persons were treated as innocent until proven guilty.
Taxation without Representation
Parliament's actions upset many colonists who had grown used to being independent. The rising merchant class thought the taxes were unfair and hurt business. Many believed that Great Britain had no right to tax the colonies at all without popular consent.
James Otis argued that the power of the Crown and Parliament was limited. Otis said they could not "take from any man any part of his property, without his consent in person or by representation." Colonial assemblies had little influence on Parliament's decisions. In addition, the colonists had no
direct representatives in Parliament. The colonists were subjects of the Crown instead of citizens of England.
At a Boston town meeting in May 1764, local leader Samuel Adams agreed with Otis. He believed that Parliament could not tax the colonists without their permission. The ideas of Otis and Adams were summed up in the slogan "No Taxation without Representation," which spread throughout the colonies.
Adams helped found the Committees of Correspondence.Each committee got in touch with other towns and colonies. Its members shared ideas and information about the new British laws and ways to challenge them.
A popular method of protest was the boycott, in which people refused to buy British goods. The first colonial boycott started in New York in 1765. It soon spread to other colonies. Colonists hoped that their efforts would hurt the British economy and might convince Parliament to end the new taxes.
THE ENGLISH COLONIES 99
Stamp Act
The British government continued to search for new ways to tax the American colonies, further angering many colonists. For example, Prime Minister Grenville proposed the Stamp Act of 1765. This act required colonists to pay for an official stamp, or seal, when they bought paper items. The tax had to be paid on legal documents, licenses, newspapers, pamphlets, and even playing cards. Colonists who refused to buy stamps could be fined or sent to jail.
Grenville did not expect this tax to spark protest. After all, in Britain people already paid similar taxes. But colonists saw it differently. The Stamp Act was Parliament's first attempt to raise money by taxing the colonists directly, rather than by taxing imported goods.
Protests against the Stamp Act began almost immediately. Colonists formed a secret society called the Sons of Liberty. Samuel Adams helped organize the group in Boston. This group sometimes used violence to frighten tax collectors. Many colonial courts shut down because people refused to buy the stamps required for legal documents. Businesses openly ignored the law by refusing to buy stamps.
In May 1765 a Virginia lawyer named Patrick Henry presented a series of resolutions to the Virginia House of Burgesses. These resolutions stated that the Stamp Act violated colonists' rights. In addition to taxation without representation, the Stamp Act denied the accused a trial by jury. Henry's speech in support of the resolutions convinced the assembly to support some of his ideas.
Repealing the Stamp Act
In Boston the members of the Massachusetts legislature called for a Stamp Act Congress. In October 1765, delegates from nine colonies met in New York. They issued a declaration that the Stamp Act was a violation of their rights and liberties.
Pressure on Parliament to repeal, or do away with, the Stamp Act grew quickly. A group of London merchants complained that their trade suffered from the colonial boycott. Parliament repealed the Stamp Act in 1766.
Members of Parliament were upset that colonists had challenged their authority. Thus, Parliament issued the Declaratory Act, which stated that Parliament had the power to make laws for the colonies "in all cases whatsoever." The Declaratory Act further worried the colonists. The act stripped away much of their independence.
Townshend Acts
In June 1767 Parliament passed the Townshend Acts. These acts placed duties on glass, lead, paints, paper, and tea. To enforce the Townshend Acts, British officials used writs of assistance. These allowed tax collectors to search for smuggled goods. Colonists hated the new laws because they took power away from colonial governments.
The colonists responded to the Townshend Acts by once again boycotting many British goods. Women calling themselves the Daughters of Liberty supported the boycott. In February 1768 Samuel Adams wrote a letter arguing that the laws violated the legal rights of the colonists. The Massachusetts legislature sent the letter to other colonies' legislatures, who voted to join the protest.
At the same time, tax collectors in Massachusetts seized the ship Liberty on suspicion of smuggling. This action angered the ship's owner and the Sons of Liberty. They attacked the houses of customs officials in protest. In response, the governor broke up the Massachusetts legislature. He also asked troops to restore order. British soldiers arrived in Boston in October 1768.
Sequencing What series of
events led to the arrival of British troops in Boston in 1768?
READING CHECK A
00 CHAPTER 3
Primary Source
LJ-UJU—........-...............
NEWSPAPER ARTICLE
< The Boston Massacre
: An account of the Boston Massacre appeared in the Boston Gazette and Country Journal soon after the event
"The People were immediately alarmed with the Report of this horrid Massacre, the Bells were set a Ringing, and great Numbers soon assembled at the Place where this tragical Scene had been acted; their Feelings may be better conceived than expressed; and while some were taking Care of the Dead and Wounded, the Rest were in Consultation what to do in these dreadful Circumstances.
But so little intimidated were they [Bostonians], notwithstanding their being within a few Yards of the Main Guard, and seeing the 29th Regiment under Arms, and drawn up in King street; that they kept their Station and appeared, as an Officer of Rank expressed it, ready to run upon the very Muzzles of their Muskets."
—Boston Gazette and Country Journal, March 12,1770
■-------------.........................
ANALYSIS
SKILL;
ANALYZING PRIMARY SOURCES
Why do you think the people described were not intimidated by the soldiers?
Boston Massacre
Many Bostonians saw the presence of British troops as a threat by the British government against its critics in Massachusetts. Some colonists agreed with Samuel Adams, who said, "I look upon [British soldiers] as foreign enemies." The soldiers knew that they were not welcome. Both sides resented each other, and name-calling, arguments, and fights between Bostonians and the soldiers were common.
The tension exploded on March 5, 1770. A lone British soldier standing guard had an argument with a colonist and struck him. A crowd gathered around the soldier, throwing snowballs and shouting insults. Soon a small number of troops arrived. The crowd grew louder and angrier by the moment. Some yelled, "Come on you rascals... Fire if you dare!" Suddenly, the soldiers fired into the crowd, instantly killing three men, including sailor Crispus Attucks. "Half Indian, half negro, and altogether rowdy," as he was called, Attucks is the best-remembered casualty of the incident. Two others died within a few days.
Samuel Adams and other protesters quickly spread the story of the shootings. They used it as propaganda—a story giving only one side in an argument—against the British. Colonists called the shootings the Boston Massacre. Paul Revere created an elaborate color print titled "The Bloody Massacre perpetrated in King Street" (above).
The soldiers and their officer, Thomas Preston, were charged with murder. Two Boston lawyers, Josiah Quincy and John Adams—Samuel Adams's cousin—agreed to defend the soldiers. They argued that the troops had acted in self-defense. The Boston jury agreed, finding Preston and six soldiers not guilty. Two soldiers were convicted of killing people in the crowd by accident. These men were branded on the hand and released. The trial helped calm people down, but many were still angry at the British.
Analyzing What was the
significance of the Boston Massacre?
READING CHECK ,
THE ENGLISH COLONIES 101
The Sugar Act is passed to raise money from the colonies for Britain.
Samuel Adams founds the Committees of Correspondence to improve communication among the colonies.
The Stamp Act taxes newspapers, licenses, and colonial paper products.
A series of resolutions is published stating that the Stamp Act violates the rights of colonists.
The Boston Tea Party
To reduce tensions in the colonies, Parliament repealed almost all of the Townshend Acts. However, it kept the tax on tea. British officials knew that the colonial demand for tea was high despite the boycott. But colonial merchants were smuggling most of this imported tea and paying no duty on it.
The British East India Company offered Parliament a solution. The company had huge amounts of tea but was not allowed to sell it directly to the colonists. If the company could sell directly to the colonists, it could charge low prices and still make money. Cheaper tea might encourage colonists to stop smuggling. Less smuggling would result in more tax money.
Parliament agreed and passed the Tea Act in 1773, which allowed the British East India Company to sell tea directly to the colonists. Many colonial merchants and smugglers feared that the British East India Company's cheap tea would put them out of business.
Three ships loaded with tea from the British East India Company arrived in Boston Harbor in 1773. Members of the Sons of Liberty demanded that the ships leave. But the governor of Massachusetts would not let the ships leave without paying the duty. Unsure of what to do, the captains waited in the harbor.
On the night of December 16, 1773, colonists disguised as Indians sneaked onto the three tea-filled ships and dumped over 340 tea chests into Boston Harbor. This event became known as the Boston Tea Party. Soon the streets echoed with shouts of "Boston harbour is a teapot tonight!" It was an early example of what later became known as an act of "civil disobedience." The protest quickly increased the tensions between Britain and the colonies.
Reading Check
Summarizing What factors led to the Boston Tea Party?
The Intolerable Acts
Lord North, the new British prime minister, was furious when he heard the news. Parliament decided to punish Boston. In the spring of 1774 it passed the Coercive Acts. Colonists called these laws the Intolerable Acts. The acts had several effects.
1.	Boston Harbor was closed until Boston paid for the ruined tea.
2.	Massachusetts's charter was canceled. The governor decided if and when the legislature could meet.
3.	Royal officials accused of crimes were sent to Britain for trial. This let them face a more friendly judge and jury.
4.	A new Quartering Act required colonists to house British soldiers.
102 CHAPTER 3
British soldiers fire into a crowd of colonists, killing five men.
Colonists protest and bring the soldiers to trial.
Colonists protest by dumping shipments of British tea into Boston Harbor.
Colonists' resentment toward Britain builds.
ANALYSIS
SKILLi Analyzing Visuals
In what year did the conflict between Britain and the colonists turn violent?

5.	The Quebec Act gave a large amount of land to the colony of Quebec.
6.	General Thomas Gage became the new governor of Massachusetts.
The British hoped that these steps would bring back order in the colonies. Instead they simply increased people's anger at Britain.
Analyzing What was the
purpose of the Intolerable Acts?
READING CHECK .
■Summary and Preview in this section I you learned about the increasing dissatis-
faction between the colonists and Great Britain. In the next chapter you'll learn about the result of these conflicts—the American Revolution.
Section 5 Assessment
-a hmhsocialstudies.com
Reviewing Ideas, Terms, and People
1. a. Explain Why did Great Britain raise taxes in its American colonies?
b. Evaluate Which method of protesting taxes do you think was most successful for colonists? Why?
; 2. a. Describe What events led to the Boston Massacre?
b. Elaborate Why do you think John Adams and Josiah Quincy agreed to defend the British soldiers that were involved in the Boston Massacre?
3.	a. Recall What was the purpose of the Tea Act? b. Draw Conclusions What message did the Boston Tea Party send to the British government?
4.	a. Explain Why did Parliament pass the Intolerable Acts?
b. Draw Conclusions Why do you think the colo-\ nists believed that these laws were "intolerable"?
i
S
Critical Thinking i
i 5. Identifying Cause and Effect Review your notes ! on the laws passed by the British government. Then
add a new column to your chart and identify the laws' results.
Law	Result
1.	
2.	
3.	
4.	
5.	
mvWriteSmart
6.Gathering Information Now you have some information about the political situation in Boston in the late 1700s. Why might someone from Britain want to immigrate to Boston at this time? Would you consider the city of Boston, rather than a whole colony, for the subject of your infomercial?
THE ENGLISH COLONIES 103
Social Studies Skills
Analysis
Critical Thinking	„ S'.v'c .
3	Participation
Study
Interpreting Time Lines
Define the Skill
Knowing the sequence, or order, in which historical events took place is important to understanding these events. Time lines visually display the sequence of events during a particular period of time. They also let you easily see time spans between events, such as how long after one event a related event took place—and what events occurred in between. Sequencing the life spans and major accomplishments of people helps you see when people's lifespans overlapped, who might have been influenced by whom, and what ideas and events happened around the same time. In addition, comparing time lines for different places makes relationships between distant events easier to identify and understand.
Learn the Skill
Follow these guidelines to read, interpret, and compare time lines.
1.	Determine each time line's framework. Note the years it covers and the periods of time into which it is divided.
2.	Study the order of events on each time line. Note the length of time between events. Compare what was taking place on different time lines around the same time period.
3.	Look for relationships between events. Pay particular attention to how an event on one time line might relate to an event on another.
[ Practice the Skill
Interpret the time lines below to answer the following questions.
1.	What is each time line's framework?
2.	How long was England without a king?
3.	What event in England allowed the colonists to get rid of the Dominion of New England in 1689?
4.	How old was Governor Andros when the Dominion of New England was formed?
Leaders and Events in the Colonies
1641 Massachusetts shews independence by passing
1590-1657 William
own code of laws.
Bradford, Signer of the Mayflower Compact
1637-1714 Edmund Andros, Governor of the Dominion of New England
1659 Virginia pledges loyalty to Charles II as king of England.
1666 Massachusetts is united with other colonies in Dominion of New England by King James II.
1669 Colonies disband Dominion of New England and re-establish separate governments.
1599-1656	1642 Civil war breaks out
Oliver Cromwell,	between King Charles I
Lord Protector of	and Parliament,
the Commonwealth
1660 Monarchy is restored; Charles II becomes king.
1649 Charles I is executed;
Parliament takes power.
Leaders and Events in England
1666 Parliament overthrows King James II and puts new king on throne.
04 CHAPTER 3
Chapter Review
Visual Summary
Use the visual summary below to help you review the main ideas of the chapter
Increasing tensions between the colonies and Britain led many colonists to consider cutting ties to Britain.
•	Taxation without representation
•	Acts of Parliament
•	Violence between colonists and British troops
Reviewing Vocabulary, Terms, and People
Match the words in the left column with the correct definition in the right column.
1.	Committees of Correspondence
2.	Jonathan Edwards
3.	mercantilism
4.	immigrants
5.	indentured servants
6.	William Penn
7.	Pocahontas
8.	Quakers
9.	staple crops 10. town meeting
a.	colonists who received free passage to North America in exchange for working without pay for a certain number of years
b.	created in Massachusetts, these groups helped towns and colonies share information about resisting the new British laws
c.	crops that are continuously in demand
d.	daughter of Powhatan chief whose marriage to colonist John Rolfe eased tensions between the Powhatan and the colonists
e.	one of the leaders of the Great Awakening, he urged sinners to seek forgiveness
f.	Protestant sect founded in England that believed salvation was available to all people
g.	people who move to another country after leaving their homeland
h.	political gathering at which people make decisions on local issues
i.	Quaker leader who established a colony with the goal of fair government for all
j.	system of creating and maintaining wealth through controlled trade
THE ENGLISH COLONIES 105
Comprehension and
Critical Thinking
SECTION 1 (Pages 72-77)
11.	a. Explain What problems did the settlers of Virginia face?
b.	Draw Conclusions Why was Maryland's Toleration Act of 1649 important?
c.	Predict How might the southern colonies' reliance on slave labor eventually cause problems?
SECTION 2 (Pages 78-84)
12.	a. Describe On what was the economy of the New England colonies based? How did the physical environment affect colonists?
b.	Compare and Contrast How were the Pilgrim and Puritan colonies similar and different?
c.	Evaluate What was the significance of the Mayflower Compact? Explain why you think the close ties between church and state in Massachusetts helped or hurt its government.
SECTION 3 (Pages 85-87)
13.	a. Identify What types of crops were grown in the middle colonies?
b.	Draw Conclusions Why did the middle colonies have a more diverse population than others?
c.	Explain Why were the colonies of New York, New Jersey, and Pennsylvania founded?
SECTION 4 (Pages 90-97)
14.	a. Identify What challenges did the English colonies face?
b.	Analyze What effect did the Great Awakening and the Enlightenment have on the colonies?
c.	Evaluate Explain the effects of the English Bill of Rights, the Virginia House of Burgesses, and the Great Awakening on the growth of self-government. Describe which one you think is most important and give reasons for your choice.
SECTION 5 (Pages 98-103)
15.	a. Recall Why did the British believe it was necessary to raise taxes on the American colonists? Why did colonists protest?
b.	Draw Conclusions How did events in Boston affect relations with Great Britain?
c.	Evaluate Did the British over-react to protests by issuing the Intolerable Acts? Why or why not?
Reviewing Themes
16.	Politics What political influences shaped the governments of the British colonies? Identify the different racial, ethnic, and religious groups that settled in the colonies.
17.	Economics How did mercantilism affect the economies of Britain and the colonies? How did it lead to the transatlantic slave trade?
18.	Politics Analyze each of the following as a cause for American revolution: mercantilism, the French and Indian War, the Proclamation of 1763, lack of representation in Parliament, the Stamp Act, and the Intolerable Acts.
19.	Politics Describe the roles of Crispus Attucks and Samuel Adams in the events at Boston.
Reading Skills
Evaluating Sources Use the Reading Skills taught in this chapter to answer the question below.
20.	Choose a topic from the chapter to research. Find five sources on the Internet that discuss the topic. Identify each source as primary or secondary. List the author and describe why he or she is an authority or not. Then identify language in each source that indicates whether or not the source is valid. Compare and contrast the information in the sources, then write a brief explanation of the topic. Verify the information you use between sources. Cite each source you are using in your explanation.
Social Studies Skills
Interpreting Time Lines Use the Social Studies Skills taught in this chapter to answer the questions below.
21.	Look at the time line on page 104. Write a brief description of the events described that includes their relationship to one another.
22.	Choose two major events from each section of the chapter and sequence them. Then create a time line with the events you have chosen.
"’J'WriteSmart
23. Writing Your Infomercial Choose a colony and time period. Compare and contrast that colony with those in other regions. Then write an infomercial with at least four scenes. Each scene should have video and a voice-over telling one of the reasons for immigrating.
06 CHAPTER 3
CHAPTER
Texas Test Practice
DIRECTIONS:
Read each question and write the letter of the best response. 1	Use the map below to answer the following question.
4	What was the central issue in the dispute between Britain and its American colonies?
F the restrictions Parliament placed on trade G the presence of British troops in the colonies H the colonists’ right to religious freedom J the power to tax the colonists
5	Which side did Native Americans take in the French and Indian War?
A the British B the French
C different groups sided with each country
D
Native Americans did not fight in the French and Indian War 6	Examine the following passage from an early colonist’s journal and then use it to answer the question below.
The red box on this map indicates which early colonial settlement?
A
Plymouth B Massachusetts Bay C New Amsterdam D Jamestown 2	Ideas about spiritual, social, and political equality arose in the colonies in the 1700s in a religious movement called
F
Separatism. G the Enlightenment.
H the Great Awakening.
J
Puritanism. 3	How did Parliament’s passage of the English Bill of Rights in 1689 affect England’s North American colonies?
A
Colonists became more interested in being governed by representatives they elected. B
Several colonies decided to unite and formed the Dominion of New England. C
The Great Awakening took place. D A
movement to end slavery developed. Z/An Indian came to us from the chief, the great Powhatan, with the word of peace. He said that Powhatan greatly desired our friendship, and that chiefs Pasyaheigh and Tapahanagh wanted to be our friends. Powhatan said that we would be able to sow and reap our crops in peace or else he would make war upon our enemies. This message turned out to be true, for these chiefs have ever since remained in peace and continued to trade with us. We rewarded the messenger with many small gifts, which were great wonders to him.,/
—Edward Maria Wingfield, from A Discourse on Virginia
Document-Based Question Why do you think Native American chiefs wanted to make peace with early English colonists?
THE ENGLISH COLONIES 107
where the British were finally defeated..
:us on Writing
^WriteSmart
United
States
Giving an Oral Report The Revolutionary War was a very exciting time in our history, a time filled with deeds of courage and daring and ending with an amazing victory for the underdog. As you read this chapter and listen to your teacher's lectures, you will learn about the great events and heroic people of that time. Then you will prepare and give an oral report that demonstrates your understanding of the history of the American Revolution by summarizing a lecture, responding to questions by your classmates, and taking notes and asking questions during your classmates' presentations.
World
